AN ACCOUNT OF THE Late ESTABLISHMENT OF Presbyterian-Government BY THE
Parliament of SCOTLAND Anno 1690.

Together with the Methods by which it was Settled, and the Consequences of it:
As also several public Acts, Speeches, Pleadings, and other matters of
Importance relating to the Church in that Kingdom. To which is added a Summary
of the Visitation of the Universities there; in a fifth Letter from a Gentleman
at Edinburgh, to his Friend at London.

Si tibi vitae nostrae vera imago sucourret, videberis tibi videre captae cum
maxim civitatis faciem, in qua, omisso pudoris, rectique respectu, vires in
consilio sunt, velut signo ad permiscenda omnia dato. Non igni, non ferro
abstinetur: Soluta legibus scelera sunt: Nec Religio quidem quae inter arma
hostilia supplices texit, ullum impedimentum est ruentium in praedam, etc.
Seneca de Benef. Lib. 7. Cap. 27. -- Quid nos dura refugimus
Aetas? Quid intactum Nefasti
Liquimus? Unde manus Iuventus
Metu Deorum continuit? Quibus
Pepercit aris? Horat. Carm. Lib. 1. Od. 35.
LONDON, Printed for Ios. Hindmarsh, at the Golden Ball over against the
Royal Exchange in Cornhil. M DC XCIII.

ADVERTISEMENT By the PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
I Have ever thought that Justice and Candor require not only, that we should
not utter any thing against our Adversaries which we know to be false; but also
that we should suppress nothing which we know would vindicate them, or
extenuate that whereof they are accused; and therefore, having come to the
knowledge of a Particular, which escaped the Author's Diligence at the writing
of this Relation, I am satisfied it will be as grateful to him, as fair to our
Adversaries to acquaint the Reader with it here. The thing is concerning Mr.
James Kirton's taking the benefit of the Act of Parliament made in favor of
the old Presbyterian Ministers, as is related p. 24 of this Book: and after a
diligent Enquiry, made by my self and others, I find that that Account is true
to a tittle from the beginning to the end of it. But that which I will not
conceal, is, that Mr. Kirton having preached two Sundays in August 1690, at
Martin, and thereby secured to himself the Benefice from Whitsunday 1689, was
persuaded by Friends to give Mr. Meldrum, the Episcopal Minister, one half year
of the Benefice of Martin. I designed to have told this in its proper place, p.
24, but this was prevented, that Sheet being printed off sooner than I expected.

THE CONTENTS.
A Short Introduction. Page 1 Act of the Privy Council at Edinburgh, December
the 24th 1689. Prohibiting all inferior Judges to give or Execute any Decrees
in favor of such of the Episcopal Clergy, as had been thrust from their
Charges by the Rabble before the 13th of April 1689. ibid. This Act furnishes a
pretext to these, especially of the Western Shires, where Rabbling had most
prevailed, to refuse Payment for what was due of the year 1688, and preceding
years. p. 2 The misery, this Act reduced the Clergy to, induced them to
endeavor to have it Repealed or favorably Explained, but their endeavors are
in vain. p. 3 The Parliament meets April 25, 1690. Their first Act rescinds the
first of the second Parliament of King Charles the Second, 1669. Entitled, Act
asserting His Majesty's Supremacy over all Persons, and in all Causes
Ecclesiastical and Civil. p. 4, 5 The thorough paced Presbyterians nickt, for
this rescissory Act does not reach many other Acts, which assert the Supremacy
to a degree inconsistent with their Pretensions; yet it encourages the
Presbyterians to go on, and ask an entire settlement of their whole Scheme.
ibid. The Address they presented to the Commissioner, and the Estates of
Parliament. p. 6, 7, 8, 9 Remarks upon this Address. p. 10, 11 The Case of the
Presbyterian Ministers, who after the first of January 1661 were turned out of
the Churches they then possessed, and the Act restoring them. p. 12, 13 The
Account upon which these Presbyterian Ministers were by Act of Parliament 1662
put from the Churches, which they possessed; was their refusing to give obedience
to the Law requiring them to take Presentations to their Churches from their
lawful Patrons. p. 14, 15, 16, 17 The Act Entitled an Act concerning such
Benefices and Stipends as have been possessed without Presentation from the
lawful Patrons: For Noncompliance with which the Presbyterian Ministers were
outed 1662. p. 18, 19 That Act justified. p. 20 An Account of the Act of the
Privy Council at Glasgow in pursuance of the foresaid Act of Parliament. p. 21
The severity of the Act restoring the old Presbyterian Ministers: by it the
Episcopal Incumbents were not only ejected out of their Benefices, but deprived
of a whole years Rent, for which they had served the cure, without any ground
of hope to be provided of other Churches, and this notwithstanding their
Compliance with the Government. p. 22, 23 The rigorous Execution of this Act;
Instances of this. p. 24, 25 An Account of the Act Ratifying the Confession of
Faith, and settling the Presbyterian Government. p. 26 The Arts used to prepare
the Parliament for this Act: For this end the Press employed, and Pamphlets
published recommending Presbytery, and disgracing and defaming Prelacy,
Speeches made by the High Commissioner and President of the Parliament. p. 27,
28, 29 The Pulpit tuned to serve their design, with an Account of such Sermons
as were Printed. p. 30 to 36 Endeavors of the Zealots for promoting the Good
old Cause, and of their Agents and Pensioners. p. 36 An Account how the Act was
prepared, debated, voted; List and Account of the Committee nominated for
Church Affairs, to whom this Act was recommended. p. 37, 38 The Act as it was
made a Law. p. 39, 40, 41 The Confession of Faith read in the House and
ratified; the Ratification of the Directory and Catechism, required in the
Presbyterian Address, and yet these not mentioned in the Act. 42, 43, 44 Act 2.
Parl. 2. Car. II. Entitled Act acknowledging and asserting the Right of
Sucession to the Imperial Crown of Scotland repealed in this Act establishing
Presbytery. Sir James Montgomery of Skelmurly reasons for repealing the Act.
The Duke of Hamilton and Lord Stairs reason against repealing it. Reflections
made out of the House upon the repealing the Act about Succession. 45, 46 That
Article of the Act establishing Presbytery which puts the Government of the
Church entirely in the hands of the known, sound Presbyterians considered. 47
Those Episcopal Ministers, who had given obedience to the Civil Government,
petition the Parliament against that Article, and beg to be allowed a share in
the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. ibid. and 48 Their Petition presented, and
backed by the Duke of Hamilton, and yet rejected with Scorn. ibid. Mr. Ross, a
Member of the House, proposes, that those Presbyterian Ministers, who had been
deposed by their own Ecclesiastical Iudicatories, before the Re establishment
of Episcopacy, An. 1662. might not be included in the number of those sound
Presbyterians in whose hands the Government was to be established in the first
Instance: this Proposal rejected. 49 Duke Hamilton reasons against putting the
Government solely in the hands of those known, sound Presbyterians, but without
Success. ibid. The Kng's Power in Ecclesiastical Matters debated in Parliament.
50 The Petition of the Episcopal Ministers, who were thrust from their Churches
by force and violence of the Rabble, in December 1688, or at any time
thereafter before the 13th. of April 1689. 52, 53, 54, 55, 56 The Article
concerning the Rabbled Clergy considered, and three Amendments the Duke of
Hamilton procured to be made in it. 57, 58, 59. Proposal, that such Ministers
as had not free access to their Churches, and so could not obey the
Proclamation of the Convention, April 13. upon the day appointed, but were
willing to obey when they should have access, might be excepted out of the
number of those who were to be declared deprived of their Benefices, rejected.
ibid. Reasons of the Duke of Hamilton, that the Deed of the Rabble might not be
ratified, i. e. that those Episcopal Ministers, who had been forced from their
Benefices by the Fury of the Presbyterian Mobb, might not for that be deprived.
60 The Petition of the Rabbled Clergy presented, and backed by the Duke of
Hamilton, but rejected without being read, and the Article approved. 62 The
Duke resents the approving the Article, and leaves the House. 63 In his absence
the Act is voted in cumulo, and receives afterward the Royal Assent. ibid. and
64 Remarks on the Commissioner's behavior. ibid. The Consequences this Act
produced, 1. Thanks. 2. Printed Sermons. 3. Presbyterian Ministers got
Plurality of Benefices, vacant by the ejection of so many Episcopal Ministers
by that Act, Instances of this. 65, 66, 67 The Duke of Hamilton and some other
Councillors procure a Gift of a Year's Revenue of their own Benefices, to some
of those Episcopal Ministers, who had been turned out by the Mobb. Restrictions
the Presbyterian Lords got put on this. 68, 69 The Petitions of many of those
Ministers rejected by the Privy Council. The Case of Mr. Skeen Minister of
Dunsyre. 70 to 77 Draught of an Act, given in by the Earl of Linlithgow, that a
Toleration might be granted to those of the Episcopal Persuasion, to worship
God after their own Manner; and particularly, that those who were inclined to
use the English Liturgy, might do it safely. 77 This rejected. The Party,
especially the Preachers, incensed at the design, and in their Sermons declaim
vehemently against it. ibid. Patronages abolished, and a new strange Model of
electing Ministers established. 78 Act of Parliament, prohibiting those
Ministers who were deprived by the Committee of Estates, and by the Privy
Council, An. 1689. for not reading in their Pulpits the Proclamation against
owning the late King James, and not praying publicly for William and Mary, as
King and Queen of Scotland, to exercise any part of their Ministerial Function,
till they swear and subscribe the Oath of Allegiance, and also engage
themselves under their hands, to pray for K. William and Q: Mary, as King and
Queen of Scotland, and not to own the late King James VII. for their King in
any sort. 79, 80. They are likewise obliged to subscribe a Declaration called a
Certificate of Assurance, which explodes the distinction of a King de facto and
de jure. 81 They do not comply, but for sometime cease from the public
Exercise of their Ministry. 82 After some time they begin again to exercise
their Ministry in their own Houses; the Presbyterian Preachers perplexed at
this, and move the Privy Council to prosecute them. 83 Instances of Episcopal
Ministers prosecuted upon this account. ibid. The Presbyterians attempt to
obtrude a Presbyterian Preacher on the Parish of Errol. A Tumult upon that
account. 84 Dr. Nicolson indicted, and libelled before the Privy Council. The
Narrative of his Libel, with the cause why this Narrative is inserted. 85, 86,
87, 88. A short Account of the Visiting the Universities. 89 to 95 The
Proclamation of April 13. 1689, against owning the late King James, and
appointing public Prayers for William and Mary, King and Queen of Scotland.
95, 96 The Speech of William Earl of Crawfurd, President to the Parliament of
Scotland, April 22. 1690. 97, 98, 99, 100
SIR,
ALTHOUGH I am satisfied, that the Papers already in Print concerning the
Persecutions, the Episcopal Church in Scotland has suffered of late, do furnish
matter enough to move the Compassion of a Friend, and glut the Malice even of
the most inveterate Enemy; yet finding by your last, that you earnestly desire
to know more about them; and not being able to resist your Importunity, I have
been at the pains to send you this following Account.

The former Relation, as I remember, brought things no farther down, than that
Act of Privy Council, dated December 24. 1689. by which all Inferior Judges
within the Nation, were prohibited to give Decrees in favor of such of the
Clergy, as had been thrust from their Charges by Tumult and Rabble, before the
13th of April preceding. Notwithstanding you have that Act in Print already,
yet being it must give the Rise of this brief Supplement, I shall here again
transcribe it.

An ACT of COUNCIL, At EDINBURGH, Dec. 24. 1689.
THE Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, considering, that by the ^ot of the
Meeting of Estates of the date the thirteenth day of April last, there is a
difference made betwixt the Ministers then in possession, and exercise of their
Ministry, at their respective Churches, and those who were not so. And that the
Case of the Ministers who were not in the actual exercise of their Ministerial
Function, the thirteenth day of April last, lies yet under the consideration of
the Parliament, and lest in the mean time they may call and pursue for the
Stipends (alleged) due to them, or put in execution the Decrees and Sentences
already obtained at their instance for the same, before the Estates of
Parliament can meet, and give the determinations in the points. Therefore the
said Lords of Privy Council, finding that the Case foresaid depending before
the Parliament is not obvious to be cognosced upon, and decided by the
Inferior Judges, but that the same should be left entire to the decision of
the Parliament, have thought fit to signify to all Inferior Courts and
Ministers of the Law, that the matter abovementioned, is depending before the
Parliament, to the effect they may regulate and govern themselves in the
judging of all Processes to be intented before them upon the said matter, or in
executing the Sentences already pronounced thereupon, as they will be
answerable.

Sic subscribitur, Crawford, I. P. D. S. Con.

No sooner did that Act pass, than Copies of it were instantly sent by the
Councils Order, to all Inferior Judges, within whose Jurisdictions those
Parishes lay, from which the Ministers had been forced before that 13th of
April, so fatal to our Clergy: And forthwith a stop was put to the Course of
Justice. For generally, those who were liable to pay the Tithes in the Western
Shires, where Rabling had most prevailed, refused to pay one Farthing of what
was due for the year 1688. or any years preceding; having for them the pretext
of this Act of Council: Neither would the Judges grant Sentences in favor of
any such Ministers, as had the hard fortune to stand in these unlucky
Circumstances. And indeed it was no wonder, if the Judges were shy to meddle
with such an Act; considering on the one hand, how darkly and indistinctly it
was worded; and on the other, how ticklish the Times then were; and how natural
it was for the Council, to have turned them out of their Places, if they had
chanced to give it an Interpretation (however consonant with the Rules of
Justice) unsuitable to the designs of the Government.

No man, I think, needs to doubt but this Treatment seemed grievous enough to
the poor Sufferers. They had entered to their respective Churches according to
Law. They had never been summoned to appear before any Court, Ecclesiastical or
Civil; nor tried, or convict of any Crime or Scandal that might infer a
Deprivation. Only they had been thrust from their Stations by lawless force and
violence; a thing so far from being Criminal in them, that it rather ought to
have engaged the Government, to have taken particular care for their Redress
and Restitution. What then may be thought of this precluding them the benefit
of the Common Law, for what was uncontrovertibly due to them? Especially
considering, that most of them had numerous Families; and not one of twenty,
any Stock of his own (besides his Benefice) wherewith to maintain them? Hard
enough sure. Well.

Necessity, you know, Sir, is a rigorous Taskmaster, and puts one upon all
imaginable Shifts to be eased of its burden. And so it is not to be doubted,
but these poor men would bestir themselves as effectually as they could, to
have that Act, if not repealed, at least explained and made more favorable: as
indeed they did; but without success. For though some Consellors (such as the
Duke of Hamilton, in whose absence the Act was made) were inclined to do them
Justice; yet at that time the Earl of Crawford, and the Lord Cardrosse, (two
Lords, who had some reason to commiserate the needy) and their Adherents of the
Presbyterian Party, made greatest numbers at the Council Board; and they had
made the Act, and so they would not so much as hear of admitting it to a new
deliberation. This, as soon as they knew it, made the afflicted Ministers
(though they had prepared their Petition) quite give over the design of
addressing to the Council, and betake themselves to the last Remedy, Patience,
till the Parliament should meet, to which their Case by the Act of Council was
referred.

I have hitherto given you but a very slender account of this matter; but if
you will be pleased to read on, you shall have what may satisfy you before I
have done. Now proceed we strait to the Parliament: In the mean time, I must
tell you, that it is no part of my present undertaking, to meddle with any
thing, but what concerns the Church or the Clergy. And even of that too, you
are not to expect the most perfect account.

The Parliament met upon the 15th of April 1690. And the first thing they did
in relation to the Church, was the Abolition of the Kings Supremacy in
Ecclesiastical matters. But alas, the thorough-pac'd Presbyterians were sadly
nicked in that matter; for it was only the Act which was made Anno 1669. that
was rescinded; and other Acts that asserted the Supremacy to a degree entirely
inconsistent with the Prerogatives of the Kirk, were kept in force and
unrepeal'd. At least, this I am sure of, Mr. Andrew Melvill, a great Promoter,
if not the first Parent of Presbyterian Parity in Scotland, and Mr. David
Black, and such ancient Worthies of the Sect, reckoned them intolerable, when
they called them, the Bloody Gullies of Arbitrary Power; [i. e. the Cutthroat
Knives.] But that is no great matter; only one thing let me add further
concerning the first Act, which is, that it founds the Repeal of that Sixty
Nine Act upon this reason, that, That Supremacy was inconsistent with the
Establishment of the Church Government (not now in being, for Presbytery was
not erected till six Weeks after; But) now desired; which what sense it may
make in Law or Politics, it is not my purpose to enquire. But I remember many
thought then, that it was a pretty odd fetch in common reason to abolish that
Act, because the Supremacy, as explained in it, was inconsistent with what had
no real Existence, but only an imaginary one in the desires of a Party. But
however that was,

The making this Act, was an encouraging Step to the Presbyterian Ministers:
for no sooner had they found by this, that their Party was strongest in the
Parliament, than they presented their Petition to it, craving an entire
Settlement of all their new and peculiar Scheme: which Petition, because it was
of so considerable consequence, and so far as I can learn, though twice
published here, yet never reprinted in England, and so perhaps you have not had
occasion to consider it; I will here set down, and give you some short
Animadversions upon it.

To His GRACE His MAJESTY'S High-Commissioner, and to the Right Honorable, the
Estates of Parliament.
The Humble ADDRESS of the Presbyterian Ministers and Professors of the Church
of Scotland,
Shows,
THAT as we cannot but acknowledge and adore the Holy and Righteous
Dispensation of the Lord in all the great and long continued Afflictions,
wherewith he has afflicted us for our sins; so we are not a little filled with
admiration at the great and wonderful Providence of our Most Gracious God, who
alone does great Wonders, for his Mercy endures for ever: That at such a Time,
when our strength was gone, and there was none to deliver, He mercifully
stirred up that Pious and Magnanimous Prince William, then Prince of Orange,
now by the good hand of God Our Gracious Sovereign, to Espouse the Interest of
the Protestant Religion, and of the afflicted Ministers and Professors thereof
in these Kingdoms, and has blessed him in so Heroic and Noble an Undertaking
with agreeable success: As also, has raised up your Lordships, our most Noble
and Honorable Patriots, to join heartily with His Majesty, in appearing
zealously for securing of the Protestant Religion in this Kingdom, and for what
may tend to the better establishment thereof in all its concerns; and in
evidencing your just Indignation against the Corruptions of Church and State,
in your Lordships Claim of Right: And particularly by freeing us of the Yoke of
Prelacy, and of the undue Powers, and Ecclesiastical Supremacy in Church
Matters, formerly established in the Supreme Magistrate. And these your
Lordships zealous beginnings for appearing for the interest of the Protestant
Religion, and Professors thereof, have been, and are great matter of joy to our
hearts, and of blessing and magnifying our Lord and Master in your Lordships
behalf: So they are a door of hope to us, and to all that love the true
Reformed Protestant Religion in this Land, That his Grace, His Majesty's High
Commissioner, and this Honorable Court of Parliament, will in your Station, go
on zealously in your work of purging this poor oppressed Church, from all
Corruptions brought into it, by Ambitious and Covetous Churchmen, who sought
their own things, but not the things of Jesus Christ; and from all the sad
Consequences, which have followed upon the Erecting of Prelacy; such as were
the driving several hundreds of Ministers all at one time out of their
Churches, without either accusation or citation; and the filling of their
places with Ignorant and Scandalous Persons (which His Majesty is Graciously
Pleased to Notice in his Declaration for Scotland, as an occasion of all this
poor Churches Miseries, and from which unsupportable Sufferings, He declared
His Resolution to relieve and rescue us,) And we may add, with many also
erroneous and unsound in the Faith, Enemies to the Reformation, and who have
now appeared disaffected to the present Civil Government; as also framing of a
numerous train of severe Laws, severely Executed both on Ministers and People
of all degrees; so for that even while we were counted and treated as Sheep for
the slaughter, we might not Petition or Complain, without rendering our selves
highly Criminal by the Laws and Acts then made. All which, we hope, the
Commissioner his Grace, and your Lordships in this present Parliament will take
to your serious Consideration, and will free this poor oppressed Church from
such Oppressors and Oppressions, and settle it again upon the right Foundations
of Government and Discipline, agreeable to the Word of God, and Established in
this Church by Law, near an hundred years ago. Which settlement, we are
confident, will prove the best remedy of all our otherways incurable
distractions, and the mean of quieting and uniting the whole Country, in a
joint and firm Opposition against all His Majesty's, and your Lordships Enemies.

We therefore, His Majesty's most Loyal Subjects, and your Lordships most
humble and dutiful Servants in Christ, Humbly beseech the Commissioner his
Grace, and Honorable Estates of Parliament, seeing the Kings Majesty has
Declared, and your Lordships with him, have Zealously appeared for the
Protestant Religion, you will be Graciously Pleased, by your Civil Sanction, to
Establish and Ratify the late Confession of Faith, with the larger and shorter
Catechisms (which contain the sum and substance of the Doctrine of the Reformed
Churches) The Directory of Worship, and Presbyterial Church Government and
Discipline, all agreeable to the Word of God, and formerly received by the
general Consent of this Nation. And seeing Prelacy, and all who have entered
under Prelacy, have been imposed upon the Church, without her Consent, in any
of her free General Assemblies; and that Presbyterial Government, cannot be
secure in the hands of them, who are of contrary Principles; Therefore we
humbly Petition that the Church Government may be Established in the hands of
such only, who by their former Carriage and Sufferings have Evidenced, that
they are known sound Presbyterians, and well affected to His Majesty's
Government; or who, hereafter shall be found to be such, (which are hopeful by
the Grace of God, shall be managed with such Christian Prudence, Moderation and
Tenderness, as shall leave no just matter of Complaint to any) and that not
only these Ministers yet alive, who were unjustly thrust from their Churches,
may be restored thereto; and these Parishes and Flocks at that time, no less
violently imposed upon, may be freed from Intruders; But also, all other
Presbyterian Ministers, who either are already, or may be, by respective Flocks
orderly called hereafter, may have access to be settled in Churches after the
Presbyterian way, as they shall be Ecclesiastically approved and appointed, and
may have your Lordships Civil Sanction added thereunto.

And we also Request, that the Church thus Established may be allowed by your
Lordships Civil Sanction, to appoint Visitations for purging out insufficient,
negligent, scandalous and erroneous Ministers. And seeing Patronages which had
their Rise in the most corrupt and latter times of Antichristianism have always
been a great grievance to this Church, as the source and fountain of a Corrupt
Ministry, That these may be Abolished; And that the Church may be Established
upon its former good Foundations, Confirmed by many Acts of Parliament, since
the year one thousand five hundred and sixty. And that all Acts contrary to
this Government, that ratify Ceremonies, and impose Punishments on
Presbyterians for Nonconformity, and for Worshipping of God according to their
Principles, may be Abrogate. And as a good and necessary mean for preserving
the Purity of the Church, your Lorships take care that Learned, Sound and Godly
Men be put in Universities, and Seminaries, of Learning; (humbly submitting to
your Lordships Wisdom the method of considering and effecting these our
desires). Thus all things being done for the House of the God of Heaven,
according to the Commandment of the God of Heaven, by your Lordships pious and
wise managing these Affairs of the Church of Christ: This poor, long oppressed,
and tossed Church; may at length, through God's Blessing, arrive at a safe and
quiet Harbor; and the true Honor and Happiness of His Majesty and your
Lordships, as the signal Nursing Fathers of the Church of Christ in this Land,
may be advanced and continued to future Generations: And so the Blessing of the
Church that was ready to perish, may remain still upon His Majesty and your
Lordships.

And your Lordships Petitioners shall ever Pray, that God may Bless and Protect
the Persons of Their Majesty's King William and Queen Mary long to rule and
govern this Nation, and your Lordships under them.

This Petition word for word (unless it was in one or two Sentences) had been
presented by them to the Parliament the year before; (for a man may be against
set forms in their Petitions to God, yet for them in Petitions to Parliaments)
while the Duke of Hamilton was Commissioner, but his Grace was no ways pleased
with it for several Reasons, but principally that they craved, that the Church
Government might be Established in the hands of such only who by their former
carriage and sufferings had evidenced, that they were known sound
Presbyterians. For what was this (said his Grace) but to pull down one sort of
Prelacy, and set up another in its place; to abolish one that was consistent
and intelligible, and establish another that implied Contradictions? And indeed
there was no answering this difficulty. For there were but about fifty or sixty
such Ministers alive in the whole Nation; And it was craved that the Government
of the Church should be Established in their hands in the first Instance? which
what was it else but instead of fourteen Prelatical, to give us about fifty or
sixty Presbyterian Bishops? But such was the posture of their Affairs at that
time, that there was no other way they could see for securing their Interest,
and so they made Necessity Justify a little Nonsense; and this year they had a
more favorable Commissioner to deal with, the good Earl of Melvill. But then
there is a great deal of considerable stuff in it. For observe, I pray you, the
charitable judgment they make of the Bishops and Episcopal Clergy. All the
distractions have been in this Kingdom will continue still incurable, unless
this poor oppressed Church be purged from all Corruptions brought into it, by
ambitions and covetous Churchmen, (it is well they are allowed to be
Churchmen) who sought their own things, but not the things of Jesus Christ.
And with whom were the Churches filled when Prelacy was erected, and the
Presbyterian Ministers turned out? With ignorant and scandalous Persons, nay
with many erroneous, and unsound in the Faith, and Enemies to the Reformation,
and till the Church is freed from these Oppressors, and Oppressions she can
never be right, is not all this charitably said? Yet this is not the worst of
it. For, consider the whole strain of the Petition, and they are the only
Protestants of the Nation; For if we may believe them. God stirred up the
Prince of Orange to espouse the Interest of the Protestant Religion, and of the
afflicted Ministers and Professors thereof. And yet I am very sure many will
confidently affirm he did not espouse (at his first coming to Britain at least)
the Interest of the afflicted Ministers of their Persuasion in Scotland.
Further, God raised up their Lordships (the Members of Parliament) their most
noble and honorable Patriots to prejoyn heartily with His Majesty in appearing
zealously for serving the Protestant Religion in this Kingdom, and for what may
tend for the better Establishing of it in all its concerns. Now what is all
this, but that though King James had given a Toleration to the Presbyterians,
yet that put them only in a very weak, uncertain, and arbitrary State, and they
could not be well enough till they had a legal Establishment Exclusive of all
Popish Prelates, and their Adherents. And not only so, but the steps the
Parliament have already made, have opened a door of hope to them, and to all
that love the true Reformed Protestant Religion in this Land, that they will go
on zealously, etc. Which words are not capable of another sense than this, that
whosoever is not Zealous against Prelacy and for Presbytery, is not a Lover of
the true Reformed Protestant Religion.

There are a great many other things in this Petition which deserve their
proper Remarks; but I will not take notice of them any more, but as they fall
in naturally in the progress of this Paper, and then they shall be considered:
The first of which, shall be the Case of the Presbyterian Ministers who were
turned out of these Churches, they possessed, after the first of January, 1661.
Where in this Petition you see the great injury which was done them is mightily
aggravated: Several hundreds of them, all at one time, were driven out of their
Churches, without either Accusation or Citation. And this was so palpable a
Persecution, so manifest an Effort of Oppression and Tyranny; That His Majesty
was graciously pleased to take notice of it in his Declaration for Scotland,
1688. which it is very true he did, for his words are: That the Dissenters in
Scotland have just cause of distrust, when they call to mind, how some hundreds
of their Ministers were driven out of their Churches, without either Accusation
or Citation. Nay our Petitioners are at it again, in another place of the same
Petition, and Crave; That these Ministers who were unjustly thrust from their
Churches may be restored thereto; and these Parishes and Flocks, at that time
no less violently imposed upon, may be freed from Intruders. This case, I say,
I shall in the first place consider; because it was the first thing in the
Petition, which was redressed by the Parliament. For within a day or two after
this Petition was presented, this Act was made, which I have transmitted to you.

ACT restoring the Presbyterian Ministers, who were thrust from their Churches
since the first of January, 1661. April 25. 1690.
Forasmuch, as by an Act of this present Parliament, relative to, and in
Prosecution of the Claim of Right, Prelary and the Superiority of
Church Officers above Presbyters, is abolished; and that many Ministers of the
Presbyterian Persuasion, since the first of January, 1661. have been deprived
of their Churches, or banished for not conforming to Prelacy, and not complying
with the Courses of the Time. Therefore their Majesty's with the Advice and
Consent of the Estates of Parliament, Ordain and Appoint that all those
Presbyterian Ministers yet alive, who were thrust from their Churches since the
first day of January, 1661. or Banished for not conforming to Prelacy, and not
complying with the Courses of the Time, have forthwith free access to their
Churches, and that they may presently exercise the Ministry in those Parishes,
without any New Call thereto; and allows them to brook and enjoy the benefits
and stipends thereunto belonging and that for the whole Crop 1689. and
immediately to enter to the Churches and Manses, where the Churches are vacant,
and where they are not vacant, then their entry thereto is declared to be the
half of the Benefice and Stipend, due and payable at Michaelmass last, for the
half year immediately preceding betwixt Whitsunday and Michaelmass: Declaring
that the present Incumbent shall have right to the other half of the Stipend
and Benefice payable for the Whitsunday last bypast: And to the effect that
these Ministers may meet with no stop or hinderance, in entering immediately to
their Charges, the present Incumbents in such Churches are hereby appointed
upon intimation hereof to desist from their Ministry in these Parishes, and to
remove themselves from the Manses and Glebes thereunto belonging, betwixt and
Whitsunday next to come, and that the Presbyterian Ministers formerly put out
may enter peaceably thereto. And appoints the Privy Council to see this Act put
in Execution.

Which Act you see uses the same colors for representing the odiousness of the
usage these Presbyterian Ministers had received, that the Declaration and the
Presbyterian Petition had made use of before, especially in the statutory part,
where it says in express terms, that they were thrust from their Charges,
(which can import no less than Force and Violence in opposition to Law and
Justice, it calls the Churches from which they had been thus thrust, their
Churches): As if notwithstanding their dispossession they had still continued
to have a Title good in Law, and it restores them forthwith to the exercise of
their Ministry in their Parishes, without any New Call thereto; Each of which
singly, much more altogether make it evident, that this their restitution was
intended by the Parliament not as an Act of Favor, but of Justice, as if these
Ministers had been unjustly and illegally dispossessed, and now Sir.

When all these things are laid together, so solemn a Declaration, the
Presbyterian Ministers so earnest Petition, and the Parliaments so public an
Act, all conspiring to represent that matter so very odious and unjust, I hope
it shall not be displeasing to you, if I shall endeavor briefly to set it in
its due light. It is true indeed a good many of these Ministers were
dispossessed Anno 1662. how many, I confess I cannot tell exactly, but I doubt
much if they were so many as they are commonly said to be. I shall likewise
grant, that they were dispossessed without either Accusation or Citation.
Herein I acknowledge they speak truth, and yet I doubt if you shall find so
much as one jot of iniquity in their dispossession when it is considered
impartially. The case was truly this,

As before the Reformation of Religion in this Kingdom (which as to its Legal
Establishment is variously dated, some reckoning from the year 1560. others
from 1567.) Patronages of Churches in this Kingdom were in force; so when the
Church was reformed, (notwithstanding of all the Changes which were then, and
have been since) our Law did still continue them, and no man was ever judged to
have a Legal Title to any Church or Benefice; unless he had a Presentation from
the Patron, and a Collation from the Bishop, whilst Episcopacy was the Legal
Establishment; which it continued to be for many years after the Reformation,
without interruption: or from a Presbytery after Presbyterian Government began
to prevail. And as this was still our Law without any shadow of interruption,
so it was likewise the constant Practice of the Nation, not only before the
late Presbyterian Rebellion against King Charles the First commenced, but even
for a good number of years after, that is, till about the year 1646. or 1647.
when the Rebellion by Divine Permission turned prosperous, and the Kings
Affairs were reduced to a very low ebb, and the Presbyterian Interest was in a
very flourishing condition: till that time I say, Presentations by Patrons to
Churches were in constant practice (as well as warranted by Law) in this
Kingdom. But then indeed the Kirk-men, sensible of their strength, began to
adventure amongst other illegal Usurpations (to say no worse) to take upon them
the disposal of Churches and Benefices, by bringing that Cheat, which they
called Popular Elections, in Vogue, and Presentations by Patrons in desuetude.
I call Popular Election a Cheat; for in effect it was no other: and the poor
deluded Populace had no more true Power than before, and Ministers were as much
imposed on them then as ever, as might easily be made appear, not only from the
common Methods were then taken in managing Elections, but also from the express
Limitations and Restrictions with which even the General Assemblies clogged
them. However the sound of the Name, for a while, enchanted the unthinking
multitude; and the Party had a turn to serve by it: and so it was pushed on
with a great deal of Zeal in many places, without any considerable opposition
(as indeed who durst then adventure to oppose what the Ministers were for). The
Party thus finding their Strength successful in so many single instances,
gathered suitable degrees of Courage; and pursued their design so effectually,
that at last they got Patronages abolished, and Popular Elections set up by a
certain Meeting of some Noblemen, Gentlemen and Burgesses, who were pleased to
call themselves a Parliament Anno 1649. And this Act of that pretended
Parliament, if it even deserves that Name, was all the pretense of Law that
ever was for Popular Elections in this Church since the Reformation; but it was
enough for the then Kirk; any shadow or color of a Pretext, being still both
Law and Gospel to them, when it makes for their purpose. And accordingly all
the Ministers who were settled in any Churches after that time, till the happy
Restitution of the Monarchy, that is for eleven or twelve years, were promoted
after this new method.

No man, I think, can doubt but this was a palpable encroachment upon the
rights of Patrons, and a trampling on Law, and by consequence a thing that
called loudly for redress, when the King was restored, and the Government began
to turn upon its proper hinges, and so no wonder if the first Parliament which
was called by His Majesty took notice of it, as indeed they did, in their first
Session which was holden Anno 1661. for in that Session two Acts were made
which demonstrate, that the Parliament still looked upon Patronages as
subsisting by Law, notwithstanding the illegal interruption which had been made
by the Act of the pretended Parliament in 1649. For instance in Act 36. 1.
Parl. Chapter 2d. Session 1. it is statuted, and ordained, That all Patrons shall
be careful in time coming to grant Presentations only to such as shall give
sufficient evidence of their Piety, Loyalty, Literature and Peacable
Disposition, and who before they receive the Presentation shall take the Oath
of Allegiance, etc. And in that same Act it is narrated: That the King's
Majesty has given a Commission, under the great Seal, as to all Presentations,
to all Parsonages, Vicarages, and other Benefices, and Kirks at His Majesty's
Presentation: And all this without so much as once taking notice of that Act
1649. And the 54th. Act of that same first Session is altogether in favor of
Laick Patrons. Now both these Acts, I say, were made Anno 1661. and so, before
Episcopacy was restored, which was not till May 1662. which I observe, because,
our present Presbyterians in their so often named Petition make the turning out
of their Ministers Anno 1662. one of the sad consequences of the erection of
Prelacy. For seeing the Parliament before the Restitution of Prelacy had
considered Patronages as still subsisting by Law; as is evident from these two
Acts. It Is evident if they were to Act consequentially they could not forbear
to make some such Act as was made Anno 1662. (of which I shall instantly give
you a further Account) though Episcopacy had never been Established. Nor can
there be any imaginable difficulty to any man in this matter unless it be made
a question, whether the Parliament when they thus supposed Patronages as still
subsisting by Law made a just supposition. But that I think may be very soon
determined: For as I have said all the old Laws of the Kingdom were positive
for Patronages; only that Act of the pretended Parliament Anno 1649. could be
pleaded for popular Elections; and what a Parliament was that? A Convention of
Rebels, who had presumed to meet without being called by any Authority, except
what they Treasonably assumed to themselves. For all the World knows that King
Charles the I. at that time was dead, I need not tell you how; and King Charles
the II. was not within his Dominions, and was so far from calling that
Parliament, or being present himself, or having any Commissioner or
Representative at it, that I doubt much if he knew that there was such a
meeting till it was Dissolved. All which (and many more such nullities, which
for brevity I forbear to mention) was so recent and notorious, Anno 1661. That
the Parliament, tho it casted and annulled all the Acts of the pretended
Parliament holden in the years 1640, 41, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, by its 15th Act,
yet did not so much as make the least mention of that Meeting in the 49th, not
thinking it worthy of the Name, so much as of a Pretended Parliament. For
which, whether they had not reason, I leave to the World to judge. But to
proceed.

The Parliament having laid such a foundation, An. 1661. and continuing to act
consequentially Anno 1662. They made an Act about the middle of May, which
because it so distinctly clears the whole matter in its Narrative, I have
transcribed at large.

ACT concerning such Benefices and Stipends as have been possessed without
Presentation from the lawful Patrons.
THE Kings most Excellent Majesty, being desirous that all his good Subjects
may be sensible of the happy effects and fruits of the Royal Government, by a
free, peaceable, and easy enjoyment of their due interests and properties
under his protection. And that in his Restitution they may find themselves
restored to those Rights which by Law were secured unto them, and by the
violence and injustice of the late troubles and Confusions have been wrested
from them: And considering that, notwithstanding the right of Patronages be
duly settled, and established by the ancient and fundamental Laws, and
Constitutions of this Kingdom, yet diverse Ministers of this Church, have and do
possess Benefices and Stipends in their respective Cu^res without any right or
presentation to the same from the Patrons. And it being therefore most just,
that the lawful and undoubted Patrons of Kirks be restored to the possession of
the Rights of their respective Advocations, Donations, and Patronages.
Therefore his Majesty with advice and consent of his Estates of Parliament does
statute and ordain, That all these Ministers who entered to the Cure of any
Parish in Burgh or Land within this Kingdom, in or since the year 1649. (at and
before which time the Patrons were most injuriously dispossessed of their
Patronages) have no right unto, nor shall receive, uplift, nor possess, the
rents of any Benefice, modified Stipends, Mause or Glebe for this present Crop,
1662. nor any year following, but their Places, Benefices, and Kirks, are ipso
jure vacant. Yet his Majesty to evidence his willingness to pass by, and cover
the miscarriages of his People, does with advice aforesaid declare, that this
Act shall not be prejudicial to any of these Ministers in what they have
possessed or is due to them since their admission, and that every such Minister
who shall obtain a presentation from the lawful Patron, and have Collation from
the Bishop of the Diocese where he lives, betwixt and the twentieth of
September next to come, shall thenceforth have right to, and enjoy his Church,
Benefice, Mause, Glebe as fully and freely as if he had been lawfully presented
and admitted thereto at his first entry, or as any Minister within the Kingdom
does or may do. And for that end it is hereby ordained, that the respective
Patrons shall give presentations to all the present Incumbents who in due time
shall make application to them for the same. And in case any of these Churches
shall not be thus duly provided before the said twentieth of September, then
the Patron shall have freedom to present another betwixt and the twentieth day
of March 1663. which, if he shall refuse or neglect, the presentation shall
then fall to the Bishop jure devoluto, according to former Laws. And such like
His Majesty with advice foresaid does Statute and Ordain the Archbishops, and
Bishops to have the power of new Admission and Collation to all such Churches
and Benefices, as belong to their respective Sees, and which have valted since
the year 1637. And to be careful to plant and provide these their own Kirks
conform to this Act.

This Act you see is so very clear and plain, that it would be superfluous to
insist on any long explications of it, only three things I would desire you to
remember in it.

The first is, That, as I noted before, The Parliament insists mainly on the
Rights and Privileges of the Patrons in the narrative and form of this Act; so
that the Presbyterians talk wide in their Petition, when they say that this Act
was one of the sad consequences of the Erection of Prelacy. Nay

Secondly, As it is obvious to any who considers this. This Act does not at all
consider these Ministers as Presbyterian, for then it would have considered all
Presbyterian Ministers equally, which it does not: for it only considers such
as had illegally possessed themselves of such Churches and Benefices from the
year 1649. at least so far as Laick Patrons are concerned. But not so much as a
word of such as had entered before that year, and yet there were many such: And
this Act was so far from depriving them that they continued in the exercise of
their Ministry, and enjoyed their Benefices for many years after that Act was
made, and put in execution.

The third thing is, The Clemency of the then Government even toward these who
had possessed themselves illegally of Churches after the year 1649. For you see
the Act declares that the Parliaments Sentence, pronouncing all such Churches
ipso jure vacant, was without prejudice to any of these Ministers, who should
apply themselves to the lawful Patron, and obtain his Presentation. What
greater temper could the Government then show? Would they have had it to have
downright authorized their illegal Usurpations? Was this to thrust them from
their Charges, when they might have kept them upon so equitable terms? And was
this a grievous Persecution? But to go on,

Notwithstanding that this Act was as peremprory, as it was just and
reasonable, yet a great many of these Ministers who had entered illegally after
the year 1649, from what Principle I am not now to enquire, turned obstinate,
and refused to take the benefit offered by the Act of Parliament against the
time prefixed: And therefore the Privy Council meeting at Glasgow after the term
was expired, in pursuance of the design of the Act of Parliament, made an Act
declaring all such Churches ipso facto vacant. This was that famous Act which
commonly passes under the name of the Act of Glasgow. And God knows how many
ill things it has been called since by the Party, but with what reason, let any
Man consider. But,

Perhaps that Act has been executed with some wonderful rigidity, and that has
raised the Clamor: No such matter, for in effect they themselves prevented all
the trouble of a rigid Execution; for immediately upon the publication of the
Act of Glasgow, they generally forbore the exercise of their Ministry, and
deserted their Flocks: whether they did so from a mistaken Conceit, That the
Church could not be served without them, and that ere long the Government would
find it self obliged to give them their Will, and court them to return to their
Charges, as many then judged, I shall not now affirm; but that they actually
did so, is so very notorious that to this very day they themselves dare not
deny it. And there is nothing better known, than that they have more than once
condemned themselves, and been condemned by the most judicious of their Parry,
for parting so tamely with their Churches. And now Sir,

Considering all I have said, where was the necessity of either Accusation or
Citation. How ordinary is it in all Kingdoms and Commonwealths to prescribe
such terms by Law, as whosoever shall not perform, shall be deprived of such
and such public encouragements without further process of Law? Need I rub up
your Memory for Example? or have you not one fresh before your Eyes in the
Kingdom of England? Besides it had been absolutely improper in their case, for
the Parliament was not to punish them; as indeed it did not, but only it did
declare, that they had no Title, as it was evident they had none.

I will only add one thing more upon this Head; suppose nothing could have been
said in vindication of their deprivation, or rather dispossession, but it had
been truly unjust; yet methinks it will very ill become the Presbyterian Party
ever after the years 1688. and 1689. to open their Mouths about it; considering
how many Ministers, (who had without Controversy entered to their charges
according to Law) were most barbarously turned out of their Churches by pure
force and Rabble; and all this was justified, and their Churches thereupon
declared vacant, by I need not tell you whom; but of this more afterward. And
so much at present about the dispossession of the Presbyterian Ministers, Anno
1662. But I have not yet done with our Act of Parliament which restored them.
For,

Besides the good Office it did them, we must try if it did any bad Offices to
any other: and here, I think we may make short work of it. For you can no
sooner set your Eye upon it, than you may see, that where the Churches were not
vacant (i. e. where at the date of the Act, viz. the 25 of April 1690. they
were possessed by the Episcopal Clergy) from which the Presbyterians had been
thrust out, their restitution to them is declared to be to the half of the
Benefice, and Stipend due and payable at Michaelmas Anno 1689. for the half
year immediately preceding betwixt Whitsunday and Michaelmas, and the present
Prelatical Incumbent shall have right only to the other half, payable at
Whitsunday: And withal to the effect the Presbyterian Ministers may meet with
no stop or hinderance in entering immediately to their Charges, the present
Incumbents in such Churches are appointed upon intimation of this Act to desist
from their Ministry in these Parishes, and to remove themselves from the Mauses
and Glebes thereto belonging, betwixt and Whitsunday next to come; that is in
six weeks time, or perhaps six days, just as the intimation shall be made. Now,

Not to insist on their case who had made no Compliance with the Civil
Government, because I know not what severities their sin may merit. I would
only ask you what may be thought of the case of those who had complied with the
present Civil Government, and had still continued in the exercise of their
Ministry at their respective Churches, many of them till near Whitsunday 1690.
and some of them after it, whether was it equitable or not thus to deprive them
of a whole years Benefice, for which they had served, and notwithstanding they
were as good Subjects as their Majesty's could desire, to turn them out of
their Churches to which they had entered according to Law, without the least
ground of hope to be provided of other Churches or Livings? Are they protected
and encouraged according to the merit of their compliance? Will this usage they
have met with be a good Motive for prevailing with the scrupulous, to bring
them into a dutiful submission to the Government? Well; the good Old Cause is a
wonderful thing, what can it not justify? But enough of this. And so I have
done with the second Act of the last Session of Parliament, which concerned the
Church, or the Clergy. Only,

Before I proceed to the next, it will not be amiss I think to hint at some of
its effects. I think you will not be very unwilling to believe, that those
known sound Gentlemen in whose favor it was made, would be forward enough to
have it put in execution, and indeed there was no want of zeal that way, but
whether according to the strictest Rules of Christian simplicity and self
denial in all instances, you may judge by these two at the present.

The first shall be the famous Mr. James Kirtoun, one of the most noted
Presbyterian Preachers in the whole Kingdom. This (known sound) Man had
entered, by the thing called the Popular Call, to the Church of Martin in the
last times of Presbytery, and had been deprived with the rest in the year 1662.
When K. James gave his toleration, Anno 1687. he was preferred to a
Meeting House in Edinburgh where, it seems, he found better encouragement than
he expected to meet with, if he should return to his own Country-parish of
Martin: And in this Meeting House he continued, till after this Act of
Parliament passed. Mr. Meldrum the Episcopal Minister at Martin had complied
with the Civil Government, and done all Duty; and so continued still in the
exercise of his Ministry there till toward the end of August 1690. that is ten
or twelve weeks after Whitsunday; and not till then it was, that good Mr.
Kirkton went to visit his poor old Parish. But then he went indeed with Energy
suitable to his Party: for no sooner arrived he there, but presently he turned
peremptory, demanded the benefit of the Act of Parliament, thrust Meldrum from
the Parsonage-house and the Church; preached two Sundays there, and secured
thereby his Title to the whole Benefice, from Whitsunday. 1689. and then
returned to Edinburgh, where (as I hear) he has still resided since, without
ever more minding his old Flock at Martin; and who can blame him? For every one
who knows them both, knows that Edinburgh is a much better place, and now he
has left his Meeting house, and possessed himself of a Church in that City,
after a certain sort of providential manner: but I will not trouble you with an
account of it at present, hoping that you may learn it shortly from another
hand: In the mean time Martin continues still vacant. Kirkton is wiser (as I
have said) than to put it in the balance with Edinburgh: The rest of the
Presbyterian Divines think it reasonable to take the best Benefices, so long as
they have so much scope for choice; Neither will they suffer Meldrum the
Prelatist to return at any rate. And they are in the Right, for the first book
of Discipline says, It Is better to have no Minister at all than a bad one. Now
the Subsumption is easy, if the Man ever owned Episcopacy.

The other Instance shall be Mr. William Violent, one of the gravest and ablest
Men of the Party; he had been Minister before the restitution of the
Government, at East-Ferry in the Shire of Fife, and was also dispossessed with
the rest, Anno 1662. but he wanted a Benefice no longer (I think) than till K.
Charles II. granted his Indulgence for planting some Churches in the West
with-Presbyterian Ministers, which was in the year, 1669. For he was among the
first that embraced that Indulgence, and was possessed of the Church of
Cambus-Netham; where he continued till about the year 1684. when that
Indulgence was retracted, and the Laws were put in execution. But after K.
James his toleration came out in the year 1678, he took the benefit of that
too, returned to Cambus-Netham; got a Meeting House (for the Church was planted
with a regular Minister) and continued there (without ever minding the Ferry,
where there was no such encouragement) till he had this Act of Parliament for
him, and then about Whitsunday, 1690. To the Ferry he comes, dispossesses Mr.
White a very old Man, who by reason of his Age was not able to officiate by
himself. But his Assistant, one Mr. Wood, had complied in all points with the
Civil Government; secures to himself the Benefice according to the Act; and
then returns to his better Provision at Cambus-Netham, where he had the
Benefice also, by another Act of the same Parliament, and where he still
continued till he got a Call to be a Professor of Theology in the New College
in St. Andrews: and so in one year he got the Rents of no less than three
Benefices. Now this is pretty strange, considering that it was wont to be one
of the principal Common Places of the Party in their invidious declamations
against the pretended Corruptions of the Church of England. For none was
represented in blacker Dress, than the business of Pluralities, unless it was
her Antichristian Hierarchy and Idolatrous Liturgy. But I remember I heard a
rare Note of a Sermon, which was preached within these three years. The Godly
may sin, but the wicked must not. And so I leave that second Act of the late
Parliament and all its Appendages.

Proceed we now to consider the next, which concerned the Church and Clergy;
namely, that wonderfully famous one. Entitled, Act Ratifying the Confession of
Faith, and settling Presbyterian Church Government, dated at Edinburgh June the
seventh, 1690.

This Presbyterian Church government is the great Diana of the Party, and the
true Parent of all these Tumults, Rabbles and Confusions, which ruined
Religion, desolated the Church, and oppressed the Clergy: And therefore, this
Act that establishes it, deserves a little more fully to be considered, which I
shall do by these steps.

1. I shall briefly deduce the Arts were used, and the Methods were taken, to
work up the Parliament to a suitable temper, before this weighty Point came to
be debated, and voted in the House. 2. I shall consider the Treatment it met
with in the House. And, 3. What Consequences it has produced since. To begin
with the
First, Indeed all hands were never more busy at work, than on that occasion.
Prelacy, as no doubt you know already had been declared an intolerable
grievance and trouble to this Nation, and contrary to the inclinations of the
generality of the People ever since the Reformation, the year before, in our
new claim of Right. This the meeting of Estates had done in an hurry (how truly
and honestly, you may perhaps learn more fully on another occasion) after the
whole Ecclesiastical State; and a great many Members of both the other two had
deserted the House; in pursuance of the same Article of the Claim of Right. The
same intolerable Prelacy was abolished by the same meeting of Estates, after it
was declared a Parliament about the 8th of July the same year. But then the
House could not agree about a new form of Government, to be introduced upon the
Church. Several Schemes were drawn and presented, but none pleased all Parties,
and so no form at all was established, but the Church continued in a state of
mere matter, without form and void of Government, for eleven Months after. A
strange state, sure, for a Christian Church: I doubt if you shall find its
parallel, since ever there was one; for there was much more in it than a sede
vacant. But to go on,

During this state of Anarchy in the Church, some People's heads began to
settle (as indeed they had need, after such an universal giddiness) and the
sudden zeal many had lately taken up for Presbytherian Parity began to cool and
relent, if not to decay and languish: People turned thoughtful, and began to
reflect and examine, whether they had found Prelacy so intolerable a burden,
as the meeting of the Estates had declared it to have been; and their own sense
not telling them any such thing: But finding their Necks not so much galled by
that Yoke, which for some 27 or 28 years had lain upon them, and withal,
calling to mind how many Necks had smarted so very sharply under the former
Reign of Presbytery, that they were no longer able to bear their Heads. They
began to compare things, and to consider if it was not better to continue at
blunt Cudgels with Prelacy, than come straight to downright Sharps with Parity.
In short, so far did such reasonings and recollections prevail, That the
Inclinations of the generality of the people, which had been made the Standard
in April 1689. were beginning to discover themselves to be very much different
from what the Party expected, about the end of that year, and the beginning of
1690. And there was no little solicitude among them, lest they had mistaken
their Measures, and their dear Parity might chance not to be established,
according to their wishes: And therefore I say, all hands were most actively at
work, and the whole Sect were studying to acquit themselves with a suitable
diligence and application, about the time the Parliament was a meeting. For
instance, not only had the Preachers their old Petition in readiness to be
presented whenever it should be seasonable, of which I have discoursed already.
But also,

That same week, if I remember right; the very day before the Parliament met, a
worthy Piece came hot from the Press, Entitled, A true Representation of
Presbyterian Government, etc. It was written by one Mr. Gilbert Rule the
Pamphleteer General for the Party. We had no less than three Editions of it in
a very few days, and the last the most considerable: For besides several
Corrections and Enlargements in the Book, it had the addition of a Preface,
wherein we were told that the Book was written half a year before, and endured
an Examen Rigorosum of the most Judicious of the Party; which was News indeed,
for no body would have known that by reading the Book. It is truly a mavelous
Work, for in it you have not only the Divine Right of Parity among Churchmen,
and Kirk-Sessions, and Presbyteries, and Provincial Synods, and National
Assemblies, and Ruling Elders, and popular Elections, etc. most doughtily
asserted; (it was no part of his task to prove) but also Presbytery and
Monarchy reconciled to an ace: and the putting the Government entirely in the
hands of the known sound Men most mysteriously justified. Doubtless it has been
an unaccountable negligence in some body, that it has not been, before this
time, Reprinted in England, and carefully dispersed all over that Kingdom. For
who knows what light it might have diffused, and what Reformations it might
have wrought among you. But that which I am concerned to take notice of in it
at present, is only this, That though the Author is content, that by the bye,
it should advance Gods Glory, and do good to Souls; yet he confesses neither of
these was his principal end for publishing it, at that time. For that was
especially that Presbyterian Government might stand right in the opinion of the
King and Parliament, etc.

And as Presbytery was thus represented and recommended, so the like care was
taken to disgrace and defame Prelacy, in Pamphlets and Pasquils, as the very
vilest of all vile things. And to all such Dirt, Trash, etc. the Press was
open; but a Prelatist might as well expect to subvert the Government, as to get
one Sheet Published in defense of his Cause. But this was not all,

It was not fit that the fate of the good old Cause should stand on nothing
else but Paper supporters: The influence of two or three principal Statesmen
(and if you please, you may join with them States-women), commonly carries on a
Cause more effectually than a thousand Printed Volumes; and therefore it was
necessary, that tool should be tried also, as vigorously as was possible. And
therefore the great Lord Melvill a constant Friend to the good Cause, and now
Their Majesty's Comissioner, must give vent to his Zeal, in his Speech he made
to the Parliament (they say with very little assurance) the first day they met.
But whatever his Influence or Zeal might be, his Rhetoric was, no doubt,
infinitely short of the florid and genuine Eloquence of that Learned as well as
Potent Lord W. E. of C. who, the next meeting, which was April 22. delivered a
Sermon to the House, wherein it was easy to discern no less Zeal, than Art;
and no less Art, than Wisdom. It was forthwith Published, so that I cannot
think, but you have seen it already. However to make all sure I have herewith
sent you a Copy of it. It Is true blue all over, and you Vid. Paper at the end
of this Book.
may be much enlightened by it. His Lordship was President of the Parliament,
and that gave him the precious opportunity to open his Mouth and speak.

Thus were the Commissioners place, and the Chair filled, and the Press
employed. And who can imagine that upon such an exigence the Pulpit would be
silent? That sure is not to be supposed: And indeed it was never exercised more
warmly: For not only had they been still making it their work to promote their
Interest by Melancholy Declamations against Prelacy, Prelates, and Prelatical
Churchmen, after they had got footing in the Churches: A Theme they are
generally better skilled in, than in the substantial things of Christianity;
but especially at that time, their Fears quickening their Zeal, they were
extremely eager, and every one as he had the fortune to Preach before the
Parliament, was sure to signalize his fervor, as much as any other of his good
qualities, in behalf of Christ's Kingdom, as they call their Yesterdays Parity.
I must confess indeed I had neither the opportunity nor inclination to hear
their Sermons; but as I was told by some who did, and as I learned by such of
them as were published, no man needed condemn them of Coldness or Indifferency;
Thus,

Mr. George Meldrum of whom you have a sufficient Account in the History of our
late General Assembly, in his Sermon preached before the Parliament April 27,
exhorts them to go on zealously in settling the Government of the Church of
Christ, according to his own appointment, recommends unto them that Word of
Artaxerxes, Ezra, 7. 23. (this Text was scarce ever missed by any of them)
Whatsoever is commanded by the God of Heaven, let it be done diligently for the
house of the God of Heaven, etc. commends them, and blesses the Lord, that with
so much Unity and Harmony (for the party had been infinitely afraid of the A
Company of Noblemen and Gentlemen Members of the Convention and Parliament, who
had been very Zealous at first for King William, and had not a little promoted
the Revolution in Scotland, turned afterward malecontent; because (as
themselves said) the Claim of Right was not observed; or (as their Adversaries
allege) because they were disappointed of the Preferments and Rewards, they
thought due to their early services. To these joined some other Members, who
had been thought Jacobites, and they altogether were called the Club. They
struggled for some time against the designs of the Commissioner, etc. but at
length were defeated.
Club, that it should have marred all their designs, but by that time it was
found too weak) they had gone some footsteps already, (that is, had abolished
Prelacy and the Supremacy, and restored the Presbyterian Ministers) exhorts
them to go on, and prays that God may be with them, etc. Was not this pretty
fair for an old Conformist? But,

Good Mr. Spalding Clerk to the late General Assembly, who had sat many a day
in a little Shop in the Town of Irwin, and measured out in retail many a Noggan
of Brandy, was a man of much finer metal, for in his Sermon which he preached
before the House upon the Eleventh of May (the second that was published) he
tells them in truer style, that now God was making way for the utter ruin and
fall of Antichrist and Popery, in all the forms of it, (two of which, to be
sure, are Episcopacy wherever it is, and the Liturgy of England) that not so
much as a Rag of the Whore may remain, and his Church may sing in triumph
Babylon the Great is fallen, is fallen: For why? God is now carrying on the
establishment of Zion upon her right basis and foundation. And to show that he
was not a flattering Gospeller, who respected Persons. He tells them in a
parallel betwixt King Saul and King David on the one hand, and King James, and
King William on the other, (at least I protest, I can make no other sense of
it) that King William is not yet absolutely right, because he has Carnal Fears
to bring the Ark (Presbytery), into his own City (the Church of England) and
again, labor to perfect the Reformation which ye have begun happily, and is
greedily expected; and that speedily, and in the first place command, as in
Ezra 7. 23. That whatsoever is commanded, etc. Let Reformation, I say, be
perfect, and throw to the door all that belongs to the Whore, even the Rags
which she left behind her for an errand to return again (all Prelacy and
Ceremonies and set Forms) and let none of Babels cursed timber and stone be
taken to build the Lords house with. (Let not so much as one Prelatist continue
in the exercise of his Ministry, thrust them all out, that the whole Kirk may
be planted with true Presbyterians). Further yet, ye have under your care and
tutory Christ's own Bride, she is a tender Virgin, and has yet but little
breasts, she has been wounded in the house of her friends (that must needs be,
either by the Cameronians, or the Politic Presbyterians, if I may so call
them, for sure in our Preachers Opinion, all the Prelatists come under the next
denomination) as well as by her Enemies, and she is not yet heal: Her wounds
are yet bleeding: For the Lords sake prove to her as the Compassionate
Samaritan. Luke 10. 24. Bind up her wounds, pour oil into them, and take care
of her, she is nobly born, she is a Kings daughter, Psalm. 45. 13. New come from
her banishment: (For Christ, you must know had no Spouse in Scotland while
Prelacy was in it. She had been banished the Kingdom) And for her Fathers
blessing, for her Bridgroom's blessing, and for her own blessing, who is ready
to perish, deal kindly with her, and be faithful Tutors to her: Yea, ye have
Christ's Crown, his Glory among your hands, (that is Presbyterian Government)
and if you take away, or suffer one Jewel of it to be lost or robbed, not only
your Estates and Lives, but your Souls may go for it, etc. Once more yet: What
will ye say when ye shall be sisted at the great Assise, before the Tribunal of
Christ, to that Question? What Justice and Vote gave you to me, and my
afflicted Church in the first Parliament of King William and Queen Mary in
Scotland? Was you for me or against me? And then he concludes telling them for
their encouragement to Vote right for Presbytery, That, as the eyes of the
Lord, his Holy Angels, and all his People in this Land, yea of all the
Protestant Churches, are upon them, (for who dares doubt but all the Protestant
Churches were extremely concerned to have Presbytery set up in Scotland) so
they are upon the wings of the Prayers of the flower of the Godly in Scotland:
And who would not be animated by such a flight as this? Here was Preaching for
a Parliament!

A Third Sermon, which was Printed, was Preached by the Learned Mr. Rule, whom
I mentioned before, on Sunday the 25th. of May, the Sunday next before the
Wednesday on which the Act was Voted; and so it was time then, or never to
speak, which forsooth, the man did accordingly: For after he had insinuated
enough of dislike to the Club, (as none of them omitted to do), and had
particularly chastised Sir James Montgomery of Skelmurly, though he did not
name him; for Sir James had made a long Speech in the House some days before,
wherein he had pleaded zealously for setting up true Fourty-Nine Presbytery in
all its dimensions; and had made use of this as one of his principal Arguments;
That Presbytery thus Established, would prove the best and most effectual mean,
could be devised for curbing and restraining the extravagancies and excesses of
Princes; which was Interpreted by those of the Gang, as intended of design to
screw up Presbytery to the highest peg, that so it might turn the sooner
intolerable, and by consequence be the sooner turned down again: For though
Sir James the year before, had showed a singular Zeal for the Good Cause, yet
he was now one of the leading Men of the Club: And it was confidently talked,
that he kept a Correspondence with King James, and so he was looked upon by the
Party, as a false Friend as they term it. After our Preacher, (I say) had
fairly chastised Sir James for this, he comes to his purpose by cunning and
smooth advances; For first he tells them, what a Glorious Nation they would
make Scotland by erecting Presbytery in it. The warlike Philistines, the rich
trading Tire, the ancient Ethiopia would be nothing to it. Make poor Scotland a
well Reformed Church (set up Presbyterian Government in it) and you shall
please God, and do him better service, than if you could make her richer, and
more potent and splendid than any of her Neighbor Nations. This was a good
beginning: But what was the next step? Why a necessary fling at Prelacy: We
plead not for a Papacy to be Cardinals or Prelates, etc. As if it were
unquestionable that Prelacy has an essential connection with Papacy or
Cardinalism. After this again, another very courteous humble one for
Presbytery. We pretend not to make Church Laws, but declare those Christ has
made, and to impose them (not what we think fit) by his Authority, and to
censure such as will not obey his Laws, not as we will, but as he has
appointed. We set up no Imperium in Imperio, but a Ministerium etc. Wonderful
fine Cant Alamode. Then another fling, yet not so much at the Scottish as the
English Prelatists. Neither is the Church preferred, nor Religion promoted by
setting up a Pompous, Gaudy, Theatrical kind of Worship, by pretending to adorn
it by Modes and Religious Rites that Christ has not instituted etc. Our
Preacher was owing the Church of England this, because one of her Bishops (Dr.
Cousins Bishop of Durham I think it was), had excommunicated him; from which
Sentence, I believe, to this very hour he was never released; having thus made
his Address, he comes home at length to his business. Let Christ's Church enjoy
all the Prvileges that he has granted her. If any man withhold any one of them,
they do not advance the mountain of the house of the Lord as they should. Sound
Doctrine, pure Ordinances, a godly Ministry, a Government drawn from Christ's
Institution, and Apostolical Practice, and that tends to advance Holiness
(for Prelacy, no doubt, tends to advance nothing but Atheism and Irreligion)
that it be managed by its Friends, (by the known sound Presbyterians, and not
by them that would supplant it) not by these juggling Prelatists, who would now
be content to call themselves Presbyterians, so that they may be permitted to
keep their Benefices) That they assemble as often as is needful for this end, (i.
e. have the power of calling, ordering and disolving General Assembles
independent on the Crown, etc.) That Church Officers be looked out and chosen
by the People of God, and not imposed upon them by men's will: That the
Fountains out of which a Godly Seed for the Church may issue, be kept pure, (i.
e. that no Prelatist be permitted to stay in the Universities) that Discipline
may be duly exercised, and whatever Letts to Religion, and Snares to the
serious godly, Men have framed into Laws (i. e. all the Penal Statutes against
the Presbyterians) may be removed: This would conduce much to the advancement
of the Church; and (N. B.) and if any of these be neglected, she is not set
upon the top of the Mountains, but somewhat else is preferred to her: At this
rate dogmatized Mr. Gilbert.

The Fourth whose Sermon was published, was that able Man Mr. David Williamson:
It Is true indeed it was not Preached till after Presbytery was established; and
so you may think it is inartificially done to bring it in here; but I had
rather take a reproof for transgressing the rules of History, than not record
the Testimony of such a vigorous Witness; especially considering how notable it
is; for it is in real sense, that Christ was a Martyr for Presbyterian
Government. His very words are these; Church Government is no light matter, it
is an ordinance of God, the Royal Diadem of Christ, he was a Martyr on this
head, it was his Ditty on the Cross. Joh. 19. 19. Jesus of Nazareth King of the
Jews. A wonderful Sermon this was as ever you read, I was once at the pains, to
number the particulars he had amassed in it: And if my memory serves me, they
were about 180.

I have thus given you this taste of their Sermons, at once, though it is not so
exactly agreeable to the true order of things, that you may have the fuller view
of them; and I might not be obliged to make so many interruptions as another
method would have required. And by this sample you may judge both of the parts
and zeal of the rest of the Brethren; for it is not to be doubted but those
whose Sermons were not judged accurate enough for the Press, were yet every
whit as much heated with the holy fire, according to the proportions of their
Capacities, as these first Rate-men. But neither was all this yet enough for
securing the precious Interest: It was necessary to set other tools also a
going.

One there was, which I believe had no inconsiderable influence; there was a
generation of Female Advocates, (belike some of them Disciples of such as Mr.
David Williamson) Ladies and Gentlewomen, who came at that time and stayed at
Edinburgh, and made it their work by all imaginable ways, to influence the
Members of Parliament into a zealous disposition to carry on the work.

There was also great throngs of the Preachers still in Town, who could not
have any other business, but to do what they could for advancing the Cause; but
I believe the Holy Sisters, the Citizens Wives, and some of themselves too were
as successful in making Proselytes as the Preachers; for they had better
occasion to traffic with such of the Members, as stayed at their houses, or
were of their acquaintance: And besides they had the other shilling in greater
readiness to give for a pint of Sack; and that goes very far with well disposed
People.

After all these, there was a certain company of Planets, little Luminaries,
Members of Parliament (some of whom I could name if it were needful) who made
it their trade early and late, in season and out of season, in all companies
and on all occasions, to vex the more intelligent, and to fright the less
discerning (and very many were such) into a forwardness for Presbytery. Nay,
more yet, it was confidently talked, that not a few of the meaner sort of
Members got Money, and were kept upon Pension, that they might be servicable.
By these and other such Arts was the Cause carried on, and no Methods were left
unessayed, till a competent number of Votes were secured for every thing, that
the Commissioner intended: While in the mean time the Club was entirely broken,
and the generality of the Kingdom, who were of other Principles, found
themselves obliged to live quietly and wait a more proper season for diligence,
and action. And so much for the first part of my undertaking: Come we now to the

Second, Which is, to give you a brief Account how this Act was prepared,
debated, voted, and at last got the Royal Assent in the House.

It was introduced according to its quality, by the Earl of Sutherland, who
presented an Act to the House concerning it, upon the -- day of -- I have seen
a Copy of it, and thought once upon Transcribing it for your use, but it was
tediously long and coarsely worded, and it contained little more than what you
have in the Printed Act, and therefore after some more thinking, I judged it
not worth the pains. Although it was believed that it was compiled by some of
the Brethren, who were best studied in the matter; some other schemes were also
given in by some other Members, but his Lordship's got the preference: It was
most regarded and best liked by Melvil and Crawford, (who probably had seen it
before) and so it was particularly recommended to the Committee which was
nominated for Church Affairs. Eighteen were at first named to be of that
Committee, viz.

Noblmen. Barons. Burgesses. Earl of Crawford, Sir John Maxwell, Sir Tho.
Stewart of Coltness, E. of Sutherland, Sir Patrick Hume, Anderson for Glascow,
V. of Arburthnet, Sir John Monro, Smith for St. Andrews, V. of Stair, Lord of
Levingston, William Heggins, L. Cardross, Lord of Brodie, James Kenman, L.
Carmichael. Lord of Dalfoilly. Patrick Mordock.

All of the true stamp except the Lord of Levingston, who, it was thought was
named merely for show, or that it might not be said, they were all
Presbyterians: Besides these first Eighteen, I think other two were added
afterward, but I have forgot their names.

This Committee met very often, and commonly they had some of the leading
Ministers with them, for advice: At last after many an hour, and much pains
spent about it, it was returned, by the Committee to the House on Friday the
23d. of May, more briefly and distinctly digested indeed, and much more
smoothly worded; and yet without any substantial alteration, or difference
betwixt it, and the E. of Sutherland's Copy. Being thus prepared and returned
to the House, in the first place, it was twice read over, all the Members
composing themselves to a diligent and headful Attention: This done, not a few
points in it were debated, and several Amendments were made. But before I
proceed further, I will set it down, as it was at last agreed upon, and made a
Law, and then give you a brief account of some particulars in it, which may
perchance contribute something to your better understanding of it.

ACT Ratifying the Confession of Faith and settling Presbyterian
Church Government. June 7. 1690.
OUR Sovereign Lord and Lady the King and Queens Majesty's, and the three
Estates of Parliament, conceiving it to be their bound Duty, after the great
deliverance that God has lately wrought for this Church and Kingdom, in the
first place to settle and secure therein, the true Protestant Religion
according to the truth of Gods word, as it has of a long time been Professed
within this Land: As also, the Government of Christ' s Church within this
Nation, agreeable to the word of God, and most conducive to the advancement of
true Piety and Godliness, and the establishing of Peace and Tranquillity within
this Realm; And that by an Article of the Claim of Right, it is declared, that
Prelacy and the Superiority of any Office in the Church above Presbyters, is
and has been a great and unsupportable Grte vance and Trouble to this Nation,
and contrary to the Inclinations of the generality of the People ever since the
Reformation, they having Reformed from Popery by Presbyters, and therefore
ought to be abolished: Like as by an Act of the last Session of this
Parliament, Prelacy is abolished, therefore their Majesty's, with the Advice
and Consent of the said three Estates do hereby revive, ratify and perpetually
confirm all Laws, Statutes, and Acts of Parliament, made against Popery and
Papists, and for the maintenance and preservation of the true Reformed
Protestant Religion, and for the true Church of Christ within this Kingdom in
so far as they confirm the same, or are made in favors thereof. Like as, they
by these presents, ratify and establish the Confession of Faith now read in
their presence and voted and approven by them, as the public and avowed
Confession of this Church containing the sum and substance of the Doctrine of
the Reformed Churches; (which Confession of Faith is subjoyned to this present
Act). As also, they do establish, ratify, and confirm the Presbyterian
Church Government and Discipline: That is to say, the Government of the Church
by Kirk-Sessions, Presbyteries, Provincial Synods, and General Assemblies,
ratified and established by the 114 Act Jac. VI. Parl. 12. Anno 1592.
Entitled, Ratification of the liberty of the true Kirk, etc. And thereafter
received by the General Consent of this Nation to be the only Government of
Christ's Church within this Kingdom; reviving, renewing and confirming the
foresaid Act of Parliament, in the whole heads thereof, except that part of it
relating to Patronages, which is hereafter to be taken into consideration: And
rescinding, annulling, and making void the Acts of Parliament following, viz.
Act Anent Restitution of Bishops Jac. VI. Parl. 18. Cap. 2. Act Ratifying the
Acts of the Assembly. 1610. Jac. VI. Parl. 21. Cap. 1. Act anent the Election
of Archbishops and Bishops. Jac. VI. Parl. 22. Cap. 1. Act Entitled
Ratification of the five Articles of the General Assembly at Perth. Jac. VI.
Parl. 23. Cap. 1. Act Entitled, for the Restitution and Re-establishment of
the ancient Government of the Church, by Archbishops and Bishops. Charl. II.
Parl. 1. Sess. 2. Act 1. Act anent the Constitution of a National Synod. Charl.
II. Parl. 1. Sess. 3. Act 5. Act against such as refuse to depone against
Delinquents, Chapter II. Parl. 2. Sess. 2. Act 2. Act Entitled, Act acknowledging
and asserting the right of Succession to the Imperial Crown of Scotland. Chapter
II. Parl. 3. Act 2. Act Entitled, Act anent Religion and the Test. Chapter II.
Parl. 3. Act 6. With all other Acts, Laws, Statutes, Ordinances and
Proclamations, and that in so far allanerly as the said Acts and others
generally and particularly above mentioned, are contrary, or prejudicial to,
inconsistent with, or derogatory from the Protestant Religion, and Presbyterian
Government, now Established; and Allowing and Declaring, That the
Church Government be Established in the hands of, and exercised by, these
Presbyterian Ministers, who were Outed since the first of January 1661. for
Nonconformity to Prelacy, or not complying with the Courses of the Times, and
are now Restored by the late Act of Parliament, and such Ministers and Elders
only as they have admitted, or received, or shall hereafter admit or receive:
And also, that all the said Presbyterian Ministers have and shall have right to
the Maintenance, Rights and other Privileges, by Law provided, to the Ministers
of Christ's Church within this Kingdom; as they are, or shall be legally
admitted to particular Churches. Like as in pursuance of the Promises, Their
Majesty's, do hereby appoint the first meeting of the General Assembly of this
Church, as above Established, to be at Edinburgh, the third Thursday of October
next to come in this instant Year, 1690. And because many Conformed Ministers
either have deserted or were removed from Preaching in their Churches
preceding the 13th. day of April 1689. And others were deprived, for not
giving Obedience to the Act of the Estates made the said 13th. of April 1689.
Entitled, Proclamation against the owning of the late King James, and
appointing public Prayers for King William and Queen Mary. Therefore Their
Majesty's with Advice and Consent aforesaid do hereby declare all the Churches,
either deserted, or from which the Conformed Ministers were removed or
deprived, as said is, to be vacant, and that the Presbyterian Ministers
exercising their Ministry, within any of these Parishes (or where the last
incumbent is dead) by the desire or consent of the Parish, shall continue their
Passession, and have right to the Benefices and Stipends, according to their
entry in the Year 1689. And in time coming ay and while the Church as now
established, take further course therewith. And to the effect, the disorders
that have happened in this Church may be redressed: Their Majesty's with Advice
and Consent foresaid do hereby allow the General Meetting and Representives of
the foresaid Presbyterian Ministers and Elders, in whose hands the exercise of
the Church Government is established, either by themselves, or by such
Ministers and Elders as shall be appointed and authorized Disitors by them,
according to the custom and practice of the Presbyterian Government through the
whole Kingdom, and several parts thereof, to try and purge out all
insufficient, negligent, scandalous and erroneous Ministers, by due course of
Ecclesiastical Process, and Censures, and likewise for redressing all other
Church disorders. And further it is hereby provided, that whatsoever Minister,
being convened before the said General Meeting, and Representatives of the
Presbyterian Ministers and Elders, or the Visitors to be appointed by them,
shall either prove contumacious in not appearing, or be found guilty, and shall
be therefore censured whether by Suspension or Deposition, they shall ipso
facto be suspended from, or deprived of their Stipends and Benefices*

If one had a mind to dispute, how much matter might this Act afford him? But
that is no part of my present task, I will therefore, as I promised, only give
you a brief account how some things in it were debated before it received the
Sanction.

First then, though any man who reads it may easily observe, that all along the
framers of the Act have had their eyes fixed on the Presbyterian Petition,
which I have given you already; yet it is observable, that the Confession of
Faith is only ratified and approved, and the Catechism and Directory (whose
Ratification was likewise craved in the Petition) are omitted. How came this to
be done? The truth, in short, is this, all these things were in the Act as it
was prepared by the Committee: But when they began to consider that Article in
the House, beginning with the Confession of Faith, the Duke of Hamilton moved,
That it might be read all over with an audible and distinct voice, and
attentively considered before they should give it the legal Sanction; for (as
he argued) that Confession of Faith had never been ratified in Parliament
before: And it was not suitable to the weight and importance of such an Affair,
nor to the wisdom and care of a Parliament to ratify what had never been
publicly considered in Parliament. This reason had such force with it, that it
was agreed it should be read; and the Lord of Craiginsh moved that if it must
be read, it might be read on the Lords day; having doubts probably, that it
might be a Profanation of it to read it on another day: However it was agreed
it should be read on Monday the 26th. as soon as the Parliament should meet,
and so it was, and heard with what attention the Members were pleased to give
it. I believe it was the first time a good many of them had ever heard it.
However it passed without any exception, which was pretty fair for such a vast
number of Propositions as are contained in the Westminster Confession.

The Confession of Faith thus approved, it was moved next that the Catechism
might be read over also: But the Confession had worn out some three or four
hours to them; and most part were wearied with it, and beginning to discover,
some by looks, some by whispers, that they were no way willing at that time to
hear any more such long Lectures, and so it was moved by the D. of Hamilton
(who was probably well enough satisfied to escape the hearing them also) that
the Catechism and Directory might be forborne: For (as he said) they had now
voted the Confession of Faith, and that was a sufficient standard, and so they
might leave the rest to the Ministers to be managed according to their
Discretion. This Proposal was greedily snatched at by the most part: But there
were some of the Ministers in the House who were not a little surprised, that
the Parliament appeared so unanimous to neglect what they had so expressly
craved in their Petition, and so they were like to fall a muttering; which the
Commissioner perceiving he left his Throne, and went out of the House to
another apartment, the Earl of Crawford first, and then the Ministers following
him. What passed among them there, whether the D. of H. his Reasoning, after
they had pondered, satisfied them, or they themselves stumbled upon some new
Discovery, I am not able to tell: Though there wants not probability, that
there might be something of the latter: Of this at least, I am sure, a very
good Reason for forbearing the pressing the Ratification of the Catechism and
Directory any further, was very obvious: For,

The Directory positively and peremptorily appoints The Scriptures to be read
publicly in Churches, one Chapter out of each Testament at least, every Sunday
before Sermon, as being part of the public worship of God, and one means
sanctified by him for the edifying of his People, Which the Presbyterians in
Scotland have been so far from observing these many years, that not only has
there been no such practice among them, but even in some very considerable
Churches, they lately got a custom of reading the Sermon which was last
Preached, as it was taken from the speakers mouth, by some zealous and swift
handed Brother, instead of the Scriptures, before the Preacher come to the
Pulpit. And besides this,

The same Directory, because the Prayer which Christ taught his Disciples, is
not only a pattern of Prayer but, it self, a most comprehensive Prayer, I
recommends it to be used in the Prayers, of the Church; and the larger
Catechism is express to the same purpose. And yet as the guise goes now, it
would be a mighty scandal to the Sect, if any Brother should say that Prayer:
For this reason; I say, it seems to me very consequential; that the Ministers
needed not have been very earnest for having the Cateohism and Directory
ratified: But, as, I said, I cannot tell if this reason occurred to them on
that occasions But it seems some one or other did. For after they returned to
the House the matter was compounded, and the Duke's motion was agreed to, and
so the Article was framed as you now have it, without mentioning the Catechism
or Directory.

The second thing that I shall take notice of in this Act, shall be the
repealing of a former Act of Parliament; Entitled, Act acknowledging and
asserting the Right of Succession to the Imperial Crown of Scotland, Chapter 2.
Parl. 3. Art. 3. I need not send you a Copy of that Act, for doubtless you have
seen it: In short, it is an Act, declaring, That, according to the fundamental
Constitutions of the Scottish Monarchy, the Crown descends by lawful
Succession, according to the proximity of blood: so that, in that same instant,
in which the present Sovereign dies, the next in blood is settled on the Throne.

This Act was not named with Rest which were to be repealed, as inconsistent
with the Protestant Religion and Presbyterian Government, in the Act as it was
prepared by the Committee: But no sooner came they to consider these Acts which
were to be repealed in the House, but Sir James Montgomery of Skelmurly made
mention of this, and pleaded earnestly that it might be likewise inserted and
annulled: His reason was, because that Act was utterly inconsistent with the
security of the Protestant Religion: For by that Act, the next Heir might come
to the Throne, and actual administration of the Government, without taking the
Coronation Oath, which was the only Security the King could give for the
Protestant Religion: and it was possible the next Heir might be a Papist; And
then he insisted to show how all this was contrary to the Claim of Right.

The Duke of Hamilton pleaded on the other hand, That to rescind that Act, was
to cut the lineal Succession, that he remembered very well, that Act was made as
much, if not more, to exclude the Duke of Monmouth, as to make way for K.
James. And that it was a very tender Point, and dangerous to speak about. The
Lord Stair added, That it was Treason even in Parliament (unless one had a good
backing) to move the rescinding of it: Nor was it necessary to rescind it,
seeing whatever was prejudicial in it to the Protestant Religion, or
Presbyterian Government, was ipso facto to be rescinded by this Act they were
now a forming: But Sir James Montgomery of Skecmurly's Reasons prevailed; And
so it carried that it should be inserted, and rescinded with the rest, in so
far at least as it was inconsistent with the just now named Interests.

The making so great a Stir about this Act, I remember at that time made no
little Noise, and underwent several Censures out of the House. Some wondered
what had moved Sir James to start such a matter. Was it merely to rub up old
Sores? as we say: For where was the difficulty of securing the Protestant
Religion, though that Act had stood in force? Is the Protestant Religion
inconsistent with a lineal Succession? Or was it inconsistent with the
Protestant Religion to say, That God Almighty is an earthly Sovereign's
immediate Superior? None of these could ever enter into a Man's head who had so
much sense as Sir James Montgomery; so it was conjectured, he had some other
thing at the bottom.

On the other hand, it seemed as strange to many, that the Duke of Hamilton
should have pleaded so zealously for the continuation of that Act and for the
lineal Succession? It Is true indeed, (said they) consider him as Duke of
Hamilton and he had good reason to appear for it, it being so nearly the
concern of his own Family. But consider him as a President of the late meeting
of Estates, and the principal Person who deposed K. James, and excluded him
whom he himself had sometimes acknowledged to be the Prince of Scotland,
without ever offering at a Reason for it, and transferred the Crown upon their
present Majesty's, and they could not see how he was consistent with himself.
But,

As for my Lord Stair, Few thought it strange that he should have so reasoned.
It was Treason to move the Rescinding of that Act, even in Parliament, unless a
Man had a good backing, which was readily interpreted to be just as much, as if
he had said, That a Man that had a good backing Power and Party enough, might
say any thing in Parliament, or out of Parliament without being guilty of
Treason: But perhaps, you may be apt to say, what is all this but Digression;
For wherein is the Church or the Clergy concerned in this matter? To which I
shall make no other Reply but, Was not all this stir made about this Act, in
behalf of the Protestant Religion?

The next thing I would have you to consider, is the establishing the whole
Government of the Church in the hands of the known, sound Presbyterians, etc.
as it was craved in the Petition: I have told you already how this Article
displeased the year before, while the Duke of Hamilton was Commissioner: but
now, you see it was granted: yet not without some opposition. For,

On Friday May 23. the first day that the Act was debated in the House, a
Petition was given in by some of these Episcopal Ministers who had given
obedience to the Civil Government: I am afraid the Copy I have of it is not
Corrected, and therefore I will not transcribe it in form, but it was this for
substance.

They for themselves, and others of the Episcopal persuasion, who have
submitted to the Government of their present Majesty's, according to Law, do
humbly Supplicate; That, according to the protection promised them they may be
secured in the possession of their Offices and, Benefices: They humbly
conceive, that, to put the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction entirely into the hands
of the Presbyterians, and establish them the sole Judges of their Life and
Doctrine, will be in effect to turn them out of that Protection: For they shall
not only thereby be deprived of all share and Interest in Ecclesiastical
Government, though they have every way as good a Right to, and are as capable
of managing that Trust, as the Presbyterian Ministers, and do very far exceed
them in numbers; but also shall be subjected to the Arbitriment of a Party who
profess it, their Duty, to purge the Church of all Ministers who have at any
time declared for the Lawfulness of Episcopacy: Whom therefore (though they are
not afraid of the strictest impartial Trial) they decline as their Judges;
which Declinature, the Presbyterian Ministers themselves cannot but in reason
acknowledge to be just and equitable, considering that they have all along
refused to submit to the Jurisdiction of the Bishops upon the like Reason. That
it has been still matter of regret of them, that the Differences upon the
account of Opinion about Church Government have been so much kept up; That
therefore it would please the Parliament to appoint a Conference betwixt some
Ministers of both Persuasions, which they most humbly conceive may prove a good
Expedient for curing the Distemper, or at least for finding where it lies.
They do not take upon them to prescribe to the high and honorable Court, but
in all humility supplicate for these things: to the end that the true
Protestant Religion, for which they have still declared their Zeal, may
flourish; and they and others for their Opinions about Church Government,
(which they are ready to maintain and justify) may not be oppressed in their
Consciences and Interests.

The Petitioners did not expect that the Grand point of the Church Government
should have been so soon brought to the House, so that this their Petition was
penned in such haste, that they had not time to wait upon the Commissioner, and
acquaint him with it before it was presented: However while the Duke of
Hamilton was disputing the Equity and Reasonableness of that Article in the
House, one James More of Stonywood presented it, and craved that it might be
read: the Duke of Hamilton backed him warmly; so it was read, but then it was
immediately hissed at: The Noise was great, and the Cry was loud that it was
indiscreer, unmannerly, arrogant, and what not? And all this, forsooth, because
they called themselves Ministers of the Episcopal Persuasion; compared
themselves for Abilities with the Presbyterian Ministers; declined them as
their Judges; craved a Conference, and undertook to maintain the Lawfulness of
Episcopacy: Extravagant impudence sure!

This Petition being thus rejected with disdain, the Duke thought it not fit at
this time to insist any longer; so there was no more that day concerning that
Article; except that one Mr. Ross, a Commissioner for some Northern Burgh,
moved; That at least these Presbyterian Ministers who had been Deposed by those
of their own Persuasion before the restitution of Episcopacy, Anno 1662. might
not be included in the number of those known sound Presbyterians, in whose
hands the Government was to be established in the first instance: But his
Motion was not regarded: And indeed it had been a great oversight if it had,
for thereby the worthy Master Kennedy who was Moderator of the late General
Assembly, and some other such zealous Brethren had been excluded, which might
have been of very sad Consequence to the Kirk. But,

The Duke was at his purpose again on Wednesday the 28. and insisted largely on
the iniquity of putting the Government solely in the known sound Presbyterians
hands. He argued from the Prince of Orange's Declaration for the Kingdom of
Scotland; from the great purpose of his coming to Britain, from his Declaration
for keeping the Peace in the Kingdom of Scotland dated February 6. 1688/9 from
the Proclamation of the Estates, April 13. 1689; from the nature of the thing,
and from many other Topics, but all to no purpose: for when it came to a Vote,
it carried easily, that the Article should stand as you now see it in the Act:
Thus were some Hundreds of the Episcopal Persuasion, by Act of Parliament,
exposed to the fury of Fifty or Sixty sworn Enemies, without any imaginable
necessity: For had it not been easy for the Parliament, if they had had a mind
to it, to have settled Presbyterian Government, so, as that all who owned the
Civil Government, and were willing to continue in their Charges without
Bishops, might have been obliged to live peaceably together, and carry on the
Common work of the Ministry? But it seems the Parliament were resolute to
support a Party. But enough of this.

There was some Dispute also about a Clause which was in the Act, as it was
prepared by the Committee; in that Article, which grants the Power to the
Presbyterian Ministers and Elders (even before the General Assembly should
meet) to appoint and keep Visitations, for trying and purging out all
insufficient, negligent, scandalous and erroneous Ministers (that is, all who
were void of the Grace of Presbyterianism) by due course of Ecclesiastical
Process and Censures, and redressing all other Church-Disorders; For here it
was subjoined; to all which Censures the Civil Sanction is hereby interposed.
About this Clause, I say, there was some Dispute; but it lasted not long, for
the Duke of Hamilton his reasoning prevailed; which was, That that Clause must
necessarily import an implicit Faith in the Presbyterian Ministers
Inerrability; For if it was possible that they might judge wrong, should the
Civil Sanction for all that, be still interposed? How strange would that be?
and what might be its Consequences? So, that Clause, as you see, was expunged.
Indeed the Civil Sanction had been interposed very laudably many a time since,
if that Clause had been retained: and many a sweet Sentence had it backed: but
it is no part of my present Task to meddle with these:

I might insist upon a great many other things, which bred no little Dispute;
Such as the Kings Power in Ecclesiastical matters, and especially in calling
and Dissolving General Assemblies, etc. The Duke of Hamilton and Sir John
Dalrymple were Advocates for the Prerogative of the King; and Sir James
Montgomery of Skelmurly and others for the Prerogative of the Kirk: It was a
nice Point; and vast Harangues were made on both sides. It was debated all the
three days (i. e. the 23. 26 and 28 of May,) and at last left in sufficient
obscurity. But to be brief, I will only insist on one Article more, which
deserves a little more fully to be represented.

It is that Famous Article in the Act, concerning the Rabled Ministers. I think
I need not tell you how they were turned out of their Churches by Force and
Tumult, about the beginning of the late Revolution, nor how they were directly
excluded the protection of the Government by that Admirable Proclamation of the
Meeting of Estates, dated April 13. Anno 1689. These things and many more which
concern these poor People, you cannot be ignorant of, if you have ever read the
Four Letters, or the Case of the present Afflicted Clergy in Scotland: And sure
I am, any Man that understands how they were treated in that wonderful Year
1689. cannot but think they met with very hard measure: yet for all that they
had still some hopes of redress: For they could not believe, but the Government
sometime or other would take their Case to consideration, and do them something
like Justice: In this Faith, I say, they lived till this Act was forming: So
that when they heard of the Article that concerned their Case, it was no wonder
if they were sadly disheartened; as indeed they were, to such a Degree, that the
most part of them who were then at Edinburgh, had once very near resolved
calmly and silently to sit still, and receive the blow which was designed them,
without ever giving the Parliament the trouble of any Address or Petition. Yet
after the first Consternation was over, I know not how, but some of them
collected so much Courage as to think of giving in a Petition, which might
represent their Case, and crave a Remedy. What (said they) may the World think
of us? How may it condemn us of an unaccountable negligence, if, having
received such notorious Injuries, we shall seek no Redress? It is not to be
supposed but a Parliament which calls it self Christian, will show at least,
that they are so much Men as to pity our Case when it is represented to them.
But if they will not, if they shall take no notice of such Oppressions, if the
worst shall happen, if they shall make such an Act as is now before them: it is
no great loss to lose the pains of drawing a Petition: One effect it cannot
miss to have, which will easily counterballance all that Expense: It will put a
Thorn in their Foot, and be a Witness against them, and render them inexcusable
before the World, if they make such an Act concerning us. Having reasoned with
themselves after this manner, I say, upon Saturday the 24th of May some of them
met, and resolved upon this Form, which because it contains the true State of
their Case in few words: I will here thanscribe as follows.

Unto His GRACE Their MAJESTY'S Commissioner, and the Honorable Estates of
Parliament.
The PETITION of the Ministers who were thrust from their Churches by force and
violence in December 1688. or at any time thereafter, before the 13th. day of
April 1689.
Humbly Shows,
WHEREAS your Petitioners, (though they entered to their Offices and Benefices,
at their respective Churches according to Law, and were in uncontroverted
Possession of them) were thrust from these their Offices and Cures, by
notorious force and violence; cast out of their Dwellings, with their Families
and Furniture, and threatened with Death, if they should offer to return to the
exercise of their Ministry at their respective Churches.

Whereas your Petitioners, upon such violent Treatment, made Application to His
present Majesty, then, His Highness the Prince of Orange, (who, at the humble
desire of diverse Lords and Gentlemen of this Kingdom, had then taken upon him
the Government and Administration of the Affairs of this Realm) by their humble
Petition for Protection, of the date at Glasgow the 22d. of January 1688/9.
presented to His Majesty by Dr. Robert Scott Minister at Hamilton, empowered by
your Petitioners for that effect, as will appear from his Commission of the
same date; and upon that Application His Majesty did emit a Declaration, for
keeping the Peace, etc. in the Kingdom of Scotland, of the date at St. James' s
the 6th. day of February 1688/9. whereby he did expressly prohibit all
Disturbance and Violence, upon the account of Religion, and Authorize all
Protestants, to enjoy their several Opinions, and Forms of Worship, whether in
Churches or Meeting Houses, whether according to Law, or otherways, with the
same freedom, and in the same manner, in which they did enjoy them in the month
of October preceding, as the said Declaration at more length bears: Whereby it
is evident that His Majesty and His Councillors and Advisers for Scottish
Affairs, at that time, were clearly convinced of the violent wrongs your
Petitioners had met with, and of the irregularity and illegality thereof.

Whereas, notwithstanding the said Declaration the Persecution of your
Petitioners continued as hot as ever; as is evident from a second Tumult at
Glasgow upon the 17th. day of February, and year abovesaid, being the Lord's
day, on which both Minister and Hearers (having assembled for Divine Worship
according to Law, and upon the protection and security, contained in the said
Declaration) were most violently assaulted by an enraged Multitude, in the High
Church of that City; and a great many other Instances which may be easily
adduced; and a Representation of that Tumult in Glasgow, and a second
Application for Protection, were made to His Majesty by Dr. James Fall
Principal of the College of Glasgow: And His Majesty referred the matter to the
meeting of Estates, indicted by him to sit at Edinburgh the 14th. of March; and
year aforesaid.

Whereas the said Meeting of Estates, did not think it convenient, in that
interim, by their Authority, to Repossess your Petitioners of their just,
legal, and undoubled Rights, as appears from their Proclamation, of the date at
Edinburgh the 13th. day of April 1689. So that your Petitioners, wanting
Protection, durst never since, without the manifest peril of their Lives,
adventure to return to the exercise of their Ministry at their respective
Churches.

Whereas your Petitioners (beside the unspeakable grief it is to them to be
thus restrained from the exercise of their Sacred Function) are generally
reduced to great Necessities, and many of them with numerous Families, are at
the point of starving, having no Livelihood but their Stipends, and being
refused Payment of these, by the Debiors thereof, upon pretense of an Act of
Council dated December the 24th. 1689. whereby Intimation is made to all
Judges, that the Case of the Ministers, who are not in the Actual Exercise of
their Ministerial Function the 13th. of April 1689. lies under the
Consideration of Parliament, and they are required in Executing of Sentences
already recovered, and in Judging of Processes to be intented at the Instance
of such Ministers to behave themselves as they will be answerable, which Act
not only the Debiors of your Petitioners Stipends pretend for not Paying the
same, as said is, but also many inferior Judges do so construct, that they
will grant no Decrees in favors of your Petitioners. And,

Whereas by the Laws of this Realm, your Petitioners (being Ministers of the
Gospel of Christ, and having entered legally to their Offices and Benefices, as
said is) have right to Protection in the Exercise of their Ministry, at their
respective Churches, and to their Benefices, ad vitam vel culpam, and can
neither be deprived of either without a legal Sentence; And now your Grace and
the Estates are met in Parliament, to which, the Case of your Petitioners is
referred by the aforesaid Act of Privy Council.

May it therefore Please your Grace and the Honorable Estates of Parliament to
take the Premises under Consideration, and interpose your Authority, for
restoring your Petitioners to the exercise of their Ministry at their
respective Churches; for causing make Payment of the Stipends that are due to
them by Law; and for protecting them both in their Offices and Benefices,
according to Law.

The Framers of this Petition made it their work to put it in as smooth and
modest a dress as they could* that it might not be condemned of
Superciliousness and Arrogance, as that had been which was presented the day
before. As for the Form, one of these who were concerned produced King Charles
the first His large Declaration, and therein turned to the Petition which was
given by the Presbyterians Anno 1638. to the Presbytery of Edinburgh, against
the Bishops; affirming it would be best to imitate that Pattern as near as
could be; For so, the Presbyterians in the Parliament could not find fault with
it, without casting dirt upon their own Predecessors. The Fancy was relished by
the rest; and this was the true reason, why there were so many Whereas's in it.

Having thus formed their Petition, Their next work was to wait upon the
Commissioner and show him a Copy of it: But that Night they could not have
access; it was a Post-night, and his Grace was busy writing Letters: So they
returned on Monday morning, and were at last, admitted into his Grace's
presence, where one of them in very few words told him; They were of the number
of these Ministers, who had been thrust from their Churches by force and
violence before the 13th. of April 1689. That they were informed, that the
Parliament had now their Case under consideration; That therefore, They had
formed a Petition, which they were to Present to the Parliament, and so, were
come to acquaint his Grace with it, and give him a Copy of it, that he might
thereby understand the true state of their Case; and with these last words he
offered his Grace a Copy of the Petition: He received it; and after a little
pause, He asked this Question: What? Are ye the Gentlemen who gave in the
Petition to the Parliament on Friday? The Person to whom he directed this
Question, understanding very well what he meant by it (viz. That his Grace had
a mind to be at them, for their Arrogance, if they had been the men) replied
instantly, They were not: And then deduced their Case, over again, briefly:
Then was there another pause, his Grace still holding the Petition in his hand,
without ever offering to read it: At last, he broke his Silence, with this very
Christian Sentence; (had he been Ingenuous in it) Gentlemen, I can say no more,
but that I am for doing just and righteous things to all men. To which it was
forthwith replied; That they sought nothing but Justice; give them that, and
they were satisfied; and with that they left him.

The next thing to be done was to search out some Member of Parliament who
might do them the favor of presenting the Petition to the House: At last they
found Sir Patrick Scott of Ancrum, a discreet Gentleman who undertook it: For
you must know, it was not every body that had Courage for such an employment,
as matters then went. Well,

On Monday the 26th. of May, there was no opportunity for it: The reading the
Westminster Confession (as I have said) wearied the whole House; so, that
Article about the Rabbled Clergy was not considered till the last and great day
Wednesday the 28th. of May: The day on which the whole Act was voted; but
before I come to the work of that day, I must give you an Account of some
Skirmishings had been concerning it, on Friday the 23d. For,

The Duke of Hamilton obtained no less than three Amendments in that Article,
that day, which that you may the better understand, I will set down the
Article, as it was prepared by the Committee; and then tell you briefly upon
what Reasons the Amendments were made. The Article, as it was prepared by the
Committee, ran thus: And because many Conform Ministers either have deserted,
or are removed from their Churches, preceding the 13th. of April 1689. and
ought not to be reponed; and others were deprived for not giving Obedience to
the Act of the Estates of the said 13th. of April 1689. Therefore Their
Majesty's with Advice and Consent foresaid, do hereby Declare all the Churches,
either deserted, or from which the Conform Ministers were removed or deprived,
as said is, to be vacant; and that the Presbyterian Ministers, Exercising
within any of these Parishes, or where the last Incumbent is dead, shall
continue their Possession, and have Right to the legal Benefices and Stipends
forth and from the time of their entering, and in time coming, ay and while the
Church as now Established take further course therewith.

In the Article thus digested, you see that it is said, That Conform Ministers
who had Deserted, (which none had) or were removed from their Churches, ought
not to be reponed.

The Duke was not pleased with this Clause: And pleaded, That it was not only
needless, (as it is evident it was) but also that by necessary consequence, it
would infer, that these who had been removed, (alias Rabbled, for in this case,
these are truly equivalent terms) since the 13th. of April, ought not to be
reponed neither: For if their being thus removed, was a sufficient Reason, in
one case, why they ought not to be reponed; why not in all? Which Reasoning
prevailed, and so that Clause was left out.

Another Amendment was: You see, by the Article as it was prepared by the
Committee, The Presbyterian Ministers, simply, upon their Exercising in such a
Parish, should have the Benefice, which the Duke excepted against, And said
that many Presbyterian Ministers had exercised their Ministry in several
Parishes, and Possessed themselves of the Churches from which the Conform
Ministers had been forced, who had neither Presentation, nor Call from the
greater or better part of the Parish: And what Title could such Men have to the
Benefice? This was pungent also; and so this Clause was added as you see it in
the Printed Act; Exercising their Ministry by the desire, or consent of the
People.

The Third was this; in the Article, as prepared by the Committee, The
Presbyterian Ministers were to have the Benefices forth and from the time of
their entering without specifying any definite term or year from which that
entering might be dated: The Duke said This was very strange; for many
Presbyterian Ministers had exercised their Ministry in several Parishes, even
since King James's Toleration; which was in the year 1687. So that this Clause
gave them Title, even since that year, though both in that year, and the next,
there was a legal Incumbent in the actual and uninterrupted exercise of his
Ministry in the Parish: What Iniquity was this? Hereupon the time of their
entering was limited to the year 1689. as now you have it. I have represented
these things, that you may see, as severe as the Act is, how much more so it
had been, if the Committee's draught had passed; or, if the Duke of Hamilton
had not been at very much pains.

Besides these Amendments in this Article procured by his Grace, on that 23d.
of May, there was another thing proposed by the Lord of Kellburn one of the
Commissioners (I think) for the Shire of Bute; it was, that such Ministers as
had not had free access to their Churches, and by consequence could not give
Obedience to the Proclamation of the Estates April the 13th. upon the days
appointed, but were willing to obey, when they should have opportunity, might
be excepted out of the number of these whom the Parliament was to declare
deprived, and their Churches vacant: But that was rejected with scorn.

Come we now to our Wednesday on which the great Point in the Article was
debated, viz. Whether the Deed of the Rabble should be justified, and all these
Ministers who had been driven from their Churches by the Rabble should be
deprived.

The Duke of Hamilton Pleaded earnestly that this Article might not pass.

It was wonderful to call these Men Deserters: For was it not notorious all the
Kingdom over, that they were violently forced from their Churches by Tumult and
Rabble, and could not, without the evident peril of their Lives, continue in
the exercise of their Ministry at their respective Churches? It was as
wonderful, to declare their Churches vacant, because of their being removed
from them: For what would be the sense of the word removed in the present Case?
Was it not plain, that it was just neither more nor less than Rabbled? And what
might the World think of the Justice of the Parliament, if it should sustain
that as a sufficient ground, for declaring their Churches vacant? These Men had
entered to their Churches according to Law; how then could they be deprived
without a legal Trial? What evil had they done? They had never had opportunity
to disobey the Government: They were violently thrust from their Churches by
the Rabble before the 13th. of April 1689. So, it was impossible for them to
obey the Authority of the meeting of the Estates, in that days Proclamation:
Nay consider that Proclamation, and it will be found that it did not bind them.
Were they chargeable with any other Crimes, or Scandals? Why then, let them be
first Tried, and Convict, and then deprived by due Course: Was it ever heard,
that Ministers of the Gospel of Christ were turned out of their Offices and
Livings, without the least Guilt fixed on them? what a reflection would it cast
upon the King, if such an Act should be made? Did not he come to these
Kingdoms, to deliver us from Arbitrary Power? To secure Liberty, and Property,
as well as Religion? But how was it consistent with this, to deprive so many
Protestant Ministers of their Churches and Livings, for no imaginable Reason in
Law, or Equity? Besides, when first the Government of this Kingdom was
transferred on His Majesty, did he not receive these Men into his Protection,
by his Declaration dated February the 6th. 1688/9. But how was it consistent
with the common Protection due to Subjects, to deprive them of their undoubted
Rights so very Arbitrarily.

These and many other such unanswerable Arguments did his Grace insist on.
Neither did any one Man so much as once offer at showing how such a thing could
consist with Law, Justice or Reason.

While the Duke was thus Pleading, Sir Patrick Scott Presented the Petition,
and craved it might be read: He was assisted by the Duke, who pressed it very
warmly: And then there was no little stir in the House: For such as were
resolved to Vote the Petitioners out of their Rights, knew very well, if it
should be read, they were not able to render a solid Reason, why what it craved
should not be granted; and therefore they had no inclination, that the House
should hear it: But then it was as difficult to find a color of Reason why it
should not be read. Crawford said, It could not be read in the midst of the
Act; a wise Tale indeed; for when was it proper to read it, if not, when the
Case it concerned was under consideration? Cardross said, He did not know but
all these Men were Enemies to the Government; and why then should the House be
troubled with their Petitions? But he knew as little, but they were all Friends
to the Government; for (as has been said) they had never had opportunity to
show how they were affected to it. At last, after a great deal of such
impertinent stuff, Sir Patrick Hume, now Lord Polwart, Moved, that the House
might first go on in the Act, and after that was voted, they might hear the
Petition. A judicious Overture, to shut the Stable door (as we say) when the
Steed is stolen: For the great purpose of the Petition was, that no such thing
might be voted. However this motion, because, it seems they could stumble on
none better, was greedily entertained by the Party: And so it was carried, that
the reading of the Petition should be delayed till the Article was first voted:
Which, what was it else, but downright to reject it without an hearing?

Then the Duke of Hamilton was at the point again, and renewed his endeavors,
but to no purpose: For the Cry immediately arose, That there was no need of
further Debate, in the Case; it had been Disputed enough already, put it to a
Vote, etc. So there was no help for it: The Vote came to be stated. The Duke of
Hamilton craved it might be stated thus. Approve, or not approve, the Deed of
the Rabble; and this twice or thrice over he pressed: But though that was the
true state of the Case, it was too bare faced; And therefore it was put in
these smoother Terms, Approve, or not approve the Article. I need not tell you
which carried; you may see that by the Act; How Almighty is a Vote! what can it
not do? Yet I must acknowledge, there were some Fifteen or Sixteen Negative
Voices, and which is remarkable, some of these, by Persons who in the hight of
their Zeal, the year before, had been amongst the most forward, for refusing
these poor Men the Protection of the Government; such as the Lord Ross, Sir
James Montgomery, etc.

After this Article was thus Voted and Approved, The Duke of Hamilton, not able
to bridle his Indignation, told the House plainly, he was sorry he should ever
have sat in a Scottish Parliament, where such naked Iniquity was established
into a Law; That it was impossible Presbyterian Government could stand, being
built on such a Foundation, and it grieved him to the Heart, to consider what a
Reflection this Act would bring upon the Government, and Justice of the Nation.
While the Duke was thus insisting, a certain Member stood up, and said, The
Duke would do wisely to temper his Language; For, what was this, but to reflect
on the House, and flee in the face of an Act of Parliament? The Duke instantly
replied, It was a mistake, it was but a Vote of the House, and had not yet got
the Royal Assent, so it was no Act of Parliament: But seeing matters went so,
though he was very much afraid the Reflection would go further than the House
were aware of, for his part he should say no more, but put his Hand upon his
Mouth: And with this he left his Seat; and went out of the House, a good number
of Members following him. Well,

What was my Lord Melvil's behavior all this while? Why, His Grace sat upon
the Throne, heard all that the Duke of Hamilton had said for the Rabled Clergy,
and all that passed concerning their Petition, and yet never so much as once
opened his Mouth in the Matter; but perhaps Prelatical People are not Men; and
though they were, is not Dominion founded upon Grace? And so what pretensions
can Conformists make that Justice should be done them? But enough of this.

There was now only one thing more to be done, and that was to Vote the whole
Act in cumulo, which before had only been voted by parcels. This was
immediately proposed upon the Dukes departure. Now it must not be forgotten,
that as soon as this began to be talked of, a Little Presbyterian Preacher who
had got into the House, cried out to the Members who were next him, Fie! make
haste, dispatch, now that He is gone, lest he return again, and create more
trouble. This He meant of the Duke. Whether it was in obedience to this
seasonable warning, or not, it is no great matter; but so it was, that instantly
the thing was done; The whole Act was Approved, and so prepared for the Royal
Assent. And indeed it was no wonder, considering what Members were in the
House, even few or none who were not frank for the Good Old Cause, except some
four or five who stayed to Vote against Presbyterian Government, that it might
not be said, that it carried Nemine contradicente, and some few others who
would not Vote for that Establishment of Presbytery; because as they pretended,
it was not Established in its proper plentitude of Power and Independency:
Except such, I say, there were none in the House, but those of the Gang; For a
great many Noblemen and Gentlemen; Such as the Duke of Queensberry, the Earls
Linlithgow and Balcarras, etc. would not be present on that occasion, And, as I
have said the Duke of Hamilton, and a Good many Members had left the House
before that Great Vote was moved.

Thus was this Act prepared for the Royal Assent on Wednesday the 28th of May:
but it got it not till the 7th of June: For that same Night that it was Vored,
an Express was sent to the King to give him an Account what was done, and his
Majesty's answer and allowance was necessary, before the Act could be touched.
And now that I have mentioned his Majesty's granting his Allowance to his
Commissioner to touch the Act, and give it the form of a Law; I cannot forbear
to tell you, that I am fully persuaded, he did not get a just and impartial
Information about the nature of the several Articles in it: which had he got,
it was impossible that he should ever have approved or ratified the Act: For
why? That Article concerning the Rabled Ministers is plainly inconsistent with
the express words of the Coronation Oath. Now who can believe that the King
would have consented to such notorious Oppression, as more than three hundred
Protestant Ministers met with him from this Act, if that matter had been duly
represented to him? But I cannot find what can be said for my Lord Melvil, who
knowing very well the whole matter, abused his Master by not fairly
representing it to him.

Thus I have given you a brief account how this Act was made, I shall make no
more reflections on it, knowing very well, how the Writers of former accounts
of this nature, have been lashed for making so bold with the Government, and
intituling it to the Persecution of the Clergy. For my part I shall leave it to
you Sir, or any to whom you shall communicate this Paper, first, to consider
matter of Fact, which I have plainly and freely told you, and then to make your
own Reflections. And so I cometo the

Third thing which I promised concerning this Act, which was to tell you, what
Consequences it produced: And, that which deserves to be put in the front was,
The Pious Gratitude of the Presbyterian Ministers to the Parliament, for making
so gracious an Act: How they thanked the Commissioner, and Crawford, and
Sutherland and such others of their good Friends, in private, I am not able to
tell: But in their Sermons, they were extremely careful to express a deep sense
of the wonderful Favor was done them. I shall only take notice of two that
were published, viz. Mr. Gilbert Rules, and Mr. David Williamson's.

Mr. Gilbert's Sermon, as I told you was preached before the Act was voted, and
therefore he was at the pains to Embelish it with a Preface to the Reader, when
it was a printing, wherein he Harangues Thus, As the Interest of Religion was
our Solicitude when these thoughts were conceived and delivered: So now we are
filled with joy, while we behold the Religious Regard; which the High and
Honorable Court of Parliament have showed to the Mountain of the Lords House
above other Mountains (which they truly are and ought to be concerned about) in
the Great Step toward the establishing thereof, that they made by their Vote
of the 28th instant. And then he concludes, That the Lord may help them to go
on as they have begun and hitherto acted, and reward them for their Good Deeds
toward his House -- is the earnest Prayer of, etc. But was worthy Mr. David
inferior to Him? That Is not to be thought: neither indeed was He; for Thus he
bespeaks them in His Sermon preached June 15. which I cited before, Honorable
Worthies, I incline not by Panegyricks to offend your modest Ears, whose Praise
will be in the Church: But we bless God, we have such a King and Queen to Rule
over us, and such a Representative of their Majesty's in this Honorable Court,
and so many Noble and worthy Patriots in this Assembly, who befriend the
Interest of our Lord: We bless the Lord, and we bless you from the Lord with
our Hearts, for what you have done for the House of the Lord, etc. I believe He
never Complemented Lady more Zealously. Thus these two Eminent Lights. And it
is not to be doubted but the rest were as forward: But to this very hour, I
never so much as heard of one of them, who either publicly or privately
condemned that Article concerning the Rabbled Ministers: And now, when I think
on it, who can blame a Commissioner, or a Parliament for making such an Act,
when they were thus not only Authorized and justified, but praised and
magnified by such Infallible Casuists? And indeed laying aside all Notions of
Right and Wrong, and Heaven and Hell, and Judgment. The Brethren had all the
Reason in the World to be thus thankful. For,

Not only were they secured of all these Benefices, where they had set up at
their own hands, after the Rabbling Trade begun, for the year 1689; which they
had still in their prospect; And in order to which, that Act of Council dated
December 24. 1689. whereof I have spoken sufficiently already, was made; But
they had also another fair Opportunity of gaining considerably by it: For they
had not so many Preachers of their Gang as filled the half of these Churches,
from which the Conformists had been forced; so that there were some Hundreds of
Vacancies, whereby they had an Excellent occasion to petition the the Council
for the vacant Benefices to make up their pretended losses: This was a Blessed
Providence, and with them it had been to resist a divine Call, to have
neglected it: And therefore it was their great Business in the Months of
August, September and October, etc. to make Hay while the Sun shined, that is,
to petition the Council for vacant Stipends: Thus Mr. William Veitch had been a
Great sufferer, for why? He had been forced to appear actually in Rebellion
against K. Charles II. at Pictland Hills, for which he was not Hanged indeed,
but declared Rebel and Fugitive: But now that the Fields were fair, and he had
endured so much undeserved Persecution, would He not have been to blame, if he
had not studied his own Interest? And therefore he petitioned for no less than
Five Vacancies, viz. Creiland, Eckfurd, Yettam, Marbottle, and Oxnam. It Is
true, the Council were so hard-Hearted as to grant him only Three of them, viz.
Creiland, Eckfurd, and Yettam: This was hard enough: but alas (tho he had
confidently affirmed in his Petition the contrary,) it was afterward found
that the Minister of Creiland had not been deprived before Michaelmas 1689. So
that Mr. Veitch could not get that Benefice, which was certainly a very
disappointing Persecution to him. No doubt you have heard of this Mr. Veitch
before, for he is the same who had the inward Call to be Minister at Peebles,
(because the Benefice was far better) rather than at several other places,
where he was far more earnestly desired. Thus also,

One Mr. John Dickson, who had sometime preached at Rutherglen, (but as I am
told was never admitted to the Ministry there) before the Restitution of
Episcopacy 1662. petitioned not only for that, but other Four Benefices: And a
great many more I could instance if my designed brevity would allow me. In
short, if they had preached but one or two Sermons in a Parish casually, or
upon an Invitation from one or two of the Parishioners in a whole years time,
it was sure to be put into the Bosom of the Petition, that they had served the
Cure in such a Parish; and that was enough. Thus did that Act of Parliament
caress the Presbyterians: While in the mean time it behoved the poor deprived
Rabbled Clergy, who had an undoubted Title in all Justice and Equity, patiently
to endure want, and see their Estates disposed of to other People, without
daring to say, that any wrong was done them: Until at last the Duke of Hamilton
and some other Councillors, who were not entirely of the fashionable Metal,
began to encourage some of them to petition the Council, and promised them
their assistance: And so indeed, some of them got Gifts of their own Benefices.
But then two or three things are observable: For 1. If there was a Presbyterian
Preacher who pretended to have exercised his Ministry in such or such a
Parish; it was in vain for the Rabbled Man to petition for it; The Case was
clear; it belonged to the Presbyterian by the Act of Parliament; So that there
was no place for any Man to petition for his own Benefice, but where no
Presbyterian could pretend that he had served in that Parish. 2. Whoever
petitioned, was carefully to forbear pleading any thing like Right or Title,
for that was downright to flee in the face of the Act of Parliament; which
Crawford, who was seldom or never absent from the Council Board, was sure to
entertain with very terrible Resentments. 3. If the Duke of Hamilton was
absent, it was folly to Petition, for it was sure to be rejected. Nay,
sometimes when he was present, yet if two or three of these who used to Vote
with him, were not at the Board, it was extremely dangerous to venture; for if
a Petition was once rejected, it was hard to get it considered a second time:
for then Crawford was furnished with a pithy Argument against it. Once, indeed
(for I must do him Justice) I heard his Lordship was forward to grant a
Conformist's Petition, so very forward, that he was clear it should be granted
before it was read: But there was a Singularity in the Case, which when you
understand, perhaps you will not be much surpised at this his Lordships
forwardness; even though there was a Presbyterian Minister concerned: For alas!
The Man, weary of his Wife, had fallen into the sin of Adultery with another
Woman: And his Lordship was mightily afraid lest this should have been
mentioned in the Petition, or by some ill natured Person at the Council Table,
who knew the Story, if his Lordship had made any bustle about it, as he used to
do on other occasions, which he had no mind for. This was the Reason of his
frankness in the matter. But,

Besides my Lord Crawford, there were some other Councillors, who sometime did
obstruct the reading of Petitions, perhaps on more odious Grounds than his
Lordship: For example, I could name a certain Privy Councillor, who for several
days hindered a certain Rabbled Minister's Petition to be read, until the poor
Man was forced to come to him, and offer to quit him some Twelve or Thirteen
pounds Sterling, which he was obliged to pay of the Benefice: And then his
Lordship appeared for him indeed, and obtained both the reading and granting of
his Petition. Had he been as poor as my Lord Crawford, perhaps he had been the
more excusable, but he is a Man of a good Estate, which makes the Trick the
baser; However, I will not name him at present.

From what I have said, you may competently understand the whole matter of the
petitioning, which was some while on foot, and of which perhaps you have heard.
I cannot deny but many were the better for it: But they owed all the Thanks to
the Duke of Hamilton; and some other Councillors, but none to the Parliament.
And yet, for all this, perhaps it were possible to give you as many instances
of Petitions that were rejected, if not more than were granted: But I will only
insist on one Man's Case, whereby you will clearly and distinctly perceive, in
what sense both the Council, and Session (the two Chief Judicatories in in the
Nation) understood our Act of Parliament: Which to represent in its true
Colors, is the Chief aim of this part of this Letter. The Case shall be that
of one Mr. Robert Skeen.

This Gentleman had entered to his Church at Dunsyre, within the Shire of
Lancick, according to Law; and served there in the Holy Ministry, faithfully
and painfully for a good many years; a Man of very good Abilities and
unblameable in his Life.

In the year 1684. a Circuit Court was kept in these parts, for executing the
Laws against Nonconformists; and so one Mr. Anthony Murray an old Presbyterian
Minister, who had been still connived at before; because he would not then
conform, was deprived of the Church and Benefice of Coulter.

This Mr. Murray had a little Estate in the Parish of Dunsyre, where Mr. Skeen
was Minister: Thither he retired after his Deprivation, and lived quietly,
without making any disturbance to Mr. Skeen, or keeping any Conventicles, till
the year 1687. That K. James granted his fatal Toleration. But then, with the
Advice of his Brethren of the Gang, who had resolved in their Clubs to carry on
a Schism in the Church: He began to set up again, not in his old Parish of
Coulter, to which one would think he should rather have returned; But in the
Parish of Dunsyre, and endeavored to draw the People after him. And true it
is, some of the meaner sort he got: But Mr. Skeen still kept the Church, and
the better part of the Parish adhered to him till April 1689. that he was
turned out by the Rabble; or rather till after Whitsunday, as you shall hear
instantly. Skeen thus forced away, Murray continued to preach a while after he
was gone: And therefore, after this our Act of Parliament passed in June 1690.
he resolved to take the benefit of it, and so Petitioned the Council for the
Benefice of Dunsyre for both years 1689. and 1690. and obtained his request
without difficulty: Skeen in the mean time knowing nothing of it.

One would think that this was even but Course Justice; for Granting the Act of
Parliament Declaring all their Churches vacant, who had been Rabbled before the
13th. of April 1689. had been never so Just and Righteous, yet how did it
appear to their Lordships that Skeen was Rabbled before that day? Was it enough
that they had Murray's word for it in his Petition? Ought not Skeen to have had
notice to appear for his Interest? But let that pass with the rest.

Mr. Skeen is a very poor man, and no wonder, considering, that he had no
Patrimony of his own, his Benefice was but small, and his Family was numerous.
And so it was as little wonderful if he was surprised when he heard the
unwelcome Tidings of Mr. Murray's having got a Gift of his Benefice for these
two years: But how to right himself was the Question. He knew very well already
in what sense the Council understood the Act of Parliament; but the Session had
never yet had occasion to give their sense of it: So he resolves to try his
Title before their Lordships, and accordingly charges those who were liable in
Payment of the Stipend, for the whole year 1689. and the half of 1690. to make
Payment to him. This was done about the middle of January 1691.

It is not to be doubted but Murray would soon get notice of this Charge; so he
makes his Address to some of the Lords of the Session, and obtains Letters of
Suspension against Skeen, till the Case should be debated before their
Lordships. And so the Case came to be fairly stated, before that Judicature.
Sir David Thoris was Advocate for Skeen, and James Stuart for Murray: For whose
Title he produced these three Arguments. 1. Murray had an Act of Council for
him, so that it was res hactenus Iudicata. 2. Skeen had Deserted and was
removed from his Church before the 13th. of April, and so was deprived by the
Act of Parliament. 3. Murray had officiated, as a Presbyterian Minister in the
Parish of Dunsyre, during these years for which he had got his Gift. To these
Arguments, Sir David Thores gave these following Answers: To the first: That
Skeen had legally entered to the Church of Dunsyre, and had a good and
undoubted Title and Right, which ought in all Law and Reason to be preferred to
Murray's Gift, especially considering that it had been obtained Clancularly,
and part inandita altera.

To the second, That Skeen had not Deserted, but was Barbarously forced from
his Church by Notorious Rabble and Violence as was Evident from this Deduction.

1. About Candlemas, first, and then several times after, in the month of
February and March 1688/9. a Godless Rabble which was then overrunning the
Country, and thrusting out the Regular Clergy where ever they came, sent to him
peremptory Orders to remove from his Church, and desist from the exercise of
his Ministry, under no less hazard than tearing him in pieces, notwithstanding
which he still continued in the exercise of his Office.

2. The Rabble finding those their Menaces unsuccessful, no fewer than sixty of
them, all Armed, under the Command of one Steel, came to his dwelling House
upon the 21st. of March, and committed such Outrages, that they frighted the
poor Gentlewoman his Wife, then big with Child, into her pangs, before the
time; in which she continued till the first of April, that she brought forth
her Child, dying her self within three hours after the Birth, and leaving him
the weighty burden of Eight Motherless Children; Yet neither for this did he
forbear to exercise his Minstry in the Church of Dunsyre; until,

3. Upon the 13th. of April (the same day that the Proclamation was ordered by
the Estates) another Barbarous, and numerous Rabble came to his House, and
threatened to Murder him, if he should offer to possess the Pulpit the next day
which was Sunday; and then indeed for fear of his Life, he went not to the
Church; yet he Preached in his dwelling House to such of his Parishioners as
came to hear him.

4. The Proclamation being ordered to be read by him upon Sunday the 21st. of
April, the Rabble returned upon Saturday the 20th. and by violence barricado'd
the Church doors, and carried away the Keys, and such Utensils as they could
find, belonging to the Church, and not only so, but on Sunday morning they
planted Guards of Armed Men, at the doors of the Church, by which they kept him
out by force; yet even that day too he Preached in his dwelling House: Nay,

5. He continued still to Preach in his dwelling House on Sundays, and to
Baptize Children, and Visit the Sick, and perform all other parts of his
Ministry as he had occasion; till after Whitsunday, that another Rabble came,
and most outragiously and inhumanely cast him, his Family, and all his
Furniture, out of doors; so that he was then forced to retire elsewhere for
shelter.

All these things were offered to be proved Positively and Evidently by many
Famous and Unquestionable Witnesses; and so the Lords were desired for these
Reasons, to give their Judgment upon this Point: Whether Skeen having thus
continued in the exercise of his Ministry, in the Church, and Parish of
Dunsyre, notwithstanding so much Barbarous Usage and so many forcible
Interruptions and Oppositions, could, in Law, Reason, or common Sense, be
reputed a Deserter of his Charge before the 13th. of April.

To Mr. Stuart's 3d. Argument, it was Answered first that granting it had been
true that Murray had officiated as a Pesbyterian Minister, in the Parish of
Dunsyre, yet he could plead no Title to the Benefice, because he had neither
been Presented, Collated, nor Orderly Instituted and Admitted to be Pastor of
that Parish; all which were necessary to Constitute a Legal Right: Nay he could
not pretend to so much as a Call from either the greater or better part of the
People; so that he ought to be looked upon as an Intruder, who had forced
himself upon another Man's Charge, against Law, and in a Schismatical manner.
But then Secondly, It was not true, that he had officiated as a Presbyterian
Minister, but on the contrary, it was offered to be proved, that he had refused
to Preach, and did forbid the People to come to him, nay that he had refused to
Baptize the Children of his next Neighbors, in case of extreme necessity, in
so much, that the Presbyterian Party in the Parish had actually called one Mr.
Donaldson another Presbyterian Preacher, to supply their necessities. Thirdly,
Murray was Reponed by Act of Parliament of the date April the 25th. 1690. to
his Church at Coulter, had actually got the Benefice there for the year 1689.
and was to get it for 1690. why then should he have the Benefice of Dunsyre for
these years too? What Title could he plead for both Benefices? And then
Fourthly, It was pleaded, that of all Men in the World, Murray was in pessimo
dolo to be Skeen's Competitor for the Benefice of Dunsyre, because, as Skeen
offered to prove, and make as Evident as Light, (and indeed he was able to have
done it by a sufficient number of Witnesses), Murray had not only never
endeavored to quiet the Rabble, which he could easily have done, had he
applied himself to it, notwithstanding Skeen several times demanded it of him;
but on the contrary, he had openly and avowedly sent to Skeen and threatened him
if he did not desist from the exercise of his Ministry, saying, he could not be
answerable for what he had done already, and he should smart severely for it,
etc. So that Murray ought truly and in Law to be reputed one of Skeen's
Rabblers.

For all which Reasons, and in respect, that the Stipend for which Skeen had
Charged (besides that it belonged to him incontrovertibly in Law and Justice)
was all the Reparation and Assithment, he expected for the Murder of his Wife,
and the Violences and Outrages done to himself and his Children: The Lords were
desired to prefer him to Murray: But nothing could prevail, for the Sentence
was This word for word.

Edinburgh 26th. of February 1691.
Upon Report of the Lord Anstruther, The Lords find, that, seeing Mr. Robert
Skeen, was not exercising the Ministry in the Kirk of Dunsyre, upon the 13th.
of April 1689. the Church was vacant by the Act of Parliament; And therefore
prefers Mr. Anthony Murray.

Sic subscribitur, Stair I. P. D.

Here Sir you have the Lords of Session giving their Sense of the Act of
Parliament with a witness. But I must beg their Lordships Permission to tell
them plainly, that many judicious People think, their Lordships did even
stretch the Act of Parliament, which I am sure was needless, in all Conscience:
They stretched the Act of Parliament, I say, for Skeen did actually exercise
his Ministry in the Church of Dunsyre upon the 7th. of April, which was the
Sunday immediately before that 13th. of April, so that he ought to have been
reputed in possession of his Church till the end of the week, for he was not
obliged to be in it till next Sunday unless it was upon some extraordinary
occasion, which is not pretended to have happened that week. In effect when
this their Lordships Sentence is considered it amounts to just neither more nor
less than this. Skeen upon such a Saturday (for such was that 13th. of April)
was not in the exercise of his Ministry, had not public Worship and Sermon,
and therefore the Act of Parliament declared his Church vacant: And is not this
a probable Consequence? I could easily say a great deal more; but perhaps even
what I have said is a Digression: Leave we therefore the Session, and let us
accompany Skeen now to the Council.

His pinching Circumstances prompted him to make another Attempt, before he
should quite give over, and that was, to Petition the Council that they would
retract their Gift to Murray; and restore him to his Right: Or if they would
not do that, That their Lordships would at least allow him. the equivalent for
the year 1689. out of some other vacancy. You may easily collect Reasons enough
to recommend this Petition, from what I have already set down i. e. The usage
he had received from the Rabble; the death of his Wife; the numerousness of his
Family; his Poverty; his continuing so long in the exercise of his Ministry
after the 13th. of April; his never, to that hour, being under any Sentence,
Civil, or Ecclesiastical; his never being heard for his Interest. Murray's
procuring that Gift surreptitiously, etc. and a great many more. All these he
had in his Petition: But the Result was, the Council would neither recall their
Gift to Murray, nor supply the poor man's needs from any other Fund; So that all
this while, he has nothing but the Charity of good Christians to subsist by.
Thus I have briefly hinted at such things, as may give you a sufficient taste of
the consequences of our Act of Parliament that settled the Presbyterian
Government.

It Is now time for us to return to the Parliament house again, and see what
more was done there concerning the Church or the Clergy. And that which comes
next in order of time, was a draught of an Act which the Earl of Linlithgow
gave into the Parliament, the next day after the Act establishing Presbytery
was Voted: The design of it was to give Toleration to those of the Episcopal
Persuasion to worship God after their own manner, and particularly: that whosoever
were inclined to use the English Liturgy, might do it safely. Being presented
by so considerable a Member, they could not refuse it a Reading: But it never
got more; Indeed, I am apt to believe his Lordship, who presented it, did not
expect that it should meet with better entertainment. However one thing was
gained by it, even that it was rejected; and that the Party who had so
thankfully embraced King Iame's Toleration before, now that they were mounted
on the Sadle, refused to Tolerate any of a different Persuasion. This
themselves were sensible of, and that it was a Thorn put into their Foot: But
it was inconsistent with their Principles to grant it, and so that such a thing
should have been moved, incensed them exceedingly; especially the Preachers,
who for several days after, made it their work to declaim vehemently against
all Tolerations; particularly worthy Mr. David Williamson in his famous Sermon,
which I have cited already, was at it, with a great deal of warmth, and that
oftener than once; For not only toward the end of his Sermon did he Harangue
directly and copiously against it, calling it A Backset to all that was done,
and a Mystery of Iniquity, etc. But even near the beginning, with more Zeal
than Discretion; He made it an infallible mark of Infidelity in a Prince to
grant Tolerations: Do not think I am injurious to him; you shall have his own
words: In respect of Religion, some (Princes) are Believers, as Joshua; some
Infidels, and so are either such as persecute Religion, as Herod and Julian; or
Tolerate it, as a Trajan. Thus the Zealous Man, not considering, that King
William had granted a Toleration in England. Nay so much was the Man's Teeth set
on edg, that such a thing should have been once muttered in Parliament, that he
was earnest in his Exhortations to the House, That they would, if not Hang, at
least Banish all the Prelatists. Thus he tells them, It is not the wisdom of
Magistrates to overlook dangerous Persons by Cruel Indulgence; one Achan
spared, may endanger the whole Camp of Israel (is not this as bad as Hanging?)
Traitors to Kirk and King would be duly noticed. And again, Persons of a
dangerous Complexion, to undermine the State, would be incapacitated, (and a
Rope is the best way for that) and put out of reach to hazard the Commonwealth:
If he were a Churchman, an Abiathar, he might be sent to Anathoth. This last
fling I am apt to believe, was designed against the Archbishop of Glasgow, for
possibly Mr. David dreaded, he was upon the Plot of the Toleration. Stubborn
Parliament, that would not provide Halters, or at least Prisons for all these
Rogues, when such a godly Man advised them!

The next thing wherein the Church was concerned, was an Act which passed July
29. 1690. Abolishing Patronages, and setting up in their stead, What? Popular
Elections, according to the Presbyterian Profession? Nothing less. What then? A
new Model for Electing Ministers, for which it will be very hard to find a Ius
Divinum in all the Scripture: For now the Heritors and Elders are to name and
propose the Person for whom they incline, to the whole Congregation, to be
either approved, or disapproved by them; and if they disapprove, the
Disapprovers must give in-their Reasons to the Effect the Afsair may be
cognosced upon by the Presbytery of the bounds, at whose judgment, and by whose
determination, the Calling and Entering of a particular Minister, is to be
ordered and concluded, etc. I am not at present to debate the Reasonableness or
Convenience of this new Model: But it surpised me at first, that the
Presbyterian Preachers were so easily pleased with this, after their so warm
and frequent Protestations for the Ius Divinum of the popular Elections: But
this Surprise was soon over when I found that this Method in the result brought
the whole Power as effectually into their Hands, and perhaps more easily than
popular Election could have done, and that was all they were aiming at: And
here it is that the Divine Right of any thing, with them, does commonly
terminate. At least I am very far mistaken, if this is not all the Divine
Right, that shall be found at the bottom of the most part of their glorious
Pretenses.

The next thing I am to take notice of concerns a Set of Men, whom, I know not
if you will allow to be called in a State of Persecution, viz. Those who had
been Deprived by the Committee of Estates and the Council, Anno 1689. for not
Reading the Proclamation against the owning the late King James, and not
praying publicly for William and Mary as King and Queen of Scotland. Some of
these, though they had obeyed their Sentence so far, as not to exercise their
Ministry in their own Churches, yet had adventured to preach in Neighboring
Churches: And for this they pretended they were only deprived of the exercise
of their Ministry at such a Place: The Council though it had deprived them, had
not unminister'd them; it was still lawful for them to preach the Gospel when
they had occasion: And as they thought they had but too much of that,
considering how many Vacancies were made, and how few of these Churches were
planted; So very few that in many Corners of the Country you should have found
six, eight, ten Churches all empty in one Neighborhood: Besides, as they still
pretend, they preached nothing but the solid and substantial Points of
Christianity, Faith and Repentance, etc. They did not meddle with Crowns and
Scepters, and Government, but made it their work to persuade People to a sober,
righteous and godly Life. However, this irritated the Government, or at least
the Presbyterian Party in the Government exceedingly, and therefore upon the 22
of July, 1690. this Act mas wade about them.

THE Estates of Parliament taking into their Consideration, That several
Ministers deprived for not praying publicly for King William and Queen Mary as
King and Queen of this Realm, and not Reading the Proclamation of the Estates,
Emitted upon the 13th of April 1689. for that effect, are up their Sentence of
Deprivation, expressly prohibited to exercise any part of their Ministerial
Function, within the Parishes from which they were Deprived, do nevertheless,
now far more perniciously and dangerously, diffuse the poison of their
Disaffection, by taking the liberty to preach and pray at other Churches and
elsewhere, where they neglect to pray for King William and Queen Mary, in
manner enjoined by the said Proclamation, to the manifest Contempt of public
Authority, and the stirrrng up and fomenting the disaffection of the People to
their Majesty's and the present Government, and the encouragement of all their
Enemies. Therefore our Sovereign Lord and Lady the King and Queen's Majesty's
with Advice and Consent of the said Estates of Parliament, do hereby prohibit
and discharge the whole foresaid Ministers, deprived as said is, to preach or
exercise any part of the Ministerial Function, either in Churches or elsewhere,
upon any pretext whatsoever, until first they present themselves before the
Lords of their Majesty's secret Council, and there, in presence of the Lords
thereof, cake, swear, and subscribe the Oath of Allegiance, and also engage
themselves under their Hands to pray for King William and Queen Mary as King
and Queen of this Realm, and not to own, or acknowledge the late K. James the
7th for their King in any sort, conform to the Tenor of the said Proclamation:
Certifying such Ministers as shall do in the contrary, That they shall be
proceeded against, as Persons disaffected and Enemies to their Majesty's
Government, with all Rigor. And further, their Majesty's, with advice and
consent foresaid ordain the said Proclamation, and Act of the Estates of the
Kingdom to be put to further Execution against all such Ministers, who have not
as yet given Obedience thereto, by praying for their Majesty's in manner
foresaid; And that the Lords of their Majesty's Privy Council proceed therein,
or empower the Sheriffs or Magistrates of Burghs to do the same, within their
respective Bounds, as they shall see cause.

Neither was this thought enough, for within a few days after, another Act was
made against the Distinction of De Iure, and De Facto, and appointing a certain
Declaration; which they call the Assurance to be taken by every person in
public Employment; And amongst the rest, the Deprived Ministers; for it is an
express Clause in the Act, That all shall take it, who are obliged by Law to
Swear the Oath of Allegiance to their Majesty's. I am now almost wearied, and
therefore I cannot be at pains to Transcribe that Act of Parliament, but I am
afraid you may be angry if you get not a Copy of the Assurance, and therefore
take it as follows,

IAB, Do in the Sincerity of my Heart, Assent, Acknowledge and Declare, That
their Majesty's King William and Queen Mary, are the only lawful undoubted
Sovereigns, King and Queen of Scotland, as well de Iure, as de facto, and in
the exercise of the Government; And therefore I do sincerely and faithfully
promise and engage, That I will with Heart and Hand, Life and Goods, maintain
and defend their Majesty's Title and Government, against the late King James,
His Adherents, and all other Enemies, who either by open, or secret Attempts,
shall disturb or disquiet their Majesty's in the exercise thereof.

Thus the Parliament thought fit to seeure their Majesty's Government, by
exploding that pitiful Distinction of de Iure, and de Facto, Rationally sure,
and Consequentially: For in a Kingdom where the Government is incontrovertibly
Monarchical and Hereditary, such as Scotland is, How is it possible that one
can be King de facto, if he be not first such de Iure? An Usurper he may be,
but can never be a King; a King in such a Constitution being necessarily Nomen
Iuris. But to let this pass, because it is no part of my present Concern; Were
not our Non-Complyers, our Non-Readers, and Non-Prayers, our Clergymen who were
deprived Anno 1689, pretty well taken notice of by these two Acts of
Parliament? I believe you will not readily imagine that many of them would
incline to qualify themselves according to these Laws, for the further
exercise of their Ministry; Neither indeed (so far as I can learn) has one of
them done it in all the Kingdom. They were forced therefore to choose the other
side of the Alternative, and cease from the public Exercise of their Ministry
either in Churches or elsewhere, and did so for a certain time; That they
looked about them, and considered a little better: And then in several places,
they adventured to have Divine Worship somewhat publicly in their own Houses
that is, they prayed and sung Psalms according to the Scottish Fashion: And
also gave their Families a Sermon, but so as they did not shut their Gates, but
left them open, that whosoever pleased might meet with them.

This gave mighty provocation to the Presbyterian Preachers: For wherever this
was done, it emptyed their Convinticles, of a great many of the Common Sort;
And besides, the Gentry generally flocked to these private Meetings of the
deprived Men: Which was an unsupportable Grievance and Trouble to the Brethren;
for so long as that was the Guise, they concluded, it would be impossible,
their Interest (what ever pretenses of Law they might have on their side) could
be secured. But what Remedy was proper for such a dangerous Disease? Should
they cite them before their Presbyteries, or Synods, and enter in
Ecclesiastical Process against them? But that would be to no purpose: For they
would be sure not to appear* and if the pursuit should proceed to the outmost,
if they should Excommunicate them, nothing would be gained; for the Sting was
taken from that Sentence, by Act of Parliament: No man being, now, by Law in
Scotland, to suffer in his Temporal Interest, by virtue of his being
Excommunicated: And it was manifest enough, these Episcopalians would not value
a Presbyterian Excommunication upon Spiritual accounts. What then should be
done? Why? There was no choice: There was no other way imaginable but to
importune the Privy Council, that their Lordships would take some Course with
such a Criminal Enormity. But then, even this required Prudence, and due
Season; for if such a matter should be proposed when the Duke of Hamilton was
present, he might breed Difficulties, and make Opposition: So, it was fit to
take the opportunity of his absence (when he was at Court) in May and June
1692. And then it was, that the rebellious and intolerable Practices of the
deprived Men, came to be considered in Council.

There was a long List of such given in to their Lordships, but I know not how
it happened, it seems it was thought fit to cite only Two at first, viz. Dr.
Richard Waddel Archdeacon of St. Andrews, and Dr. John Nicolson Parson of
Errol. The first had been deprived for not reading the Proclamation enacted by
the States against the owning King James, and not Praying for William and Mary
as King and Queen of Scotland, before Whitsunday 1689. and by consequence
before the Accounts came to Scotland that William and Mary had sworn the
Coronation Oath, without which, according to our Claim of Right, they could not
be King and Queen. The other, for the same Crime, had been afterward deprived
by the Council: Dr. Waddel's late Crime was, that in his own Dwelling House at
St. Andrews, he had Preached some Sundays, without qualifying himself according
to Law, that is, without swearing the Oath of Allegiance, and giving it under
his Hand, that he should Pray for William and Mary as King and Queen and taking
the Assurance: But Dr. Nicolson's Transgression had many different
Circumstances: Which, that you may apprehend the better, I will give you this
view of his Case.

Errol is a considerable Parish: It lies in one of the most Fertile places in
Scotland, commonly called the Carse of Gowrie: and so there are a great many
Gentlemen who have Estates in it: But all generally Malignants, or
Antipresbyterians, except two or three: So that it was very difficult to get it
planted with a fashionable Preacher. But Zeal for the Good Cause must surmount
all Difficulties: And therefore these two or three Presbyterian Lairds, with a
small number of inferior People, whom they had cajoll'd into their own Temper,
resolve they will have a Presbyterian Preacher, once possessed of the Pulpit of
Errol, and accordingly upon a Sunday morning, (I think it was on the Tenth of
May 1691) they bring along one Tullidaff, a young forward Man to preach to them
in the Church; but it seems besides those in the Village of Errol, all the
Commons in the Parish generally had got notice of the design, and therefore
they convened in a considerable number, and met Tullidaff and his Guards, as he
was entering; and asked what the matter meant, etc. One of those Presbyterian
Lairds, who were in his Company, began to harangue to them, how Presbytery was
now Established by the Law of the Land, that here was a Presbyterian come to
preach in the Church, that it would be dangerous to make any opposition, and a
great deal more of such stuff: But the resolute Clowns were not to be wrought
upon by such whining Rhetoric, and therefore they told that Gentleman briskly,
that that Preacher would do best to be gone without further noise, for that day
he should not enter the Church of Errol: The Lord began to expostulate further
with them but in vain, for one of them told him, they were not to reason
Matters: But they would have nothing to do with that Preacher; he should not
come there. Upon this one of that Gentleman's Servants (more courageous, it
seems, though not more zealous than his Master) offers a stroke at that Fellow,
and then it came to earnest, in short Tullidaff the Preacher found it
convenient to try if his Horse could ride, and his Guards got sufficient Pay
for that days Muster.

All this time Dr. Nicolson was in the Parsonage-house (for by the forbearance
of a Worthy young Nobleman the Earl of Northesk his Patron he had still
continued to to inhabit it, notwithstanding his deprivation) no ways concerned
in the Tumult, but as he used to do, going about Divine Worship in his own
Family. Methinks it needs be no hard task to persuade you that this opposition
would be warmly resented by those of the Party, and indeed so it was; for
within a few days after the Matter was brought before the Privy Council, and
Summons were issued out charging those who had made that Tumult to appear
before their Lordships, and among the rest Doctor Nicolson, as one who had
instigated and encouraged the Rabble.

The Privy Council banished Doctor Waddel out of the Town of St. Andrews, and
Doctor Nicolson out of the Parish of Errol. But it is not much my present
business to insist on this; that which I have had in mine eye all a long, is
the Libel that was given in against Doctor Nicolson; or, which is all one upon
the Matter the Charge that was given him to appear before the Council: It was a
very large one, no less than three full Sheets of Paper; so that it would be
both a tedious and a needless work to Transcribe it all: And therefore I will
only give you the Narrative of it; which was this word for word.

WILLIAM and MARY, by the Grace of God etc.
FOrasmuch as it is humbly meant and shown by our Lovit Sir William Lockhart
our Sollicitour, and John Blair Agent for the Kirk; that where, albeit by the
Common Law, the Laws and Acts of Parliament, and daily practique of this and
all well governed Nations, the Sacred Function of the Ministry is to be holden
in great Respect or Esteem, and Ministers should be secured in their Persons,
and Goods against all Assaults, Outrages and Violences; and the perturbers of
Divine Service, and those that shall hinder the performance thereof are
severely punishable, and particularly it is provided by Act 4. Parl. 3. Jac.
II. That the Hally Kirk be kept in freedom, and that nay Person vex Kirkmen in
their Persons and Goods, etc. And by many subsequent Laws the liberty and
freedom of the Hally Kirk is to be observed, and the Persons of Ministers and
Churchmen in the Sacred Function are to be had in special reverence, and no
ways to be assaulted, hurted or affronted, especially when they are about going
to Divine Service, and in the execution of their Office. And by the 27. Act
Parl. 11. Jac. VI. It Is statuted that whatever Person or Persons, shall happen
to perturb the Order of the Kirk, or make any Tumult or raise any Fray, where
through the People convened shall happen to be disturbed, disordered and
dispersed, the same shall be a Point of a Ditty against the Persons that shall
be convict thereof, and they shall tyn all their moveable Goods to be Escheat
to the King, for their Offense; but prejudice of a greater punishment, if there
happens any Offense, as Slaughter, Blood, Mutilation, and whosoever invades any
Minister or puts violent hands upon them, shall be punished with all Rigor,
and incur the pain of their moveable Goods, for the said Invasion or Violence,
albeit no Slaughter nor Mutilation follow thereupon; all which is ratified by
the 7th. Act Chapter I. by which it is declared that because the insolence and
violence may be committed by Lawless and Irresponsable Men; who cannot be
gotten detected; It is statuted that the Landlords, Heretors, Chief of Clans,
and others within whose bounds they dwell, shall be holden, upon Complaint to
the Lords of Secret Council to exhibit and produce the Malefactors, to be
censured and punished at the discretion of the Judge; and the Heretors and
others in whose Land they reside are obliged to exhibit them, under the like
punishment after intimation made to them that they stay upon the place. And by
the 4. Act, Session 2. Parl. 2. Chapter II. It is statuted and declared, that
whatsoever Person or Persons shall be found Guilty of Assaulting of the Lives
of Ministers or actually attempting the same shall be severely punished, etc.

Thus, I say, did the Narative of the Doctors Libel proceed, and then upon this
Foundation was the rest of it built, viz. That notwithstanding he was deprived,
and the Church of Errol declared vacant, yet when by the Presbyteries
appointment Mr. John Tullidaff came to preach there, such a Tumult was raised:
And the Doctor was accessory as an Instigator, etc. Now,

I could easily tell you a great many things that might be worth your Notice:
And that a great many more Acts of Parliament might have been cited: For we
have had enough to that purpose, occasioned by the Insults, Invasions and
Murders committed by the Presbyterian Party in King Charles II. His time: But
that for which I have Transcribed this Narative is chiefly this, that as on the
one hand you may see the Piety of our former Parliaments, in the Protection of
Clergymen, so on the other, you may take occasion to consider what a Spirit
prevailed in the last Session of our Parliament, which justified and approved
the Deed of the Rabble against so many Ministers: And whether we have not now a
very Impartial Government, when the same Laws, which must be buried in deep
Silence, when the Case concerns the Episcopal Clergy, are thus awakened, and
made cry so lowdly, when the Presbyterian Interest stands in need of them, not
as if I were to justify Tumults of that Nature, No: I abhor them with all my
Soul: But why should not all alike guilty be equally punished?

Thus, Sir I have according to your desire, given you a short Deduction of the
Usage the Episcopal Clergy in Scotland have met with, from the Civil Power
since the 24th. of December 1689. I have endeavored all along to represent
Matters faithfully and truly, as well as succinctly.

Two other Things there are which are important, and would not a little
gratify your Curiosity. viz. The Proceedings of the Presbyteries and Synods
since the Power was put in their Hands by the Parliament, against those
Prelatists who complied, and the Purging the Universities. As to the first, I
thought it convenient at this time not to meddle with it, both because it would
swell this Letter infinitely beyond its due limits, and I have reason to
believe you may confidently expect to se that fully done by another Hand.

And for the Universities, those Seminaries of Learning, as they stood under
the Episcopal Constitution, were a great Eyesore to the Party; and therefore
none could expect that the Presbyterians could be satisfied, unless the public
Schools were put into their Hands. Besides the Education of Youth added much to
their strength and National Settlement; so they are resolved at any rate, quo
jure, quave injuria, to seize very speedily the most conspicuous, and most
eminent Places. The Ministers were so warm in this Design, that they importuned
their Patrons in the State to remove such Masters as they judged most opposite
to their Government, even before the Affair was considered by the Parliament.
But the wiser sort among them withstood this precipitancy; for since they might
frame an Act of Parliament such as they pleased, it was thought most convenient
to delay their Revenge for a little while; because the Masters of the
Universities might be more effectually turned out under the Covert of an Act of
Parliament, than by the Methods that they first advised. These Consultations
tossed to and again at last produced that Act of Parliament, that appoints all
Masters and Professors in Universities and public Schools: 1. To sign the
Westminster Confession of Faith, as the only Standard of Theological Orthodoxy.
2. To swear Allegiance to K. William and Q. Mary. 3. To sign the Declaration
and Assurance, which I have had occasion to mention above. 4. To submit to the
Presbyterian Government in its last and latest Figure, as it was lodged in the
hands of about fifty or sixty old Presbyterian Ministers. It was easy to
foresee that there were but few Masters whose deprivation this Act would not
occasion.

The trust of visiting Universities, Colleges and Schools was devolved on some
Noblemen and Gentlemen (whose names are inserted in the Act of Parliament) that
were most addicted to the Interests of Presbytery. A full Quorum of them met on
the twenty third day of July 1690. and subdivided themselves into four lesser
Committees: One for St. Andrews, one for Edinburgh, one for Glasgow, and one
for Aberdeen. The Committee appointed to visit the University of St. Andrews
was managed by the Earl of Crawford, and they could not commit it to one more
bigoted to the Interests of their Party. So that their Design was accomplished
in that place, in a very few meetings, when the Earl made report to the General
Visitation at Edinburgh, they were deprived the 25th day of September, ad unum
omnes; Nor did they expect to be otherways treated; But this merciless Sentence
raised the Odium of many against the Party: for both the heads of Houses and
the subordinate Professors in that University are learned and deserving Men,
Dr. Alexander Skeen Rector, and Provost of the old College by his singular
dexterity, industry and constant application, changed the rubbish and ruins of
that House into beautiful and convenient Habitations both for Masters and
Students. And Dr. James Weems Principal of S. Leonard's College minded nothing
in the World more than the welfare of that House. And there is little doubt to
be made but that the Learned and Reverend Dr. Lorimer, Principal of the new
College, if he had lived had been treated as his Brethren were, since his
Principles were as different from Presbytery, as theirs are from the Catholic
Church. The next place to be visited was the College of Edinburgh, and because
that House was in the Eye of the Nation, they peremptorily determined to have
the Government of it in their own hands. And it must be confessed, that the
first Professors in that House, did frequently and freely despise the Faction:
and therefore could not but expect to be censured accordingly. The
Presbyterians were very much afraid that Dr. Monro and Dr. Strachan would
comply with the late Test, as it stood in their Act of Parliament. This put
their Invention upon the Rack, and therefore a strict Enquiry is made into
their Lives, Actions, private Behavior, Words and Conversation; that if they
had complied with the Act of Parliament, they might be turned out on other
Heads; but this Inquisition and toil was very needless. For after four years
sufferings, they would venture upon the greatest Calamities, rather than comply
with a Test of such Consequences as that is. However it was, this is certain,
that the Professors of the College of Edinburgh were prosecuted with the
greatest Solemnity, bitterness and indignation that was possible. The first
Masters knew very well, that they could not hold their Places under the present
Scheme of things, yet they made particular Answers to all the Articles Libelled
against them: for otherwise the Presbyterians would have propagated amongst the
People, that they were not turned out, because of their refusing the public
Test, but rather for immoralities and Scandalous Faults.

There is already published a particular account of the Methods that they took
in turning out the Masters of the College of Edinburgh, Vid. Presbyt.
Inquisition as it was lately practiced against the Professors of the College of
Edinburgh.
yet I must beg the Author of that Narrative pardon, if I add some things to
what he has written. And I do it the rather, because they are material, and
because I have undeniable Authority for them. In the General it is very
observable, that the Libels against the Masters of the College of Edinburgh
were owned and subscribed by no particular Accuser, and yet the Committee
proceeded upon such Libels, as if they had been brought before them in the most
orderly and legal manner. By a public Proclamation they had invited, in a
manner, all the Nation, and every particular Man in it, to bring Libels against
the Masters, but all this to no purpose: and therefore Sir John Hall then
Provost of Edinburgh (who was contented with the humble glory of being a drudge
in this Affair) cajoll'd Mr. Andrew Massy, one of the Regents of the College,
to draw up Libels against all his Brethren. Mr. Massy had in all the Periods
of his Life some affected singularities, that made him apt to quarrel with his
Colleagues; and always had so much Religion as to worship the rising Sun; and
therefore he (foreseeing that Dr. Monro must needs be turn' out) undertook this
generous and honorable Employment of being the Accuser of his Brethren. These
Libels formed and contrived by Mr. Massy, were afterward in several private
Conferences conserted with Sir John Hall, and Mr. Henry Ferguson, and then at
length read in the Town Council, the Clerks being removed, to the end that Sir
John might be furnished with all necessary preparations when the Committee for
visiting the College of Edinburgh sat. By such kind Offices Mr. Massy
recommended himself at once to Sir John Hall and Mr. Gilbert Rule, who, a
twelvemonth before the Visitation, was designed to succeed Dr. Monro as
principal of the College. Let none of the Inhabitants at Edinburgh think that
this is a piece of Forgery vented by ill nature and Envy; for I appeal to all
who were Members of the Town-Council of Edinburgh at that time, and I have my
Intelligence from one of their number, who still makes a considerable Figure in
the City. And if any sober Man be unsatisfied concerning the several steps of
this Knavery and Disingenuity, he may ask his Neighbors who were then Members
of the Town-Council.

But the most extravagant piece of partiality was, that Mr. Gilbert Rule
himself, who had all possible assurances and promises of succeeding* Dr. Muro,
was one of the Judges in that Committee; and 'twas told by a Gentleman, who
observed very punctually what passed in the General Visitation, that when Dr.
Monro was removed five or six times, the other Presbyterian Ministers Members
of the Visitation all of them by turns rose up and spoke against him, some
once, some twice, but Mr. Rule spoke thrice. Upon which some said, that that
was to kill and take possession. The Masters were never acquainted with the
Libels until they appeared before the Committee, and even then they were not
read all at once, but one Article after another, for since most of the Articles
Libelled against them related to matter of Fact; to oblige the Masters to
answer ex tempore, was the most proper way to entangle them; and so the Members
of the Committee took all possible advantages to make them say things
inconsistent, or to make their defenses in great have and confusion.

In the next place I must acquaint the Reader, with what I have from good
Hands, viz. that the only reason why Dr. Monro and Dr. Strachan returned
particular Answers to the unsubscribed Libels against themselves, was, that the
Presbyterians might not propagate among the People, and leave it upon Record,
that they were turned out for Immoralities of Life, not that they thought it
possible in that juncture, to stand their ground against Presbyterian Malice.

At this Visitation there were five of the Masters turned out. The two
Professors of Divinity, Mr. John Drummond Professor of Philology, Mr. Alexander
Douglas Professor of the Oriental Languages, and Mr. Thomas Burnet Professor of
Philosophy, Dr. Gregory Professor of the Mathematics was connived at for a
while, though he had refused the Test as it stood in the Act of Parliament.

The College of Glasgow was visited by a Committee whereof my Lord Carmichael
was President: And he (you may be sure) would take a Method different from Sir
John Hall; for though my Lord favors the Presbyterian Party, yet he is a Man
of great Modesty and Calmness of Temper, and he managed that Trust with great
Moderation and Equality: Dr. Fall Principal of the College of Glasgow refused
the Complex Test as it stood in the late Act of Parliament, and so must needs
be turned out, and upon the same account, his Colleague Dr. Weems Professor of
Divinity, and two of the subordinate Masters, Mr. Blair, and Mr. Gordon. By
Doctors Falls prudent and frugal management of the public Revenues he
advanced the College of Glasgow to a very flourishing Condition.

As for the University of Aberdeen, the Presbyterians were not so zealous to
turn them out, because they were remote from the Center of the Nation; and
partly because they had but few of their own number, who were willing at that
time to undergo the Toil and Pedantry of speaking Latin. It was more
convenient for their Interest, and more agreeable to their Nature to Preach
little Stories to the People, and since most of the Churches of the Southern
Shires of Scotland were vacant, they might plant themselves in the most
plentiful Livings, and so leave the Aberdonians for a while in Possession of
the Northern University; whether for the Reasons lately mentioned, or because,
perhaps the present Professors of Aberdeen are of a more yielding Temper than
their inflexible Predecessors Dr. Baron; and Dr. Forbes, etc. they continue
still in their Places. They are all of them very deserving Men, and it is good
for that part of the Nation, that they have been more gently treated, than
their Neighbors.

I have given you this short touch of the Visiting our Universities and
Colleges, but no doubt you have the Acquaintance of some in all of them, to
whom you may write as freely as to me, and from whom you may expect greater
satisfaction than I am able to give you. And now I hope you will allow me to
draw to a Conclusion for this time: And Pardon all the failings in Language and
Method.

I am etc.

A Proclamation against the owning of the late King James, and appointing
public Prayers for William and Mary, King and Queen of Scotland. April 13.
1689.
THE Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland having Proclaimed and Declared William
and Mary, King and Queen of England, France and Ireland, to be King and Queen
of Scotland, They have thought fit by public Proclamation, to Certify the
Leidges, that none presume to own or acknowledge the late King James the
Seventh for their King, nor obey, nor accept, or assist any Commissions or
Orders that may be emitted by him, or any way to Correspond with him; and that
none presume upon their highest Peril, by Word, Writing, in Sermons or any
other manner of way to impugn or disown the Royal Authority of William and Mary
King and Queen of Scotland, But that all the Leidges tender their dutiful
Obedience to Their Majesty's; And that none presume to misconstrue the
proceeding of the Estates, or to create Iealousies, or Misapprehensions of the
Actings of the Government; but that all the Ministers of the Gospel within the
Kingdom publicly Pray for King William and Queen Mary as King and Queen of
this Realm: And the Estates do require the Ministers within the City of
Edinburgh, under the pain of being deprived and losing their Benefices, to read
this Proclamation publicly from their Pulpits, upon Sunday next, being the
14th. Instant, at the end of their Forenoons Sermons; and all the Ministers on
this side of the River of Tay to read the same upon Sunday thereafter, the
21st. Instant; and those benorth Tay, upon the 28th. Instant; under the pain
foresaid. Discharging hereby the Proclamation of the Council, dated the 16th.
of September 1686. to be Read hereafter in Churches. And the Estates do
Prohibit and Discharge any Injury to be offered by any Person whatsomever to
any Ministers of the Gospel, either in Churches or Meeting Houses, who are
presently in the Possession and Exercise of their Ministry therein, they
behaving themselves as becomes under the present Government; and Ordains this
Proclamation to be Published at the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, with all ordinary
Solemnity that none may pretend Ignorance, And that the same may be Printed.

The SPEECH of WILLIAM Earl of CRAWFURD, President to the Parliament of
Scotland, the 22d. of April 1690.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
I May say with Nehemiah, to the Nobles, Rulers, and rest of this Honorable
Assembly; The Work before us is great, Let us not be separated upon the Wall
one far from another, and our God will do for us. Our Religion,
Church Government, Public Safety, Laws, and Liberties, are all at stake; and
the Enemy is watching for our halting in our endeavors, for every one of them:
Yet if God countenance us, so that Duty be made plain, and we be helped to
follow it, we are under the Protection of a Prince, who is a great Judge where
our true Interest lies, and I am convinced, will frankly deal to us, whatever
upon a just Claim, we shall apply for.

His Majesty's Printed Instructions for last Session, are plain evidences of
His tender Regard of His People, and contain greater Condescensions, than we
have seen, or read of in the Reigns of any of our Kings, for many Ages: But I
trust this new Diet will complete that Tranquillity, which we so impatiently
wish and wait for: And that we shall be engaged to say of his Majesty, as the
Queen of Sheba did of Solomon; Blessed be the Lord thy God, which delighted in
thee, to set thee on the Throne, because the Lord loved us, therefore made he
thee King to do Judgment and Justice.

It were a suitable Return to his Majesty, for the great things He has done
for us, to repose an entire Trust in Him, and evidence a true Zeal for His
Service; which in this Critical time, as it would be most satisfying, and
engaging to so generous a Prince; So it would be of notable advantage to His,
and our Affairs.

Were it not a seasonable part to guard against Prejudices toward one another,
and when all is at Stake, to part with trivial Differences, (our Enemies only
reaping advantage by them) and to employ our selves to the outmost, for the
Settlement of our Church, the Defense of the Kingdom, and the Enacting of other
good Laws, now under our Consideration: That we may comfortably and fully
partake of the wonderful Deliverance God has wrought for us.

If in our last Session we had begun at the House of God, other things might
have framed better in our hands; has not the Church suffered sadly by our
Differences? And have not our delays made the Work more difficult? The
Opposition at home, and Clamor abroad, had certainly been less, and many
honest suffering Ministers ere now had been relieved of their Pinches, if a
greater Dispatch had been made. But what if any remaining Obstacle should prove
a real Disappointment in the Establishing of our Church, would not the blame be
lodged at our own Door? Some are at the same Language that was spoken in
Haggai' s days; The time is not come that the Lord's House should be built: To
such I shall give the Prophets Answer, Is it time for you to dwell in your
Cieled Houses, and this House lie wast?

We have occasion with Ezra, to bless the Lord God of our Fathers, that the
stop is not at the King's Door, but that he has put such a thing as this in
his Heart, to Beautify his House with that Model, which shall be suited to the
Inclinations of the People, which I trust will be squared to the Pattern that
was showed in the Mount, and not merely regulated by humane Policy.

We are threatened by a Foreign Enemy, our Country is infested at home, and the
Kingdom sadly exposed to many great Inconveniences; What should become of us,
if His Majesty withdrew His special Protection, and we were left to the rage of
our Enemies? Though our Church were Settled to the greatest advantage, and our
other Grievances likewise Redressed, the Nation cannot be safe, without a
Supply, suitable to the present Exigency.

It is matter of heavy Regrate, that so many are groaning under the Load of
Forfeitures and Fines, and His Majesty willing to relieve them, and as yet no
Issue put to those desirable Purposes.

May the Wisdom and Goodness of God, so overruled all our Counsels, that we be
not imposed upon by false Notions of things: Let neither Partiality on the one
side, nor Passion on the other, either keep up former Differences, or give a
rise to new ones, lest it he said of us, as was spoken by Ezra upon the like
occasion, And after all that is come upon us for our evil Deeds, and for our
great Trespass, seeing that thou our God have punished us less than our
iniquities deserve, and have given us such Deliverance as this, should we again
break thy Commandments?

What my Lord Commissioner spoke the other day, (...) delivered to such
advantage, that any enlargment I could make on it, would be like a rash touch
of a Pencil, by an unskilled hand, upon a complete Picture; So I forbear every
thing of that kind.

It is beyond Debate, that in this Honorable Assembly, the Hearts of a great
many are very warm to His Majesty, and that His* though at a distance from us,
is no less filled with Thoughts of Favor to us: So if the Result of our
Councils be not Comfortable to our selves, and of National Advantage; I am
afraid, the present opportunity of doing well, if neglected, shall prove a
heavy Charge against us, in the day of our Accounts.

But as the Lord's hand has been eminently seen in every step of our late
escape from Popery, and begun Reformation; So I trust the Head-stone shall be
put on with shouting, and we shall in the Issue be forced to acknowledge, This
is the Lord's doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAGE 1. lin. 18. read ^ise to. p. 2. l. 10. dele The. Ibid. r. determination.
p. 4. l. 2. r. the great. p. 7. l. 2. r. Power. Ibid. l. 29. d. For. p. 18. l.
30. r. we are hopeful. p. 11. l. 25. r. the Episcopal Persuasion. ibid. l. 27.
r. Ioin* ibid. l. 28. r. preserving. p. 18. l. r. Cassed. p. 21. l. ult. r.
Examples. p. 37. l. 28. d. [.] before Although. ibid. l. 39. put [.] after
matter. p. 41. l. 31. r. Representatives. p. 45. l. 9. r. the rest. p. 48. l.
8. r. to them. p. 55. l. 10. r. Debitors. and so l. 19. p. 63. l. 25. after
Matter. r. Is this doing just and righteous things to all men? p. 64. l. 17. r.
Earls of. p. 65. l. 3. d. Him. ibid. l. 19. r. Is. ibid. l. 30. r. Embellish.
p. 70. l. 5. d. In. p. 74. l. 13. r. Cases of. p. 77. l. 1. r. in to. p. 86. l.
27. Going about divine. p. (...) r. just now.


