THE GREAT LAW OF NATURE, OR SELF-PRESERVATION, Examined, Asserted, and
Vindicated from Mr. Hobbes his Abuses.

In a small DISCOURSE; Part Moral, part Political, and part Religious.

London: Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by Will. Crook at the
Green-Dragon without Temple Bar, 1673.

TO THE READER.
READER;
THis small Treatise was writ two or three years ago, and since has remained
in the hands of some friends, till now at last I have adventured it to censure.
It is chiefly the result of a few serious thoughts upon consideration of some
of M. Hobbes his strange Tenants, which he would seem to ground upon that Great
Law of Nature, Self-preservation; whereby, in the judgment of the world, he
takes away all Foundations of Virtue and Goodness: yet is he well approved of
by many, who would be thought like him, Great Wits, and to have Understandings
and Capacities much transcending the Doctrine and Pedantry of Moralists and
Divines.

Knowing therefore with whom I have to do, I have argued chiefly out of Master
Hobbes his own Principles, and thereby endeavored to evince the grosness and
folly of his Errors, in making all Justice, Honesty, Morality, Goodness and
Virtue, the consequences only of a Civil Government; as if, where there were no
Civil Magistrate, these things had no being; and where there is a Civil
Magistrate, took their measures only from his Mouth: So that whatsoever he
pleases to call Good, Just, Honest, Virtuous, must therefore only necessarily
be so; and whatsoever he pronounces Evil, Unjust, Dishonest and Vicious,
immediately, for the same reason, is become so to all his Subjects; And these
Enormous Tenants he pretends to deduce and ground upon his Definition of the
Right of Nature, and the Great Law of Self-preservation. This shameful abuse
both of God, and Nature, and all that dare pretend to any thing of real
goodness and virtue, I have endeavored to detect and confute out of his own
granted Principles: which whether I have effected, I must leave to thy
judgment: And doubt not, but Truth and Reason will prevail at lengh with the
Intelligent and Rational: And that they may so do with all, I have linked them
also with Interest; being assured thereby, to leave none that love themselves
unconcerned in the matter of the subsequent Discourse, and out of the reach of
the arguments and reasons thereof, according to the best of my understanding.

ERRATA.
PAge 11. l. 19. for non, read man; page 86. l. 20, 21. blot out this whole
sentence, viz. if others will interpose, let it be at their perils.

THE Great Law of NATURE, OR SELF PRESERVATION, EXAMINED.
THat the Notions or Laws of Right and Wrong, Just and Unjust, Good and Evil,
are independent upon, and naturally and rationally antecedent to the
Constitution of any Commonwealth, or Civil Government, and are binding or
obligatory to all men, both in the state of Nature, and in all Political
Government; proved out of Mr. Hobbes his own Principles of Self-Preservation,
and equality amongst men.

2. From the Nature of God; with a subsequent Discourse, showing the
unreasonableness of that Tyrannical and Arbitrary Government, seeming to be
vindicated, and held necessary by the same Author in his said Book: with
another light reflection upon the Justice and Reasonableness, or rather the
Injustice and Unreasonableness of their Demands, who in any Civil Government
will challenge to themselves Liberty of Conscience, or a public free exercise
of what Religion they best fancy; being all grounded upon the same Principles
of Self-preservation.

And because the greatest part of these forementioned Errors seem to be
deduced from Mr. Hobbes his definition of the Right of Nature, I will first
begin with that.

By the way requiring one thing only to be granted, viz. That Right Reason is
to be the Law and Rule of all our actions. By Right Reason, I do not mean as
Mr. Hobbes, De Cive, page 21. every man's private Reason; for who but himself
did ever call this Right Reason? but I mean what is commonly hereby meant, an
unerring Reason, or that which proceeds always upon true Principles, and thence
deduces true Consequences and Conclusions.

Mr. Hobbes his Definition of the Right of Nature Examined.
THe Right of Nature, which Writers commonly call Jus Natural, is the liberty
each man has to use his own power, as he will himself, for the preservation of
his own Nature, that is to say, of his own Life, and consequently of doing any
thing which in his own judgment and reason he shall conceive to be the aptest
means thereto: In his Leviathan.

Though we should freely assent to the first part of this definition or
description of the Right of Nature, which we do not, yet may we be well allowed
to deny the inference or consequence thence deduced: For though it should be
granted, that the Right of Nature is the liberty each man has to use his own
power as he will himself for the preservation of his own Nature, yet is the
inference guilty of a most notorious Error, viz. that it is therefore a
liberty that each man has of doing any thing which in his own judgment and
reason he shall conceive to be the aptest means thereto; for in his own
judgment and reason, he may, and often does conceive that the aptest means
thereto, which re vera is not, but rather quite contrary to it, and the aptest
and readiest means to bring him to destruction; of which infinite examples
might be produced, and every man's daily experience confirms this for a most
undeniable truth.

And what rational man will pretend, that because he has a right and liberty
granted him by God or Nature, to preserve his own life, or another man's, will
conclude, that hereby is intended to him a Grant of a Right and Liberty to
destroy himself, or another?

Now according to the definition it self, the Right of Nature is only a liberty
that each man has to use his power for his own preservation, not his own
destruction; for this should be really to infringe the Law of Nature and
Reason, to the breach of which no rational man will ever pretend to any Right,
which commands Self-preservation: and this is meant, I suppose, of a real
preservation, not a seeming or intentional only; therefore the means, in order
to this end, ought to be really and truly, and not only seemingly and
intentionally (in the party acting) conducing to the end; otherwise the Law of
Nature will re vera, really and truly be broken, contrary to design and
appearance: for seeing that this is the great Law of Nature and Reason, viz.
Self-preservation; to act that which is really and truly contrary to this Law,
must needs be a breach thereof, though the man so acting may be so far in an
error, as not to think the action to be so destructive to the end he aims at
as it is: And therefore I affirm, that though a man's own judgment and reason
prompt him to do a thing as seeming to him the aptest means to secure this end
of Self-preservation, which thing really and truly is not according to the rule
of right reason the aptest and most probable means to attain this end
aforesaid, this man is guilty of misusing that liberty given him, guilty of
transgressing the rule of right reason, which obliges all men, at all times, in
all places; and guilty of acting that which is absolutely contrary and
prejudicial to his own preservation, the end and design of his actions: nor
(...) excusable, because he did that which to himself seemed most conducing to
the end; for as in Civil Government, ignorance of the Law is no good Plea to
excuse and justify, though it may somewhat extenuate a Crime in some cases; so
in statu-naturae, error, ignorance or passion, cannot excuse and justify
those actions which are really contrary to right reason, or that principle of
Self-preservation. And seeing each man desires to justify his actions by right
reason, and chiefly of all other things, desires, intends and endeavors
Self-preservation; each man hereby implies, and does acknowledge, that every
act contrary to right reason, and this Principle of Self-preservation, is
folly, which he condemns; though if you come to urge him with a particular case
of his own, ignorance, partiality and pride, (because he would seem no less
wise then he ought to be) may make him endeavor to justify his own actions
with a gloss of reason, though really, and in themselves, irrational, and
destructive to the end he aims at. Now because no man is absolute Master of
right reason, it follows, that all men are guilty of transgressing the Laws
thereof, amongst which Self-preservation is a Chief; and this frail condition
of man is agreeable to the Lessons taught by the Divine Lawgivers, viz. That
man is born in sin, and under an inavoidable necessity of sinning, as he is in
the state of Nature; because he is not always able to regulate all his actions
according to the exact Rules of right reason.

It is be objected, That if we grant Self-preservation a constant Rule and
Maxim of right reason, a man in statu naturae not knowing but every one he
meets may have an intent to kill him, ought, according to the rule of this
reason, to prevent the danger if he can, by killing the other first, or
reducing him into a condition not to be able to do him any prejudice, and this
act shall be good and just, because rational, and so by consequence all other
inferior acts of hostility; therefore no active and positive justice and
injustice, good and evil, in statu naturae.

To this I answer, That if such act or acts be really and truly most conducing
to the end of Self-preservation, we will disputandi gratia suppose them good
and just, or not evil or injust. And to try this, let us examine them according
to the Principles of Equality and Self-preservation agreed to by the Hobbists:
As first, That Nature has made men equal in power; if therefore you go about
to take away the Life of any man, there is as much reason and probability to
suspect he may take away yours, as you his; and so if you attempt to take away
from him any other thing that he has right to: Therefore whenever you
attempt any such act, consider, that by reason of the equality that is betwixt
you naturally, you do, as it were, upon even terms, throw Dice for your Life.
But this is not all: suppose you conquer and kill, yet does there rest as many
such Battles to be fought by you, as your shall find men in the World, for the
same reason which bids you suspect one, and fight him, bids you suspect all; so
that you are to throw Dice (as it were) for your Life, not once, but a hundred,
(...) thousand times: And were it not rather Madness, then Reason, to suppose
that you shall win every throw? And if you imagine your self to have a little
more craft in the Game you are to play then another, so as by cunning, skill,
strength, confederacy, deceit, surprizal, etc. you may conceive more hopes of
prevailing then another, you impugn the Principle of Equality already allowed;
the same hopes, for the same reasons, and all the same advantages, being common
to others, and your self lying as obnoxious to them, as they to you; and you
may expect to meet with as cunning Gamesters as your self, and to be caught
upon the same odds, surprizals and disadvantages. By this it appears, that even
in the state of Nature, such attempts to take away the Life or the right of
another man, are not according to right reason, and regulated by the
well-weighed rules of Self-preservation: But to kill, se defendendo, all Laws
adjudge just and allowable. To sum up in short what I have said, I affirm, That
For a man to do that which is destructive to his own Life and happiness, is
against the Right and Law of Nature and Reason: But for a man to do any thing,
or every thing, which in his own judgment and reason he shall conceive to be
the aptest means for the preservation of his own Life, ofttimes is to do that
which is destructive to his own Life and Happiness: Ergo For a man to do any
thing, or every thing, which in his own judgment and reason he shall conceive
to be the aptest means for the preservation of his own Life, is oft-times
against the Right and Law of Nature and Reason, and no man can have any Right
by Nature to act contrary to these Laws.


The major needs no proof; the minor is proved by all men, as often as by their
own folly they bring mischief and destruction upon themselves, which when it is
too late they commonly see, confess and condemn. Now though there be a
necessity of acting according to each man's private reason, right or wrong, and
consequently of acting not seldom contrary to the principles of right reason
and self-preservation, yet is every such act a failing or sin, and all men in
some degrees guilty thereof: amongst whom they are most excusable, who
endeavor most to find out the true rules of right reason, and according to
these rules to regulate their own private actings; they most culpable, who not
attending to that more Noble principle, suffer themselves to be led by the
brutish part of nonsense and passion only.

To give more light to what has been said, and to examine more exactly the
nature of right and wrong, good and evil, according to the granted principles
of equality and self-preservation, let us consider the first of these according
to Mr. Hobbes his Assumption, Part 1. Cap. 3. of his Leviathan, in these words,
viz. Nature has made all men equal in the Faculties of the body and mind, as
that though there be found one man sometimes manifestly stronger in body, or of
quicker mind then another, yet when all is reckoned up together, the
difference betwixt man and man is not so considerable, as that one can
thereupon claim to himself any benefit to which another may not pretend as well
as he. See Chartes in the beginning, De Methodo, to this purpose, as to the
faculties of the mind, which only makes the man.

Seeing therefore that all men are by Nature equal in power, and that measuring
the power of each man, we shall measure his right and title to what he lays
claim to (as he is in the state of Nature) which is adequate and proportionate
to his power (according to Mr. Hobbes his Principles) the power of all men
being equal by Nature, their right and title to all things they lay claim to
must be also equal, and if their right and title be equal, then ought their
share and parts to be equal in the said things; Nature in giving them equal
power, declaring that they have equal right, and ought to have equal portions
thereof: Therefore though we agree with Mr. Hobbes, that every man in the stat
of Nature has right to every thing; yet do we not agree, that this right
extends to the whole thing if there be Competitors, but to a just and equal
portion of it.

And from this Fundamental Thesis of Equality in Power amongst men in the state
of Nature, before the Constitution of any Commonwealth, the rules men are to
live by, in this state of Nature, may rationally be deduced: As for example, in
those rules which are that part of the Moral Virtues which respect our
Neighbors.

I. Seeing men are equal by Nature, one man ought not to take to himself a
greater liberty in his actions, which respect or concern another man, then he
is willing another man should in his actions which respect or concern him; for
this would be an impugning the natural equality betwixt them, in abridging the
power of his Fellow, and enlarging his own; and consequently the other,
according to the rule of reason may, and therefore it ought to be expected he
will by force maintain and defend his own just rights. Hence the Rule of
Justice and Equity, Do not to others, what you would not they should do to you:
From which it is evident; 1. That no man ought to take that liberty over the
person of another, as to affront, abuse, imprison, hurt or kill him, because he
is not willing another should take the same liberty over him; and this branch
of Justice concerns the person, and personal injuries. 2. One man ought not to
endeavor to abridge another of that right he has to all things equally with
himself, because he is not willing he himself should be abridged in the same by
another: And this is the second branch of Justice, which concerns the right and
enjoyment of things appertaining to the person of each man.


II. Seeing men are equal by Nature, in the state of Nature, one man ought not
to expect any greater service, as due to himself from another, then he thinks
due from himself to another; for that were to abridge another man's liberty, in
making him more a servant then his Fellow, contrary to the equality betwixt
them, and therefore, according to reason, he ought to expect that the other
will maintain and defend his just rights by force. Therefore seeing it is
evident others are not obliged to do more for you, then you are obliged to do
for others, do unto others as you would they should do unto you; Hence it
follows, that we ought to think our selves obliged to do all good Offices for
others upon every just occasion, because we desire and think the same due to
our selves from others; and this is called Charity; and these two Virtues of
Justice and Charity, are the grounds, and the foundation, and the very
ligaments of all Humane Society; and all Covenants, or Pacts, express or
implicit, whereby Commonwealths are constituted, or one man obliges himself to
another, are binding as acts of natural Justice, which one man ought to observe
toward another, according to the rules of reason, grounded upon Equality and
Self-preservation; it being contrary to the rules of Justice for a man to
infringe his faith and promise given to another, whereas he himself would not
another should do so to him: And upon these two Laws of Justice and Charity,
all other Moral Virtues, which respect our Neighbors, are grounded; and
actions are esteemed virtuous or vicious, good or evil, as they are conformable
or repugnant to these two Laws: As for example, to enumerate some particulars;
Gratitude is a point of Justice in returning kindnesses received; for as you
would expect that others should pay obligations of Gratitude to you upon
occasion, so ought you to do to others: So sincerity in all your dealings and
transactions with others is a point of Justice, because you desire others
should deal sincerely with you: So to keep promise or Covenant; so of Mercy,
where you have had just provocations, and suffered injuries, Charity bids you
pardon, because you desire to be pardoned: All other Virtues, respecting our
Neighbors, are easily reducible to the same Heads. Contrary to these Laws, and
injurious to our Neighbors, are Pride; to arrogate to himself more then is
due, and to put too high a value upon himself, and too low upon another, this
is injustice: So of all kind of wrong, as Theft, Murder, Reproaches, Affronts,
Backbiting, Slandering, Lying, Malice, Envy, Hatred, Cheating, Dissembling,
etc. no man being willing to suffer these things from another, therefore in
Natural Justice he ought not to do them to another.

Now there is another sort of Virtue and Vice which has no respect to our
Neighbors, or not so much to them as to our selves; and the measure of these,
with their reasons and grounds, may be deduced only from the Law of
Self-preservation: Such is Temperance in all things that concern our selves, as
in eating, drinking, recreation, study, exercise either of the mind or body,
etc. which actions are so far allowable, as they are consistent with
Self-preservation, that is, the health of our bodies and minds; and if we
exceed in them so far as to prejudice our health, we destroy our selves, and
sin against Nature, or the Law of Self-preservation.

And as we have demonstrated that Justice, Charity and Temperance, with all
their subordinate Species, do naturally result from the consideration of these
two Maxims of Equality and Self-preservation, without any reference or
dependancie upon a Civil Power of Commonwealth; so also does it appear of the
notions of good and evil, which in a Moral sense are nothing else but Virtue
and Vice; so that so long as men are men, viz. rational beings, and are acted
and governed by reason, they must all necessarily agree in these Notions of
good and evil; every virtuous action being denominated good, every vicious
action evil. And hereby it appears, that these are not things merely arbitrary,
or dependant upon the mouth of the Prince, or the Constitution of a Civil
Government; it being impossible that any Civil Power should make those actions,
which in themselves are good, that is, conducing to the general happiness of
mankind, as Justice, Charity and Temperance, to be evil; or those things which
are evil, as Injustice, Uncharitableness. Intemperance, to be good, because
always destructive to that happiness; Therefore these are not things dependant
upon the Constitution of a Commonwealth, or the mouth of the Civil Magistrate;
but the Constitutions of all Civil Governments and Commonwealths are depending
upon them, and if not framed according to them, must needs be ruinous and
pernicious to as many as live under such Governments, or the greatest part of
them; for without Natural Justice, Charity and Temperance, it is in vain to
think any Civil Government can subsist, the design of all Civil Government
being the execution of these Laws, in order to Self-preservation; there being
no need of any Civil Magistrate, if these Laws could be made to be observed
without their help; nor does any benefit accrue to any people from their
Magistrate and Government, where these Laws and Rules are not observed; and to
exempt the Prince from the observation of them, is to exempt the people, who
are to obey him, and to reduce all things into a Chaos; for these being the
Laws of Reason and Self-preservation, the non-observance of them is to act
contrary to both, and the consequence destruction.

And that these Laws, even in statu^ Naturae, do oblige in foro conscientiae,
viz. to a desire that they should take effect, Mr. Hobbes accords: If then the^
oblige to a desire, wheresoever the en^ Self-preservation, and the actual
exerting of that desire may consist together they certainly oblige to actual
performance; for whosoever is obliged to a desire that he might do a thing, is
certainly obliged to do it, where he may do it with safety, especially where
with benefit and advantage to himself and others.

Now that the actual performance of these Laws of Nature are always consistent
with Self-preservation, is evident from what I have before shown, viz. that
they oblige only to do that, which according to the rules of right reason, is
most conducing to that end, the actual performance whereof must needs be always
requisite; and therefore to say they oblige only in foro interno, or to a
desire, is as much as to say a man is obliged always to desire
Self-preservation, but must not use the means to secure it.

And as for that Objection, That the practice of Justice and Charity, in a
state of Nature, is not the means to preserve our selves, because it would
expose good men as a prey to the danger, lusts and passions of evil men, who
would observe no such Laws in their dealing toward us:

To this I answer, That it is neither against the Law of Nature, nor Reason, or
every man to stand upon his guard, ^o be as cautious as he can, and as jealous
as he pleases, or sees cause, of those with whom the has to deal, unless he
(...) well acquainted with their disposition and temper: and it is very lawful
for him to put himself in a condition to de^^nd and preserve his own right, but
in ^o doing, he must not prejudice another; for that were to provoke and pull
^ose dangers upon himself, against which he desires to secure himself; for ^he
Rule of Justice, Do not to others what ^^u would not others should do to you,
^lls every man in the state of Nature, as has been shown) that he is not to
inure another: And the same Rule tells ^s, that whosoever dath to us an injury,
^^at person thereby declares, that he is willing to be looked upon as an Enemy,
and must in reason and Justice expect a like return of hostility: for he who
does injuries, ought in Justice and Equity to expect the same, and cannot
complain of injustice, if the party injured take from him the power of doing
him any further injuries, even by taking away his life, if in reason it appear
he cannot otherwise secure his own: But where more gentle proceedings are
likely to take place, there the rigorous are always to be avoided, because more
dangerous to our selves, and destructive to others: So that though by the
rigor of Justice you may requite one injury with another, yet according to the
Rule of Charity, you are to suffer injuries, and do good for evil, and forgive
your Enemies, because you desire when you offend others in the like manner to
be favorably dealt with, and forgiven your self: besides, it is more safe to
spare an Enemy, then prosecute him with the utmost rigours, lest either he
himself should in a desperate condition make as desperate a resistance, or some
others seeing your cruelty toward him, should serve you the same sauce, as
with reason is to be expected. You see therefore these Laws of Nature, Justice
and Charity, do not bind up our hands, and expose us to the abuses and
injuries of others, but gives us liberty to use the means, according to right
reason, most likely to secure us: But if we will foolishly conceit, we cannot
be safe unless we subdue all we see, and make them our Vassals; or will upon
every slight injury, or weak surmize of an intended injury, do a real one, this
is not according to the rule of right reason, most conducing to our
preservation, but will certainly and suddenly, at some time or other, be our
destruction: Much less ^an it be just and reasonable, where there ^s no cause
of fear nor danger from a man, to abuse, rob, spoil, wound, hurt or kill him.

Now though it be certain, that if men would live according to the Laws of
Nature, I do not mean that Nature which is common to man with Bruits, but that
which specifically constitutes man's Nature, and distinguishes him from other
inferior Creatures, viz. Right Reason, (for every one has but so much of Man
in him as he has of Reason) they might live happily and securely, as in the
Golden Age celebrated in the Fictions of the Poets of Old: yet because men are
acted very much by the inferior principles of appetite and passion, common
also to the Beasts, which are always strong and vigorous in them, and because
no man is absolute Master of Right Reason, nor are all men in equal degree
Masters thereof; hence it is, that generally they are swayed by passion,
blinded by ignorance, biased by self-love, pride and conceit, or interest;
which imperfections each man easily perceives, and takes notice of in others,
but seldom can, or will see, or acknowledge in himself: So that though every
man in the state of Nature should agree for quietness and securities sake, that
each should have an equal share or proportion in all things, and equal services
done as required of him, yet when these agreements come to be put in execution,
they would not agree in their accounts and calculations of the individual and
just measure to be assigned to each in particular; whence Contentions, Strife
and War arise. To avoid those mischiefs, and that each may enjoy what in
Justice and Equity belongs to him without strife or danger, Reason advises
them, as the only remedy, that they should choose one or more to administer
Justice, and to sit as sole Arbitrator of all Causes, and that they should
unanimously agree to submit themselves to his or their judgment and
determination in all their concerns, who is by mutual Covenant to see Justice
impartially executed. But because such Judge or Judges so constituted cannot
execute their charge without a Power able to force obedience in the disobedient
and refractory; it is also necessary that all agree to give to such Judge or
Judges, such Power as is necessary to bring Offenders to just punishment, and
defend the Commonwealth from violence; and this Power is thus transferred to
the Supreme Authority chosen, viz. by Promise, Covenant or Oath, express or
implicit, to assist him or them with the hazard or life and estate, to the
utmost of each man's power, in all things necessary for the executing Justice,
and defense of the Commonwealth; of which necessity the Supreme Power to be
Judge, and not the Suject: And this Supreme Power is not only to be Judge of
what is just betwixt one of his Subjects and another, but also of what is just
betwixt himself, and any of them, or all of them together; yet are not all his
actions therefore just, nor any of them just, any further then they are
conformable and consentaneous to the Law of Nature or Reason, whereby he is
obliged to assume to himself no greater liberty of Command over his Subjects
Persons and Estates, then is necessary for the accomplishing those ends for
which he is constituted their Prince, viz. execution of Justice, and defense of
the Commonwealth; and if he assume any greater, he is absolutely unjust, unless
that liberty be granted to him by the general consent of the people: for though
the people transfer to their Sovereign so much of their power and right as is
necessary to execute Justice, yet this Authorizing him to be Judge, and
obliging themselves to adhere to his Decrees, does not make those Decrees of
his to be all just; for then were it impossible, in this sense, for any Judge
or Arbitrator to do an act of injustice; which is contrary to what has been
already proved: and therefore we conclude, that when any Prince or Power in
Authority Sovereign, acts contrary to the Laws of Nature, viz. Justice, etc. he
does wickedly and unreasonably, in regard such actions tend to the destruction
both of himself and people, though for any such acts done, he is not:
accountable to any Earthly Power; for if you give his Subjects Authority to
call him to account for his actions, you must suppose the Commonwealth
dissolved in so doing, the Minister of Justice being disabled to execute his
duty, because under check and restraint, and in the power of others. And thus
far we have argued only upon those principles which Mr. Hobbes makes use of,
and which are before the constitution of a Commonwealth, both natura, and
tempore, viz. equality amongst men, and self-preservation. And this I have
done, and shall do, not because it is my own opinion that there are no other
grounds or foundations of good and evil, but this Principle of
Self-preservation and Equality; but to show out of these Principles granted by
Mr. Hobbes, that those Eternal Laws of Justice, Charity, Temperance, Reward,
Virtue, etc. which he by the same Principles seems to destroy, or make the
Daughters only of Civil Government, are the Mothers and the Foundation of it,
and grounded in the very nature of man, so as to oblige him to act according to
them, though there were no Civil Magistrate in the world, or though the
Magistrate positively command the contrary.

Now Reason will dictate to us another Principle, from whence, and the same
Rules of Equality and Self-preservation already laid down, the same things may
be deduced and confirmed more strongly and effectually, viz. that Justice and
Injustice, Right and Wrong, Good and Evil, are not consequents only of a Civil
Government, so as to leave no place for any Evasions to any man that will
acknowledge that he ought to govern himself by the rules of reason: and this
principle is, That there is a God; which may be proved, and is evident: 1. From
the order of causes in the world, it being to every man's indifferent judgment,
that has any, apparent and clear, that there must be a first cause. 2. From
the order and method of the Universe it self, and the admirable frame of it,
and the Creatures therein; which shows that they were not the effects of
Chance, but of some wise and skilful Architect. 3. From the general consent of
all men in all Nations, and of the wisest men, and greatest Masters of Reason,
that have been in the world: and that which the most part of all, and the most
part of the wisest agree to, at least is most probably true. If therefore
Reason tell us we ought to believe that there is a God, the first Cause,
Creator, and Architect of the Universe; the same Reason will also tell us, that
whatsoever perfection we perceive in our selves, or in the Universe besides, we
must conclude to be in the Creator and Giver in a far higher degree then in our
selves, or the Creatures; for nothing can give to another what it has not in
it self: Let us therefore consider what things we esteem the greatest
perfections and excellencies. Now above all others, we set the highest value
upon Power; therefore in the first place we call God Omnipotent, and attribute
to him all Power; and because Power without goodness may be idle or hurtful, as
we find by experience, in the second place we denominate him Good; which we
see verified, in that he has made use of his Power in creating us, and giving
us whatsoever we have, that we can call good: and also because Power without
Knowledge or Wisdom, may err in its Operations; therefore, in the third place,
we denominate God Wise, or Omniscient; and in these three Attributes, or
Perfections, are contained all others; for he that has Power, and is thereby
able to do all things, and Wisdom, and thereby knows what is best to be done,
and how best to do it, being also Good, we are not to doubt, but that we are to
expect from him all things that are the results of Power, Wisdom, and Goodness
cooperating. Hence therefore you may conclude, that he is Eternal, True and
Just; the Opposites of which, viz. Finite, False and Unjust, are all contrary
to the Attributes of Omnipotent, Good and Omniscient. It being thus
demonstrated, that every man, according to the Rule of Right Reason, must
acknowledge that there is a God; and that this being supposed, we must
necessarily believe, that he is owner of all Perfections; and that those
Attributes aforementioned, viz. Omnipotency, Omnisciency, and Goodness, etc.
are the greatest perfections, and therefore his; and we being all by the right
of Creation and Dominion his Subjects, we ought, according to the rule of
reason, to believe that he will do Justice to every one according to his
Nature, and the Office of a Sovereign; and therefore we ought to be careful to
live according to the Laws of Justice already by reason determined, which
command us, not to do to others what we would that others should not do to us,
and to do to others as we would that others should do to us: For though we
should, in acting contrary, foolishly hope to escape the ill consequences that
we ought reasonably to expect we shall hereby draw upon our selves from the
hands of men; yet seeing there is no hope left to escape an Omnipotent and
Omniscient Judge, the Rule of Self-love, or Self-preservation will command us,
not to do those things, which if not most certainly, yet certainly most
probably will bring evil and destruction upon us, from the hands either of God
or men: And this is argument sufficient to determine the judgment and actions
of all men that resign themselves to the Government of Reason; and to those
only I speak.

Now if any take notice that I have given a notion of God according to the
notions that men have of perfection, whereas I should have given a notion of
perfection according to the true notion and Attributes of God; it being fitter
to say, Whatsoever is in God is a perfection absolute and universal, then to
say, Whatsoever is amongst men a perfection, is a shadow or Character of God: I
answer, seeing we can frame no other notion of God any otherwise, then by
attributing to him whatsoever we esteem, according to reason, most excellent
and perfect; Hereby it appears, that it is the good pleasure of God that we
should really believe him to be such as we have spoken him to be, it being most
reasonable, we should think it his pleasure we should judge of all things, and
therefore of him, according to those faculties he has given us to judge by:
which we have done. And seeing it is the will of God we should really believe
him to be such as our faculties declare to us, we ought also to believe, that
he really in his own Nature and Essence is such, because the same faculties
reasonably judge, that he is no deceiver, for that is an Attribute inconsistent
with the former perfectious that constitute his Nature.

And thus I have demonstrated, that every man ought to believe there is a God,
that this God is good, and therefore just, seeing Justice (as we have shown
before) is good, and a good absolutely necessary, and most conducible to the
good estate of the Universe; and therefore the presumption of him that does
evil, and yet hopes to escape the hands of men, though it does, for the most
part, bring him at one time or other to destruction, even by the hands of men,
and is therefore unreasonable; yet the consideration of a God being also in the
way, such presumption must be the greatest madness, and absolutely contrary to
the Rules of Self-preservation, the Principles whereupon we have proceeded.

And seeing we have proceeded thus far upon these Principles of
Self-preservation, and the Equality amongst men by Nature, as to deduce from
thence the Laws men are to live by, and the Nature of Good and Evil, as to the
Conceptions which man must necessarily, in respect of himself, frame thereof;
and thereby made it appear, that Mr. Hobbes abuses and perverts his own
Principles, in order to another small Disecurse; we will declare more at large,
not what Mr. Hobbes understands, but what in reason ought to be understood and
meant by the word Self-preservation, lest any should conceive I intend no more
thereby, then barely the preserving of life, or a been esse in this life, which
would injure the notion I think we ought to have of it, by a great mistake; for
whatsoever Mr. Hobbes his Opinion is concerning Self-preservation, when he
makes it the great Law of Nature, it is manifest to any indifferent judgment,
that hereby ought to be intended, not only the preservation of life, or a been
esse in this life, but a general desire that necessarily and naturally is in
every rational creature, whereby they wish to themselves happiness and
satisfaction; which may properly be called Philautia, or self-love, or is
grounded thereupon, and is infinite as desire, running parallel with Eternity
it self: for every man does not only naturally desire to preserve his life, or
to live happily in this world, but to be for ever and eternally happy, freed
from grievous objects, and conjoined to pleasing and desirable; and this I
think undeniable: and hence it appears, that this Philautia is the Center upon
which every man's actions move, and finally are determined and directed; it
being impossible for any one endued with a rational soul, rationally and
intelligently to desire to be miserable, or not to desire to he happy. This
therefore being acknowledged for the great and necessary Law of Nature, it must
of necessity be granted, as a consequence plainly deducible from hence, that
that is always to be accounted best and most Eligible by each man, that
conduces most to that particular man's real happiness; and that most of all to
be accounted of by the Universal suffrage and consent of all men jointly, that
is most conducing to the benefit, happiness and satisfaction of all men: and it
is easily visible upon the observation of the whole frame of the Universe, and
the nature of man in particular, that if we submit to the judgment and dictates
of right reason, each man's private happiness will be found linked together
with, knit and united to the happiness and felicity of the rest of his Fellows,
as to this life; the greatest pleasures whereof are found to consist in
Society, and the benefits we have by the mutual commerce, company and enjoyment
of one another: And this is the reason that people desire to unite themselves
in Commonwealths, and under Civil or Politic Governments; and a more powerful
and effective reason, I think, then that of fear, which Mr. Hobbes seems only
to insist upon, though I acknowledge them both to be strong motives. Now seeing
that a Civil Government, for the reasons before alleged in our former
drscourse, and this last mentioned, is necessary, as much conducing to the
better and more comfortable estate of mankind in this life, the Dispute will
arise, what kind of Government is to be desired, whether Monarchy,
Aristocracy, or Democracy, the common Species talked of. I say, that Government
is most to be desired, which is most conducing to the end for which it is
desired, which, as has been said, is the safety and more pleasant comfortable
living of all the men in the world, and this, I think, no man can plausibly
cavil at: Consider then which of these disserent Species of Government, last
mentioned, do most conduce to this proposed end, viz. the general safety and
comfortable living of all mankind, and not only of this or that particular
person, or some sort of men; and I am much mistaken if any man will
deliberately, proposing this end of Government, adjudge Mr. Hobbes his
Monarchical Tyranny to be such; that is, for all men to submit their Lives,
Estates, and all their Concerns, only to the will and pleasure of one Man, and
he to be Sole Proprietor and lawful disposer of them all, without doing wrong
or prejudice to any; nay, as it seems by his Principles, without possibility of
doing any injustice, injury or evil: Such an absolute power in any one man's
hand, is too great and unsafe, unless we could suppose him always the best of
men, or little less then some Divinity. But suppose he be, or become Fool or
Madman, or get some distemper in his brain, either by sickness, or any other
accident, how shall such a one manage the Sword of Justice with an equal hand?
his will and desire may be the same with Caligula's, that all the people of his
Jurisdiction had but one Head, that he might cut them all off at one blow, or
the like fumes of madness, melancholy or extravagancy: And certainly no man
having the use of reason, whilst he sees and knows himself, and all his
concerns in this life, subject to the will, humor, and extravagancy of such a
one, can think he lives happily or comfortably, though he yet see the
threatening dark storm fall besides himself. If it be urged, that if we do make
a King, it is not possible to make him with a limited power, because if there
be any other power in being that can check and control him, that power is
saperiour to him, and therefore he but a subject to this: I answer, That he may
have a power limited by the Rules of Natural Justice and Fquity, which oblige
all men, Kings and others, not to do wrong; and limited also by positive and
National Laws, or express Covenants, to which he may be obliged by Oath,
Promise or Covenant; and such a limitation I only mean, which is a sufficient
Obligation and restraint to a good and just, or any reasonable and wise Prince.

In an Aristocratical Government, though there be not so much danger that all
the Rulers may agree together to destroy or abuse their Subjects, yet does
self ends and interest carry them very often upon projects and private
designs, and beget Factions, dangerous and of fatal consequence to the Public.

A Democratical Government is most difficult to be continued, some, not
withstanding all caution and care of prevention, growing more eminent and
powerful then the rest; and spurred by ambition, attempting the subversion or
disturbance of the Government, and often, at last, grow too powerful for the
Commonwealth, and change the face of the Democratical into a Monarchical
Government, as in the Roman Commonwealth did Caesar, etc.

To avoid the inconveniences of each several Species, it is evident, that the
well compounded Government, as that of England, is the best, under which it is
most manifest that the people live the most happily, I mean all sorts and
degrees, the Commons as well as the Lords, of any Nation in the world; where
though there be one Monarch, and the Government resembling that applauded by
Mr. Hobbes, yet does he not pretend to that absolute arbitrary and unlimited
power Mr. Hobbes would give his Prince; the Laws and Legislative Power being
not solely posited in him, without the concurrence and consent of the People by
their Representatives, though the Execution of them only be in the King, with
other Royalties and Prerogatives, whereby he is sufficiently enabled to do
Justice amongst his Subjects, and defend them against the strongest of his and
their Enemies. And though if you respect absolute Power abstract from Justice,
it is in the Kings to pervert these Laws established, at least as to the
execution of them; yet with Justice he cannot do it, nor without imminent
danger to himself and his people: for though Subjects ought not to take upon
them to oppose and resist their Princes actions, whether just or injust, as
has beer said, otherwise then by Petition, or refusing to be the Ministers of
these injust Commands; and such Doctrine they ought to be well instructed in,
with the reasons thereof; yet is it very difficult to impose this belief upon
men, for each man naturally thinks himself concerned, as a Subject, to a higher
Prince then any upon earth, viz. the God and Creator of all things, to maintain
and uphold the Eternal Laws of that King of Kings; so that where a Prince, the
greatest in the world* does an act of apparent wrong and injustice, or which is
so construed and apprehended, all parties so understanding and apprehending it,
do thereby conceive the Majesty of that greatest King offended; and
consequently, considering also the case to be of a general concernment, and may
be their own, they desire and wish to see such irregularities (as they conceive
them) re^ormed, and thereupon often engage in the quarrel unadvisedly and
precipitately, as being both Gods, and their own private, and that of all the
world besides, wherein to die a Martyr must meeds be Meritorious; not
considering, that the thing which they conceive to be unjust, may not
withstanding be most just and reasonable, and the error not in their Prince,
but in their own private Opinion and Judgment; and not considering, that if the
Prince did pervert Justice, etc. yet those particular acts wherein he did so,
would not be of so bad a consequence to the Commonwealth, as the remedy they
did attempt, viz. a Civil War: which if so, then are they themselves guilty of
a greater injustice, in bringing greater calamities upon a Nation, to avoid the
lesser; and what greater calamity can be then such a War?

Now the Constitution of the Commonwealth of England is such, that besides the
old Laws, approved by many Ages of experience, no new Laws bind the people,
which are not, or have not been ratified by their own consent: The King
therefore that is to Rule according to those Laws, wi^^ certainly be more
cautious in observing that they be put in execution, then ^ he were left at
liberty, and unconfined^ and his own Imperial Commands or E^dicts were only and
singly to be accounted Law; the diversity betwixt such a Government as this of
ours, and such a Tyrannical Government a^ Mr. Hobbes speaks of, being this: i^
ours, the people can say, We have agreed and submitted to such and such Laws
and no other, and by these we desire to be ruled, and if you govern or handl^
us otherwise, you do us apparent wrong, and let God and your own Conscience
judge betwixt us and you^ whether you observe, as you are obliged by the mutual
Covenants and Engagements betwixt us and you: But in these absolute Monarchical
Tyrannies, there is no such mutual compacts or agreements betwixt the Soveraig^
and the People, no positive Laws but the Princes Command or Edict; and the
people agreeing, or having agreed to be subject to such a kind of Government,
have no other will then that ^f their Prince; it being the same a^ if hey had
said, We submit our wills to our will, and our selves to be wholly overned
according to your discretion; do ^ us what to you seems good, we and all we
have are yours, and you may di^ose of us and ours as you think fit and
^nvenient; your only Edicts and Com^ands shall be the absolute Laws to which we
willingly submit our selves, and which shall be by us inviolable.

This is the nature of Mr. Hobbes his Monarchical Tyranny: Now let any national
man judge, whether the Prince, whose power, as to the just measure of ^^, and
how far it ought lawfully to be extended, is known and determined, and cannot
without notorious injustice and breach of Covenant be enlarged, will not be
more cantious in using the ^^ me according to moderation and discretion, and
containing himself within the Sphere and extent of Justice and ^quity, then he
who may, according ^o the Laws of the Kingdom and Government, and without
seeming wrong ^r injustice to his people, by reason of their consent to his
Arbitrary Government, do what seems most agreeable with his own fancies,
however extravagant and destructive to his people^ in the first case, the sense
of the apparent injustice opens his eyes to the danger of such actions, and
restrains his irregular designs; in the latter, no fault is committed the
people by the Laws of the Land can justly complain of, or the Prince by any Law
but Divine, or natural Equity and Conscience, know to be a fault; and
therefore, I confess, no such pretense of Insurrection or disobedience to the
people, nor sense of injury to them done in the Prince: But it is most
certainly true, that with all bad Princes, the fear of bringing mischief upon
themselves from their wronged, and thereby provoked, and at last enraged
people, is a great safety, and the best Shield of the people to protect and
secure them from violence and injustice. And when the Prince is by express
Laws, by Oath and Covenant with his people, positively bound to the observation
of their established known Laws, which without the general consent of the
people are unalterable: Surely matters being thus reduced to a certainty, as to
^he method and Laws of Government and Justice, the people will, even in the
Princes own judgment, much sooner apprehend and disgust irregular and ^njust
proceedings, having a constant Standard to measure them by, then when all is
referred only to the Princes will and pleasure; where quod libet li^et, quod
licet aequum est; and the Prince, though he vie with all the Records of History
for all forts of Tyranny and Oppression, yet must be thought to do ^o evil, or
at least no wrong to his poor Subjects; and this apprehension, and doubt of the
bad consequences which will probably ensue upon such Tyrannical actions, is a
great check to Tyranny. And though the Doctrine be admitted most certainly
true, that for no reason whatsoever any Subject ought to take up Arms or wage
War against his Prince, no not to preserve his own life, (which yet Mr. Hobbes
allows of) yet will this give no security at all to the Tyrannical Governor;
for but sew men in the world busy their brains to search out and apprehend the
true reasons of things, as they ought, or are capable of so doing; and fewer
will be content to sit still and suffer wrongfully (as they conceive) where
there is good hopes of defending and vindicating themselves from wrong, let the
wrong-doer be what he will. The number of those that will be dissatisfied with
the just and lawful proceedings of a just Prince, does often overpower their
Fellows, who are good and loyal-hearted Subjects, as woeful experience does
often teach: how much more ought it to be expected, that when the Prince does,
contrary to Justice, and the established Laws, abuse and Tyrannize over his
Subjects, the number of the prudent Loyal, and lovers of peace, should be much
inferior to the number of Malcontents and Mutineers? And hence the danger
arises that so often overtakes the Tyranny even of lawful Princes and
Governors, and the fear that the Prince must necessarily stand in of falling
by the number of his irritated and provoked Subjects, who conceive themselves
wronged by him, will always put some restraint upon his extravagancy and
Tyranny, let him be never so wicked, if he have but such an indifferent measure
of prudence or consideration, as to respect his own safety and estate; so that
the peoples sense of wrong, does often conduce much to the securing them from
much oppression under wicked Princes, as it does often also bring great
iniseries and asslictions upon them under both good and bad Princes. To
restrain which natural propensity that all men have of revenging themselves,
even upon their Princes and Governors, though with the hazard of a whole
Nation, where it lies in their power, for an injury done, or conceived to be
done to them or theirs, though by their Prince; it is very reasonable and
necessary that the Laws should be so severe as they are against Rebels and
disturbers of the Peace; and yet for all this, all to little to curb the
exuberancy of this disease: for though good effects may sometimes be the result
of unlawful and irregular actings, yet such actings ought not therefore to be
allowed or approved, because such effects are but accidental, and not naturally
incident to them; besides, w^ must not do evil that good may insue^ but it
seems a secret of Gods Providential contrivance, as in many other like cases,
so in this, that the sins of the Prince, as Tyranny, etc. should be punished by
the sins of his people, as Rebellion, etc. and so vice versa, the Rebellious
humor of the people to be punished by the heavy hand of the^ Prince, or some
other Usmping Tyrant: Therefore, I say, where the Law are made and established,
and thing reduced to as great a certainty as is possible, as to what is just or
unjust, lawful and unlawful, both in respect ^^ Subject and Prince, and one
Subject and another; though the interpretation ^^ these Laws, and the execution
of them be left solely to the Prince; yet is there much more hopes the people
may enjoy some benefit of these Laws, then where there are no Laws so
established, but all is left to the will and discretion o^ the Prince to make
new, or revoke old or do what he list: for a Prince tha^ will pervert these
Laws, after they are so established, and he sworn to the observation of them,
What would the same Prince do if there were no such Laws at all to stand in the
way of his will and desire? certainly be much more Irregular, Tyrannical, and
Exorbitant. Suppose the Kings of England had been all actually Kings of France,
or of the Turkish Empire, to Rule there according to the Custom of those
Countries, do you think those Countries of France, and the Nations under the
Dominion of the Turk, should have been used by the same Kings with no less
respect and regard to the peoples satisfaction, and no less Liberties,
Immunities and Privileges allowed them, then to the English. Subjects? Or
suppose the French King, or the Turk, were to govern according to the Laws and
Constitutions of England, amongst a people inured to such a Government, do you
think that the people should presently undergo as much servitude under them, as
the people they now Rule? No certainly; the different Constitutions of
Government, though under the same men, would alter the condition of the people
that lived under those men and Governments, and the Princes be thereby and by
the humor of the people, deterred from abusing them contrary to their Laws,
with the same licentiousness they would their other Subjects^ Hence it is
clearly evinced, that good Laws established, as in England, are the immediate
cause, under God, of the happiness, freedom, wealth and privileges, the people
living under them as in England, enjoy above those other people and Nations of
the world. And though, in other Countries, the Prince may have a more absolute
Dominion and Arbitrary power, of doing or undoing whatsoever to him seems good,
yet to a good Prince this is no ma^ne^ of felicity, his satisfaction and
contentment consisting chiefly in making his people under him live happily, and
with the greatest assurance of the greatest immunities and privileges they may
be capable o^ as Subjects; and therefore desires not to impose any thing upon
them, but what is in order to this proposed end: For why is the Prince said to
represent God, but because he ^s to be as God to his people? whose greatest
Attribute wherein we enjoy him ^eing goodness, the advantage the Prince has
above all others, is, as God, ^o do good to so many people his Subjects, and
under the influence of his power. And certainly to any soul that is livine aure
particula, that carries in it ^he Image of its Creator, the greatest ^^^licity
in the world is to do good to (...), and oblige all by benefits and cour^esies,
or at least to deserve well at the ^ands of every the meanest subject or
^erson: for this is that which God has done of all his Creatures; and those
creatures which desire to resemble their Creator, must do so by one another;
and that man, I think, ought always to ^ook upon it as a special favor of God,
and a great blessing, in whose hands God has been pleased to put the means and
^pportunities to delight himself in this ^leasing God-like exercise of
distribu^ing happiness, and contentment, and ^ll the benefits of peace, plenty,
riches, honors, immunities, rewards, and other good things, to his inferior
Subjects or Vassals; and that man who finds no satisfaction in thus acting the
part of God toward his fellow creatures, or rather whose greatest and chiefest
satisfaction and pleasure is not herein found to consist (for omnium suavissime
delitiae sunt obligandi delitiae) has no part of God, nor no resemblance of
him: And let him pretend to what other virtues, excellencies or perfections he
will, they all lose their luster without this one Noble qualification, which is
their end; and he thus destitute of this ennobling perfection of the Soul,
which is the light thereof, he resembles no more the light which is God, but
darkness his contrary.

But it may be objected against what I have said, that the people under those
absolute Monarchs by Mr. Hobbes described, being their Slaves and Vassals, and
all they have theirs in Law and Justice, freely to dispose of according to
their high Prerogatives, the Prince will be more careful, in this case, of
preserving his own, then he would otherwise be if the people challenged, and
had absolute propriety in their estates, goods and possessions, and a free
disposal of themselves, and all they had, without being liable, or obliged by
any Laws or Commands, but those by themselves expressly made or consented to;
for the Prince being as Master of the Family, will be more careful of the
Family, and all that appertains to it, looking upon all as his own proper
goods, then if he were but a Guardian and Overseer for another benefit.

To this I answer, That it were happy for many men, Masters of Families, both
in respect of themselves and their Families, if they had not power to waste
their substance, ruin their estates, and be a continual affliction and
vexation to all those that are necessarily dependant upon them, in some sense
their poor Subjects and Vassals: And how many examples have we of this nature?
Is it not the most common and ordinary thing in the world, to see the Son
scatter what the Father has scraped together; and by his folly and
extravagancy, totally destroy all the Monuments of his Fathers frugality,
wisdom and industry? And how many families every day fall to ruin; and from a
plentiful estate, are reduced to beggary, or a very low and mean condition, by
the misgovernment of the Pater-familia's? How few Ancient Families, of many
thousands, have continued their Hereditary Estates and Grandeur from the first
Foundation of this Kingdom, or but from the last settlement of it under the
Norman? And how many times have the best of them been shaken, and reduced to a
low and very weak estate, only by the exorbitancy of their own heads? If Kings
then were as Masters of Families, and governed after the same manner, as freely
and arbitrarily disposing of all the Profits and Revenues of the Nation, and
the labors of the people; what man is so blind, as not to see that Kingdoms
would be things of no firmer foundation, nor longer continuance, at least under
one and the same form of Government, and Race of Princes, then Families are, or
the Estates appertaining to these Families continue under, and in the hands of
the same Lineal Masters, whereof one in a hundred does not continue its
felicity a hundred years together; but is without any other default or cause
then that of the Governor, or Pater Familia's thereof, reduced to the greatest
extremities, and in some respect annihilated? Where is then this care that each
man has of his own Proprieties? And certainly Kings being but men as others
are, and challenging from nature no more nor greater abilities either of mind
or body, if they might without opposition, and with as much facility, dispose
of their Kingdoms and people, as a Master of a Family of his Estate, many of
them being guilty of the same extravagancies other men are, would make both
their own Grandeur, and their peoples Fortunes, subject to the same
incertainties, periods and vicissitudes, that ordinary Families are; with this
diversity, that a Master of a Family having not so absolute a power, is not
able to do so much mischief. If it be further objected, that many of those
Tyrannical Kingdoms, as that of the ancient and present Persian Monarchy, the
Turkish, Indian, and others, are or have been of long continuance: I answer,
That even these, however they seem to be absolutely Tyrannical, yet de facto
they are not so: For in the first place, each of these Countries has its
Religion established and certain, besides Customs, which arbitrarily to alter,
is not in the power of any the greatest Princes amongst them. Secondly, though
the Princes may, according to the Custumes of some of those Countries, by their
high Prerogative, and without infringing any positive Laws, take away the
estate or life of any the greatest Subject without any legal proceeding, or
good cause shown, or real guilt (contrary to the Laws here with us) and so
often do; yet is it not in their power to change the Souls of men, and make
them approve and like well of such injustice and wrong. Hence it is, that
further then their absolute power maintained by the strength of a Military
force will uphold them to exercise these Tyrannical actions, they neither can
nor dare do them; but the awe of the Soldiery, whose interest such Princes
have commonly linked with their own arbitrary Dominion, and whose advantage
usually arises out of the oppression o^ the people; and the custom whereby the
people have been inured to such subjection, makes many such oppressions and
tyrannies to pass with less opposition or disturbance: But then is not this
Prince so arbitrary in his Government as is supposed; for he can do nothing but
what shall be liked and approved of by his Army or Soldiery, with whom he must
always carry fair, oblige, gratify, and please them; and even they, further
then their own interest does bias and incline them, will never be drawn to
countenance and maintain open injustice, injury and oppression; and the Prince
is himself in the power of these, by whose power he tyrannizes over his people;
and that it is so, is often experienced, they casting him off upon any
displeasure conceived, and setting up who they please. But by reason it has
been usual with the Subjects of such Princes to be thus tyrannized over, being
well acquainted with the irregular proceedings of their Prince, and the power
of his Armies, and having no established Laws but his will, nor no pretense of
any Law to defend them, or interpose against such wrongs, but only extrema
necessitas, or Lex Nature; they are content to bear much, and much more then
will those people, who being inured to another manner of Government, and having
positive established Laws, do no less. impatiently endure the breach or
infringement of those their Countries Laws and privileges, though but lightly
touching their estates, persons or conveniences, then the others do the
greatest extremities of tyranny and oppression. Hence it is, that in such
Tyrannical Governments the Prince having inured the people to suffer a far
greater measure of wrong, hardship and slavery, then in some other places they
have been acquainted withal, may with more safety, and less danger of provoking
them, continue the same, then another Prince commanding a freer people, and
better acquainted with more liberty, and good usage, may reduce them to suffer
from him a far lighter measure of injustice: which if a good Prince, he will
never desire to do nor attempt; if a bad, I see not why any man should desire,
that he should find an easy and uninterrupted path to help to go more
cheerfully, and with greater facility, to the execution of his bad designs, in
oppressing and grinding his people, and making their lives unpleasant and
uncomfortable. Yet if any man could convince me, that the people were made only
for the Prince, and not the Princes for the people, I could perhaps be more
easily induced to think, that every thing that made the way more plain and open
for the more absolute Dominion of the Prince; and the most absolute slavery of
the Subject, were to be made a part of our Creed: But this is a Doctrine no
well-advised man methinks should ever desire to set on foot, nor no wise or
good Prince would ever make any use of, his peoples greatest assurance of a
happy estate under his Government being his own greatest glory and content: And
though he himself may be good, and therefore need no restrictive Laws to limit
him his actions; yet he knows not what his Successors may prove, or how fit or
unfit to be trusted with so great and arbitrary a power; and therefore is well
contented to give the people all the security he can, which may be consistent
with his and their safety, for enjoying themselves and their estates, in the
best manner that Subjects can be capable of, without desiring that all should
be arbitrary, and depend only upon the will and fancy of him that shall sit in
the Roval Seat; which is that which Mr. Hobbes will needs make Essential to it:
For, says he, in his Book de Cive, The rules of good and evil, just and
unjust, honest and dishanest, are Civil Laws; and therefore what the Lawgiver
commands is to be taken for good, what he forbids for evil. And again, Before
Empires there was no such thing as just or unjust; therefore lawful Kings make
those things which they command just, by commanding of them; and what they
forbid, by forbidding of them, they make them injust; and a Subject, cannot sin
in obeying his Prince. If this should be all taken for Gospel by all the world,
as Mr. Hobbes would have it, there needs no more then the Succession of a bad
Prince or two in each several Nation, to destroy the Generation of Mankind
from off the earth. What brave sport would some of those Roman Emperors, as
Nero, Caligula, etc. have made, if all their Subjects would have been so
exactly obedient to their Commands? Yet in some cases Mr. Hobbes will allow the
Subject to deny obedience to his Prince; For, says he soon after, We must not
obey the Prince, if he command us to dish^^our God, or not to worship him; for
to dishonor him, or not to worship him, can be by none understood for any
manner of worship: Nor had any one, before the Constitution of a Civil
Government, the Right to deny honor due to God, and therefore could not
transfer such Right upon the Civil Power. Well then, Mr. Hobbes grants the
Lawgiver is not always to be obeyed: When is it then lawful to disobey? says
Mr. Hobbes, When he commands us directly to dishonor God, or not to worship
him. And why may we not dishonor God, or not worship him? Sure, I think, for
no other cause, but because it is directly contrary to the light of Reason:
Therefore by consequence, whenever the Lawgiver commands us any thing
directly concrary to the light of Reason, we are no obliged to obey, according
to Mr. Hobbes his Concession; and such are all Commands contrary to the Laws of
Nature, viz. Justice, Charity, Temperance, etc. as has been shown. But Mr.
Hobbes will say, such Commands must be directly contrary to the Light of
Reason, and not by consequence only. I will not trouble my self with the
meaning of this distinction, but affirm, that whatsoever is by a clear
consequence contrary, is directly contrary to reason; and even, according to
Mr. Hobbes, the Subject, in this case, is necessarily to be Judge himself,
whether the thing be directly contrary to reason or not which is commanded. And
whereas Mr. Hobbes says, That no man before the Constitution of a Civil
Government had the right to deny honor due to God, and therefore could not
transfer such right upon the Civil Magistrate, and therefore may deny
obedience: I have likewise already proved, that before the Constitution of a
Civil Government, these Laws of Nature, Justice, Charity and Temperance, were
obligatory, and no man had any right to break them, or dispense with them; and
therefore neither, in these cases, could transfer any such right upon the Civil
Magistrate. But sure Mr. Hobbes had forgot his definition of the Law of Nature,
when he said, We must not obey the Prince, if he command us to dishonor God:
For a Prince may command such a thing on penalty of life, and then the very Law
of Nature gives us a right to save our lives, which is with him Suprema Lex.

Having thus spoke to the concerns of men, in respect of this life, let us look
a little, or rather a great way further; that is, to his concerns after this
life is ended, to all Eternity; and by the same principle, whereby actions
relating to our present estate are guided and directed, by the same is that
also, viz. Philautia, self-love or self-preservation, taken in a more liberal
sense; for God himself has made that the great business of every intelligent
rational being (as has been before intimated) and by his infinite and gracious
wisdom and goodness, has made those actions which most conduce to that end of
self-preservation, to be the same with what his own Eternal, and also late Laws
have appointed and directed to be done: So that insisting in that path, and
closely pursuing that end, we shall infallibly please our great Creator, and do
those things which are consonant and agreeable to his will, and his very Nature
and Essence (as we ought to believe) for seeing he is good infinitely, and wise
infinitely, out of his infinite goodness and wisdom he has conjoined our
interest with our duty; for certainly we could never have thought that goodness
in God, according to the notion we necessarily frame to our selves of goodness,
which should have made our interest inconsistent with his will, and where in
endeavoring our own felicity we should have crossed, his Laws: Therefore (as
has been said) we ought to believe, that God out of his wisdom and goodness
has closely conjoined and united our interest, happiness and felicity, to all
Eternity, with his own glory, his good will and pleasure, his own Eternal Laws
of goodness and wisdom; which then we shall be sure most closely to pursue and
follow, when we most closely pursue our own interest, our own real happiness
and felicity: and this being granted, confirms and establishes those
forementioned Laws of Justice, Charity and Temperance, etc. without which it
is impossible for men to live securely or comfortably in this life; without
which there can be no Civil Society; and without which the Generation of
Mankind must of necessity, in short time, be destroyed, and perish from off
the earth: Therefore it ought to be concluded by all, that Justice, Charity and
Temperance, etc. are things in themselves absolutely good, because absolutely
requisite and necessary both to our well being, and the very being of all
future Generations, and so strictly to be observed, even according to the Law
of Nature: and whatsoever Religion or Opinion crosses or impugnes these Laws,
confutes it self.

This being proved before, let us consider what Religion ought to be established
in a Common wealth: for though Justice, Charity and Temperance, and some other
Virtues, be granted to make a necessary part of it; yet may other matters be
admitted, no less necessary, in some respects, so as they be not inconsistent
with these: and herein are men at a great loss, and a mighty stir is made in
the world, and not without reason, for seeing Religion is that which respects
our eternal happiness and well being, no wise man but will think himself
therein more concerned, then in all the comforts and conveniences of this
short life; so as he will rather choose to lose all those benefits and
advantages, together with life it self, then lose himself eternally.

Now certainly, that Religion which has the best foundation in Reason and
Authority to ground it selt upon ^^^ght by any reasonable man to be chosen; and
that the Christian Religion is such, has sufficiently been proved by the
Learned Pens and Arguments of many great and wise men; and that it is not only
consistent with, but strictly injoyns the observation of those great Laws of
Justice, Charity and Temperance, etc. we all know and acknowledge: And that the
holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, are the Books wherein this
Religion of ours is fully comprehended and taught, or at least that all that is
in them comprehended is true and authentic, is generally agreed to by most
that profess Christianity; only the several Comments upon the Text, the various
Expositions of men, who differ in their Opinions and Judgments, is the great
occasion of that confusion that is amongst us, and the great differences about
Religions; all pretending to ground their Tenants upon equal Authorities of
Scripture: for where it is agreed on all hands, that the concerns of the life
which is to come, are to be preferred before this present, as being of infinite
greater and larger consequence, because relating to our eternal good or bad
estate; Hence it is most clear and evident, that according to the Laws and
Rules of Self-love, or Self-preservation, every man is obliged to do those
things that may assure, or secure unto him his future everlasting happiness;
and for no consideration, regard, or respect of any temporary or transitory
pain, penalty, pleasure or profit, to lose or hazard the loss of himself, as to
his future estate: And although, according to the same Laws, he ought only to
pursue those steps that lead directly toward this end of a future eternal
happiness, without treading awry, or erring to the right hand or the left; yet
because no man is infallible, but each one subject to many failings and
errors, in point of judgment as well as otherwise, all that can be done, is
only for every man to do that which in his own judgment and reason he shall
conceive the aptest means to this end, praying Gods assistance, and to him
referring the event: and the dictates and determinations of this judgment and
reason of his, is that which he calls his Conscience; which though certainly in
many things erroneous and mistaken, yet seeing that to him it appears
otherwise, he must needs think himself obliged to observe and pursue the
resolutions thereof; and therefore looking still upon the End, Eternal
happiness, unto which his Conscience, as he conceives, directs him the true
way, though perhaps in truth very erroniously and deceitfully; he is no less
zealous in prosecuting these fallacious paths, pointed out to him by his
ill-discerning Conscience, then if they were real'y the true ways. Nor is he to
be blamed for doing that which he conceives the aptest means to the justly
desired end he aims at, but for misconceiving that to be an apt means, which is
not: Therefore the best remedy to avoid the great mischiefs that happen upon
such misapprehensions, and conscientious errors, is for each man to lay aside
that high conceit he has of himself, and to put off his pride and prejudice,
and retain but a moderate esteem of his own judgment, as easily misled and
abused; and to consider with himself, that seeing there are so many different
Opinions concerning one and the same thing, both in point of Religion, and
other matters; and that all those who differ in Opinion from himself, and from
one another, are men, and therefore, upon that account, equal to himself; and
though some inferior, yet other perhaps suppriour to him in reason and
knowledge. Hereupon he ought humbly with himself to conceive, that it is no
less probable he himself may be mistaken, and his Conscience misled and abused,
then some one of his Fellows: For methinks it is high arrogance and
presumption, for any the wisest man upon earth, to suppose all his own Opinions
infallible truths: And though clara, and distincta perceptio, according to Des
Chartes, be a great and strong testimony for the truth of the thing conceived;
yet men will deceive themselves with a firm belief that they have that clear
and distinct perception of the truth of a thing, when to other men's judgments,
and even in truth and reality, they are in a manifest and apparent error, and
are afterward themselves convinced of it; and a firm belief that a thing is so
as the party does conceive it, though not grounded upon sound reason, nor upon
the evidence of a clear and distinct perception, but only upon fancy,
enthusiasms, misconceit, ignorance or prejudice, is no less strong to overruled
and determine the affection, and, even the mind and judgment it self, then the
evidence and demonstration of the most infallible truths, grounded upon the
clearest perception the mind of man is capable of: So that a man's firm belief,
and unshaken confidence of the truth of a thing, though in the highest degree
imaginable, is no sound argument to prove that he is not in an error. Let
therefore every one consider his Neighbor as no less desirous of that
happiness he is in pursuit of then himself, and to have a Soul, with Reason,
Judgment and Conscience, equal with himself. No man will scruple to say, this
Neighbor of his is mistaken in his judgment, and abused with false Doctrines
and Principles of Religion: and in reason, why may not you who are so
censorious of another, be as worthy of censure your self? especially if you
have no better Warrant for your Opinions, then the charitable belief you have
ever had of your own, or your own Sects abilities to judge of the truth; which
in reality are no more nor greater, perhaps inferior to that of your
Neighbors, whom you condemn: So that if you will set aside this over-balance
of self-conceit, which only gives you the advantage, in your own Opinion, to
any other indifferent Judge, there is perhaps as much, or a greater
probability, you are in an error, then your Neighbor; or else that both are
mistaken. Let every man therefore suspend his zeal, and look to the grounds of
his Conscience, without prejudice, pride, and self-conceit; examine them over
and over again, especially let him try them by the Touchstone of these three
Cardinal Virtues, of Justice, Charity, Temperance, and what others right reason
dictates, and if after all this it will speak no other Language but what it did
before, I say, then he ought at least in conscience to proceed in his own ways,
though he afterward may find, perhaps too late, his Conscience but a vain
Opinion, and ill-grounded surmise: for his Conscience being the same with his
judgment, it is evident, that this often failing and abusing him in many easy
and familiar matters, subject even to the trial of his outward senses, or in
points of his Calling, wherein with reason he may pretend to the greatest
skill; it must be great presumption in him to be so peremptory, and lay so
great weight and stress upon it in things of a higher nature, and of a more
speculative and curious knowledge, unless he have cultivated his mind with
those Sciences and Studies that may enable him the better to discern betwixt
truth and error; which is the greatest and most difficult; though the most
Noble and Excellent Art in the world; yet in its highest perfection and
improvement, far from making any man infallible: and though every man's
Conscience, that is, his own private judgment and opinion, ought and must
necessarily be his Guide; yet sound judgment will advise, that in some things
we should prefer another man's judgment before our own, especially in matters
wherein we have reason to believe he has great skill and knowledge, and better
then we our selves; as in matters of his Calling, whereunto we may be
strangers, and never versed or instructed in the things appertaining to it: and
therefore a Learned Divine, or the greatest Scholar, will rather rely upon,
and admit of his Taylers judgment, for cutting out a suit of Clothes, and his
Shoo-makers for making him a good pair of Shoes, then presume upon his own;
and herein he cease not still to follow the dictamens of his own private
judgment, which he thinks fit, in these cases, with good reason, to submit and
accommodate to that of others: Why should not therefore every Mechanic, with
the same humility, submit to the Opinion of the Learned, in points of Learning;
and to their Exposition of the Scripture, in Scripture-Interpretation; whose
business, study and calling is conversant about, and does make him a Professor
of such knowledge? and if to the Opinion of one, much more to the Opinion of
all the most Learned and Judicious of a whole Nation, being confirmed and owned
by Public Authority.

But still if Conscience cannot be persuaded to this, you will say, Conscience
must not be wounded and forced, we must not drive, but lead her gently: For if
my Conscience tell me this is a sin, it is no excuse before the Judge of
Hearts, in committing this which I really conceive to be a sin, to say it is
allowed of by the Commonwealth, a Convocation of Divines, or by the Parson of
the Parish, but it appearing to me a sin, and I supposing it to be such, in
giving way to it condemn my self, and am left inexcuseable: therefore
Conscience must not be violated; and every man will think himself obliged to
act still according to the dictates and suggestions of his own Conscience, let
all the Laws of the World, Humane or Divine, say what they will: for that has
only the power and influence to work upon a man's Conscience, which he himself
conceives to be Law.

Hence it is manifest, that every man in the world that has any regard to
Religion, or a future estate, will desire Liberty of Conscience; that is, that
he may do any thing that in his own private judgment and Opinion he conceives
the aptest means to attain a future Eternal happiness; and as far as such a
future happiness is to be preferred above temporary transitory things, so far
will he think himself obliged by that Principle of Self-love, to prefer the
free exercise of his Religion, the means to this happiness, before life it
self, or all the concerns of life. But in the mean time, each man I think will
grant, that in reason he ought to consider others as equal with himself; and
that according to the Eternal Laws of Justice and Charity, as he desires a
Liberty of Conscience for himself, he ought to allow the same Liberty of
Conscience to all other men, who for the same reasons, and upon as good grounds
as he, viz. upon the account of their Eternal Estate, think themselves, and are
as much as he also, obliged to follow the suggestions of their own consciences
or judgments, in order to attain that great proposed end of Felicity. This
being granted, the consequence thereof must of necessity be a dissolution of
all Civil Government, where the consciences of men, as in these present times,
do put them upon such different ways and means of accomplishing this proposed
end, as are absolutely inconsistent, and cannot be allowed, without interfering
and crossing one another, both in principles and practice.

But however, if you will have Liberty of Conscience granted to any, then
certainly the Supreme Authority of the Nation must not be deprived of this
Liberty which every private man does contend for, and thinks of right to belong
to himself: This certainly were great injustice and wrong; yet this being once
allowed, there is no more liberty left for any Subject, other then what is
consistent with that of the Public. But you will say, the public Authority
ought to take such a course, as every man may have his liberty, at least so far
as is consistent with the Civil Government. I grant it; but then must the
public Authority be Judge in this case, viz. what Liberty may be or is
consistent with the Civil Government, and not every private person. Moreover,
seeing the Supreme Magistrate is to have Liberty of Conscience, which I think
cannot with reason be denied, so far as is consistent with the Laws of the
Land, and the Religion by them established. Let us suppose, as we well may and
ought, that he thinks himself obliged in Duty and Conscience, in point of
Justice and Charity, to take no less care for the future, then present good
estate of his people: Hence it will necessarily follow, that he ought to use
all lawful means to suppress all Religions, Sects and Opinions, which he
conceives to be Heretical and Erroneous, and contrary to the National
established way of Worship; and what in him lies, to propagate that which he
himself conceives to be the true; and unto the observance and defense whereof,
he is not only by his private Conscience, but public Engagement obliged: For
he who sees another man in his Opinion blind, and going directly upon a Pit,
or Precipice, where he shall be sure to pitch upon his own death, is very much
too blame if he do not hinder him from running thus foolishly to destruction,
though the other party exclaim against him, because he will not suffer him to
go forward upon a certain death: How much more then shall he fail, in point of
Charity and Duty, who seeing men run upon their own Eternal death, by slipping
into Errors and Heresies, shall not endeavor to relieve and recall them, or at
least hinder them from drawing the rest of mankind after them, into the same
Gulphs of misery and perdition, by suppressing and hindering the growth and
propagation of these Errors; more especially where bearing the Sovereign
Power, that Office lays a duty and obligation upon him, by his particular
relation to his Subjects, to be careful of all their concerns?

And hereby it appears, that whosoever will set up for Liberty of Conscience
for himself, seeing he can in Justice and equity do no less then allow that
liberty to others, as well as desire it for himself, and consequently to the
Sovereign Magistrate; this man immediately, and ipso facto, hereby deprives
himself of all liberty, more then what the Law of the Land will allow him: for
the Conscience of the Magistrate injoyning him to be as careful of the Souls of
his Subjects, and their future estates, as of their bodies, and their temporal
welfare, he can do no less, according to Conscience, then use the means and
power that is in his hands, according to the Laws of the Land, to suppress all
Religions but the true one; that is, that which he himself, as Supreme Head,
has judged so to be, by obliging himself to defend and conserve the same
according to the Laws of the Land. And if you will exclaim against him for
doing so, it is without any reason: For having allowed the Proposition, that
every man ought to have Liberty of Conscience, and by his Conscience to
regulate his actions; you ought not to accuse him who assumes this liberty of
acting according to his Conscience, though it impugnes yours: for to say, he
acts not according to his Conscience, or that his Conscience is erroneous or
wicked, and therefore not to be a rule to others, is to take upon you, in the
first case, to know that which only God can know, the heart of man; or in the
second, to presume to make your own Conscience the Standard of Truth, to
measure another by: So that the liberty you contend for, is only a liberty to
set up, and idolize your own judgment and fancy, above all the world besides.
And hereby it is evident, that Liberty of Conscience, other then what is
allowed by the National or Civil Power or Authority, is not a thing to be
desired; or if taken, will certainly dissolve and bring to ruin all Civil
Government; and that man who cannot with a safe conscience submit to the
Government in being, whether in a Kingdom, or any other Species of Government,
I think his wisest way were to go to some such place or Country, where he may
freely enjoy his own way of worship; and if no such can be found, then let him
again consider, what kind of Religion he has gotten, that drives him from the
society of mankind: But for every man to think himself highly wronged, because
he may not be suffered to set up a Religion according to his own fancy or
conscience, is to offer the greatest wrong to all his Fellows, who may with as
much Justice lay claim to the same privilege; and then will it be impossible
for any Civil Government to take place or continue, where every man may be
allowed the liberty to do what seems good in his own eyes, without respect to
the established Laws: for who knows, or rather, who knows not, to what
extravagancies men's consciences, or hypocritical wicked men, under pretense of
Conscience (which is the same) are often carried? and therefore Liberty in this
kind is necessarily to be restrained within certain bounds and limits, of
which the Supreme Authority ought only to be Judge.

Object. And now having through all these several discourses adhered so closely
to the Law of Self-preservation, or Self-love, perhaps some will hence take
occasion to say, this selfish Principle is base, and unworthy a Christian, nay
even a generous Heathen; our duty to God, and respect to the universal good of
all mankind, being things to be preferred before all self ends.

Answ. They who have well considered what I have said before, will save me the
trouble of answering this Objection, and be able to do it themselves. and to
the rest I say again, for I have said as much before, Our duty to God, and
respect to the general good of mankind, are things inseparable from our
interest; there being nothing so absolutely necessary to our well-being, as to
do our duties to our Creator, and to do good to our Fellow Creatures, which is
commanded by the Law of Nature, and by the example of God himself; whereby, in
imitation of him, in all things to be imitated, and into a shadow of whose
perfections we are to endeavor to form and model our selves, as far as our
natures are capable of it, we are obliged and enjoined to do good to all; which
indeed is not only our duties upon the aforesaid accounts, but is also one of
the most pleasing and delightful things to all good dispositions, and
well-tempered spirits, that can be conceived or imagined, and they little
better then Devils that are of a contrary sense and judgment. But if you will
urge me further, and say, Suppose those duties we owe to God and our Neighbors
were really disunited from our interest, what were then to be done? I say, the
very supposition is wicked, and injurious both to God and man; for it is as
much as if we should suppose God could cease to be, or be otherwise then good,
an Attribute and Perfection inseparable from his Nature: For certainly it could
never be judged goodness in God, but its contrary, to make our duties to
himself, and our Neighbors, inconsistent with our interest, I speak not here
of petty worldly ends and advantages, which some base-minded men account their
only interest; but that I account our interest which is eternally so, and upon
which our future estate and happiness to all Eternity does depend; and
whatsoever is a means conducing to that end, and that only, I account our
interest; and if others will interpose it, it is to be at their perils.

If after all this it be objected still, that if we permit every private man to
be Judge of good and evil, just and unjust, right and wrong, and that every man
does and must of necessity govern himself, and direct his actions according to
his own private judgment and conscience, in order to his well-being; it must
necessarily follow, that many men's private Opinions (as Experience teaches us
every day) will make them refractory and disobedient to the Prince, and may be
a cause of Rebellion, Sedition and War.

I answer, It has been ever so since the World began, and ever will be so till
all men's private judgments jump in one: Nor is there any remedy for this
mischief, as I conceive, but what I have already mentioned, viz. to persuade
men to lay aside pride, prejudice and self-conceit, and be well advised before
they oppose their private Opinions to the public, and the common remedy, which
is, that he who has so great, and probably overweening Opinion of his own
private judgment and conscience, as to oppose them against the Public
Authority, he does it at his own peril, and is obnoxious to the Law; which if
he think it more for his true interest and happiness to oppose, then submit to,
he does but observe the Rule of Self-love, or Self-preservation in so doing;
and he cannot do otherwise (unless he could alter his Opinion of the means in
order to that end) the greatest seeming good being always most prevailing with
the judgment to determine it: For it is impossible for any man to renounce or
resign the power of determining himself what is good and evil, and absolutely
to be therein governed by another man's judgment, if he act rationally; the
understanding not being otherwise to be determined, but by an apparent good;
and where several apparent goods offer themselves, the understanding must
necessarily be swayed by that which appears to be the greatest: and it is
impossible for any man to make whatsoever another man pleases to call so, to
seem to his reason and judgment an apparent good, or the greatest apparent
good; even as much as it is impossible for any man to believe black to be
white, or white black, pain pleasure, or pleasure pain, or that two is a
greater number then three, only because another man bids him believe them to be
so: And therefore that we should all believe the Commands of the Civil
Magistrate to be the only Rule of good and evil, is not only unreasonable and
destructive to Humane Society (as has been showed) but also impossible, unless
a man could believe what he listed: yet still so long as we all agree that such
disobedience in the Subject to the Civil Magistrate, is punishable according to
the Laws ordained, though private conscience put men upon such acts of
disobedience, the Government may remain firm enough, whilst every private man
satisfies the Law, either by active or passive obedience, obeying, or suffering
for his disobedience: and if the Laws against such Dissenters as cannot be
allowed or tolerated with safety in a Civil Government be strictly executed,
men will be well advised of the grounds upon which they refuse obedience to
Authority, before they thrust their fingers into the fire.

FINIS.
Books (since the fire in London, 1666.) printed for, and are to be sold by
William Crook at the Green-Dragon without Temple Bar, 1673.
THe Triumphs of Gods Revenge against the Crying of the Sin of Marther: With
his Miraculous Discoveries, and severe punishments thereof, in 30 several
Tragical Histories, committed in diverse Countries beyond the Seas, with
Pictures resembling all the passages: Written by J. Reynolds, Fol. Printed
1670. price 10 s. Sylva Sylvarum; or a Natural History in ten Centuries:
Whereunto is newly added the History of the Prolongation of Life, with the New
Atlantis, and Articles of inquiry about Metals and Minerals; by Francis Lord
Verulam. To which is added the Authors Life; by Dr. Rawley, in Fol. Printed
1670. price 8 s. The Jesuits Morals; collected by a Doctor of the College of
Sorbon in Paris, who has faithfully extracted them out of the Jesuits own
Books: Translated out of French, in Fol. Printed 1670. price 10 s. A
Geographical Description of the World, in four parts, illustrated with Maps:
Writ in French by Monsieur Sanson, Geographer to the French King, and Englished
and augmented by R. B. Gent. in Fol. Printed 1670. price 20 s. Thomas of Kempis
Christian Pattern, in twenty fours, price 1 s. Drexelius Considerations on
Eternity in English, in 12. Grotius Catechism, Greek, Latin and English, with
a Praxis to it; by. Chr. Wase, F. Goldsmith, Esquire, B. Beale, etc. in Octavo.
Clark's Praxis Curiae Admiralitatis, in Octavo. Mr. Hales Tract of Schism, in
Quarto. Hammond's Complete Measurer, in Octavo. The Life of Renatus Des Carts,
in Octavo. Enigmatical Characters, by R. F. in Octavo. Price 1 s. Three papers
presented to the Royal Society by Tho. Hobbes against Doctor Wallis. Printed
1671. price 6 d. Doctor M^ynwaring of health and long life, in Octavo. His
Complete Physician qualified and dignified, showing the rise and progress of
Physic, in Octavo. Nomenclatura, Greek, Latin and English, for the use of
Schools, in Octavo. Hodder's Vulgar Arithmetic, in 12. Gerhard's Meditations
in Latin, in 12 An Answer to Mr. Fergusons Book, entitled, Justification only
upon Satisfaction: Wherein he is friendly reproved, fully silenced, and clearly
instructed: Whereunto is added a Discourse of the extent of Christ's Passion and
Death, in Octavo. Printed 1670 price 1 s. 6 d. Mr. Hobbes De Principiis and
Ratiocinatione Geometricum, in Quarto. Sir Henry Blunts Voyage into the Levant:
Being a brief Relation of a Journey lately performed from England, by the way
of Venice, into Dalmatia, Sclavonia, Bosna, Hungary, Macedonia, Thessaly,
Thrace, Rhodes and Eg^pt, unto Grand Cairo: With particular observations
concerning the Modern condition of the Turks, and other people under that
Empire, in 12. Price 1 s. The Complete Vineyard: Or an excellent way for the
planting of Vines according to the German and French manner, and long practiced
in England: Wherein is set forth the ways, and all the circumstances necessary
for the planting a Vineyard, with the Election of the Soil, etc. Also the
fashion of Winepresses, the manner of bruising and pressing of Grapes, and how
to advance our English Wines, in Octavo. Enlarged by the Author. Printed 1670.
price 1 s. 6 d. A Sermon preached at the Funeral of a sober Religious man found
drowned in a Pit; wherein Sudden Death is most excellently handled, in Octavo.
Printed 1670. price 1 s. The Deaf and Dumb Man's discourse; or a Treatise
concerning those that are born Deaf and Dumb; containing a Discovery of their
Understanding, and the Methods they use to manifest the sentiments of their
minds. Together with an additional Tract of the reason and speech of Inanimate
Creatures; by Geo. Sibscota. Printed 1670. price 1 s. A Description of Candia
in its Ancient and Modern State; with an account of the Siege begun by the
Ottoman Emperor, 1666. Continued 1667, 1668, and surrendered 1669. With all the
remarkable passages, and the Articles of Surrender. Printed 1669 in Octavo,
price 1 s. The Court of Curiosity: Wherein by the Algebra and Lot the most
intricate Questions are resolved, and Dreams and Visions explained and
interpreted: so which is added A Treatise of Physiognomy; published in French;
and for the excellency of it, translated into Dutch, Spanish, Italian, etc. and
now out of French into English. The second Edition, cleared from many mistakes
of the former Impression, both in the Fortune-Book and Dreams: With an
Alphabetical Table added; so that now the Dreams, or Answers to Questions, may
with ease be sound out, in 12. Printed 1672. price 2 s. The Flower-Garden:
Briefly showing how most Flowers are to be ordered; the time of flowring,
taking them up, and planting them again; and how they are increased by Layers
of S^ts, Slips, Cuttings, Seeds, etc. with other observations relating to a
Flower-Garden. Whereunto is added the Gardiners Dialling, viz. How to make an
exact Horizontal Dial on a Grass-plat, the knot of a Garden, or elsewhere; by
W. Hughes, in 12. Printed 1672. price 1 s. The Memoires of the Life and rare
unheard of Adventures of Henrietta Sylvia M^liere; being the Remarks of the
strange and Heroic actions of a great Lady in France now living. Written by
her self in French, and translated into English, in 12. Printed 1672. price 2
s. The American Physician; or, A Treatise of the Roots, Plants, Trees, Shrubs,
Fruits, Herbs, etc. growing in the English Plantations in America: Describing
the place, time, names, kinds, temperature, virtues and uses of them, either
for Diet or Physic: with the Governor of Jamaica's Letter, etc. Whereunto is
added all the ways of making Chocoletta, and its virtues; by W. H. in 12.
Printed 1672. price 1 s. Lux Mathematica: Wherein the 20 years Controversy in
the Mathematics, betwixt Dr. Wal^is and Mr. Hobbes, is debated, and dedicated
to the Royal Society; by R.R. in Quarto. Printed 1672. price 5 s.
Poetry and Plays.
Epigrams, of all sorts, made at diverse times on several occasions, in Octavo.
Printed 1670. price 1 s. Poems written by the Right Reverend Dr. Richard
Corbet, late Lord Bishop of Norwich. The third Edition corrected and enlarged.
Printed 1672 in 12. price 1 s. Vittoria Corombona, or the White Devil: A
Tragedy, as it is often acted at the Theater Royal, by their Majesty's
Servants, in Quarto. Printed 1672. price 1 s. The Old Troop, or Monsieur
Raggou; A Comedy, as it was acted at the Theater Royal. Written by John Lacy,
in Quarto. Printed 1672. price 1 s. The Travels of Ulysses, as they were by
himself related, in Homer's ninth, tenth, eleventh and twelfth Books of his
Odysses to the King of Phaeacia.

