THE ADDRES OF THE UNIVERSITY OF ST. ANDREWS TO THE KING By the Rector,
Vice Chancellor, Heads of the Colleges, Deans of Faculties, and the rest of
the Masters and Professors of the University of St. Andrews, whose Names are
insert at the end of their Address;

ALSO, A Letter from the Archbishops, and Bishops, to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty,

London, Printed by J: R: to be sold be A: L: 1689.

The Rector, Vice Chancellor, heads of the Colleges, Deans of Faculties and
the rest of the Masters and Professors of the University of St. ANDREWS.
To the KING.
SIR,
THE Universities and Seminaries of Learning have so great and peculiar a share
in the happy consequence of the public peace and Tranquillity, not only their
flourishing and increase, and your life and being, have such a singular
Dependence on the Supreme Authority, that it cannot be justly either vanity or
flattery when they endeavor to make their Gratitude as remarkable as their
Advantages and Obligation; And we in this place do humbly offer to your Majesty
at this time, our most dutiful sense and acknowledgments of the security,
Peace, and Quiet we enjoy under the Wisdom and Paternal care of your Gracious
and Happy Government.

It was King James the first of that name, that founded this University the
first in this Kingdom, and gave us these privileges and immunities, which have
been continued and enlarged by his Royal Successors; And we find by the
frequent and signal marks of your Majesty's Princely care and concern for us,
that you inherit with the Crown and Dignity of your Ancestors the affection
they bore to this University: And as we reflect on this gracious Tract of the
Royal Favor to us, with the most grateful remembrance; so we cannot but also
glory, that from the just notions of our duty and happiness we have at all
occasions, and in the face of what ever hazards mantained an immovable and
affectionat Loyalty to the Government and adherance to the Royal Family.

When by a happy providence this Nation was honored and refreshed with your
Royal presence, we cheerfully concurred in the Land and Lively Joy and
Acclamations of all Ranks of people in the universal Admiration of your Virtues
that were so eminent, that your Enemies finding nothing else were forced to
make Objections of them, and with our most ardent and sincere wishes, for your
coming to the peaceable possession of the Throne and Empire, to which (after
your Royal Brother whom we ever remember with due reverence and honor) the
Laws of GOD, of Nature, and of these Kingdoms had established your Right.

And we owe the most profound and thankful Reverence to Heaven, which has been
so favorable to the wishes of honest hearts, that we have a Prince of the
Native and Royal Blood, to reign over us, who has given the most sincere and
solid demonstrations of his love to these Kingdoms, by encounting the greatest
hazards for their Honor and Safety, who has filled the World with the great
and immortal Fame of his singular Accomplishments in all the Acts and weighty
concerns both of War and Peace, who succeeding to that Gentle Innate Goodness,
which has been very remarkable in his predecessors of this Royal Family, and
having got (while he went himself through the roughest and most hazardous
conditions of a Subject) a most tender sense and feeling of our infirmities,
does by the admirable effect of an incomparable Clemency, to whatsoever
offenders in principles or practices give the greatest assurance of his being
utterly averse from the least violence or severity, even to the worst of his
Enemies, until it be extorted from his Royal Justice, and Magnanimity by
obstinate and insufferable abuses of his Benignity and Goodness; so that we
cannot fancy what more is requisite to the full and solid happiness of people,
but our just sense of what we enjoy, and our firm relyance on your Majesty's
faithfulness and generosity to preserve it inviolable.

And we are sure that your Majesty's loving Subjects who in the eye of the
World, and the midst not only of the noise and clamor of your Enemies, but
also of your own reasonable expectations, peaceably submitted themselves to
your just possession of your Crown, and Dominion, with solemn expressions of
the greatest joy and satisfaction, will never be guilty of a Levity, so
absurdly inconsequential to suffer themselves to be diverted from their love
and obedience, until they have shaken off all Ties and Principles as well of
Honor as of Duty.

The sad experience of our late Miseries and convulsions has left us sufficient
marks and indications what rocks to shune, and has so disgraced the Artifice
and Delusion of fears and jealousies, that till we have lost our Memories with
our Judgments, it cannot be expected that the most Vulgar credulity can be
wrought by that imposture. These alone were the noisome Vapors raised by
wickedness and ambition; and gathered into these clouds which darkened the
Wisdom and Glory of these Kingdoms, and ended in that fatal and dreadful storm,
which brought upon us all the heavy dismal calamities of Blood and Confusion.
The pretended Fears of Arbitrary Government made us fight our selves Slaves to
Arbitrary violence and oppression, jealousies created by malice, or blind and
sick imaginations of the hazard and change of Religion, produced the highest
contempt of all that is Sacred, banished all the vital and essential Characters
of our peaceable and humble and most holy Faith, raised the most execrable
Villanes on the ruins of One of the best and most Religious Kings, and made
these Kingdoms the schene of the most attrocious Villainies, and most
dishonorable monstrous barbarities that Hell could conspire. And it is
morally impossible Men can ever be sure of any better consequence then disorder
and certain ruin from such corrupt and dangerous causes, those Visions and
Fantastic creatures of Sedition and Distempered Minds.

Great Sir, We hope that this sure and lasting Wisdom which comes from the
Observation of former misfortunes, that the Sacred ties of our Religion and
Reason with the love of our truest interest will for ever produce the just and
peaceable effects in the minds and endeavors of all your loving Subjects, and
particularly of the Societies of Learning and Education who by their
professions and opportunities are the Searchers of Truth, and are so closly
knit to the public safety, that in the time of intestine commotions they
perish, or are overcomed with Ignorance and barbarities, and who therefore are
guilty of an inexcusable neglect and ingratitude, if they slight or abuse the
Advantages they have of knowing and propagating the reasonable principles of
Love and Obedience to your Majesty's sacred person and Authority.

The fundamental Rights of Government and Supremacy are so strong and plain in
Reason, and Divine Revelation, that they need not the weak and indecent
assistance of Flattery, to support or magnify them; They are also so Equable
and Constant, and hold so unexchangeable under all lawful Sovereigns, never
altering with Times and Circumstances, and with all are of so great and general
importance, that it can never be unreasonable, and so often necessary for
honest Men to Declare and Assert them, and there may be as much indutyful
malignity in affected and disintended silence, as in malicious Grievances and
Clamor.

Sir, For these and the like considerations, it appears to us, your Majesty's
Servants, in this your Ancient and Honorable University, a necessary part of
our duty, humbly to beg your Majesty's pardon, and allowance, that we publish
and Declare to the World, these clear distinct and certain Verities, which
exact and deliberate Examination has fixed in our minds, concerning the Natural
and perpetual Foundations of Society, Government, and Subjection, and we reduce
them shortly to these plain Proposals and Observations

First, As the Being, Nature, and whole Perfection of Mankind, are from GOD the
Infinitely Perfect Being, and the Supreme Author of all things; so there are
some certain and fixed Methods and Means by which He will have these preserved,
and which He has given us sufficient light to discover, and therefore
whatsoever means are thus found to be absolutely requisire, for the Being and
preservation of Mankind, are for that reason of Divine Right, and Original, and
are the Ordinance of GOD.

Secondly, Of such means it is evident that Society, and consequently
Government, are the chiefest, for besides that, the natural Order in which GOD
has designed the preservation of Mankind, is by the Posterity and Succession of
one Generation to another, which it is hard to conceive possible, without
Society the infirmities of Humane Nature, and the necessities of our Life, are
such, that there are many things without which we cannot live; Which,
nevertheless, no Man that is alone and separate from all others, can procure to
himself. And as the Author of our Being, has made this Society so necessar for
preserving us, He has also in several respects fitted us for it, by implanting
in our Nature a strong inclination to preserve ourselves; and in our Posterity
an earnest desire of Knowledge and Information, (not to speak of the appetire
of some) and which is most remarkable by affording us these Organs and
Instruments of speech and Conversation, from all which put together, it is that
the generality of Philosophers, and Writers concerning Government in all Ages,
having called Man a Sociable Creature.

Thirdly, And as Mankind cannot subsist without Society, so neither can Society
without Government, this is not only true in the matter of fact, and certain
experience of all the World; but who ever considers humane nature, will
necessarly see that it most be so. And that as man is partly fit, he is also
partly unfit for Society, if every one were left to his own Liberty and
Government; the furious vehemence of contrare passions, the indelible love and
esteem of our selves above others: the unbanded desires of many toward the
same things, the weakness and pusilaminity of some compared with the strength
and ability of others; should produce nothing better then unavoidable violence,
rapine, fear, murder, and dissolation: The very Speculative Supposition of
which state illuminates us fully to understand the absolute necessity and
unspeakable usefulness of a power and authority, Superior to every man and
every faction of men, in the Society which may constitute and regulate every
Man's Rights, Circumscribe the Licentious Extensions of men's Passions, and
desires to defend the Weak from the Injuries and Invasions of the Stronger,
punish the Transgressors of these Bands set on them. And in a word, may
deliberate and do what ever may Contribute to the good and security of the
whole Society, and of the whole parts of it, and it is the Power we call
Government or Soveraignity.

Fourthly, As any Society should quickly be destroyed, if every man in it were
his own absolute Governor, the same Reasons demonstrate, that in one and the
same Society, there cannot be a Plurality of distinct and Coordinate
Governments for the ends above mentioned. For these should be as absurdlie
liable to the same inconveniences, if not more and greater and as
unpracticable as the single Governments of every Man by himself: and tho in
every well ordered Society, their may and must be for the conveniences both of
the Sovereign and the Subject some Inferior subordinate Powers, yet all these
(that there be not a confused and endless Series of Subordination) most
originally derive their being and duration from one that is Supreme, and seeing
there can be no Society preserved, unless every man have his own will in it,
and pleasure absolutely subjected to be Governed and Regulated by the Supreme
and Sovereign, in all things which concern him, as a Member of that civil
Corporation, then who ever goes about to plead Immunity from this Universal and
Absolute Subjection, does upon the matter please the Society to be dissolved,
and so mankind to be destroyed, and consequently he is to be considered as an
enemy to Mankind, from all which it follows by the clearest light of Reason,
that the Government and Soveraignity of every formed State, and civil Society,
is in its nature One indivisible Supreme and Absolute.

Fifthly, There is nothing serves more to free us of the prejudices that arise
in the Ignorant, or Inadvertent from the sound of these Words, then distinctly
to reflect and consider, that this Supremacy of which we speak, has been and
is actually in all constituted Societies whatsoever: The distinctions of
Monarchical and Popular Authority, are not from the Nature of the Power it
self, but from the diversities of the form, Subject or administration of it.
The bigot Re-publicans cannot deny, but that the Plurality of Governors, or
the Major part of them, in the Ancient Athenian, or such other popular Estates,
were all as Supreme, Absolute and incontrollable, as the Persian, Assyrian, or
whatsoever other Monarchy in the World; and every single Athenian as Absolutely
subject as any single Person or other Asiatick. So that the Liberty of the
Subject, is a mere empty name to amuse and delude the Turbulent and Unthinking
Rabble: and they needed no less then the highest Airie flourishes of the Roman
or Grecian Rhetoric (which was ordinarily employed in managnifing themselves in
every thing above all the World) to set of so manifest a contradiction, and who
ever seriously considers the substantial grounds of all the unhappy contentions
that have been in the World about Government, shall find that too many among
them who know what they say, the question is not if there is, or most be a
Supreme and absolute Authority in every State, and civil Society; for that as
it is necessary and unavoidable, so it is highly convenient, but in whose hands
the Supremacy is (which is a thing the Seditious ever Labor to perplex and
obscure) or with whom it may be left entrusted whither with one; or with a
multitude, or Plurality, which are the differences of Form, we are in the
natural Order to compare and examine in this place; it is fit to observe, that
not only is the Supreme Power (as has been said) in it is own nature, One and
Indivisible, but in all States and civil Societies, it is lodged in one Person,
either in a Natural or Moral sense: For even in the more Popular parts, these
many who are said to have a share in the Government, have this power properly
Lodged in them (according to the principles of the highst Re-publicans) no
otherwise then as they are Morally, Civilly, or Virtually one, that is, as
they aggree in one Mind, Will, or Determination. And therefore when we speak of
Government in the general, they as well as Monarchs, they may be called by one
single Name the Sovereign.

Sixthly, We do the more fully comprehend the Nature of the Supreme Power and
Soveraignity, by taking a distinct view of some of the most Considerable and
Essential things that belong to it. And first, whoever has the Supreme
Authority, is the Author and Pountain of all Civil Law and Justice: For to have
the trust and care of preserving the Unity and Peace and Society of the whole
and every part of the Society necessarly includes a Power of deliberating, and
judging what is fittest for these ends, of prescribing these Rules, Measures,
and directions, by which the Subjects (whose Wills as to these things that
concern the Society, are submitted to the Supreme) are in their several
Capacities to Regulat their Actions, as also of fortefying these Laws against
all contempt and disobedience, and of punishing the Transgressors, seeing the
most perfect Laws without being armed with the Coactive Strength and Authority
should be Naked, Ridicoulous, and Ineffectual: And whoever is the Supreme giver
of the Laws, is for the same Reasons Vested with a Power to Interpret, Correct
and change them as necessity requires; Strict Riged, and Litteral Laws, is the
Severest and Bloodiest Master in the World: And therefore it belongs to the
Supreme Power (in which is the Paternal care of the Subject) to Interpret and
Mitigate the severity of the Law, or suspend its Execution, as may best agree
with the end of the public safety, and the wholesome intention of all Laws
whatsoever: The perpetual multitude of new Actions, and qualities of Actions,
which cannot be foreseen: is so vast, that no Laws can be made so general, and
extensive as expressly to comprehend them, and therefore it belongs to the
Universal trust and care of the Supreme Power; there immediately, or by inferior
deputed Judges and Ministrators, not only to declare these Actions about which
the Laws were directly intended, but also to apply the general and material
Justice of the Laws; to the varieties of Actions and Emergencies, which they
cannot explicitly comprehend, the condition of Humane Affairs, the Tempers and
Inclinations of the People, the means of advancing the most general ease and
conveniences of the Government, and the Subject care remarkably Various and
Mutable; not only in different Nations and Societies, but at different times in
one and the same; Therefore the wisest and celebrated Law Givers have
acknowledged that their Laws were not the best they could have framed, but only
the best the condition of their People could bear at the time of their making;
and were therefore, with the alteration of their condition and circumstances to
be Rectified or Improven: Yea, even these Laws which the Sacred History tells
us, were conveyed by Moses from GOD himself to the Jewish Nation, cannot be
said to be the most complete and perfect Directions that could be given to
Mankind: otherways all the World, at least such as heard of them, should
indispensably be oblidged to their Observation, but their perfection consisted
in their being Proportionated and adopted to the Capacity, Temper, and
Circumstances of that Rude, Ignorant, Supperstitious, Unthankful and Sensual
People, for whole Benefit they were given. Aand when the Observation of these
Laws and Ceremonies were designed, to separate and distinguish from the
Luxurious and corrupted Nations. And so for the alteration of Times and
Circumstances, and the Diminution of the Hazards against which they were
intended: Some of the most Considerable of them, were innocently dispensed
with, and is continued: and at last, the whole or Genetality abrogated and
loused their Obligation from all which it is evident, that generally speaking
an immutable Humane Law, is an absurdity or contradiction, and when ever former
Laws and Constitutions appear to the Supreme Power, (who is the only Judge in
such Cases) to fail of their Subserviencie to the more general Happiness and
Conveniences of the Society; the Sovereign has not only unquestionable Right,
but is found by the nature of supreme Power and Trust, which is from the
Gracious and the bountiful Governor of the World, to Alter, Correct, or
Abrogate them as may be most expedient. 2dly. The Sovereign to whom belongs the
Care, not only of the Internal Order and Happiness of the Society, but also of
the securing of it from External Violence, and preserving its Balance and
Proportion with the Neighboring States and Societies, has the undoubted power
of making War and Peace; and consequently of the raising and disposing of
Forces, making Confederacies, sending Ambassadors, keeping Correspondences,
and prescribing the necessar Expenses, affoorded by the Subjects, for these and
other Necessities of the Government; and for the supporting the Strength,
Honor and Interest of the Nation. 3dly. And it belongs to the Sovereign only,
(in whom is the Supremacy and Original Jurisdiction, and whose it is to Judge
of the Qulifications and Fitness of such as may be employed in any inferior
Administration) to Errect and Regulate the Freedoms and Privileges of all
inferior Corporations, to Constitute Magistrates, to Appoint and Nominate all
public Ministers, Officers of State, Judges, Counselors; and in a word, all
that serve in any Public Civil Trust, and Capacity whatsoever.

Seventhly, These are the Foundamental and Vital Prerogatives of Government and
Supremacy, to which all the other Particulars by Consequence and Connection are
easily Reduceable: And now from what has been said in the General concern of
Government, the inference is Natural and Obvious, that whosoever murmurs
against the Being or Exercise of the Supreme Authority, who absurdly pretends
to limit it, for some seeming present advantage endeavor to incroach upon the
Prerogative of the rightful Sovereign, is guilty not only of the greatest
wickedness, by contemning the Power, and resisting the Ordinance of God, but
also of the greatest Folly, by doing what in him lies, to subvert the
Foundations of all Peace and Tranquillity, and to shake and unsettle that
surest Rock on which his own, and his posterities perpetual security and
happiness is built.

Eighthly, As to the different Forms of Government, it may be observed: first,
that seeing no man denies, but that it is possible in any Society, to have it
sufficiently known, and publicly acknowledged, what is their form of
Government, or in whose hands the Soveraignity is Lodged; it is certain that
that Society, is in so far the happiest of all others in which this is most
Distinctly and Universally known. 2dly. When we are inquiring into the best
form of Government, is not to be expected that any one can be found which is
absolutely perfect, for in this our frame and imperfect State, it is impossible
to find any humane Administration that is attended with no inconveniencie or
imperfection, but by the most perfect Government in this State of things, we
are to understand that which is liable to the fewest inconveniences, and from
which the most advantage and the more solid, and permanent can be justly
expected to the Society.

Ninthly, And so, tho we are not rashly or dogmaticaly, to condemn the ancient
and established Government of any Nation by which it has enjoyed its security,
yet we cannot be so blind, as not to understand that of all the several forms
of Government which the wit or subtility of man can imagine the Monarchical,
that is, where the Soveraiguty is lodged in one single person, in the natural
sense is evidently liable to the fewest and smallest inconveniences and is
most exactly proportionated for the attaining and preserving the Peace and
Security, and all the other ends of Society and Government, when we consider;
first, that it is the most natural Being, the Modal and Draught of the Paternal
or Patriarchicall Power, from which it has its Original. In the constituted
Order of the World, Men are not dropped down from the clouds, but Born and
Educated in some Family, and Society, which thing is enough to destroy the vain
presence of the natural Liberty, and equality of all men, from the subjection
of the Children to their Parents, from whom they have their Being and by whom
they are Preserved and Educated, is so clear by the light of Nature, and has
been so universally acknowledged by all Nations and People; that it were but a
loss of time to prove it in the particulars. And it being also certain from the
most Ancient Authors that all the Primitive Governors were Paternal and
Monarchical; Kingdoms then being nothing else but larger, and more extended
Families has given occasion to the later Authors to observe, that all
Governments by plurality, as they are in themselves unnatural, so they appear
from the History to have had their Beginning from some odd and mutable change,
or from most unjust usurpation and violence. But then, 2dly, not to insist in
resembling Monarchy to the Supreme Providence and Government of the World, or
in illustrating the Argument of most part of all Divines, to prove the unity of
the Deity from Its Being, unconceiveable, how there can be two or more supreme
Governors of all things; there seems to be in all pluralities of Humane
Governors a fatal necessity and perpetual natural occasion of Faction and
Division, things directly opposite to all the good Designs of Laws, Government
and Society, it being next too impossible, but that among many equal sharers of
Authority, there will be always some who are acted by partial Interest, some by
Ambition, and the Emolation of their Rivals, some by a vanity of showing their
Parts, some by an uneasy pride and singularity, and tho there were no thing
else, the diversity of Opinions which is unavoidable, is able to produce
Jealousies, Envy, and Animosities; and these are able to weaken, embroyl, or
disturb any Society. 3dly, In a plurality any one that is disaffected to a
Design, if he have sense or a little popularity, can create more difficulties
and delays then many are able to answer or overcome; and the just opportunity
of doing public affairs are often lost by their contentions and tedious
consultations, and even when they come to a conclusion, it happens frequently
that (as some of the Ancients were wont to rail the Athenian Councils, tho wise
men consult and deliberat, fools and mad men determine. 4hly, In a multitude of
Governors the public is neglected frequently, whiles any single man thinks
himself but little concerned, and that he will be blamed for the Errors of the
Government; and these who are more active, and have been esteemed the wisest
men in such Governments, have always endeavored to gain Reputation to their
Councils, by being supported by the popular favor: And by what mean and
unworthy Arts that is procured, and when attainted, how light and inconstant it
is all the World knows. 5ly, Secrecy which is a thing undoubtedly requisite,
for the safety and expedition of public Councils, is very rare, and almost
impossible in a Plurality. 6ly, A Monarchical Government, be cause it is free
of these, and the like heavy inconveniences, because it is casier to find a
good and wiseman, then many, because the Vulgar which is always the greatest
part of any multitude or plurality, is ever ignorant, rash, and untractable,
and because of the manifold advantages of this Government, it has been always
thought in all Ages and Nations, absolutely necessar in Armies; and the same
reasons hold as naturaly, and clearly in Civil Societies. And therefore it is
no wonder that Monarchs have been more solid, and permanent, and of far longer
duration then Popular Governments, and their Subjects more universally pleased
under the exercise of their Authority.

Tenthly, That those inconveniences of Government by plurality are not airly
speculations will be clear to any who seriously considers the miserable face of
that Republic, which by the Admirers of Popular Government was set up as the
greatest beloved Idol, for when we see that after the most unjust expulsion of
the Roman Kings, the Consuls usurped their Authority, and carried it higher
than ever they did, that the Tribunies these Incendiaries of the Rabble, when
they had got their Being, and a little footing, managed a continual design,
sparing no Artifice or violence to diminish the consular Authority, as being to
Arbitrary and Tyrannical; and to get it into their own hands (in which they
became by desires more and more succesful) on pretense of giving it to the
People, that during the more seemingly Popular form of Government, never were
their greater roarings and complaints of Oppression, in any state of the World,
that the constant Discentions betwixt the Nobility and the People produced
perpetual Tumults, where the Streets were filled with the Blood and Gore of
their Citizens, and all places with the sad Calamities of Civil War and
Confusion. And when we consider that in all their greatest hazards and
difficulties, they were found to run to the expedient of a Monarchical
Dictator; And that (as all their Authors Confesses) they had been at last
utterly destroyed and sunk under their civil Calamities, if they had not again
fallen under a lasting Monarchical Government: These are sufficient
demonstrations, when People Sacrilegiously encroach on the Right of their
lawful Superiors. It is hard for them ever to fix on any thing of solid
duration, that the famous Roman Liberty, was properly but an Impunity for
cutting one another Throats, that Faction and Disorder, which all the wisdom
and strength of that people could not prevent, all the natural effects of such
Governments; and that the happiness of a State consists, not in the Greatness
and Extent of its Bounds and Empire, but in its Internal order and Tranquillity.

Eleventhly, As to the great public inconveniences of a Monarchs turning a
Tyrant. It is observable, First, That the marks of a Tyrant are so variously
and dubiously given by the enemies of Monarchy, that it is very hard for the
most Ingenious, much more for the Vulgar to determine, where any Governor
deserves this odious Character. 2dly, If every man would industriously employ
himself in the proper business of his own calling and capacity, there would be
little time and less occasion, for these unprofitable Inquiries into the
Councils and Actions of Princes; which of necessity, must be kept more closs
and mysterious then these of private men: And yet we see how liable these are
to be often and greatly misrepresented. 3dly, Tho there is no shadow of true
reason, to imagine that Monarchs are accomptable to their Subjects for their
Administration, which is an Error no less absurd (an accomptable Monarch,
being an inferior Supreme,) then it is pernicious both in Government and
Religion; Yet Princes cannot but remember, that as Subjects are accountable to
their Sovereign, and Superior: So Monarchs are to theirs, the Great GOD and
Governor of the World, by whom Kings reign; and against whom only they sin.
4ly, We cannot fancy very few Monarchs so void of common sense, as not to
understand that their Honor and safty does depend on the happiness and
prosperity of their Subjects, so it is next too impossible that they can design
their general hurt and oppression. 5ly, When some Severities actually happen
which are generally looked upon as excesses of Government, they are never so
heavy in Nature, nor so Universal in their Extent and Duration, as the dreadful
Calamities of Civil War, which is the common cause of the frailty and
mortality of Empires; and which is thus always so unluckie as to produce the
same, and more, and greater Evils then are pretended to be feared or suffered
from the Lawful Superior; and whoever by his fears, discontents, and
grievances, will needs disturb the Government or would circumscribe it must
asurdly suspect himself to a power which he must acknowledge, to be greater,
otherways he cannot dream how he can set Limits to the former. But lastly,
which is a sufficient answer, when it is asked what if a Monatch abuse the
Power, neglect the dictates, or Laws of his Kingdom; we ask the enemies of
Monarchy, what if in their forms of Government, the Major part or
Respresentatives and Trusties of the People do the same? If they say, that
these can be resisted or judged by the rest, then it seems very evident, that
there can be no Government at all, or at least none that can be promised to be
of a weeks continuance, if these cannot be justly opposed or resisted, then it
is clear that the difficulty proposed, is at least equal in all forms of
Government; but that it is greater on the Re-publicans side, we are able to
bring from impartial History, many more example of Popular Governments,
generaly vitiated, or in which avaritious, irreligious, and licentious Men,
have had the whole swey, then can be produced of wicked Monarchs: And this one
matter of Fact being true, is enough to destroy all the empty Objections of the
Enemies of Monarchy; as to that case of the Alteration of Civil Laws, besides
that these have no force, nor obligation, but what they entirely derive from
the Sovereign. And we are by all the Rules of Discretion and Charity, to
suppose that when ever there happens any change in any of them, it is intended
for the better, and for the more general convenience, of which the Sovereign
always is Judge; who ever thinks the perpetuity of Laws an advantage to a State
or Society, most have the less esteem of Popular Government, when after
examination ye shall find that never was there a greater number of partial and
ridiculous constitutions, never more frequent abrogations, vicissrudes, and
changes of Laws, then in the Roman, Athenian, and such other Republics, which
has given occasion to that remark of some Lawyers: That any considerable
alteration in the Civil Laws cannot be expected in Monarchies, in less then the
Revolution of 30 years, generally speaking, but in the Popular Governments,
with every Callends of January.

Twelfthly, From what has been said in the general concerning Monarchy it is
easy to observe, that these Monarchies are most perfect which are Hereditary,
Being in their Nature, of the most equable Stability, for seeing every
Successor in such a Series, has a full right to the entire Soveraignity: This
Right can never prescribe or be diminished. And tho the Wisdom of the most
Absolute Monarchies, is in all Ages, thought to use several Methods and Forms
of Consulting their Subjects in the great and weighty Affairs of the
Government, yet no Concession whatsoever to subjects, no custom be it never so
long of employing them, or any number of them, for private or more solemn
Counsels, or in administration of Justice, can Allienat any part, or making any
shares of the Supreme Authority, the Society may also Reasonably expect the
greatest care and sincerest love from Hereditary Princes, who considering the
Government and Society, as their Property and Inheritance will watch over it,
with the more dilligent and circumspect exactness, that they may transmit it in
the more secure and flourishing condition to their posterity.

Thriteenthly, And now in the last place, what is the fixed and established
Government of this ancient Kingdom, we cannot explain or assert in words more
clear and comprehensive then these. In which at several times and different
occasions, the Subjects of this Realm have solemnly sworn, either inviolable
fidelity and allegiance, and in which the Representatives of the Body of this
Nation, in their most solemn and lawful Convocations, have openly declared to
the World the unquestionable Rights of this Monorchical Government; in these it
is solemnly owned and acknowledged, (for Subjects give no Prerogative but
assert them) in several public Oaths and Declarations, that the Kings Majesty
is the alone Supreme Governor of this Kingdom, and above all Persons in it
whatsomever; that he is a free Prince of a Sovereign Power, having as great
Liberties and Prerogatives as any other King, Prince, or Potentate whatsomever;
that his Majesty is a Sovereign Monarch, Absolute Prince, Judge and Governor
over all Persons, Estates and Causes, in this Realm: That the Kings sacred
Majesty and his Heirs, and Successors, for ever, hold the Royal Power from God
Almighty over this Kingdom. And that there are great Obligations from the Laws
of GOD, the Laws of Nations, the Municipal Laws of the Land, and Oath of
Allegiance to maintain and defend the Sovereign Power and Authority of the
Kings Majesty, and that sad consequences do accompany any encroachments upon or
diminitions thereof; they acknowledge the great happiness that this Kingdom
has for many Ages enjoyed under the Princely Government of their Royal Kings,
who by the special blessing of Almighty God have reigned over them, in so long
and unparalelled a Series of Royal Discents, and the Obligations thereby lying
on them in Conscience, Honor and Gratitude, to own and assert the Royal
Prerogatives of the Imperial Crown of this Kingdom, which the Kings Majesty
holds from God Almighty alone; and to vindicate the same from all Invasions
made upon it, that all Government and Jurisdiction within his Majesty's Ancient
Kingdom, does Originally recide in his Sacred Majestys Lawful Heirs and
Successors, and it being impossible to invent any surer way of knowing the
Government of any Kingdom, who e're impartially considers these with many such
other Declarations, whereof, some have been made when any doubt arose
concerning any particular of the Royal Prerogatives; and some after a sad
experience of the fatal consequences of Sacrilegious Invasions upon them, and
all to express the public sense of the Nation, concerning the rights of their
Sacred Sovereign: Who ever, take notice, that our Kings have ever been the
Fountain of Civil Justice, making Laws of Universal unquestioned Obligation on
all the Subjects; sometimes by themselves alone, sometime by the Advice and
consent of their Barrons; sometimes of their Earls; sometimes of their Prelates;
and sometimes of their Representatives of the Generality of their Subjects,
which have been assembled by their Authority; and are in these Laws frequently
called their great Council or Parliament. And in a Word, who ever considers the
whole thread of our free and unbaysed History, cannot but be convinced, how
clear and certain it is (if it be possible for words clearly to express any
thing) That this ancient Government is properly Monarchical. And that in the
Sacred Person of our King is lodged, the Supreme Power and Authority; with all
these inviolable Rights and Prerogatives, which belongs to the entire
Soveraignity.

Fourtenthly, In Buchannan (who has been justly called a reproach, as well as
any Ornament of our Country,) we admire the empty loosnes of his reasoning, no
less then we do the purity of his Latin, his frothie Dialogue, is an instance
how far Malice, Passion, and mistaken interest, can lead men out of the common
Rod of sense and reason; his Characters of a King, and of a Tyrant, are so
Chimerical and Imaginary, and with all, so nyce and possitive, that according
to his discriptions, there were never King or Tyrant in the World. But in
short, if his intended parallel of a King and Physician, be in many things
impertinent, if it be inconsistant that his King be sometimes the perfectest
thing in the World, or otherways to be resisted or expelled, and sometimes very
imperfect, that he may get Laws to govern him, just as the Latin, and the
Rapture takes the Author, if he is blindly in Love with the word Laws, without
considering the thing who shall make them; if it do not follow that because
some Kings have been Ill men, therefore there should be no King: Or if the same
reason hold in the Popular Government, and if there have been at least as many
and great corruptions in Popular Governments as in Monarchies, which are things
any can demonstrate, who are not strangers to Reason and History: Then all
these Rhetorical Florishes which makes up this Authors Book about Government,
(which has abused some whose considerations go not beyond the surfice of
things,) do conclude nothing but that if he had bestowed a little of that time
which he spent in acquiring of Language, on the study either of Law or
Geometry, he might have Learned to pursue this malicious design, a little more
closly, while as now he has only made it appear that he was capable to write a
Play; but not either Law or Reason concerning Government.

SIR, These Assertions and Observations are owned by the whole Body of this
University, since they seem to be founded on clear Methedical and Permanent
Reasons. If they do not displease your Majesty, we shall be careful to insert
them in our most Solemn Records, to remain as a perpetual Monument of the
unalterable Principles of this Society.

We do not offer to your Majesty, without the special Approbation of the most
Reverend Chancellor of this University, the great and happy Influence of whose
Example and Council, on the Loyalty and Order of this Place, is suitable to the
geeatness of his Trust and Interest in it: We shall rejoice in our happiness,
if what we have said, can do any service to Dissipate the clouds of Ignorance
or Prejudice, that are on the minds of any who have not leisure or advantages
of long and Laborious Inquiries, into the Reasonable Foundation of their
Allegience; there being nothing dearer to us, then the Fidelity and Affection
we bear to the most Ancient and Royal Government of this Kingdom, and to your
Majesty's sacred Person, who is the breath of our Nostirls, and who has been
graciously pleased, to take the State of your Universities among the first and
principal Concerns of Your Government, and who, we do not doubt, will continue,
to confirm and enlarge with Your Empire the Learned Glory of Your Kingdoms. And
we dare with the sincerest boldness of our honest Hearts, assure Your Majesty,
that the just and never unfashionable Notions of our Duty, with the entire
Trust and Confidence, we repose in Your Majesty, shall ever preserve us from
being diverted, or frighted from our Love and Obedience, and shall excite from
Your Majesty, and Kingdoms happiness, the perpetual Prayers of, etc.

Signed by Arthur Archbishop, Chancellor Alexander Skeen Vice Chancellor
Richard Waddel Archdeacon James Lorimer D. D.
All Regents.
Charles Kinnard John Menzies Alexander Skeen Patrick Mcgill William Comery
James Ross John Monro.


A LETTER From the Archbishops and Bishops, to the King's most Excellent
Majesty.
May it please Your most Sacred Majesty,
WE prostrate our selves to pay our most Devoute Thanks and Adoration to the
Sovereign Majesty of Heaven and Earth, for preserving Your Sacred Life and
Person, so frequently exposed to the greatest hazards, and as often delivered,
and you miraculonsly prospered with Glory and Victory, in the Defense of the
Rights and Honor of Your Majesty's August Brother, and of these Kingdoms; and
that by his Merciful Goodness, the Ragings of the Sea, and madness of
unreasonable Men, have been stilled and calmed; Your Majesty as the Darling of
Heaven, peaceably seated on the Thrones of Your Royal Ancestors, whose Long,
Flustrious, and Vnparallelled Line, is the greatest glory of this Your Ancient
Kingdom.

We pay our most humble gratitude to Your Majesty, for the Repeating Assurances
of Rour Yoyal Protection to our National Church and Religion, as the Laws have
Established them; Which are very suitable to the Gracious Countenance,
Encouragement and protection, Your Majesty was pleased to afford to our Church
and Order, whilst we were happy in Your presence amongst us.

We Magnify the Divine Mercy in blessing Your Majesty with a SON, and us with
a PRINCE, whom we pray Heaven may bless and preserve to sway Your Royal
Seepters after you, and that he may Inherit with Your Dominions, the
Illustrious and Heroic Virtues of his August and most Serene parents.

We are amazed to hear of the Danger of an Invasion from Holland, which excites
our prayers for an universal repentance to all Orders of Men, that God may yet
spare his people, preserve your Royal person, and prevent the Effusion of
Christian Bloods, and to give such success to your Majesty's Arms, that all who
Invade your Majesty's Just and Undoubted Rights, and Disturb or interrupt the
peace of your Realms, may be Disappointed and clothed with shame, so that on
your Royal Head the Crown may still flourish.

As by the Grace of God we shall preserve in our selves a firm and unshaken
Loyalty, so we shall be careful and zealous to promote in all your Subjects: an
Intemerable and steadfast Allegiance to your Majesty, as an Essential Part of
their Religion, and of the Glory of our Holy profession; not doubting but that
God in his great mercy, who has so often preserved and delivered your Majesty,
will still preserve and deliver You by giving You the Hearts of your Subjects,
and the Necks of your Enemies. So pray we, who in all Humility, are,

May it please your most Sacred Majesty, your Majesty's most Humble, most
Faithful, and most Obedient Subjects and Servants,

Edinburgh. Nov. 3. 1688. Signed by Arch: St: And: Jo. Glasgow. Alexr:
Edinburgen: Jo: Galloviden: Jo: Dunkelden: Gec: Abredonen: Will: Moravien: Ja:
Rossen: Ja: Brichen: To: Dumblanen: Arch: Sodoren: And: Orcaden:


FINIS.

