FEMALE FALSEHOOD: OR, THE Unfortunate Beau. Contained in the genuine MEMOIRS OF
A Late French Nobleman.

WRITTEN By Monsieur S. Evremont.

And now made English.

Felix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum. LONDON: Printed and to be Sold by
E. Whitlock, near Stationer's Hall, 1697.

THE TRANSLATOR TO THE READER.
SInce these Memoirs were designed, both by the Writer and Translator of them,
for the Reader's Instruction, it is hoped he will do himself and us the Justice,
to make his Remarks only upon the different Characters of those Women our
Knight-Errand has met with, and (warned by his Sufferings) fortify his Heart
against their Allurements who would serve him in the same kind, without
criticizing upon the Style or guessing at the real Actor, whom the Ingenious
Author has disguised both as to Time and Place; not so much for his own sake,
as to conceal the Names of those Ladies, who little merited so generous a
Caution.

Indeed the World is extremely obliged to his good Nature, since he had rather
expose his Discretion to our Censure, than let us want the pleasant Relation of
so many diverting Adventures; and that Person must be very nice, who, among
these several Amors, cannot find one that will relish his Palate: Perhaps some
being surpised at the variety of these Intrigues, may think them Fictitious,
or at least suspect they are not the performances of one Gallant; but we doubt
not their Wonder will lessen, when they consider his sanguine Constitution and
roving Temper, which run him into perpetual Temptations.

I would not have the charming and best part of Mankind esteem this Narrative
as a Libel upon their Fair Sex; for the Virtuous (who are much superior in
number) are no ways concerned in the Reflections made upon the Infamous, for
whom neither my Author, nor my self, have an overgreat respect.

I never troubled the Press before; but if this meets with a kind Reception, it
may encourage a young Beginner to higher Undertakings.

I must not omit to tell you, That the Book is at present imperfect; the Second
Part, promised by the Author, being not yet come to our Hands: But we chose not
to delay the Publication of this, being hasty to show some of those Rocks and
Quicksands on which our powdered Beaux do daily suffer Shipwreck.

MEMOIRS OF THE Count de -- Compiled by Monsieur SAINT E. BOOK I.
I Am now entering into my Sixtieth Year, more weary of the World, for the
Crosses I have met with in it, than because of my Age* Let me then endeavor to
enjoy my self, during that little Time that is yet afforded me* by employing my
Thoughts wholly on that, which may draw them off from worldly Concerns. But my
Life being, as I may say, a Complication of all the Misfortunes which the
Conversation of Women exposes a Man to, I think it will be of no little Use,
both to my self and others, if I run over all those Adventures of mine which
they engaged me in. Whosoever reads these Memoirs, will, perhaps, warned by my
Follies, know how to avoid the like Disasters; and I by writing them, and
exposing the Ridiculous Errors all Admirers of the fair Sex are guilty of, will
be encouraged to persist in the Resolution I have taken of extinguishing that
cursed Inclination, that in spite of my Age and Experience, might yet bear too
great a Sway over my Judgment; so little is the Power we have over our selves,
to follow that Good we approve of, and avoid that evil which we blame.

Since my Design in writing these Memoirs is rather to leave the World an
Instruction than an History, I hope I may be excused if I conceal my Name, as
well as those of most Persons I shall speak of. My Aim in writing, is not the
making a Recital of my Adventures, but by that Recital to direct my Reader how
he shall avoid those Inconveniences I have lain under; and it would be unjust
in him, to apply himself rather to guess at the Truth of this History, than to
make his Advantage of what I write.

I desire that such as find me out, will at least be so kind as not to divulge
their Conjectures, and I discover to them as a Secret all I can not conceal
from them.

I was born in May, in the Year 1625. My Father, who was descended of one of
the most Ancient Houses in the whole Kingdom, and had an Employment in the Army
which allowed him little Leisure to look after his Family, had left that wholly
to my Mother; which consisted in a Girl and Three Boys, the Girl being the
Eldest, and I the youngest of all Four. He might be worth about Four hundred
thousand Livers, and was the poorer because he had made considerable
Settlements on my Mother, though she had brought him but a slender Fortune. We
scarce knew any thing, but we were informed how small an Estate we must trust
to. My Mother took Care not to be troubled with us too long, and having
bestowed her Daughter into a Nunnery, where she paid but little for her Board,
she looked for Colleges, where her Sons might be educated at as cheap a rate.
My elder Brother, though he was yet but Fifteen, had already engaged himself into
the Army; and my second Brother and I were sent, under the Conduct of a Priest,
to a little Country Town, wherein was a College, where the Priest carried us to
follow our Studies. We were not a little looked upon, though our Expenses were no
ways extravagant; but besides that it was known what Family we were of, such
Titles were bestowed on us as might occasion that Distinction. My Brother was
called a Count, and I a Knight; for it was not then, as it is now the Fashion,
to entitle Children to the Name of Abbot, who have no other Call to an
Ecclesiastical Life than that of being younger Brothers.

The Count, my Brother was no ways inclined nor fit to study, and all his
Occupation from Morning till Night was to vex the poor Man, who was entrusted
with us. As for me, I was something more tractable, and though I was no Enemy to
Sports, yet I made a Shift to please my Tutor. The Difference that was observed
in our Characters, procured me some Praise; which being a Mortification to my
Brother, occasioned that Hatred he has always bore me, an Instance that Parents
ought never to send Children out together, whose Inclinations are different.
The Reprimands an elder Brother, who is outdone by his Junior, is subject to,
must always be paid for, by him who is the innocent Cause thereof. My Brother
was already Fifteen and I Fourteen Years old, when a Company of Strowlers came
into that Town.

I had as yet felt but loose and uncertain Impressions of that Passion which
inclines one Sex to the other. It was at the Play that it began to unfold it
self, and make me feel it is Rage: And I must own it, to my Shame, or to that of
the graver Authors of the Tragic Scene, that at the Acting of the Cid I began
to love in earnest. The Actress, who represented Chimena, charmed me, with her
Beauty, and the Tenderness expressed in her Part. I was moved with Compassion
at her Sufferings; and was methought something concerned that she should be so
virtuous as the Author had made her: But that Care was presently over. I soon
understood how that Woman, who on the Stage expressed such Virtue, had as
little in another Place. This it was that put my poor Brain quite out of order.
What, thought I, were it then so easy for me to be beloved by that Chimena who
is so cruel to Roderiguo? These and such like Reflections wholly employed my
Thoughts, and thus I unwittingly sucked in the Poison of Debauchery.

What I experienced in that tender Age, has since hindered my being surpised,
when I have seen Actresses, though never so infamous, be courted with a stronger
Passion than honest and virtuous Women. The Part they act on the Stage seeming
to give, as it were Relish to that which they act elsewhere.

However, I was not old enough to apply my self to the Chimena, who had pleased
me so well, in acting the Cid. Besides, she was always engaged with Sparks, not
so young as my self, and whose Pockets were better furnished than mine at that
Time; and foreseeing that if I presumed to make Love to her without presenting
her with something, I should be received but as a Schoolboy, I sought for
easier Amors and Mistresses not so hard to be come at. But to whom should I
proffer my Service? I saw not one Woman who was indifferent to me. Every She
was my Chimena, but I, alas! was no Body's Rodriguo; and the greatest
Complement I had from those I bestowed most upon, was, That I was a pretty Boy.
This was worse than Death to me, who would have been looked on as a Man, since
I so well felt my self to be such.

There was a Nunnery in that same Town, the Abbess whereof was something a kin
to us: I visited her pretty often, and by that means had got acquainted with
most of the young Ladies she boarded. There was one among the rest, who was
much about my Age, and pleased me above them all; and having all Liberty of
seeing her, I thought I could not do better than to make my Application to her.
She was then the Person pitched upon, to whom I should express those Desires
that had newly taken Possession of my Heart. I did it in some Verses I had
remembered out of a Play, which I repeated to her with all the Passion and
Softness imaginable. Miss was already a far greater Scholar in that Science
than my self, and I was amazed to hear her answer my Verse in very intelligible
Prose. She ridiculed the manner wherein I had made my Declaration, and told me,
She had learned in her Nunnery to speak in another Tone. I found her well read
in Books of Gallantry, and learned enough, not only to answer my Love, but also
to instruct and encourage me in it. She swore, however, That she never had
felt, but on my account, that Passion which she discovered, and that she never
would feel it for any one else; but she told me, That if I really loved her, we
must lose no Time, but must seek out the Means frequently to enjoy each other's
Company.

One may easily imagine how ravished I was, to find so charming a Person filled
with Love for me. I was easily persuaded my own Desert had occasioned that
Passion in her, and the Letters she began to send me daily, confirmed me in
this vain Opinion; for I thought it impossible to write with more Wit and
Passion than she did.

Her Love began to be the only Object of my Thoughts. We wrote to one another
every Day, constantly, and one of my School-fellows, who was Son to a Servant
of the Abbesses, delivered me her Letters, when he came into School, and took
my Answers back with him, as he returned home.

It was a Month since this Intreague had begun, when my Brother, who, it seems,
was fond of a Nun of the same Abbey, and was not over-given to Secrecy, showed
me the Letters he had received from her. How was I amazed, when I saw they were
almost Word for Word, the same as those my Boarder sent me, and that they must
have all been composed by the Nun! I took no Notice of it to my Brother, but
having left him I went and packed up all the Letters I had, and sent them back
to her whom I had received them from, acquainting her by a Note, That I would
neither love nor see her any more, since she had been capable of deceiving me.

She returned an Answer yet more disobliging than my Note; and as my Love was
real and sincere, I was concerned to see her angry. I sent her a very
submissive Letter, begging a thousand Pardons; but having no Answer, I waited
on her my self, to sue for a Reprieve.

She received me in such a manner that I was persuaded she never had loved me.
She made a Sport of the Grief I was in, and seeing I would have made a formal
Complaint of her Cruelty, she said, I was a fine Lad indeed to pretend to such
a Person as she was. This confounded me quite, for she was not much older than
my self, and I was enraged to be used like a Child by a Child, not knowning at
that Time, That Women are sooner ripe than Men.

The ill Success of this my first Attempt began to give me an Insight into the
Character of the Female Sex, which would have been a Happiness to me, had I
taken Warning by it; but I thought the Levity of Youth was the only Cause she
had served me so, and resolved to apply my self to more solid Mistresses.

We were often invited to the Deputy Governor of the Town we lived in. He was
married to a Woman not unhandsome, and who was pretty much talked of. She was
about Thirty Years old, and I wanted something of Fifteen, yet I never saw her
but I gave her some Tokens of my Passion. I thought (...) Man must pretend
Courtship (...) he conversed with, and in my Applications I really spoke my
Mind, for in the general Desire I had to make Love, I found my Heart ready for
any who would accept it.

I had read several Romances, for it was then that they began to be cried up,
and did not think it lawful to make Love otherwise than their Heroes. I fancied
my self sometimes Alexander, sometimes Orondates, and I took the Governor's
Lady for no less a Mistress than Cassandra or Statira.

I was not at all suspected by the Husband, being almost the only one whom he
permitted her to converse withal. Besides our frequent being alone at her
House, we often went abroad, only she and I, into a Garden she had in one of
the Suburbs.

One Day she told me, she would try whether I was sincere in my Addresses, and
if she could trust me. I promised her an Inviolable Discretion; and then she
told me, She had some Business with a Relation of hers, whom we should find in
the Garden, but that it must be done with all Secrecy, because she were undone
should her Husband come to the Knowledge of it, he having expressly forbid her
ever to see that Man. She assured me, It was about Business that she desired to
discourse with him, and I promised her, I would be faithful, without enquiring
what Reason she had to do it.

We went to the Garden, and were scarce there, but the Spark, she waited for,
got in over the Wall, and came toward us. There he is, said she; stay here
while I speak with him in that Summer House, and watch if any Body comes: And
if there does, you will come and give me Notice. I told her, She might rely upon
me; and she went into the Summer House with that Man, while I lay Perdue at the
End of the Walk that led to it, she having charged me not to stir from that
Place.

No sooner was she in, but I forgot the Promise I had made her not to leave my
Post, and creeping softly to the Door of the Arbor, I was unlucky enough to
knock at it pretty hard, crying out, Madam, Your Husband is coming. Whereupon
she came to the Door, and without opening of it, desired me to carry her
Husband into another Walk, while her Friend should make his Escape.

I walked aside to give him that Leisure, and my Spark returned by the same
way, though with a little more haste than he came. She came to me, and seeing me
all alone, asked where her Husband was? It was in vain for me to tell her, he
was gone out again; she perceived what I had done was but to fright her, and
expressed so much Resentment as to give me ill Language.

I thought, that having Knowledge of her Intreague, she would be afraid to
disoblige me; but it happened quite otherwise; she carried me home again,
without saying a Word, and having left me, went and told her Husband, I was an
impudent young Fellow, who had been so bold as to make Love to her, and that
she desired him that I might come no more to her House.

I came there the next Day, and the Husband told me, in a deriding manner, that
I was a lewd Debauchee, and that were it not for the Respect he had for my
Family, he would have me whipped.

This Affront touched me to the Quick, and instead of answering him as I might
have done, that his Wife made a Fool and a Cuckold of him; I only reflecting on
the shameful manner he had threatened me in, flew in his Face, and had I been
strong enough, would have done him more Mischief. His Spouse ran in, alarmed
at the Noise, and taking her Husband's Part, called me a thousand Rogues. See,
said she, what Impudence! How brisk this little Rogue is for his Age, and if he
dares use my Husband thus, what would he not say of me, if he might be (...)? I
was taken off of the Husband, and was desired to avoid his House; on which I
went out, exclaiming against both Husband and Wife as they deserved.

When I was got Home, I reflected with Admiration on the Impudence of that
Woman, who knowing it was in my Power to ruin her Reputation, by divulging what
I knew of her, had yet carried her self so strangely toward me; but I knew not
as yet all a lewd Woman can do, and what happened to me then, was but a Sample
of what I have experienced since in those of that Character.

This Adventure made no little Noise: Our Tutor, at whose House we boarded,
wrote to my Mother about it, and prayed her to send for us back, because we
were grown too big to be governed by him. She would have had little Respect for
his Admonitions, were she not that Year, which was 1640. become a Widow, my
Father being killed in Piedmont, in the Battle wherein the Count de Harcourt
got the better of the Spaniards. She sent for us to Paris, where we found my
eldest Brother, who was come there after my Father's Death, to beg for his
Place, and to endeavor to get Two Commissions for my Brother, the Count, and
my self.

We had a Friend whose Interest was very great, with whom my eldest Brother had
been educated, and who had also been a great Acquaintance of ours, in our
Childhood. It was Monsieur de Cinq Mars, Son to the Marshall d'Effiat. He
being at that Time at the highest Period of his Favor, we easily obtained what
we sued for. My eldest Brother was preferred to the Post my Father had been in;
my Brother, the Count, was placed with the Duke de Breze, to serve at Sea, and
the former, who had a Kindness for me, kept me with him, to make my first
Campaign in Piedmont the next Summer. I remained with him, at Paris, for that
Winter, being a sharer in almost all his Pleasures, and it was then I had an
Opportunity of enquiring more particularly into the Manners of Women of
Pleasure.

We were almost perpetually at Monsieur de Cinq Mars's; and here I cannot
forbear mentioning the Amasement I was in, and the Reflections I used to make
whenever I saw him. Never any Man seemed to me more happy than he did at that
Time. He was at the Age of 20 Years the King's chief Favorite, and that in such
a degree as never any one was before him; adored by all the Courtiers, and
caressed by all the Ladies he was pleased to court. Yet I never saw him
contented, and as often as he found himself alone with my Brother and me, he
would say he was the unhappiest Man in the World. He mused, sighed, and would
spend whole Hours in walking about the Room, without speaking a Word. My
Brother was the only Confident of the Causes of his Affliction, and they would
often whisper together. As for me, I was not desirous of meddling with their
Concerns, but could not cease admiring how much those Men are imposed upon, who
think that Places of great Trust and great Honor are an essential Part of
Happiness.

I had no Knowledge of Monsieur de Cinq Mars's Secrets as to Matters of State,
and I know not whether he revealed them to my Brother, but I was entrusted with
most of those that related to his Gallantry; for many may be met with who have
Command enough over themselves, to conceal what respects their Fortune, but few
that can forbear bragging of what flatters their Vanity in Love Affairs.

Monsieur de Cinq Mars was extraordinary handsome and very generous. However,
the Women he applied himself to, were unfaithful to him. Being obliged to
attend the King almost all Day long, he had but little Time left to Converse
with his Mistresses, and they deceived him with all the Ease imaginable.

He kept one who had beeen very expensive to him: He had given her a sumptuous
House, richly and magnificently furnished, and seldom made her an empty Visit.
He often carried me and my Brother thither, and sometimes left us there, being
obliged to go to Court. Whether my Brother was engaged elsewhere, or that he was
unwilling to Court his Friend's Mistress, he expressed little Kindness for her,
and when Monsieur de Cinq Mars was gone out, he commonly fell asleep, and left
me free Leave to talk what I would to her.

I had not yet lost the Habit I had got, to fancy that a Man must not see a
Woman without making Love to her. The Lady was Handsome, and, it may be easily
imagined, that, having Liberty to say what I would, I told her I loved her.

Being, however, desirous to do things handsomely, I told her, I was sorry to
see Monsieur de Cinq Mars so fond of her, and that she should be under such
Obligations to him, because I would else have taken the Freedom to make my
Addresses to her. You think, said she, he has a Kindness for me, and that I am
obliged to him; but you are mistaken, he does not love me at all, and gives me
no Tokens of his Passion. How! replied I, not without Amasement, then I am very
ill informed, for the World talks as though he had already bestowed above Fifty
thousand Crowns upon you. Well, answered she, and Fifty thousand Crowns;
there is a mighty Business for such a Person as I am. If I would oblige others
as far as I have done him, I should already have received three times as much
Money, and be better settled.

I confess this Discourse seemed to me to be so singular that I could scarce
forbear taxing her for so high an Ingratitude; for I knew not then that a
bought Mistress still thinks she is worth more than is laid out for her.

I would not however let her perceive the Surprise I was in. It is true,
continued I, that in respect to your Desert Fifty thousand Crowns are a small
Matter. But what must he expect then, who has nothing; and how will you accept
of the Tender I design to make you of my Heart, I who cannot give you a
Farthing? Do you think then, said she, that I am Mercenary, and would buy my
Lovers? If you did love, and that you are in earnest, I would have more
Kindness for you than for Monsieur de Cinq Mars, with his Fifty thousand
Crowns; for, continued she, Whores only make a Trade of Love.

These Words won my very Heart, and hindered the Reflection I should have, how
ridiculous and extravagant it was that a Person should be so covetous as not to
be satisfied with Fifty thousand Crowns, and yet pretend to Generosity; but I
was charmed with it as though she had been sincere in what she spoke. I fancied
my self a Man of greater Merit than Monsieur de Cinq Mars, and carried my Folly
so far as to think, that a Girl so well equipped, as she was, might not only
love me without any Interest, but might give me some more substantial Proofs of
her Affection: For I was then very bare of Money, and found that I should love
that Woman most whom there was most to be got by.

I told her, That I was wonderfully taken with her generous Temper, and that
she ought not to doubt of my Sincerity. The Answer she made me persuaded me I
was beloved by her, and she assured me, That I should be Welcome when ever I
should visit her, and that no Body should disturb us. I desired a Meeting the
next Day, at Ten in the Morning, and she gave her Consent thereto.

I left her, so transported with my good Fortune, that I could scarce forbear
acquainting my Brother with it. I could not, as we returned home, leave off
talking of her to him, and that with such an Earnestness as made him laugh. I
think, said he, you are in Love with her. I should, answered I, be rich enough
to gratify her, before I might pretend to that. This made my Brother laugh
extravagantly; and especially when I told him, That none but Monsieur de Cinq
Mars must attempt to gain her Affection; and I have thought since, that he must
have known her for what she was.

I expected with Impatience that the Clock should strike the appointed Hour,
when I received a Note from her, wherein she acquainted me, That an unexpected
Business was fallen out, which obliged her to go forth early; and that wanting
a Watch, all here is being at the Watch-maker's, she desired me to send her one,
she had seen in my Hands the Day before. I had one indeed which was tolerably
pretty, which I sent her, with a most passionate Letter, begging, She would
remember her Promise against that Afternoon. I was eager to be with her, and
found her undrest, and saw no Sign of her going out that Day. She had Two of
her Friends with her, who, she told me, had kept her at Home till then; adding,
She must go out within a quarter of an Hour, to procure Ten Pistols, having
lost as much at Play.

I do not ask you for them, said she, since you have told me, You had no Money.
She spoke those last Words so dry, that I thought she meant to upbraid me with
it. That struck me to the Heart, and I resolved to get her Ten Pistols,
whatever it cost me. I left her, and went and sold a small Diamond I had, and
brought her the Money. She expressed an excessive Joy thereat, and told me, What
she did was rather to try me than any need she had of them. She promised to
meet me the next Day; but when the Time was come, I had a Message, That she was
heartily vexed she could not see me, Monsieur de Cinq Mars having sent her
Word, he was coming to her.

I was mad at these Disappointments. The next Day was not more favorable to
me, and she fooled me thus for a Fortnight together, finding still some new
Excuse to disingage her self. That Time being expired, she sent me Word, to
meet her at a certain Church, to which she came, and where I went to speak with
her. She expressed much concern that she could not contrive it so, that I
should see her at her House; but said, My frequent Visits had been taken notice
of, and that we must of necessity meet at some other Place. But she said, That
was not her greatest Pain; for what troubled her most, was, That Monsieur de
Cinq Mars, having given her Fifty Pistols to buy her a Gown, she had no more
Wit than to engage her self at Play; that she dared not tell him she had lost
them, and must make 'em up some way or other. Do you think, said she, that if
you pretended you wanted that Money, and should ask Monsieur de Cinq Mars for
it, he would deny you? I told her, I dared not propose any such thing to him,
not only because I was averse to borrowing of any one, but also that for some
Reasons of great concern to me, I must not lose Monsieur de Cinq Mars's good
Opinion. She replied angrily, That this was but a Sham, and that she was a Fool
to think I ever loved her. She left me after that, and would not hear my Reply.

I had all imaginable Cause to think she Jilted me. She had my Watch, which she
hastened not to return: I had given her Ten Pistols, and she again asked me for
Fifty more: But yet I was blind enough not to reflect on her Ber Behavior. She
is too rich, thought I, to desire more than she has, and her Addressing her
self to me, must be an Effect of Confidence she has in me.

I resolved then to beg the Fifty Pistols from Monsieur de Cinq Mars. We were
at her House when I proposed this to him. I took him aside into another Room,
and told him trembling, That I had an urgent occasion for Fifty Pistols, by
reason my Friends allowed me short. He replied, he would give me a Hundred, and
presently calling the Lady, at whose House we were; What Money, said he, did I
leave you, Madam, the last Time I was here? Was it not Three hundred Pistols?
Fetch me a Hundred, pray, which I have a present occasion for. She blushed, and
not daring to return any Answer, brought him the Hundred Pistols; which he gave
me. I scrupled taking them, saying; That perhaps she wanted them. No, no, said
he, she has enough, and I will have her, when you want any thing, to supply
you; and calling her, he bad her give me all I should ask her for. I went away,
keeping the Hundred Pistols, in the Resolution of letting Monsieur de Cinq Mars
know, That I had borrowed them only for that Person of whom he had them, and
left him with her.

I was at a loss what to make of her, who pretended Want of Fifty Pistols, when
Monsieur de Cinq Mars had so lately given her Three hundred: Yet I found it
pleasant enough, supposing she tricked me, to see her thus punished for her
Covetousness; and that instead of asking her for Money, she was now to give me
some as often as I should require it.

I could not forbear acquainting my Brother therewith, who was angry that I
should have borrowed any thing of Monsieur de Cinq Mars, and would have the
Hundred Pistols, to send them back to him. He told me then, That she was used
to play such Pranks, and let Monsieur de Cinq Mars give her never so much Money,
she would be still asking some of all that pretended to her. I have attempted,
continued he, to convince Monsieur de Cinq Mars of it; but Love blinds him; and
he has not Leisure to study his Mistresses Characters.

My Brother returned the Hundred Pistols, which Monsieur de Cinq Mars would not
accept, but on condition that I would ask her for more, whenever I had need of
them. My Brother, who had already found how blind he was on her account,
thought not fitting to let him know, That it was she who had obliged me to ask
him for that Sum: But as I had resolved to get my Watch and my Ten Pistols
again, I was also determined to make use of the Order Monsieur de Cinq Mars had
given me, and to lack for nothing.

I went then to see her, and was not a little astonished, when receiving me
with a smiling Countenance; Well, said she, and where are the Hundred Pistols
Monsieur de Cinq Mars has given you; are not they for me? For you? said I, Why,
Faith I have spent them; and, far from that, I must beg of you, that you would
supply me with Twenty more, on the account of an urgent Necessity. What then,
replied she, you think the Three hundred Pistols Monsieur de Cinq Mars spoke
of, were mine? You are mistaken, he had given me them to keep for him, and he
is so covetous that he would be as mad as the Devil, if I should touch a
Farthing of it. Alas, added she, with Tears in her Eyes, I am an unhappy Woman:
Monsieur de Cinq Mars scarce allows me what is necessary, and I never ask him
for any thing but he upbraids me with it.

What my Brother had told me, secured me against this Artifice. I told her, she
misrepresented Monsieur de Cinque Mars, and that I would speak to him my self,
to know the Truth of the Matter: Then I prayed her to return me my Watch, and
my Ten Pistols, since I had now no more Cause to doubt but the Love she Feigned
was a Pretense she made use of to Chouse me. Here she wept afresh; begging,
That for God's sake, I would not tell Monsieur de Cinq Mars of it: Which I
promised I would not. But it was in vain for me to insist upon my Watch and my
Ten Pistols; she positively denied them, telling me she would keep them for my
sake.

As Angry as I was, I could not forbear laughing at the Complement. The more I
laughed the more she cried; but I had the Courage not to be moved with her
Tears, and to despise her as much as I had ever loved her. She was indeed such
as my Brother had told me; tho Monsieur de Cinq Mars had lavished an incredible
Sum of Money on her, she would be asking every Body for more. She was worth Four
hundred thousand Livers when Monsieur de Cinq Mars died, and we shall see anon
what was her Fate.

I avoided her House, except when I was forced to accompany my Brother thither,
where he went often to meet with Monsieur de Cinq Mars; and looking for another
Amor, I pitched on -- House, because the Duchess of -- was our Cousin, and was
always very obliging to me. She had a very pretty Niece, whose Education she
took care of, for she had no Child as yet. She was a Maid about Sixteen or
seventeen; and it will easily be judged, that a Youth of my Complexion did not
see her often without telling her she was Handsome. She answered my Love in
such a manner as made me distracted; she did nothing but laugh at it, and I
could not guess whether she loved me or no. One Day, that she was gone out with
the Duchess, I went to see her, and found no Body there but a young Woman, that
waited on her, who was about Twenty and very passable: I used to be civil to
her as often as I saw her; but finding her alone, was more free of my
Complements than usually. She spoke to me of her Mistress, who, she said, was
passionately in Love with me, but dared not tell me so her self. She told me,
That if I really loved her, she would endeavor to rid her of those Fears, and
to contrive how we should converse privately together. I made her all the Oaths
and Protestations she desired; and she assured me, I should shortly see her
Mistress, provided I would be discreet. Then she gave me that Caution, That I
should not take any Notice of it to the young Lady till she had prepared her
thereto.

This Conversation was scarce ended, when the Duchess came back with her Niece.
With what an Eye did I look on that charming Person, having just before heard
how well inclined she should be on my Account! I took that Opportunity of
assuring her, That I loved her even to Madness; and indeed I never was more
passionate. I found then, that nothing is more capable of increasing our
Passion, than the thought of an equal Return.

The Waiting Woman was afraid I should grow impatient. The very next Morning
she sent me Word, She had something to say to me: And I went to her in a
neighboring Church. She told me, She had discoursed with her Mistress, and
that if I would come that Night to their House, I might see her. You may think,
I did not put it off, but submitted my self to her Directions.

I waited that Evening on the Duchess, who kept me to Supper: And when I
thought it was time to withdraw, I took my Leave; but instead of going out, I
went up into a Garret, where they laid their Lumber, into which the Waiting
Woman locked me. It was extreme cold, and I was freezing there for the space of
Two Hours. When that Time was expired, which was about Midnight, I heard the
Door open, and perceived it was the Maid; who, taking me by the Hand, whispered
to me, That I should follow her. I did, and after many Turnings, I found my
self in a Chamber, wherein was a Fire, half out, which gave not Light enough in
the Room to let me see where I was. She bid me warm my self, and that my
Mistress was coming. Half a quarter of an Hour afterward, I heard one come in,
who, without saying any thing, came near to me. It is you? said I, taking her
for the Duchess's Niece. I might repeat the Question often enough, no answer
was made: This made me think that her Modesty was the cause of her Silence; I
therefore resolved to spend no more Time in talk. In that very Moment the Door
was opened, and I saw the Shape of a Man come in. The Person, who was come near
me, pushed me into the Ruel, and went to him who had disturbed us. I heard that
Man speak very familiarly to her, and she desired him very civilly to go out;
which he refused, and answered with an Oath, That he would see what was the
Reason he might not be admitted. With that, in he comes to the Bedside, where
I was, and falling on me in a furious manner, was very free of his Blows. I
returned the Complement, endeavoring to get from him, which occasioned some
Noise. Immediately I heard a great stirring in the Room over head, and
presently a Light enters, which discovered the Duchess her self, followed by
her Waiting Woman. She was no sooner come into the Room, but I knew him who
beat me unmercifully to be a Footman that belonged to the House. The Waiting
Woman showed me to the Duchess, saying, with Tears in her Eyes, You see, Madam,
I did not tell you a Lie, and that the Knight hid himself in my Chamber with a
design to ravish me; I was loath to let you know it, and went and desired Tom
to turn him out: But it was impossible for him, so that I was forced to call
you up. The Duchess could not forbear laughing, though she was very angry, and
directing her Words to me, she told me, These were fine Doings, and that I was
a pretty Fellow. I was so ashamed that I could not speak one Word. The Duchess
sent some of her People to wait on me to the Door, and I went out, guessing in
part the Business.

The Truth is, That the Waiting Woman had never spoke to her Lady in my behalf,
and that she had only made use of her Name to have a Meeting with me her self.
She it was that came into the Room, and did not dare to answer when I asked, Is
it you? Whether the Footman, who came afterward, had seen me, or that he had
used to come to that young Woman, he was resolved to stay there; and she
finding her self in that Dilemma, thought the best way to get out of it, was to
tell the Duchess, I was hid in the Room. This had the Effect she desired; she
was taken for a chaste Vestal, and I for a Debauchee. Neither did I dare to
undeceive the Duchess presently, because it would have prejudiced her Niece; so
all the Shame of that Adventure fell to my share, and no one doubted but I was
in Love with the Waiting Woman. The Niece taxed me with it, and it was in vain
for me to protest I was innocent, and to tell her what Hopes the Maid had given
me. All was to no purpose, and she still believed what was most likely, and
took the Truths I told her for sham Excuses.

I was resolved not to be bubbled, and seeing the Niece her self was against
me, I told the Duchess the whole Truth of the Business. This made her suspect
the Waiting Woman's Honesty; she watched her, and found she had Intrigues not
only with that Footman but also with several others. She was turned out of
Doors, and the Duchess and her Niece had no other Complaint to make against me,
but that I should harbor such ill Thought of that young Lady, as to expect
what Mrs Abigal had promised me.

When all the Truth was out, I found the Duchess and her Niece more obliging
than I had done hitherto, and whether they had pitied the ill Success of my
Adventure, or that Women have a natural Tendency to love those who have the
Courage to undertake something for them, I could not doubt but both had a
Kindness for me. But, alas! even that served but to give me a farther Insight
into Female Inconstancy.

The Duchess was the first who opened her self to me; she told me plainly, That
having looked upon me hitherto but as a Child, she had not dared to let me know
the secret Inclination she had for me; but that after the Courage and
Discretion I had expressed in the Adventure with the Waiting Woman, she saw I
might be relied on, and that she would have me love her: But, said she, we must
patch up your Reputation, for you have the Name of a Lewd young Man, and it
would be ill looked upon if I should admit your frequent Visits, unless you
appear quite another Man than what there is cause to believe you are. You are
the youngest of your Family, and if you will be advised by me, enter into
Orders; I will see you shall not want Preferment. Get into a Seminary.

I told her I was ready to obey her; and indeed I was at that Time so pleased
with the Thoughts of being courted by a Duchess, that neither the natural
Aversion I had for that Profession, nor the Melancholy Reflections I might make
on the Life that is led in a Seminary, could deter me from it.

I promised her to get some body to speak to my Mother, and that very Day told
my Brother of it; and I found my Family very willing to let me take that
Condition upon me, which seemed to rid them of all Care of me, better than any
other.

I pretended then a great unconcernedness for worldly Affairs, and made all
things ready to enter the Seminary, and to apply my self to Divinity. When this
Resolution of mine was given out, the Duchess's Niece, to whom I had not spoke
a Word of it, was amazed and much concerned. She told me, I was mad, and that
she should never have expected this from me; For, added she, I must confess I
have loved you ever since I saw you. If I did not presently let you know my
Mind, it was because I was desirous to know you first; however, I looked upon
you as the only Man I could fancy, and was in Hopes of being your Wife one Day
or other.

Ah, Madam! I replied, why did you not speak sooner? For what will People say
of me, to see me alter my Resolution after the Preparations I have made?
However, it shall be as you please, and I assure you I will let it alone, if
you will have me. She told me, I must by no means be a Clergyman, and that if I
was it would be a sensible Affliction to her; on which I assured her, I would
not: and the next Day I told the Duchess, I could not find in my Heart to
embrace an Ecclesiastical Life.

I see, said she, you have been with my Niece, I know she loves you, and gives
way to the idle Fancies her Passion supplies her with, but she is very wide of
her Mark: She is a Fool I am weary of; and I Will tell you that we intend to
marry her within these Two Days. Thereupon she told me, the Duke, her Husband,
and she had taken secret Measures to marry her to a Man of Fortune, who sought
for some Support by that Alliance.

Indeed at this News I found I was really in Love. I was possessed with a deep
Sorrow, to hear they were going to marry a young Lady, I had a Kindness for,
and that to a Man, who deserved her no other way than by his Estate. I told the
Duchess, I was ready to do what she would, and would enter into the Seminary
the very next Day, but that it was an unconscionable thing to marry her Niece
in that manner. Do what I desire you, answered she, and you shall have no
Reason to complain.

I gave the Niece an account of the Discourse we had had; and told her, That
her Aunt was jealous of the Kindness I had for her, and would marry her if I
did not put on a Gown. How was I amazed, when upon the News that she was to be
married, she cried out, as transported with Joy; Lord! is it possible? Yes,
said I. But hear to whom; it is to such a one. What to him? said she, in a
redoubled ecstasy. Oh! I know him, he is an extraordinary Rich Man, and I
cannot be better matched. Then I am turned off, said I, in a serious manner.
You; said she, Do People use to marry Clergymen? This was no sooner said, but
she ran and called one of her Women, and embracing her; Ah! my Dear, said she,
do you know I am going to be married?

I remained motionless, so great was my Amazement at so unexpected a Change;
and I had almost determined my self to become not only an Abbot, but even an
Hermit, seeing Women were guilty of so much Inconstancy. She took little heed
of the Pain I was in, and I went out with a firm Resolution, to do what the
Duchess expected of me.

I remained at Paris while my Brother went into Piedmont, where his Regiment
still made a part of the Count of Harcourt's Army, and I put on the narrow
Band. What I obtained from my Duchess was, that instead of shutting my self up
into a Seminary, I should board my self out somewhere near the Sorbonne, and
study Divinity there.

The first Day that I dressed my self as an Abbot, I came to see her, and she
instructed me how I should behave my self in that Habit; How I must look
demure, and take a modest Phiz and an honest Countenance. Indeed it was a great
Proof I gave her of my Affection, for besides the natural Aversion I have
already said I had for that kind of Life, I was an Enemy to all Affectation:
But my Ambition was so flattered with my being beloved by that Woman, that though
I had not then for her all the Kindness I have since had, yet I thought I must
yield a blindfold Obedience to all her Commands.

She was extremely taken with me when she saw me an Abbot, and took all
possible care to spread a Report, That I was grown a Saint, and that an
extraordinary Devotion had induced me to become a Clergyman.

Indeed, tho it was with great Dissatisfaction that I played a Part so contrary
to my Inclination, yet I was wonderfully pleased that a Lady of such Quality,
and of an ununspotted Reputation, should have so favorable Thoughts of me as
she seemed to express. The Duke, though elder than her self, entertained no
Suspicion of her Conduct, and she deserved that Trust from him, by Two or Three
convincing Proofs she had given him of her Affection, which I shall mention, to
show what a Woman is capable of.

A Person of the first Quality and extraordinary well accomplished, had courted
her, with the most endearing Tokens of a sincere Love, and that in a more
respectful and submissive manner than those of his Rank are used to do. The
Lady had at first answered his Passion; but perceiving it gave her Husband some
Jealousy, she told her Lover, That she must admit no longer of his Addresses.
This almost distracted him, and he fell sick upon it: The only Comfort he had,
was, that of Writing to her, and I never saw any thing more soft than his
Letters: but she showed them all to her Husband; who himself composed her
Answers, which, it may be thought, were not over obliging, since he was the
Author of them. I admired how it was possible she could be so cruel to him, who
was so obliging to her; and this made me secretly despise her. Certainly, said
I, once to her, you must hate that Man unmercifully, to use him in this
barbarous manner. Hate him? replied she, not at all; I rather love him, and
should I follow my Inclination I would take pity of him: But I love my own
Quiet better, and in the present Posture of my Affairs, I must not give my
Husband the least Ground to mistrust me. As young as I was, I could infer from
thence, That I must expect the same Fate, if her Husband came to suspect me.
However, I kept my Thoughts to my self, and seemed to applaud what my Heart
could not but disapprove.

This Lover of hers knowing that my Visits were freely admitted of, had found
the Means to be acquainted with me, that he might have the Pleasure to
discourse of her, and I could scarce forbear undeceiving him, when I saw him
persuaded that his Mistress's Disdain proceeded from an excessive Virtue. At
last I took so much Compassion on him, and that Woman seemed to me so
undeserving his passionate Affection, that I resolved to free him from his
Error. I wrote a Letter to him, as unknown, and in a Counterfeited Hand,
whereby I gave him Notice, That the Duchess was not the Woman she appeared to
be, and that if he would watch her at such Time as a young Abbot used to visit
her, he might be convinced of her Falsehood. Being my self the Abbot, I was
indeed very inconsiderate, to make that Discovery which might have proved of a
fatal Consequence to me* but I was young and conceited, and I found a secret
Pleasure in showing him that I was more happy than himself; So that, in Truth
my Vanity had more share in that Action than either my Generosity or the Pity I
took of him.

My Letter came safe to his Hands, and though he gave little Credit to it, yet he
resolved to make use of the Advice. He took his Opportunity to get into the
Apartment where I used to see the Duchess, and hid himself behind the Tapistry,
in a Corner, where he had room enough to stand unseen, and whence he might
easily hear all we said. Neither the Duchess nor I knew any thing of his being
there, and it was about Three in the Afternoon, the Hour we usually met at:
Scarce had we been a quarter of an Hour together but we heard some Noise behind
the Hangings. The Duchess ran to see what it was, and found him in a Swound,
and almost breathless; so great had been his Amasement at what had passed.

I admired the Resolution and Presence of Mind she showed on that occasion. Get
you gone, said she, and let me alone to manage this Business. I did not give
her the Trouble of repeating it a second Time, but was very glad to get out of
a place where I thought it not safe for me to remain.

I was no sooner gone but the Duchess called one of her Women to her, and
showing her the Man behind the Hangings, bid her, Turn him out of the House:
Adding, He was a Madman, and that Love had turned his Brain. Her Husband came
in that very Minute; and asked, What was the Matter; It is, answered she,
without the least concern, that fool -- who was come to see me, and had the
good Nature to drop down because I would not hear his Impertinence. Come, my
Dear, it is not so proper for you to stay here, let us walk off, and leave to
her the Care of sending him home.

The Duke led off his Spouse, fondly caressing her, and praising her
unparalleled Virtue; while our Lover came to himself, and went out without
speaking a Word. I did not doubt but he would be revenged on the Duchess and my
self, and repented at Leisure for the Pains I had taken to undeceive him, but I
soon perceived his Resentment was not at all prejudicial to me. He resolved to
despise her as much as he had ever loved her, and in that he showed more Wisdom
and Discretion than I have since done in the like occasion. Being a very
generous Person, he took no notice of this Adventure, and always spoke well of
the Duchess. I took great Care not to be in his Way, and seldom saw him since,
for he dyed a few Months after, of a Wound he received at the Taking of the
City of Salses.

This was not the only Hint I had of the Duchess's good Nature, she gave her
Husband another Instance of it, and that in a manner yet more cruel than what
we last mentioned, and which made me begin to fear in earnest. Before she had
received my Addresses she had pitched upon a Gallant, not quite so young as I
was, who was Son to her Nurse, and had persuaded the Duke to prefer him to be
her Page, for in those Days they made Pages of riper Years than now. That young
Man was still in her Family, when she took a Fancy to me. He was very rash and
addle-headed, which made her Son see there was not much to be expected from
him; and it was to that Consideration I owed my good Fortune. She judging the
Complacency she had for me might make him jealous, resolved to put it out of
his Reach to hurt her, if he should resent it. To effect this, she made him
suspicious to her Husband; telling him, He was so audacious as to make a
Declaration of Love to her. The Duke immediately took Fire, and without any
further Examination, called the Page, threatening to cut his Throat for his
Impudence, if he did not immediately quit his Service. The Youth, without being
frighted thereat, answered, That if he had made Love to his Lady, she made the
first Advances; and, as a Proof of it, produced a Note of here is, he had yet in
his Possession. The Husband having showed it to his Lady, she told him with the
greatest Confidence, That it was her Hand, but she knew not how he came by it,
for it was a Note she had sent to a Lady of her Acquaintance: And indeed
unfortunately for the Page, the Note was wrote in such a manner that it was
hard to discover whether it was to a Man or to a Woman. The Duke was easily
persuaded the business was as his Lady had represented it, and the poor young
Man appeared to be guilty of a double Insolence, his Crime seeming much
height'ned by that aggravating Circumstance. This was not all, the Duchess had
presented him with several rich Jewels, which she knew he had kept; so she
accused him to her Husband, not only of that Arrogance but also of Thievery,
saying, She missed a thousand things of Value, which she could tax no body else
with. The poor young Man's Trunk was searched, and the Jewels found in it;
whereupon the Duke would have prosecuted him, but his Lady, a mild,
good-natured thing, interceeded with her Husband, That he would only discharge
him his Service. The Page, presently after, got a Commission, but was
unfortunately killed in the first Engagement he was in.

It may well be guessed I was very uneasy at my being so far engaged with a
Woman, who, I saw, was so ready to sacrifice her Lovers to her Husband's
Jealousy; but I knew not how to break with her; and besides, my Ambition
fast'ned me to her, whom my Reason inclined me to abhor. In the mean while, I
applied my self to my Studies, and began to be in some Reputation among my
Fellow-students, though I had as yet no Preferment in the Church, neither,
indeed, did I look on the Profession I had undertaken as a lasting one, since I
well foresaw the Duchess's Kindness would come to an End in a short Time, and
then my Reverence would end with it.

A Woman came to me one Morning, to acquaint me, That there was a Person who
had a Fat Benefice in his Disposal, that would gladly bestow it upon me, and
that through her Means I might, when I would, come to the Speech of him. I
presently imagined she was used to make such Bargains, and she frankly owned,
that she had put it into that Person's Head, in Hopes I would not forget her
Kindness. I heark'ned to her Proposal, more out of Curiosity than for any
Fondness I had for the Benefice, and she appointed me at S. Martin's Gate, the
next Day. I came thither, and was carried into an ill-look'd House, where being
climbed up to the second Story, I found a Girl of about Twenty, very ugly, but
extraordinary well dressed; who addressing her self to me in a familiar way,
said, Her Mother was coming, who would inform me further of the Benefice I had
been told of, and that in the mean time she was glad to have an occasion to
converse with an old Acquaintance. Never was I more puzzled in my Life, for I
could not call to mind that I ever had seen her before, though she would have
persuaded me that I knew her very well. It came in my Head to tell her, That I
supposed she designed to try me by that Civility, and that she knew well-enough
that a Churchman ought not to be acquainted with Ladies. She appeared to be
satisfied with this Answer, saying, She was very glad to see she was not
mistaken in me, and that her Mother had indeed looked upon me as a Man whose
extraordinary Sanctity might entitle me to Church-preferments. With that she
made me a long Sermon, at which I was amazed, to hear a Girl talk so well of
Piety, who by the beginning of her Discourse seemed rather to have been
inclined to speak to another purpose. By that time the Mother came in, who
began with embracing me, and then told me a long Story, the burden of which
was, That I should, before a Month were over, see my self, through her means,
one of the richest Clergymen in France. I thanked her for her good Will, and
was going to take my Leave, when a Lady came in with a Purse, saying, She made
a Gathering for a Person of Quality, who was fallen under an extreme Necessity.
Ah! my Dear, said the Mother, we must remember the Poor; and put Three Pistols
into the Purse: The Daughter gave Two, admonishing me that I should be
charitable; and I pulled out a Crown, saying, When I should enjoy the Benefice
I might afford more liberal Alms. I grew Jealous at these Proceedings, and
feared I had Sharpers to deal withal: However, I dissembled my Thoughts, and
told them, I should be very glad to hear from them as soon as possible. I did
not tarry long, for the Mother having, in the Discourse we had together, told
me, That she had another Daughter in a Nunnery, I was surpised to see her at
my Lodging the next Day, with that pretended Daughter of hers, who might be
about Fifteen or Sixteen Years old, and seemed very Melancholy. The Sight of
that pretty Maid engaged me to feign an Agreement to the Proposal about the
Benefice, that I might have a Pretense to see her, in visiting the Mother;
which I did Two Days after. I was received by that young Woman, who appeared
yet more sad than when she was at my Lodgings; and I could not forbear asking
her the Cause of her Grief. She looked first about her, and seeing no person
near, told me with Tears in her Eyes, That the Woman of the House was no Mother
of hers, but had stole her from her Friends while she was a Child, so that she
knew not whom to call Father. These Words were attended with a Shower of Tears;
which so moved me with Compassion that I promised her I would take her out of
that House. She seemed revived at this Answer, and said, If I had that Charity
for her, I should take her away immediately. I am ordered, said she, to
entertain you alone, in hopes you may be rude to me; which if you were, there
are Rogues ready to hector you, with a Design to bubble you out of your Money. I
found then what Danger I was exposed to in remaining there, and began indeed to
fear, lest I should not go out as brisk as I came in: So I rose, intending to
be gone, and telling her, She should not trouble her self, and that I would not
suffer her to remain long in such a House: But she, not content therewith,
would needs follow me out, fearing, if I went without her, I should forget my
Promise. While I was making fresh Protestations, That I would be true to my
Word, in came Two Men with drawn Swords in their Hands, who accosted me in a
very rude manner, crying, So, so Monsieur l'Abbe; what! you love the Ladies, it
seems. I answered them as civilly as I could, telling them, more than once, I
was their humble Servant. The Mother, without more ado, said, She must send for
a Commissary, and that she would have Satisfaction for the Wrong I would have
done her Daughter. I protested to her, That I had no ill Design, desiring her
to enquire of her Daughter. The Girl cried and spoke not a Word: As for me, I
was at a great Loss what to do; however, I resolved to brazen it out, saying, I
was not unwilling the Commissary should be sent for. In that very Minute there
was great Knocking at the Chamber Door, and the young Woman, under Pretense of
seeing who it was, opened the Door, and rushing out, signed to me, that I
should follow her. The new Visitors, whose coming was very seasonable to me,
were two other Bullies, who drawing upon those that had assaulted me, cried
out, Are you there, you Rascals, we are glad we have met with you. I did not
stay to see how those would answer the Complement, but got away as fast as I
could, left my Company should have been Troublesome to the Gentlemen, who, I
saw were upon Business, and got down Stairs; where I found the Maid, who taking
me by the Arm, hurried me into the Street. So I went out with the poor Girl,
who was all in Tears, while the Mother was at her Window, crying out, Help,
Thieves, Murder. The Neighbors got together, and I was in a moment surrounded
with above One hundred Persons, who were questioning me what was the Matter. My
Companion praid me, for God's sake, to get away: I was so giddy, and out of
Countenance, that I could not tell what to do; but, she being more resolute,
made Way through the Crowd, and along we went, attended by a numerous but
troublesome Train, till we got to a Broker's, who harbored us and sent away
the Mob. I had lost my Hat and my short Cloak and Band were all to pieces, and
the young Woman was in as bad a pickle. The Broker could not tell what to make
of us, nor I what account to give him, so he concluded it must be some Fortune
I had stole, and very civilly offered me his Service, which I readily accepted,
and we remained in that House the rest of that Day. She expressed a great Joy,
to see her self out of that Woman's Hands, at whose House I had found her, and
calling me her Deliverer, earnestly begged of me that I would not forsake her.
I sent the Man of the House to the Duchess, with a Letter; wherein I gave her
Notice of my Adventure, desiring her to send me a Coach: She came by her self
at Night, and would take me away with her. Then I made her a full Relation of
what had passed, and how I found my self entrusted with the young Woman. Her
Beauty moved the Duchess's Compassion, and she carried her home, assuring me
that she would keep her, till she could find a Nunnery wherein to place her.
This being done, I went to my Lodging, where I was told it was noised about,
That I was fallen in Love with a young Woman, and had run away with her. This
Report was so strong that it was impossible for me to overcome it, and without
being guilty of any other Crime, than of having ventured into a strange House,
and of taking a young Woman from the ill People she was with, I went under the
Scandal of a Rape, and was looked on as a Debauchee; so little Credit is to be
given to outward Appearances, for all the Circumstances made against me,
insomuch that had any one undertook to vindicate my Reputation, he would have
made himself ridiculous. What I then experienced, to my cost, has ever since
prevented my giving too speedy a Credit to the Aspersions cast on other People,
and whenever I had heard any one ill spoken of, I have thought there might be
as little Ground for it as for those laid upon my self.

This Accident made me determine to throw off the Narrow Band, foreseeing, that
after the Noise it had made, it would be hard for me to thrive in a Condition,
wherein a Man can never be easy whose Reputation is once tainted. Besides, my
Inclination still turned the Scale, and though I was but very young, yet I
apprehended how Troublesome that State must needs be, which obliging Men to be
of a more rigid and austere Life, exposes them to be scorned and ridiculed for
that which is an Accomplishment in other People. I was too brisk for an
Hypocrite, my Conversation was sprightly, and I had a natural Tendency to the
fair Sex. This often procured me sharp Reprimands from my Superiors, and I
thought, that to set my self off to the best Advantage I must quit a Habit
which prescribed me too narrow Bounds. For, indeed, true Merit lies in knowing
how to place ones self aright, and I have seen a thousand Persons, who by
taking a Profession upon them, which they were not fit for, could never attain
to the Esteem which might have been paid them, if they had applied themselves
to what was most proper for them.

I acquainted the Duchess with my Resolution, who gave her Consent thereto, the
more freely, because she began to grow weary of me. I took notice of it, but
what surprised me was, that she should make use of the Adventure I had had, as
a Pretense for her Indifferency. No Body knew better than she did, that I no
ways deserved the Scandal I went under. I had at first told her all the Truth;
yet through a sudden Alteration of her Mind, she said, that after what had
happened, it were imprudent in her to suffer me to visit her often, since she
could not persuade the World I was a sober Man, whilst it was so strongly bent
to believe the contrary. This made me take Notice of what I have since had a
Thousand Instances of, that their number is but small who are generous enough
to justify an absent Friend.

I was very easy at the Duchess's change; but the Maid's Ungratefulness, whom
I had saved from certain Ruin, gave me no small Trouble. The Duke was at first
Sight so taken with her, that he grew stark mad for her, and expressed so much
Passion that the Damsel, who was not so great a Child as she appeared to be,
resolved to make her Advantage of it. She seemed to resist him, which so
increased his Passion that every Body took Notice of it. The Duchess was, or
pretended to be jealous thereat; and being desirous to send her away as
speedily as possible, made use of me to persuade her to suffer her self to be
carried into a Nunnery, unknown to the Duke. I not doubting in the least but
she had a great Respect for me, after the important Service I had done her,
proposed the thing to her, telling her, of how great a concern it was to her,
to keep in Favor with her Lady. She asked me why I troubled my self? Which,
indeed, put me into a great Passion: I could not forbear taxing her with
Ingratitude; which she answered by affronting me: And desired me, Not to
concern my self with her Business, denying, with the utmost Confidence, that I
had ever laid any Obligation upon her. Good Gods! how was I amazed at her
Impudence? and how often did I cry out, What Creatures Women are? Having left
her, I went and desired the Duchess to dispose of her as she pleased, giving
her an account of the Discourse we had had. The Duchess found she had a cunning
Jilt to deal withal, and resolved to send her back to the Place whence I had
brought her. Enquiry was made for the Woman, who went for her Mother, but she
was not to be found; and we understood the pretended Mother, the other
Daughter, and the Bullies, that had affronted me, were all packed off.

The Duchess, not knowing what to do with her, and being resolved to get rid of
her, did not stick to put her out of Doors; and one Night that wretched
Creature was forced from her Chamber and carried into an Hospital without the
Suburbs, to the Directors of which she was recommended as a poor friendless
Maid, whom they would do a Deed of Charity to receive into that House.

The Duke was in the Country, and I knew nothing of all this; but it was not
long e're I understood it: For the Duke came Home, and not finding her there,
asked what was become of her? The Duchess answered, She had not heard of her
since one Morning, that she went out unknown to any Body, and that she supposed
he best knew where she was. The Duke fretted, swore and threat'ned, and came
presently to me, thinking I might inform him; which it were strange if I
should, being ignorant of the matter. While I protested to him, That I could
give him no account of the Girl, a Servant came to tell me, That there was a
Gown-man that wanted to speak with me. I answered, I could not leave my Lord
Duke, and that I desired him to call another Time. But he was urgent to speak
with me, and, with the Duke's Leave he was called in; then taking me aside,
Sir, said he, it is unconscionable in you, after you have debauched a poor
Girl, to send her into an Hospital; I must tell you we can keep her no longer,
and that we desire you to take her away. I prayed him to explain his meaning,
and understood he was one of the Directors of the Hospital, and that the Slut
had informed them, I had sent her thither. The Duke took notice that we spoke
with a great deal of Heat, and asked, What was the Matter? whereupon the Priest
told him what we were discoursing about. The Duke grew extreme angry, and
calling me a Rogue and a Rascal, said, He would take Care of her; and leaving
me, took the Clergyman into the Coach with him, ordering him to direct his
Coachman to the Hospital. I vowed to him, I had no Hand in the Business,
earnestly begged I might go with him, and offered to convince him out of the
Girl's own Mouth, That I had no Share in what passed. But the Duke would by no
means permit me, and was accompanied by none but the Clergyman, swearing he
would be revenged on me. Away they went, and I ran to the Duchess's, to give
her an account how matters stood, at which she was much surpised; but taking
the Hint from the Opinion she understood her Husband was prepossessed with,
That I had sent the Girl into the Hospital, she secretly resolved not to
undeceive him, but to let the Weight of the Duke's Anger fall upon me: So all
the ill of this second Adventure fell to my Share. The Duke took his Mistress
home again, and has never since had any Kindness for me; the Duchess, on the
other Hand, protested to him, she was ignorant where the Maid was gone, and, to
regain his Favor, winkt at the Kindness he had for her, which lasted three or
Four Years; after which he married her to a Captain, who has since raised her
to a considerable Fortune, insomuch that she was reckoned one of the richest
Ladies at Court, and was in no small Esteem: It is not long since she dyed.

Being fixed in my Design, of leaving the Clergy, I wrote to my eldest Brother
about it; who very well approved of my Resolution, and sent me some Money, that
I might come to him. He was then in the Roussillon, but ordered me to wait for
him at Lions, where he intended suddenly to be; in Hopes of seeing Monsieur de
Cinq Mars, who had been so good to him; and was to be brought there, after his
Condemnation, in order, as it was reported, to suffer a shameful Death.

I then clapped on a Sword, and taking my Leave of my Brethren, Abbots (some of
whom have since attained to considerable preferments in the Church; which has
often made me repent that I did not stay among them) I arrived at Lions, where
I met my Brother, who had disguised himself, that he might the easier find an
Opportunity to see his dear Friend, and receive his last Orders.

I had hitherto met with Instances of the Female Sex's Inconstancy, but I now
found stronger Proofs of the little Trust that is to be reposed (...) of the
Great, and on (...), in the unhappy Death of poor (...) de Cinq Mars, who was
brought to Lions the next day after my arrival. My Brother and I went, dressed
like Serving-men, near to the Town-Hall-Gate, that he might see us, as he came
out of his Coach. He took Notice of us, and judging from our Habit that we were
there incognito, desired he might be permitted to speak with us, alleging we
had been Servants of his. It was pretty hard for him to obtain that Favor, but
we acting our parts well-enough, and neither our Clothes nor our Behavior
betraying us, were, a Moment after, admitted into his Chamber. We could not
forbear breaking out into Floods of Tears, as we embraced him, but he, smiling
on us, What, my dear Friends, said he, could you then think all this were real,
and that the King would ever suffer me to be put to Death? My Brother, who was
better informed than I that his Condition was hopeless, redoubled his Grief,
seeing him so confident, and embracing him with a more fervent Zeal, expressed
so deep a Sorrow, that Monsieur de Cinq Mars changed Color, and starting back,
What then, cried he, are they in earnest? My Brother continued embracing him,
and shedding abundance of Tears, but had not Power to speak a Word; and
Monsieur de Cinq Wars, seeing he could not get any Answer from him, turns to
me, saying, What is the meaning of all this? He had no sooner spoke, but I saw
so great an Alteration in his Face that I thought he would have swounded, and
my Brother, throwing his Arms about his Friend's Neck; Ah! dear Sir, said he,
your Misfortune is but too certain. Here he remained speechless, and Monsieur
de Cinq Mars falling on a sudden from deep Sadness into an extravagant Passion:
What, said he, must I be tricked thus! This was followed by a torrent of Oaths
and Imprecations, which my Brother stopped, by saying, That he thought it his
Duty, as his real Friend and Servant, to advise him to forgive his Enemies, and
prepare for Death. Ah! As for Death, replied Monsieur de Cinq Mars, it is not
that troubles me, but I never can forgive the Procurers of it: And then he told
us, How the King had formerly given him frequent Assurances, That he would dye
rather than forsake him. My Brother heard them without Interruptions, and when
he had done, informed him, in a few Words, How there was no Favor to be
expected from his Majesty. Monsieur de Cinq Mars continued his Discourse,
sometimes cursing the Court, sometimes contriving his Escape, and then desired
my Brother to lend him a Dagger, to stab himself withal; and having no Answer,
he fell down in his Chair, saying, I see, dear Friend, that I am lost: What
shall I do? Then growing a little more sedate; It Is true, said he, I find I
must prepare for a Future State: Well, I am resolved to do it, and since I have
been so cruelly deceived in this World, I must prevent my being so in the next.
He wept while he spoke these last Words; and my Brother exhorted him not to
dwell upon the Thoughts of what had past, but to prepare himself for his
ensuing Death. This Conversation lasted about Two Hours, and we had the
Consolation to behold him very calm, though without any Hope or Thoughts of a
Pardon. He begged we would excuse his Weakness and want of Moderation, and gave
some Commissions for my Brother to execute; desiring him not to quit Lions till
he had seen what would become of him. We departed, glad to leave him in so good
a Disposition. There was no possibility for us to see him any more, for his
Execution came on presently after, at which we were present, getting as near to
the Scaffold as we could, where he appeared with an undaunted Courage, and was
as resolute as when we left him. When first he mounted the Scaffold, he looked
about him, with a Design (as we thought) to spy us out; and I know not whether
he did or no, but he bowed toward us. Indeed, I could not bear that doleful
Sight, but cast down my Eyes, which I lifted not up, till I had heard the fatal
Blow. Then I saw his Trunk, out of which issued a Stream of Blood; Upon which
my Brother said, Let us be gone, the Business is over. We, rather dead than
living, were no sooner at home but we got to Bed, where my Brother remained a
longer Time than I did, being really fallen sick upon it. I had all the Reason
imaginable to love my dear Brother, who had been so kind to me, but the
Instance he then gave me of his good Nature, increased the Affection I bore
him. He often told me, Monsieur de Cinq Mars's Misfortune proceeded from the
Passion he had for some Women, who were the cause of his ill Conduct. This and
the Experience I had of the Falsehood of that Sex, while at Paris, made me
firmly resolve never to engage my self any more with them. But, alas, there is
little heed to be given to such kind of Resoutions; the Love of Women is a
dangerous Rock, on which, though warned by numberless Shipwracks, yet the
Springtide of our Inclination will still hurry us. But, if I had no reason to
speak well of them in my younger Days, it grew ten times worse when a riper Age
gave Place to a more refined and constant Passion.

I followed my Brother into Catalonia, where my first Campaign made me an
Eyewitness of the taking of Perpignan, and the Conquest of all the Roussillon.
I served then in his Regiment, and in some occasions convinced him I was no
Coward, for I was more daring than usual in the first Engagements; a Military
Life began to please me, and being well read in History, I fancied my self to
tread in the Steps of Caesar or Alexander, which animated my Soul with an
Heroic Courage.

About the latter End of October we returned to Paris, after the Battle of
Lerida, gained by the Marshall de la Mothe. He presented me to the Cardinal de
Richelieu, giving me all the Praise that can well be bestowed on a young Man.
The Cardinal, who knew my Brother, and was not ignorant of his Intimacy with
Monsieur de Cinq Mars, told me, (which I understood not in what Sense to take)
That I had a very discreet Brother, and that I should do well to follow his
Example. My Brother, who was present, making no reply, he repeated over-again,
That I had a very discreet Brother; adding, That he knew him to be so: And
promised us all possible Favor, provided we would stick to our Duty.

This Visit being ended, I asked my Brother, Why the Cardinal had insisted so
much on his Discretion; and he informed me, That the Cardinal had, two Days
before, sent for him, to discourse with him about Monsieur de Cinq Mars: That
he seemed to him to be very much concerned on his account, and had asked him
several Questions, especially For what Reason Monsieur de Cinq Mars had such an
Aversion for him. To which, he told me, he had answered, That he had no
knowledge of the Designs or secret Inclinations of Monsieur de Cinq Mars; and
the Cardinal not having appeared satisfied with this Reply, he supposed what he
had said was by way of Reflection. This made us think the Cardinal would rather
be an Enemy than a Friend to us: But the Death of that Prelate, which happened
the Fourth Day of December following, soon rid us of those Fears.

I was then Eighteen Years old, we lived with my Mother, who allowed us Meat,
Drink and Lodging; but we could not oblige her to do more for us, by reason she
had made a Shift, what by her Settlement and other Pretensions, to get from us
the little Estate my Father had left. My Brother, the Count, was also with us,
and she had taken home my Sister, who was near Thirty, and had constantly
refused to remain in the Convent as a Nun. My Mother had a Design to marry her
to a young Officer, whom she had the entire Management of. It was an ill Match
for her Daughter, but she, who had no greater Desire than to get rid of her,
thought it good enough, provided he would but agree to it. Fearing, however, it
might sound ill that she should consent to so unequal a Marriage, she
endeavored to vindicate her self, by bringing things about in such a Manner,
as that she might seem to have been forced to it; and there I had an Instance
how basely Parents seek rather their own Satisfaction than their Children's
Happiness, may act to their Prejudice. The Way she made use of was, to make
People believe he had debauched her; and to compass her Design, she left them
alone as long as they pleased. By this means the Officer fell in Love with my
Sister, and endeavored all he could to do what my Mother intended; but she
resisted him, either out of Virtue or a want of Kindness for him. Her Coyness
added fresh Fuel to the Fire, for he grew more Passionate, and through my
Mother's secret Assistance (though not appearing in the Matter) easily got into
my Sister's Chamber, while she was asleep. My Mother having quickly
Intelligence, made us all be called up, to surprise them together; whereupon we
went into the Room, when my Mother, without admitting any Excuses, made the
Officer promise, He would marry her the next Day: Which was done, though my
Sister swore there had nothing passed between them that might any way prejudice
her Honor. But she was forced to comply, and fearing, lest a Mother, who was
so unworthy as to expose her thus, should punish her worse some other way, she
consented to marry a Man whom she had never any Respect for; but all my Mother
got by their Wedding was, that she coupled two Persons together, who soon
became a Charge to her.

My Brother, though he had no Estate besides his Commission, had long since
thought of getting him a Wife; he loved and was beloved by a Person of the
first Quality. The Match would have been very equal, had her Parents given
their Consent; for though my Brother bore not so high a Title, yet his Family was
more Ancient, and his own personal Merit, with the honorable Post he had in
the Army, made him be not a little respected; but he had not as yet attained to
the pitch of Preferment he arrived to afterward, and they judged of him then
but by the smallness of his Estate. That Lady was denied him, and he resolving
to be married, espoused a rich Partizan's Daughter, who brought him near Four
hundred thousand Livers. This Marriage was the making of him, and he was in the
Right, to consider, that how great soever his Desert might be, he could never
put himself forward, without an Estate to support it.

The Lady whom he had courted, was enraged at it, though he had taken no little
Pains to make her sensible, That it was a Folly in him to persist in loving
her. She was not satisfied with his Arguments, for she was obstinate and
opinionated, and affected to contemn Wealth and Honor as much as my Brother
seemed to respect both. In a Word, she would have made a fine Character in a
Novel.

My Brother, who had a great Affection for me, kept nothing of all this from my
Knowledge, and I was informed by him how he had disobliged her. My Head being
full of Romances, I admired his Mistress's Humor, and blamed my Brother for
having married against her Will; nay, I found my self inclined to affect so
Romantic a Person, and would gladly have been in her Favor: But the Count, my
Brother, had prevented me, having already engaged her. I do not know whether
she loved him, or whether it was to spite my eldest Brother, that she seemed to
admit of his Addresses, but I perceived they were pretty familiar, when I
designed to make my Applications to her. My Brother, being a Brute, who kept no
Measures with any one, I thought fit to put off my Courtship to another Time.
All I did was to tell my eldest Brother of it; who foreseeing what might
follow, and having yet some Respect for the Lady, seriously advised my Brother
to desist. He presently acquainted his Mistress with it; who, thinking my
eldest Brother had done it out of Jealousy, and resolving to provoke him as
far as she could, proposed his running away with her: Which, suiting with his
Temper, he readily embraced, for he was vain and rash enough to have attempted
the stealing of a Princess.

They put all things in readiness to effect their Purpose, but a Person whom
the Lady entrusted with it, and who dreaded the Event, acquainted her Father
with it; who sent her immediately into a Nunnery, forbiding my Brother ever to
come near her. The Fool sent him a Challenge, which the other slighting,
obtained an express Order for his Imprisonment, and he remained Two Years in
the Bastile, wherein the Lady's Father caused him to be confined.

We were not sorry for our being rid of him, seeing he was always full of
Encumbrances, which occasioned no small Trouble to us; besides, I had still a
Secret Inclination for the Young Lady, and all she had done on that Score did
but inhance my Desires. I was heartily vexed that she should not have pitched
upon me sooner than on that giddy Cockscomb. My Vanity was offended at it, and
I wished for an Opportunity of gaining her heart; so unaccountable are the
means whereby the several Passions creep into our Breast; for, to speak the
Truth, the Motive of my Love should rather have been a Reason for my Contempt.
My Thoughts ran wholly upon that beautiful Person, and I longed to see her in
the Convent where she was For which end, I represented to my Brother, That what
she had done, being but through a fit of Anger, he ought not to desert her;
this I did so effectually, that he resolved to make her a Visit, and carried me
with him. He would not appear in it at first, but sent me to her in a Footman's
Disguise, as though I had come from her Father. She came to me, and having known
me, expressed no little Joy; and I forgetting that my Errand was but to give
her Notice of my Brother's coming, I mentioned not a Word of him, but spoke
only of my self. I upbraided her with her Intriegue with my Brother, the Count,
as an Injustice she had done me, who was her most passionate Adorer. This
Declaration was answered in a very obliging manner, for she desired me to write
to her daily, and see her often, and assured me she would be wholly at my
Devotion. Our Conversation lasted so long, that my Brother growing impatient,
came in to see what staid me there all that while, and desired me to withdraw.
I was not over-well satisfied at it, but fearing to disoblige him, I went out,
and stood close to the Door, listening to their Discourse.

I heard, that after the shedding of several Tears, she said, She was unhappy
in having settled her Love on that Brother of the three who had the least
Affection for her, and thereupon she gave him an account of all I had said to
her. I could scarce forbear interrupting her in her Treachery; however, I did
not, but heard my Brother admonish her not to hearken to young Men, who only
sought her Ruin, but by a sober and modest behavior to regain her Father's
Good Will, and then to think of a Husband that might deserve her; as for him,
he would remain her sure and constant Friend. She answered these wholesome
Admonitions by a fresh Shower of Tears and new Reproaches, swearing his
Inconstancy should not be unpunished, but that her self would revenge it by his
Blood. My Brother having endeavored, in vain, to appease her, left her, and we
came back. He told me, by the way, That he was happy not to have married her,
and that she was of a dangerous violent Temper, and one who would not stick at
any thing to compass her Ends; an Instance of which was, That she had pretended
to him that I had courted her. I cried out, Oh, the Iilt! I had not Power to
say any more, but the Tears came in my Eyes. My Brother fell a laughing, and by
the Exhortations he made me, To be very wary in my Addresses, and take Care
what Women I had to deal withal, made me suspect he did believe her. I was
vexed to the Heart, at what had happened, and charmed at the same Time with my
Brother's Goodness and Moderation, who did not express any Dissatisfaction with
me, but only advised me, for my own sake, not to concern my self with her. I
followed his Counsel, though something unwillingly, and, I think, I should have
went on my own way, had not two things happened; one, that she married a Person
of Quality in the Country, and the other, that my Brother being ordered away to
the Army, I was obliged to accompany him thither.

We went into Champaigne, which was that Year become the Seat of the War, and
my Brother's Regiment, with some other Troops of Reserves, were ordered to stay
under the Walls of Charleville. My Brother, who had been made a Brigadier
General, followed the Duke d'Anguin, leaving me to look after his Regiment,
during the Battle at Rocroy. I was not a little troubled that I could not be
there, and though I had that Year obtained a Company in my Brother's Regiment,
and that all the Officers paid me a great Respect, yet I should have been
inconsolable, had I not met with a handsome Maid, who employed my Thoughts
another way. She was Daughter to a Citizen of that Town; but besides her
Beauty, her Carriage raised her above her Birth, and both together kindled a
Passion in me, which she answered with an equal Flame: She was going to marry a
young Man of that Town, when I first grew acquainted with her, but her Aversion
to a Citizen's Life was so great that she owned, She had rather be my Mistress
all her Life, than to be married to that Man. For, said she, I cannot pretend
that you should marry me; I weigh too well the Difference between your Quality
and mine, and should never require it of you: But I will trust to your Honor,
and leave my self to your Disposal, too happy in enjoying your Love and
Conversation.

Indeed I was so transported to hear her talk thus, that I thought I had never
loved till then; so great was the Difference between what I felt for her, and
what I had felt for others. I answered, Her Heart was all I could covet; and
that if I might contribute to her Bliss, I would marry her that very moment.
No, no, said she, do not think of that, only contrive to place me where we may
freely give and receive Tokens of each other's Love. We agreed, that after the
Campaign was over, I should send for her to Paris, and that she would, the
whilst, make her Friends believe she had a mind to enter into a Religious
House. She was wholly guided by me; but I, at last, overcome with a strong
Desire of enjoying her, resolved to marry; and having made a Contract and got a
Priest and some Witnesses, we went into the Country, where we made a Wedding;
to which the most essential Formalities were wanting, and which seemed as good
as any to us Two, who understood not what was requisite for it is Validity. No
Body knew of it but such Persons as must needs be entrusted with it, and, about
a Fortnight after, finding a Necessity for me to be gone, she went into a
Nunnery, declaring to her Friends, That she had renounced all Thoughts of a
Husband, and had made a Vow to lead a Holy Life. They, who had already begun to
be jealous at my frequent Visits, were glad to see her so well disposed, and
readily consented to what she had a mind to impose on their Belief; and she,
the better to cover her Design, took a Nun's Habit. I also gave over visiting
her, as soon as she had taken it, but I was present at that Ceremony, wherein I
just got a Minute to bid her adieu; for toward the latter end of July our
Regiment was ordered for the Siege of Thionville. Her Noviciat being to last a
Year, I pro^^ised her, That before that Time were (...) I would take her from
that Nunnery, and carry her to Paris. She told me, She thought her self with
Child, and begged I would not let her stay too long there. I swore with all
possible Sincerity, That I would be as good as my Word, so soon as the Forces
should be in their Winter Quarters, and left her, being possessed with all the
Love and Grief my Heart was capable of. We had taken our Measures for Writing
to each other, but our Letters were intercepted, and she did not hear from me
all the while the Campaign lasted. There was no possibility of my leaving the
Army to fetch her out of that Convent, or of being informed of the Cause of her
Silence; for after the taking of Thionville, we were sent into Germany, to
reinforce the Marshall de Guebrant's Army. I never could obtain Leave to be
absent, but remained most part of the Winter there; all I could do was to order
some Soldiers, that went for France, to call at Charleville, but I never heard
from them since. About the latter end of March I came to Paris, and the very
next Day rid Post for Charleville, for I was almost distracted through the
Impatience and Anguish I had, not to have heard, for Ten Months together, from
a Person, whom I was so tender of, and for whom my Flame was increased by my
Uneasiness at the Ignorance I remained in of her Condition.

Being arrived at Charleville about Three in the Afternoon, I saw a Multitude
of People got together; and having asked what was the matter, I was informed
that they were going to hang a young Woman, who had murdered her unlawful
Issue. I presently saw the Prisoner coming along, attended by a Confessor and a
Hangman; but, good Gods! How great was my Amazement, when fixing my Eyes on
that unfortunate Person, I found her to be the same I had so great a Desire to
see! There was such an Alteration in her Face, that none but a Lover could have
known her; and as often as I think on the sad Estate she was in, I cannot
forbear weeping at the melancholy Reflection.

I adored her, with the utmost Passion, my Esteem for her was not inferior to
my Love, and I never had known any thing of her but what deserved my
Admiration; then let it be judged how these Impressions could affect my Soul at
such a Sight: I was ready to drop down with Grief and astonishment; but having
some Presence of Mind, I made way through the Crowd, crying out, as loud as I
could, Grace, Grace. The People hearing that, thought I really brought a
Reprieve, and began to flock about me. I saw the Signs of a general Joy appear
in every Countenance, and was thereby encouraged to cry out louder yet, that
every one should assist me in saving her. With this, part of them began to pull
down the Gallows, while the boldest followed me, and having routed the Officers
of Justice, she was left to our Management. They took her, and gave her into my
Arms, as I sat on Horseback; and I, embracing her, spurred on, and got without
the Walls. The Catch-Poles made a show of following me, but my kind
Confederates shut the City-Gates upon me, and I found my self in one of the
Suburbs, where I met with no Opposition; far from that, a Man, who let Horses
out to hire, seeing mine could scarce gallop, gave me a fresh one; on which I
mounted, without abandoning my Prey. And more than all this, Four Horsemen,
well equipped, came, of their own good Will, to offer me their Service; so
easily is the People moved to save from Punishment, such as are convicted of
certain Crimes, occasioned by Despair. I got out then, with my Four Companions,
and having galloped for about a League, went into a Wood to take a little
Breath, and endeavoring to set my Mistress up behind me, being not able to
hold her in my Arms any longer: She was in a Swound, and had so little Breath,
that having laid her down, I thought she had been really dead. One of the Men
that were with me, who was stronger and less tired than my self, told me, It
was not safe staying where we were, and that he would undertake to carry her
thus till Night. We got up on Horseback, and at Two the next Morning arrived at
a Town Twelve League distant from Charleville; so great was the Speed we had
made. There we rested Two Hours, and the first thing we did was to put the poor
Gentlewoman into a very hot Bed, where she began to give some Signs of Life. I
was near her all the while, and the Joy I conceived at her Deliverance was not
great enough to stifle the Vexation I was in, at the Thoughts of what she had
endured, and of her present Condition. At length she opened her Eyes, and
having fixed them on me, without expressing any Knowledge of me, I grasped her
very tenderly, and with Tears in my Eyes; Ah! said I, do you not then know me?
She changed Color, and raising her self up, asked me, in a Fright, What, Sir,
are you dead? I answered, No. I was living; and, at length, by often telling
her who I was, she came to her self again, and I had the Comfort of seeing her
Fit had left no dangerous Symptoms.

Who can express the Ecstasy I was in, when I saw her alive again; and the Joy,
the Tenderness and Love I was possessed with, when her Eyes discovered, that
she was as sensible to the Pleasure of seeing me, as I to that, of once more
possessing her! Those (if any) are happy Moments. We embraced each other,
without uttering one Word, for our Tears and Sighs would have stopped our Speech,
had the Transport we were in permitted us to talk. But our Joys were disturbed
by the necessity of pursuing our Journey; and, by good Fortune, we found there
a kind of Horse-Litter, wherein we placed her; and thus we came to Reims by
break of Day. We hid our selves in a private House, where my obliging Company
remained with me all Day, and then taking their Leave they promised me they
would not betray us, but would pretend they had pursued us, and could not
overtake us.

I remained alone with that charming Person, who informed me how she had been
involved in the fatal Danger I had relieved her from. Seeing, said she, that I
could not hear from you, I doubted not but you had proved false to me, and that
made me resolve to turn Nun, in earnest; but I was in an extraordinary Trouble,
when I felt too certain Signs of my being with Child, and my Care increased as
my Time drew near. I know not what kept me from destroying my self, for Death
was the only thing I wished for, being depressed with the sorrow I was in, to
see you had deceived me; and, with the Extremity of my Circumstances, I
revealed my condition to an old Maid, which belonged to the Convent, wherein
she had served a long time, and she was the only one who had any Knowledge of
my being delivered, for I had the Courage not to cry out. This wicked Woman
took the Child, without saying anything to me, save That she would dispose of
it, and going out, before it was Day, threw it into a Rivulet that runs through
the Nunnery. By a Mischance, or rather by the Direction of Divine Justice, the
Child being carried down the Stream, stuck to a Grate, which divided part of
the Convent from a Street that is very much frequented. It was seen, and the
Justices sent for; who came to the Nunnery, very much scandalized. Information
being given to the Abbess, she easily found out I was the Mother; and I took
little Pains to justify my self, so great was the Desire I had to be rid of a
Life that was grown irksome and tedious to me. So, I accused not her who had
done the Fact, and every body thought me the only Criminal. None of the Nuns
took any Pity of me, but all, on the contrary, did, with the utmost Severity,
say, There was no Punishment bad enough for me. Thus was I delivered into the
Hands of Secular Justice, and all my Friends Interest could not obtain the
putting a Stop to my Sentence. I was removed to Paris, where my dreadful Doom
was confirmed: And, while I was there, I wrote a Letter to you (which you will
perhaps find in the Hands of your Mother's Porter) wherein I bad you farewell,
and told you what Thoughts I retained for you, and that I died entirely yours.

Here, inclining her Head in my Bosom, a Flood of Tears hindered her farther
Discourse. As for me, I could not forbear weeping, during the sad Relation;
which at last she ended, telling me, That when I came in, crying out Grace, she
knew me; but that since that Moment she had been wholly deprived of that little
Sense, which the Dread of impending Death had left her. This Disaster pierced
me to the Quick, that I should have been the occasion of her Misery.

Having recovered her Health, I asked her, What she thought of going to Paris
with me? She had no reason to doubt of the Sincerity of my Affection,
nevertheless, through a Generosity, which showed her Soul greater yet than I
could have thought it. No, said she, my Dear, I cannot flatter my self with the
Thoughts that you love me still: The Crime I have appeared guilty of, and the
shameful Sentence I lie under make me for ever unworthy your Esteem; all I
expect from you is, That you would have so much Compassion on me as to procure
me a Confinement, where I may spend the residue of my Life in an unfeigned and
austere Penance. Ah! replied I, for God's sake, do not cherish such Fancies, I
am the Criminal, you are Innocent. Nothing of this redounds to your Shame, but
will rather inhance my Love and Admiration. All Arguments were fruitless, and
she being persuaded that our Marriage could not stand good, was obstinately
bent to turn Nun, which I promised I would not oppose, so soon as we should
arrive at Paris. She suffered me to carry her thither, and I took a Lodging for
her near to the Fathers Recollets, in S. Laurence's Suburbs, where I left, and
returned Home. There I found the Letter she had spoken of, which I have ever
since kept by me, and will insert here, in confirmation of her Generosity.

I Date my Letter from a doleful Prison, being condemned to dye, for a Crime
that proceeded but from the too great Affection I bore you; for the melancholy
occasion of my Journey hither was, to hear the Confirmation of the dreadful
Sentence I lie under. Who would have thought, alas! that I should have seen
Paris, on this account, when it was there I once proposed to have been made for
ever happy, by enjoying you! You will abhor the Thoughts of me, when you know
through what kind of Death my Days are at an end: Nevertheless, I assure you,
That how shameful soever it be, I embrace it with Pleasure, as ridding me of a
Life grown tiresome to me, since you have forgot me. If you go to Charleville
you will there be informed of my Guilt, without your being suspected to be any
ways concerned; for I have never mentioned your Name, desiring to preserve your
Honor and Reputation, which I value above my own Safety. The only Favor I beg
of you is, That you would cause some Masses to be said for my Soul; and that
you would believe, if Heaven has Mercy on me, I shall continually interceed for
your Prosperity.

Farewell, I dye wholly yours.


I cannot express how I was moved at the Reading of this Letter: I ran to her
Lodging, more determined than ever not to suffer her to part from me; there I
found her not, and understood that a Father Recollet had been with her. I went
to him to enquire what was become of that lovely Creature, but he would not
satisfy me; and, after a Week's Search I understood she was at the Hotel Dieu,
with a design to embrace a Religious Life. Thither I ran, and with much
Difficulty got Leave to see her. I never was so transported; I fell at her
Feet, and swore I would stab my self, if she would not hearken to me. My
Despair moved her Compassion, and she said, with Tears in her Eyes; What would
you do Sir? You cannot marry me and keep your Reputation, and it would be an
eternal Shame to you to espouse a Woman whom you have taken from the Gallows.
That is not the business, answered I, I will not marry you, since you thus
refuse me, but if you must be a Nun, pray choose some other House. O! Sir,
replied that charming Person, I will not be a Charge to you; I came hither
because my Admittance would cost me nothing, and I cannot enter into another
Convent, without putting you to an Expense, which I know you cannot well bear,
Ah! said I, my Life and Fortune are devoted to you, and whatsoever it cost, I
will certainly place you, where you shall not be liable to such Austerities. To
this I added a thousand more endearing Expressions, but could obtain nothing
from her; then she left me, with an Adieu, so moving, it wounded my very Soul.
Not prevailing with her, I asked for the Prioress, and opposed her entertaining
that young Woman, acquainting her, She was my Wife, and that I demanded her as
such. She thereupon, sending for her, told her, She could not receive her, and
so I had her again; but overcome, by her pressing Entreaties, I carried her to
a little Convent, the Superior of which was my very good Friend, to whom I
recommended her, as being a Woman of near concern to me.

In the mean while, what I had done at Charleville, made no small Noise in the
World, and I heard Informations were preferred against me. All my Friends had
heard the Story, and I found by public Discourse, that indeed I could not
marry her with Honor. I shall not relate all the several Designs that came
into my Head, for I thought it very hard that I should be so great a Slave to
other Men's Opinions, as not to have the Liberty of spending my Life with a
Person, whose Reputation was only tainted by the Misfortune of loving me. If
she would have consented to it, my Resolution was to go into England, but she
was still persuaded, that I ought, for my own Credit, to let her take a Nun's
Habit. My eldest Brother, to whom I related the Particulars of this Accident,
told me, He pitied me, but that I was happy, however, to have met with a
Person, who was of her self inclined to do what I should have persuaded her to.
This he confirmed with so many good Reasons, that I saw it was necessary for me
to comply with her Desires. I obtained her Pardon and my own, and then we
placed her into a Nunnery of the Carmelites. My eldest Brother generously
presented her with Two thousand Crowns; and I obliged her to accept of a small
Annuity, which I freely gave to the Convent. We changed her Name, and
concealing what had happened to her, she was admitted with a great deal of
Respect, and no body has ever known who she was. She has since led a very Holy
Life, and my Brother and I have for ever after had in her a sincere and assured
Friend, to whom we had always recourse, when we wanted Advice or Consolation.
It was with all imaginable Difficulty that I brought my self to consider her as
a Person secluded from the World, and had not my Brother ever afforded me a
kind Assistance, I should, no doubt, have lost my Wits. Indeed I never had so
violent a Passion for any one; so that by the odd Contrivance of Fate, that
only Woman, who deserved my Esteem, was one whom my Honor obliged me not to
marry.

This Adventure put me very much backwards in the World, for it was a whole
Year before I would see any Body, having taken a retired Lodging, near the
Carmelites, whence I never stirred, and where I lived privately; for I went
under the Notion of a Man that had withdrawn himself from Conversation, and
minded nothing but the way to Heaven. My Brother, however, kept my Company
indisposed of, having given out that I was ill, and obliged to drink the Waters
of Bourbon, which were absolutely necessary for the Recovery of my Health.

I shall forbear giving an account of the Life I led in that kind of Hermitage,
and how agreeable it was to me to discern my Carmelite's Voice from that of her
Companions, while they were singing Mass. For that was the only Bliss I
enjoyed, since she had, during that time, denied me her Sight; only she wrote
to me sometimes, advising me to think of her no longer, and either wholly to
forsake the World, or follow a Life more suitable to my Birth.

My Brother's Desires, joined with her Admonitions, prevailed with me to return
to the Army; which I did in the Year 1645. I was then but Twenty; but I thought
that after the Experience I had had, it would be impossible for any Woman to
delude me again. I made the Art of War my only Study, and found that the
Trouble which the loss of a Woman, I loved so dearly, had given me, did not a
little contribute to raise my Name; by occasioning me to seek for an
Opportunity of dying with Honor, since I could no longer live with Pleasure. I
fought in the Battle at Northingues, and thence went into the Marshall de
Turenne's Army, where I was at the taking of Dunkespink; I may without Vanity
say, That none was more bold than my self in either of these Occasions. Let men
be naturally never so brave, they must be carried on by some external Motives,
to attain a certain Pitch of Valor; and that which provoked me to act as I
did, was rather Despair than Ambition.

I returned not to Paris till Landaw had surrendered to Monsieur de Turenne; and
there I found that my Nun's Neighborhood increased my Melancholy Humor, for I
could not forbear going to Prayers at the Carmelites. This Weakness of mine I
disclosed to my Brother; who being persuaded that nothing but a long absence
could perfectly cure me, proposed to me a Voyage, which I had an Opportunity to
make, into Poland. The Princess Mary was to go thither about the beginning of
November, and the Relation she knew we had to a Prince, whom she had loved till
Death, made her desire that I would accompany her.

I accepted of this Offer, and (to my Shame be it spoken) found in me a secret
desire of pleasing the Princess, endeavoring to gain her Affection. I never
reflected on what I was going to undertake; but as soon as I found I was to
make that Journey, and that I should have an Opportunity of freely Conversing
with her, I began to forget my Nun, and was obliged to acknowledge, That a new
Mistress is a better Consolation for the Loss of an old one than either
Ambition or War.

The Princess was, on the account of her Love to the deceased Prince, much in
the same Condition as I had been on that of my Carmelite. His Death was an
eternal Grief to her, and she made him the Subject of our daily Discourse. I,
on the other hand, related to her what had happened to me at Charleville; and
she was glad to hear I was capable of as tender and constant an Affection as
her self, and we would often dispute which of us was the most unhappy, she in
her Lover's Death or I in my Mistress's Confinement.

If this was a Romance, I might here bring in the Conversations we had on that
Theme, which, I dare say would equal those in Clelia or the Grand Cyrus. But, I
omit all such Digressions, to stick only to my Purpose; which is, To expose, as
much as I can, in these MEMOIRS, the Characters of some Women, and the dismal
Consequences of engaging with them.

Finis Lib. I.
MEMOIRS OF THE Count de -- Compiled by Monsieur SAINT E. BOOK II.
THE Princess, at length, seemed to be resolved to find an Antidote against the
Grief she conceived at the Loss of her dear Lover, in the Honors which waited
for her in Poland, and it was in vain that I would persuade her to drive out
that Passion by another, her Mind being wholly taken up with her Ambition, and
the Grandeur she expected; she perceived, however, that I spoke through
Self-Interest, and would often tell me, That had she had an Inclination for me,
she would not have encouraged my Falsehood to so lovely a Person as to my Nun;
but I was grown weary of that nice Fidelity, and the Princess's Discourse on
that Subject was uneasy to me. At last, I told her plainly, That I loved her,
which she seemed to disbelieve; but seeing I was in earnest, she grew serious
upon the Matter, and said, If I talked any more so presumptuously she would
send me back to France: Which Words were uttered with so scornful an Accent,
that I highly resented it, and resolved not only to forbear speaking for the
future, but entertaining any Thoughts of Passion for her; so I continued silent
the greatest part of the Voyage. This displeased her, and she advised me, That,
since I could not be in a good Humor without an Amor, I should make my
Addresses to one of her Maids, which was not unhandsom; adding, That she would
take care the Jest should not be carried on too far, only to make the Journey
more diverting. I was not well pleased at this raillery, and resolved to court,
not the young Woman she mentioned, but the first Polander I should like. This
Intention, which I did not inform her with, made me as gay as ever, and the
Princess, who had been dissatisfied at my being chagrine, seemed not over-well
contented with my Mirth. I took all possible Care not to speak the least Word
she might interpret as an Expression of my Love to her, which I the more easily
effected, because I really had none. How great soever she might be, her Pride
and disobliging Reflections still stuck in my Mind, and I had Sense enough to
consider, That it was impossible for me to prevail with a Princess, who besides
much Ambition and Haughtiness, had also a great Stock of Virtue.

Our Journey at last grew toward an end, and we arrived in Poland. King
Ladislaus came to receive his new espoused Queen, who presented me to him in a
very obliging manner: Among the Retinue his Majesty gave the Queen, there was a
Lady who pleased me well enough, to make me think she was the Person whose
Chains I was resolved to wear. She was about Eighteen or nineteen, and Daughter
to one of the greatest Lords of that Kingdom: I happened to be near her when
she was presented to the Queen, who, whether she took notice of it or not,
smiled, as I thought, to see me view her with great Attention, and I perceived
since, that of all those which had been placed about her, she had the first
share of her Majesty's Favor. The Queen's Kindness for her gave me frequent
Opportunities of seeing her, and I grew very passionate, which I soon informed
her of; that Lady understanding French well enough to converse in that Tongue.
I was something surpised that she should be equally fond of me, but more to
hear her express it in so frank a manner; but she carried her Ingenuity
something too far, for the Queen having asked her, What Discourse we had
together? she not only told her what I had said, but also what Answer she had
returned; confessing freely, That she was very much inclined to love me The
Queen made her sensible of the Inconveniences such a Passion might be attended
with, and ordered her never to speak to me in private. Her Majesty laid the
same Commands also upon me, threatening to send me back into France if I
disobeyed her. It was by no means my Interest to disoblige the Queen, and leave
her on such an account, but I also loved that Maid, and the free and natural
manner wherein she had expressed her Thoughts to me, made me dote the more on
her. I found my self then in a great Dilemma, from which I was shortly after
delivered, but it was to fall into a worse. I had for Eight or ten Days
carefully avoided my Mistress's Company, according to the Queen's Order; when
her Majesty took an Opportunity to tell me, I was easily discouraged; but,
however, since I had been so obedient, she would have some Regard to my
Passion, and that she gave me free Leave to visit the young Lady when I would.

I could not imagine whence proceeded this sudden Change; the Reason of which
was, That her Majesty had perceived the King had a Kindness for her, and
whether through Policy or Jealousy, she intended to put him out of Conceit
with her, by letting him see she admitted my Courtship. I was not willing to
lose any time in making Reflections, but my chief Care was to seek for an
Opportunity of speaking to my Mistress. Now she (which I thought stranger)
avoided me, as I had before done her; and having asked her the Reason, she
owned to me, with her usual Openness of Heart, That the King courted her, and
that it was so great an Honor, she durst not receive any other Addresses; but
when she was married she would return my Love. I understood then that the first
thing the Grandees of Poland do, when they have a mind to debauch a Woman, is
to get her a Husband; and, accordingly, there was much talk at Court, a few
days after, of a Match between her and a great Lord in Lithuania. The Queen was
not at all satisfied with it, since she knew that the King's Design in Marrying
of her, was to make her his Mistress, and see her with more Liberty. So she
would still be persuading me to marry her, not doubting but if that were done,
I would certainly carry her away into France.

I apprehended that a great many Inconveniences might accrue to me from this
Marriage: For since (as her Majesty had told me) she was to be married but to
facilitate the King's Amors, I thought it impossible for me to carry her away
without his Consent; which, had he granted, I knew I had not wherewithal to
maintain a Lady there, whose whole Estate remained in Poland. I represented to
her Majesty, why I could not obey her Commands, and she seemed satisfied with
the Arguments I gave her; and made me an open Confession, That being desirous
to have the absolute Management of her Husband, it was her Interest to get her
matched to one who would give her Majesty a good account of her; and she agreed
with me, That I was very unfit for such an Employment. So we parted, without
taking any other Measures.

The Lithuanian Lord dyed in the mean while, and the King being obstinately
bent to give her a Husband, desired her to name whom she would; who, swayed by
her Love, she pitched upon me.

The King readily yielded to it, and sending for me, made me that Proposal. I
humbly told him, That I had no Estate, and being a younger Brother, expected
but little, so that I was in very ill Circumstances to maintain a Wife. His
Majesty answered, That she whom he designed me, was rich enough for us both;
and that, besides, he would make me so considerable in Poland, that I should
not miss the Little I had left in France. I would have accepted this Offer with
no little Joy, had it been made on any other account; for I had an Opportunity
of raising my self, by marrying a Woman whom I had a great Kindness for; but
all my Philosophy would not persuade me to take her on such reproachful Terms.
Not knowing what other Reasons to give, I told the King that his Majesty's
Favor loaded me with Honor, but I was naturally very jealous, and should make
a very severe Husband. The King smiled at this Excuse, and told me, If that was
all, He would take care to prevent it, and would give me such Employments as
would not permit me often to be with my Wife, and too narrowly to pry into her
Behavior.

This I took as a great Affront, but concealing my Thoughts, I told his
Majesty, That I could not renounce my Native Country, and that I would never
consent to marry, but on Condition I might go thither immediately after. No,
said the King, I will not yield to you in that Point, for your Spouse shall
never leave Poland while I live. If it be so, Sir, I replied, I humbly thank
your Majesty, and beg, as a farther Favor, That instead of marrying me you
would be pleased to grant me Leave to return home. Upon this the King left me,
telling me; I might be gone, and that I was a Madman.

Then I presently waited on the Queen, to give her an Account of what had
passed; who begged, with Tears in her Eyes, That I would comply with the King's
Desires: And that, to satisfy my nice Jealousy, she would keep her so much in
her presence, that the King should never find an Opportunity of being private
with her; that she should be responsible to me for her Conduct, and that I
might rest my self satisfied as to that.

Her Majesty used so many convincing Arguments, that at last I desired her to
tell the King, I was ready to obey his Commands. He was glad to hear it, but my
Mistress transported at the Thoughts of becoming my Wife, and that in so
violent a manner, as persuaded me she never had loved the King; which gave me
Hopes, that being the only Possessor of her Heart, and seconded by the Queen's
Vigilance, I might easily avoid the Shame I dreaded. In a Word, I was so taken
up with the Prospect of Advancing my Fortune, and satisfying my Desires, that I
was deaf to all other Considerations, insomuch that I wondered how I had ever
scrupled the Matter. So irresolute are our Minds, and so easily do we prefer
what may promote our Interest and Pleasure, to what secures our Honor.

I married that Lady, and therefore changed my Name, for being thereby grown
the owner of a Considerable County, I was for ever after called by that Title.

The Queen was as good as her Word, and her Jealousy and Virtue, with the Care
I took, kept my Wife under such a Constraint, that it was impossible for the
King to be alone with her. He was at last tired with Fruitless Endeavors, and
began to Court a Lady who was more her own Mistress. I was overjoyed at his
Change, hoping I might now, without Disturbance, possess my own Right; but
that, alas! was prevented by a Hand I least expected it from. My Wife was
enraged that the King should quit her for another, and the great Affection she
had expressed for me, turned to an implacable Hatred. Being averse to all
Dissimulation, she openly told me, I was the occasion that she had lost her
Lover. It was to no purpose that I endeavored to make her sensible of her
Extravagancy, all the Arguments I brought proved but greater Provocations; and
whether she had a Mind to be rid of me, or that she though moving the King's
Compassion was the best way to regain him, she complained to his Majesty that I
treated her very ill. This false Accusation the King the sooner believed,
because he remembered I told him, That I was inclined to be extreme Jealous. My
good natured Spouse's Malice went farther, for she gave the King to understand
that I was in Love with the Queen; and he susceptible of both these
Impressions, did, without farther Examination, resolve I should be murdered,
which he saw might be the easier effected, because my Preferment had excited
the Envy of most of the Polish Nobility. The King wanted not Persons who would
readily have taken that Opportunity to express their Zeal to him and their
Malice to me.

The Queen's Intelligence was quicker than mine, and seeing her Honor was
concerned, she did not think fit to acquaint me with it, concluding I would
have absconded my self, which might confirm the King in his Jealousy. Her
first Care was to undeceive the King, to which end she took no notice of the
Advice she had received, but counterfeiting some Letters from France, wherein
she was acquainted, That my Brother was dead; she showed them to his Majesty,
telling him, that it would much prejudice me to be kept in Poland. The
Unconcernedness she spoke with on my account, and her Proposal, to have me sent
back, made him think her falsely accused. He owned to her the Suspicions he had
had of an Intreague between us, and begging her Pardon a thousand times for
entertaining an Opinion so injurious to her Virtue, he confessed, Those
Thoughts, joined with my Wife's Complaints, made him resolve I should dye; and
that he knew not whether I was then alive, some Persons being appointed to
assassinate me that Day. Her Majesty having blamed his Rashness, entreated him,
without Delay, to recall his Orders, lest his Mercy came too late.

A Fruitless Enquiry was made after me, for I had Notice of my Danger; and the
Person who had done me that Courtesy had also found me a Place of Refuge. She
was one of the best reputed Ladies at Court, who had often professed herself my
Friend, but I did not imagine her Kindness extended so far. She made use of
that Opportunity to give me at once a Declaration and convincing Proof of her
Love; being a Widow, and consequently Mistress of her own Actions: She did not
stick to conceal me in her own House, which I thought was an Obligation highly
to be valued, since I saw my Ruin was unavoidable if I appeared abroad. During
a Week, that I lay hid, she proposed to me the several Means which her Passion
inspired her with, to provide for my Safety. That which she insisted on, as the
most infallible, was, to poison my Wife, the Performance of which she offered
to take upon her self. I entertained not her Proposal with that Horror which I
should have done at another Time, believing her to love me, had drowned both
Religion and Reason; only representing to her the ill Consequences it might
produce. She would never let me write to the Queen, to inform her where I was;
and that Princess concluding that I was either fled or murdered, it made her
very uneasy: But, to prevent the ill Constructions People might frame of my
Absence, she caused it to be reported, That, upon the News of my Brother's
Death, I was returned into France.

At last I heard of it, and believing that my Brother was really dead, I grew
impatient to know the Truth of it, and positively told the Lady, That I would
attend the Queen, to be better informed. She upbraided me with allowing my
Brother a Share in that Affection which she would have engrossed wholly to her
self. From these Reproaches she came to Affronts, and those led her to
Indifferency. She threat'ned to betray me to my Murderers; nay, and could not
forbear telling me, that since I was so firmly resolved to leave her, she would
take Care to prevent it, and would poison me first. What she had proposed to me
on my Wife's account, made me the more fearful as to my self, and this
Apprehension kept me from eating. Never did any Couple pass so suddenly from
the warmest Love to the most inveterate Hatred as we did, for we were already
grown intolerable to each other; wherefore I plainly told her, She was become
my Adversary, and entreated her to let me retire.

Yes, you shall go, said she, but it shall be out of this World: On saying
which, she flew at me with a Dagger. I strove to wrest it from her, but (by I
know not what Accident) she received a Wound in her Breast. I well foresaw my
Danger, and that I could not escape should any of her Servants know what had
happened; which made me leave her with the Dagger by her. By good Fortune I
found all the Doors open, and went out unseen by any. Having gone through a
Street or two, I came to the House of a Polander of my Acquaintance, and beged
his Assistance, telling him some earnest Business, occasioned by my Brother's
Death, obliged me to go to France, which I must do incognito, because my Wife
was averse to my Journey. This Man Offered to serve me to the utmost of his
Power, and the very next Night procured me some Horses, which carried me to
Dantzick; where I was no sooner arrived, but I wrote to the Queen a Relation of
my Adventure.

She received my Letter, in a Time when every one was crying out against me,
for being so base as to murder a Lady who had been so obliging to me. She had
indeed been found all Bloody by her Servants, and taxed me with the Villainy:
And tho her Wound proved but very slight, she still persisted to say, I had a
Design to have killed her. No Body questioned the Truth of what she spoke, and
great Search was making for me, when the Queen received my Letter. She
presently carried it to the King; who prayed her to command me, That if I were
Innocent, I should not delay coming to confront my Accusers.

It was not so much a Principle of doing Justice moved this Prince to have me
recalled, as the Trouble which my Wife created him, who was become a continual
Plague to him* and he wished for my Return, to rid him of so violent a Woman.
The Queen wrote to me, That my Brother's Death was a Fiction, and that I must
return to Warsaw, to clear my self from the Assassination which was laid to my
Charge. Her Letter came safe to my Hands, and the Joy I conceived at the News
of my Brother's being alive so transported me, that I willingly obeyed her
Commands, though I was not unsensible of the Hazard I exposed my self to.

As soon as I was arrived, I did, through the Queen's Advice, surrender my
self, and was carried to Prison. The Lady that accused me was in a great
Surprise at my Return; but affecting a Generosity which she was wholly a
Stranger to, she was the most earnest in suing for my Pardon. For my part, I
had rather she would have let her Intercession alone, that the Truth might have
appeared, upon a fair Trial: But seeing this was generally looked upon but as a
Quarrel between two Lovers, I did not insist on a fuller Enquiry into the
Matter, but accepted of my Grace, and was set at Liberty. The King also obliged
me to return Thanks to the Lady, my Adversary; which I did, though much against
my Will.

The Business wholly ruined her Reputation; for in Poland they do not easily
relish Gallantry of so deep a dye as that seemed to be. There was no other way
for her to clear her Honor than Marrying me, and that has fully persuaded me,
that she poisoned my Wife, who died suddenly some time after.

My Spouse was a little before delivered of Two Children, a Boy and a Girl, and
I heard at once of her Sickness and Death; for her Conduct had so highly
disobliged me, that we seldom saw each other. However, I was sorry for her, not
so much remembering the Reasons I had to hate her, as those whereby she once had
gained my Love.

She was no sooner dead, but the King himself told me, That I was under an
indispensable Obligation to marry the Lady, who had preserved my Life, at the
Loss of her own Honor. I begged of his Majesty not to precipitate this
Marriage, but to allow me a little Time to mourn for the Loss of my late Wife,
which deeply afflicted me, hoping by this Delay to find some means of breaking
the intended Match, without disobliging the King, though I was resolved to hazard
all rather than comply.

The Lady was neither Handsome nor Young; and, on the other Hand, her familiar
Acquaintance with Daggers and Poisons made me look upon her with great
Detestation: But I dissembled my Thoughts, and carried my self to her as a
Woman I was shortly to espouse.

Imagining she had made sure of me, she took no Care to pleasure me, treating
me rather with an affected Scorn, and openly professing a Kindness for others.
I, who desired nothing more than to break with her, taxed her with Coquetry;
she laughed at me, saying, she would not constrain her self for my Humor,
since I must marry her whether I would or no. I thought, if I could surprise
her in some Gallantry, it would free me from this pretended Obligation; which I
easily did, for she carried on her Intrigues so openly that none need be
ignorant of them; and one Day I was informed she was in private with a Palatine.

Thereupon I made my Complaint to the King, saying withal, That I now thought
my self fairly discharged. His Majesty replied, It must first be known whether
or no that Lord would marry her, because if he refused it she still fell to my
Lot, as having the first Claim to her. This Answer I took for a Jest, and could
not forbear smiling, till the King very seriously told me, it was the Custom of
the Land.

I did not much trouble my self with consulting the Polish Lawyers about it,
for from that very Minute I resolved for France, and took all the necessary
Measures for a speedy Departure; being weary of living in a strange Country,
wherein I had met with a Chain of Misfortunes, and stood in daily Expectation
of worse.

I acquainted the Queen with my Intentions, beseeching her to take my Children
under her Care and Protection; and having privately sold all the Estate I had
there which I might dispose of, I stole away with one only Servant. The great
Fortune I expected to make by my Journey, was reduced to poor Twenty thousand
Crowns, for which I took some Bills of Exchange, and went, leaving my Children
rich enough with their Mother's Estate. Then was the latter End of the Year
1647. I had lived Two Years in Poland, and was about Twenty Three Years of Age*
but appeared as Thirty, being naturally tall and grown something corpulent,
which made me seem older than I really was.

Once more I thought it impossible for any Woman to deceive me. My Journey
affording me Leisure enough to reflect on the Disasters they had procured me, I
considered it was on their Account that I had left Franee, in a Season when I
might have made my Fortune there, and that they also had occasioned my coming
from Poland, when I seemed to be well settled in that Country. On these
Reflections I resolved to make the best Use of my Experience, and to court Mars
instead of Venus. I had wrote to my Brother, to let him know of my Return from
Poland, who was not well satisfied with my having Married in that Kingdom, and
was glad I had a Pretense to forsake it. The Letters I received from him,
obliged me to take Venice in my Way, where he wrote I should find a particular
Friend of his, who, having fought a Duel, had been forced to fly for it, and
was then in that City.

I arrived at Venice in December, and they were then preparing for the ensuing
Carnival. I met with my Brother's Friend, who prevailed with me to tarry there
for a Time; during which, I forgot all my fine Resolutions against the Female
Sex, notwithstanding the fresh Items I had to remember them; for I was no
sooner at Venice but the first News I heard was, that I had been obliged to fly
out of Poland, for having poisoned my Wife and stabbed my Mistress. I too well
knew the occasion of that Report, and took no little Pains to undeceive those
who seemed to credit it, but I found it difficult, and have several Years since
met with some Persons, who were prepossessed with this Opinion, which has done
me no small Injury.

How earnest soever my Friends Instances might be, to persuade my tasting the
Diversions of the Carnaval, I should scarce have complied with them, had it not
been my Misfortune again to fall up to the Ears in Love. It Is true, I had felt
but weak impressions of that Passion while in Poland; which made me the easier
engage in a new Amor with a Person, who, I thought, would not be over cruel.

She was Daughter to a Venetian Nobleman, at whose House, I, on my first
arrival, grew very well acquainted, through the means of my Brother's Friend,
who having known this Nobleman's Son at Paris, had there renewed his
Acquaintance, and increased it to a great Intimacy. I often saw the Father and
Son, but it was long before I had a view of the Daughter, only in a Picture.
This Piece seemed to me so charming, that I could not forbear crying out in an
Ecstasy, I never had seen such Beauty before. The Lady was then in an adjoining
Room, where, unknown to me, she saw and heard me. I was no sooner in the Street
but a Man followed me, who, without saying one Word, put an unsealed Note in my
Hand, which was wrote in Italian to this purpose.

THE Person whose Picture you so much Admired, has as high an Esteem for you.
If it be true that the Sight of Painting has afforded you some Pleasure, you
shall enjoy that of the Original. Be discreet and leave the rest to me.


I read the Note above twenty times over; and though I could scarce imagine that
it really came from the Person whose Picture I had seen; yet I thought my
safest Way was to use the Discretion which was enjoined me.

It may easily be guessed how impatient I was to return to the Venetian
Nobleman's Palace: The very next Day I made him a Visit, and took my
Opportunity, by way of Discourse, to express the great Desire I had to see the
Person whom that Picture represented, but no Body offered to give me that
Satisfaction; only a Mask was proposed and the Habits agreed on.

I was scarce got home, but the same Man came into my Chamber, who had given me
the Note I just mentioned, and observing a deep Silence, presented me with a
Box, and immediately withdrew. I pressed him to stay, and he answered me but in
dumb Show, and went off. Then, opening the Box, I found it full of rich Jewels,
and, under them, this Note, which was written in the same Hand as the former.

YOur Reputation being of a near concern to me, I was willing to contribute to
your Magnificence. Make use of these Jewels to appear like your self in the
intended Mask, and when you have done with them, you may return them to the
Bearer, whom I shall send for them.


Then, I thought I had no reason to doubt of the Reality of this Adventure,
which gave me at once a great Pleasure and no little Disquiet.

I put on the Jewels she sent me, which were so rich and fair none made a
better Figure than my self.

Several asked me, Where I had got them? And having answered, That I hired
them; the Lady's Brother whispered in my Ear, He knew the Person had lent them,
and what the Hire of them came to. This made me think he was his Sister's
Confident; at which I blushed, and made no Reply.

As I was returning home from the Mask, I was attacked by Six armed Men, who
having driven off my Companions, in spite of all the Resistance I could make,
disarmed and robbed me.

This Accident gave me no little Trouble; but my Comfort was, that I had yet a
Bill of Exchange for Twelve thousand Crowns, which I thought would procure the
same number of fine Jewels.

When the Man, who had brought them me, came for them again, I informed him of
my Misfortune, and offered the Bill of Exchange in lieu thereof; but he refused
it by Signs (which made me believe he was dumb) and the next Day came to me
very early, with this following Note.

BE not concerned at the Loss of the Jewels. When I lent them, I willingly
exposed my self to all the Inconveniences that might follow; the Blame lies
wholly on me, therefore it is my part to pay for them. I wish I might, by more
considerable Losses convince you your Heart is the only Riches I covet. Do not
dispose of it, till you may judge whether I deserve it or no.


Whether she deserves it! cried I, Can there be a Woman more deserving? Thus
charmed, with her Generosity, I abandoned my self to the Transports I was in,
at my seeming good Fortune. I earnestly entreated the Dumb Messenger to carry
her the Bill of Exchange, or at least an Answer to her obliging Billet; but he
would do neither, and so left me.

The next Day her Brother told me, She had hired them of a Jeweller, whom he
dealt with; informing me withal, That his Sister had revealed to him the great
Passion she had for me, wherein he served her willingly, because she had laid
the like Obligation upon him, in an Amor he had with a young Lady of her
Acquaintance; and he also assured me, That it should be my Fault, if I was not
as happy in his Sister as he in his Mistress.

The Reader will, no doubt, be astonished to understand, That all this was only
an Artifice to chouse me of my Money; yet so it was, for this Brother of hers
had caused me to be robbed, and had the Jewels in his Possession. The Rascal
made me believe, That his Sister's Generosity had brought her into a great
Trouble, for she knew not how to pay for them; and that if she still refused to
accept my Bill of Exchange, the whole business might break out, and come to her
Father's Knowledge; to prevent which, he offered to carry me to the Merchants
who had lent them. I was overjoyed at this Opportunity, of showing my
Gratitude, in saving her Honor, and paid the Jeweller Eight thousand Crowns,
with more pleasure than I ever discharged any other Debt. This Man, who was
Confederate with my pretended Friend, received some small part of the Purchase,
and the Brother and Sister shared the rest between them.

I suspected not the Cheat, but still flattered with the vain Thought of being
beloved by a Person whom I was so charmed with, I considered not the Loss of my
Money, which was at it is last ebb; and my only Desire was that of seeing the
beautiful Unknown.

I often solicited the Brother, That he would procure me the so much longed
for Interview, which he as often promised me, but still found an Excuse for his
Delay. I only sometimes received a Letter from the fair Deceiver, which was no
more delivered by the dumb Man, but by himself, and he also undertook to be the
Bearer of my Answers. Our Billets were all very passionate, and the continual
Theme was, deploring our hard Fate, which kept us thus asunder.

This continued till about the middle of February, when I received Letters from
my Brother, who much blamed me for staying so long at Venice, saying, I
endangered my losing the Employment he had procured me in the Prince's Army,
which was to take the Field and besiege Ypres in March.

I little regarded my Brother's kind Admonitions, nor the Injury I did my self
in tarrying there any longer; but full of Longings to see my Mistress, I sent
him Word I was Sick, and that as soon as my Health should permit, I would ride
Post for France. But he, being better informed of my Condition than I imagined,
renewed his Instances for my return, which I was so mad as to refuse, for I
would sooner have parted with my Life than left Venice, till I had at least
seen the Lady.

His Letters had this only effect, That I was more urgent with her Brother, not
to keep me in Pain any longer; and at last, seeing I threat'ned to be gone, if
he did not give me that Satisfaction, he promised to comply with my Request. I
was ordered to put on a Spanish Habit, and to take with me as many Jewels, and
as much Money as I could, his Sister having pretended to the Person, at whose
House we were to meet, that her Lover was a rich Spanish Lord. I made no
Reflections upon the Matter, but yielded a blind Obedience to his Directions,
and being accoutred as a Castillan (not forgetting the Money and Jewels,) I was
introduced into the Lo^dgings of a most notorious Curtezan. Indeed I was
somewhat scandalized at my being carried to such a Place (for I both knew the
House and her who kept it) yet my Impatience to see my Mistress soon stifled
that Scruple.

At my first Entrance I was locked up in a Room, into which, after some Minutes
waiting, the Object of my Wishes was admitted. She did not seem to me so
handsome as her flattering Picture represented her, though it was so like, that I
had not the least reason to think my self imposed on. This Disappointment
something cooled my Passion, when the Lady, who observed it, used such Means to
reflame me, as made me imagine this was not the first Rendezvous she had had.
This gave me a Disturbance which I could not conceal, and being unwilling to
discover the true Occasion, I pretended it was at her coming into such a House.
She told me, She should not have expected such a Reprimand from me; however,
she seemed not to take it ill at first; but seeing I continued preaching to
her, she left me, saying, The next Time I met her I might make an end of my
Sermon.

Then I fully experienced the Weakness of my Heart: For though I had all the
Reason in the World to be convinced of her Dishonesty, yet she was no sooner
retired but I longed more than ever to see her again. All my Scruples vanished,
and I heartily repented the ill use I had made of that Opportunity. Her
Brother, thereupon, coming in with an Angry Look, drew his Sword, telling me, I
was a Base Man; that my Sister had complained to him of my rude Treatment, and
that he would have Satisfaction. Said I, Can I affront your Sister! For
Heaven's sake, dear Friend, procure me one Meeting more, and you shall see what
Esteem I have for her. He seemed more calm at these Words; and withdrew,
promising he would endeavor to persuade her to return; I waited Two Hours, but
instead of either, in came the Curtezan; who asked me in Italian, How now,
Signior Don John, what ails you to Day, that your Mistress is not so well
satisfied with you as she uses to be? With this she looked earnestly at me, and
seemed very much surpised. I inquired into the Reason of it, and why she
called me Don John? She would not satisfy me then, but told me, The next Time
I came thither I should know farther. This was all I could get from her, so I
left her.

My first Care, when I came home, was, to lay up my Money and Jewels, but I
found neither. The only Person I could tax with stealing them, was the Lady I
had been with, for no Body else had come near enough to me, to pick my Pocket;
and this gave me very ill Thoughts of her. I remembered there was one Don John,
a Spaniard, who lived then in Venice, and I concluded the Curtezan had mistaken
me for him, and that my Mistress used to entertain him in that Place. The very
next Morning I went to the Curtezan's to be resolved; who told me more than I
was willing to hear: For, I understood, this Lady, for whose sake I had so
highly disobliged my Brother and my self, was used to this pretty Trade, and
had for Six Months Time kept a Correspondence with this young Spaniard.

While I was meditating on my Revenge, I received a Letter from my Brother,
wherein he acquainted me, That he had notice what Life I led at Venice, and how
I had been made a Cully both by the Brother and Sister; but he advised me to
pass it over, and leave that City as speedily as possible.

Imagining his Friend was the only Person that could have sent this
Intelligence, I went to him, telling him, It had been much kinder to have given
me Warning of my dangerous Acquaintance than to have informed my Brother. He
was loath to own it, but, at last, embracing me, What could I have done, dear
Friend? said he, You was so bewitched, that if I had attempted to undeceive
you, I should not have been credited. It was with much difficulty that I
forgave him, but, seeing there was no Remedy, I told him, That I was resolved
to have my Money again, or to cut the Villain's Throat who had thus bubbled me.

Though this Gentleman was exiled from his Native Country for a Duel, yet that
Misfortune did not deter him from venturing on another, but he freely offered
me his Service; So I sent the Rogue a Challenge, which he slighted. Mad at such
Cowardice, I resolved to provoke him to Fight whether he would or no; and
having pitched on a Day to attack him, I put on my former Spanish Disguise, and
caused my Second and all our Attendance to be equipped in the same Fashion.

Thus we waited for him, in a certain Street through which he was to pass: When
he came I bid him Draw, but he refusing it, I gave him Two or Three Blows over
the Face with the flat side of my Sword, by which, being obliged to defend
himself, he did it, but so faintly, that he received a home Thrust, and dropped
down. We had the good luck, though this was done in the open Street, to escape to
a Gondalo, which lay ready for us, and carried us to a Vessel we had prepared.

To complete my Revenge, I left a Letter for the Lady's Father, pretending my
self a Friend of Don John's, and that, on my arrival at Venice I had discovered
an Intriegue between that young Lord and his Daughter, which was chiefly
promoted by her Brother, and gave him a full Narrative of the Proceeding;
concluding, that Don John having been affronted by his Son, I was resolved to
maintain my Friend's Quarrel, so that if any thing happened amiss in his
Family, he need look no farther for the procurer of his Misfortune.

The Nobleman having received this Advice, Informations were preferred against
Don John; for all those who had been Witnesses of the Rencounter, agreed the
Assaulter was a Spaniard, who had immediately made his Escape, with several
Persons of the same Nation; which confirmed the Contents of my Letter.

We heard at Padua the good Success of our Enterprise; for the Lady's Brother
dyed without being able to speak; Don John, afraid of the Informations
exhibited against him, was fled for it, and every one was fully persuaded that
he had killed him.

The Pleasure this News afforded me, was some Consolation for the Loss of my
Money, and the Tricks which they had put upon me, but I now resolved more firmly
than ever, to avoid Womankind.

My Brother's Friend, who had accompanied me to Padua, not daring to return
into France, nor thinking it safe for him to go back to Venice, asked my Advice
about a Journey, he designed for Poland; which I encouraged, for my own
Advantage, in having a Friend there, who might inform me of my Children's
Condition, and the Posture of Affairs in that Kingdom. I knew that King
Ladislaus was desperately ill. It was the current Report, That he was dead, and
that the Queen would espouse Prince Casimir, Brother to the deceased King, and
I doubted not but her Majesty would show my Friend all possible Favor.

It being then the latter End of May, and the Campaign something advanced in
Flanders, I thought I should get no credit by going there so late, and
therefore resolved to get into Naples, in hopes to find Opportunities of
signalizing my self, under the Command of the Duke de Guise, who had rendered
himself Master of that City, which made no little Noise in Italy. I wrote to my
Brother, to acquaint him with my Intentions, and keeping my Spanish Habit, I
set forwards for Naples, thinking that Disguise might facilitate my Entrance;
but I arrived there a Month after the Duke's Imprisonment, so ill had I been
informed of those Transactions.

I heard he was confined at Gayetta, in order to be transported to Spain; and
thought it my Duty to offer him my Service, in consideration of the Interest
all our Family had with him, especially my Brother.

It was certainly my ill Genius led me thither, for this occasioned my engaging
into a fresh Amor, which proved as Troublesome and vexatious to me as my last
at Venice.

The Duke took my Visit very kindly, and when I told him the occasion of my
Journey to Naples, he said, I might do him a more signal Service there, and
with less Danger to my self; whereupon he showed me a Letter from a Neapolitan
Lady, who had been his Mistress while he remained in the City: She expressed a
great Despair for the Duke's Imprisonment, and threat'ned to stab her her self,
if he would not yield to her following him to Spain. She is stark mad, said he,
and will do some extravagant Action or other, if not prevented. Oblige me so
far, as to return to Naples, and carry a Letter from me, which cannot be sent
by a better Hand. I promised an exact Performance of his Commands, and having
attended him till his Removal thence, I immediately set forward to execute his
Orders.

I could not, during the Journey, but reflect on my fantastical Destiny, for
while I endeavored to forget the Female Sex, and think of nothing but War, it
engaged me into a necessary Occasion of Conversing with them, and made me the
Confident of an Amor. However, I very willingly obeyed the Duke, moved by a
secret Inclination for a Woman, who was capable of so much Passion and Wit as
her Letters expressed. Here my cursed Propensity to Love again confounded my
Reason, which would have led me to France much rather than Naples; whereby I
was convinced, that let a Heart be never so covetous of Glory, it soon
degenerates from that Heroic Temper, when once it yields it self up to
Effeminacy.

I still wore my Spanish Habit, that I might the better conceal my Country; and
being arrived at Pozzolo Castello, while it was Day, I staid there a little,
not designing to enter Naples till Night. To divert my self in the mean while,
I walked abroad in a very agreeable and solitary Place, where I thought I
should not be observed: But I had not gone far e're I spied a Gentleman with a
Lady, and another at a little distance from them, which seemed to have
withdrawn only to leave them more at Liberty.

This looking like an Assignation, I crept as near as I could, and having hid
my self behind some Trees, overheard part of their Conversation. All I could
make of it was, That the Cavalier complained of her former Affection to
another; and that she assured him, he was the only Man she had ever loved.
Having remained there about half an Hour, I thought of retiring; which I
maliciously did, with Noise enough to make them take notice of me. The Lady,
who was speaking to her Gallant, no sooner perceived me, but she changed
Color, crying out, Ah! what do I see? It Is himself. She seemed to me very
handsome, and imagining she might take me for her Husband, or some other
Troublesome Person, whom she had no mind to entrust with her Amor; I made her
a very low Bow, and walked slowly off. Looking back sometimes, I saw the other
Lady followed me, upon which I stopped, that she might overtake me. She did,
and having viewed me attentively, told me in Spanish, I looked so like the Duke
de Guise, that I had been taken for him. I smiling at the Fancy (for besides
the Shape, Color of Hair and Skin, I had not one Feature resembling his)
replied, they were mistaken, and asked, What Relation the Duke had to them. She
said, That each true Neapolitan ought to fear, lest the Duke should still be
plotting to render himself Master of that City, which was happily reduced under
the Obedience of her lawful Sovereign. I easily guessed she spoke after that
manner, taking me for a Spaniard, for I knew the Duke de Guise was very well
beloved in Naples. However, I did not discover my self, though I had an itching
Desire to know the Company, being already charmed with the other Lady: But not
thinking it proper to ask any more Questions, I came back to Pozzolo Castello,
and went to Naples, the Sky being already darkened.

I applied my self, next Morning, to a Person the Duke had directed me to, in
order to my waiting on the Lady, for whom I had his Letter; but I was informed
she was in the Country: And having asked whether that Country was so far off
that I could not go to see her? It was answered me, That I had best be
cautious, since her Intimacy with the Duke de Guise had rendered her suspicious,
especially to the Spaniards, who mistrusted the Correspondency they held
together was more for Affairs of State than Gallantry.

I remained then a whole Week at Naples, which grew very Tiresome to me, for I
scarce durst appear, because the Spaniards were very strict in seizing any of
the French Nation, whose Misfortune it was to fall into their Hands. That Time
being expired, I understood the Lady was returned, and was, by the Duke's
Correspondent, introduced into her Presence. I presently knew her to be the
same I had seen at Pozzolo Castello, and she also knew me again: So I delivered
my Message, but spoke not a Word of her stabbing her self or going into Spain,
since, by what I had seen, I judged she was pretty well recovered of those
Melancholy Fits. But I found she had need of more than one Comforter; for
before we parted she told me very intelligibly, I had so much of the Duke de
Guise's Air, that she felt the same Inclination for me as she formerly had for
him.

It will, no doubt, appear a Wonder that I should trust to these Advances,
which I must needs imagine were not sincere, or that I would betray the
Confidence the Duke had reposed in me; but our Reason is easily stifled by the
Vanity of being beloved by a fine Woman. Not the Thoughts of the Treason I was
going to commit against my Friend, nor of that she had already been guilty of
to him, by favoring the Gentleman I had surpised her with, could deter me
from being passionately in Love with her. I protested my Affection for her was
greater than the Kindness she had expressed for me; and made her sensible I was
concerned at her being engaged with more than the Duke and my self. She
answered, The Man I had seen at Pozzolo Castello, was the Object of her Hatred,
and that I should not have any occasion to be jealous on his score. I believed
her, or at least I pretended so, and made it my Business to free my self from
any thing that might have hindered my relishing the Pleasure of a new Amor.

I wrote to the Duke, That his Mistress was inconstant; and though she had
blinded me to that degree, yet I could set her forth to him in her true
Colors. It had been happy for me if I had made use of the Advice I gave him,
Not to think of her any more: But I could not fancy her under the Shape I had
represented her in, which, I knew was so like her, it being the common Fate of
Lovers to overlook those Faults in their Mistresses, which themselves can make
others take notice of.

My present Rival soon perceived our new Commerce, and was very much
displeased, so was I, to find, that instead of Breaking with him she
entertained us both.

This Jilt had acquainted him, That I was no Spaniard, but a Frenchman, whom
the Duke de Guise had sent to her: Which Secret was no sooner revealed to him,
but he thought of a quick Remedy for his Jealousy, for he discovered me to the
Magistrates, and I was immediately clapped into a Jail. My only recourse was, to
write to the Lady, desiring her to use her Interest in procuring my Liberty,
but I understood, that far from that, she boasted her self to be the Author of
my Confinement, giving as a Reason, That I was come from the Duke to make her a
Proposal of going into France. From this she expected a double Advantage;
first, to persuade her other Lover, That she had not been intimate with me, and
besides, to regain the Favor of the Spanish Party, who (as I have said) were
no good Friends of hers.

When I understood the Trick she played me, I awaked as out of a Lethargy, and
acknowledged that I had but my Desert. Good Gods! What Imprecations I made
against Women! What Desires I had to be revenged! But I was obliged to quell my
Fury, and apply my Thoughts only to endeavor the regaining of my Freedom. I
durst not venture to own my self, for fear of a closer Imprisonment, but
pretended I was a Servant of the Duke de Guise, whom he had sent with some
Letters to his Mistress. I was believed, and about a Week after released, with
some poor Frenchmen, who had been my Companions in this Habitation, and were
not thought strong enough for the Galleys; where I should have been sent, had I
not fallen sick in the Prison.

As soon as I was at Liberty, I went to the Lady, to whom I was so much
obliged, expecting she would, at least, procure me the means to return Home,
for I had but an old ragged Coat on, and not a Farthing of Money, all being
rifled from me when I was seized on. She could not forbear laughing to see me
in that Pickle, and when I would have taxed her with her Perfidiousness, she
interrupted me, saying; What would you have, poor Fellow? All I can do is to
bestow some Alms on you, to help you in your Journey. Here, continued she,
addressing her self to one of her Women, Give him Three Pistols and send him
away.

O Heavens! How is it possible for a Man to bear up under such Afflictions?
However, I took Patience, in good Hopes one Day or other to revenge my self;
and refusing her Money, went to the Duke de Guise's Correspondent, expecting he
would procure me enough to bear my Charges to France; but he denied himself to
me, and my Servant that came thither with me, who was a Polander, being run
away (as soon as he saw me arrested) with all the Officers of Justice had not
robbed me of, I was left to the wide World, without Friends, without Money, and
in a strange Country.

I judged it my best way, (if possible) to get to Rome, hoping to find there
some Polish or French Acquaintance, who would treat me better than they had
done at Naples. I made a shift to reach Terracina, where I fortunately met with
the Duchess of -- bound for Rome, whom I informed of my Circumstances, telling
her, I had fallen among the Banditties; and she did me the Favor to take me
with her. I was not long at Rome, e're I met with a Friend, who furnished me
with the Money I wanted; and presently after I took Post. The Speed I made was
such, that I arrived in Flanders the 18th of August, Two Days before the Battle
of Lens.

I apprehended the best Way for me to get into Favor again with my Brother,
and to regain my lost Credit, was to begin with some generous Action, which
might efface all the ill Reports spread of me, during my Absence. That was the
Motive which induced me to go directly for Flanders, where I heard they were
preparing for an Engagement. I was unwilling to appear before my Brother, who
was there, and had the Reputation of being one of the best Commanders in the
Army; and only discovered my self to another General Officer, who was my
Relation, with whom I remained concealed till the Day of Battle, in which I
desired him to put me into a Post of Honor.

My Caution, in writing these Memoirs, of keeping my self undiscovered, shall
excuse me, if I do not give the Reader a particular Relation of an Action I
performed, which raised my Fame even above my Wishes. That Engagement has been
so often described, that did I here make a Narrative of the Share I had in it,
I should betray my self to every ones Knowledge; and I think it enough for my
purpose, to let the Reader understand, that the Prince d'Anguien gave out, he
stood indebted to me for the Victory, having had the good Fortune to to hinder
a considerable Body from being routed, whose Flight would have occasioned that
of the whole Army. This Exploit procured me a Regiment, having obtained a
Colonel's Commission, by my General's Recommendation. I found my Brother as
kind as ever; and was informed by him, That the Count my other Brother, was
fled to Poland, a Duel having put him to the Choice of undergoing either a
Voluntary Banishment or an Involuntary Death; and that my Sister was separated
from her Husband, and lived with my Mother.

The Reputation I had gained in the Fight at Lens, had so animated me, that I
did a Work of Supererogation, in desiring I might stay with the Marshall de
Rantzan, in whose Army I served, in the Siege of Furnes; and, the Campaign
ended, I returned to Paris, about the latter end of October: And there found
all things in a great Disorder, occasioned by the Hatred which the Parisians
bore to the Cardinal Mazarine.

The more I reflected on what had happened to me (especially the Two Years last
past) the more I fancied my Life to be Romantic: And, in spite of so many odd
Adventures, I yet trusted with so much Confidence to my good Stars, that I
neglected the Pursuit of my further Preferment, and arming my self against the
Snares of Beauty. But I visited the Ladies with the less Fear, because I
thought my Heart secured from their Allurements, and I was resolved to pretend
a Passion to all, but fix on none. The ridiculous manner wherein my Mother
exposed her self might have confirmed me in those Intentions, since it was an
undeniable Proof that neither Age nor Reason can oblige a Coquet to Modesty.

My Mother, who had lived without considering either Children or Estate, took
care, however, never to want a Lover. She had been courted a long Time by a
Widower, much about her Age, who was so assiduous in his Visits, that there was
no other Argument against the Aspersions which might be thrown upon her for it,
but that they were as good as married. All the Family was persuaded that he was
her Husband, and that Match not being too agreeable to us, we expressed our
Discontent by a very cold behavior to her, tho without coming to an open
Breach.

This Gentleman had a Son newly come from the University, whom my Mother
received into her House, she having given out, That he was to continue there,
but till such Time as they might send him to the Academy. My eldst Brother did
not seem to take notice of it, nor so much as complain of the extravagant
Expenses she put her self to on his account; but the Servants soon acquainted
us, That her kindness for him went farther yet, and that something had passed
between them which they knew not how to interpret to her Advantage. His Father
was informed of it also; and his Displeasure was so great, that forcing his Son
from her, he sent him to S. Lazarus. But, to complete his Vexation and ours, my
Mother showed him a Contract, and the Certificate of a Marriage, made above a
Month before. So, what the Father had courted during Fifteen or Sixteen Years,
with the most engaging Complacencies and endearing Tokens of Love, his Son, tho
yet a Schoolboy, obtained in less than Three Months Time. This Business, which
became at once the public Discourse and Jest of the Town, gave us no little
Mortication. His Father would have had us prosecute in order to annul the
Marriage, and produced a former Engagement from her to himself; but we being
indifferent as to the Person, since she was resolved to have a Husband, thought
it not worth our while to meddle with it, and left him to manage the Affair
alone; which proved his Ruin: For after losing several Lawsuits, and his
Reputation into the Bargain, his Trouble was so great that he sicken'd upon it,
and dyed; having first disinherited his Son, whom my Mother took out of the
unpleasant Lodging he was in, having proved her Marriage good: But People never
would be so complaisant as to call her by her New Husband's Name.

I thought all these Experiments had wholly withdrawn me from that perfidious
Sex: But even those induced me to seek for new Amors. I had an earnest Desire
to discover a Discreet Virtuous Woman; and it may well be imagined that it was
impossible for my Heart to remain free, when I thought I had found her.

I often visited my poor Carmelite, I cannot say I saw her (for she was very
exact in observing the Rules of her Order, one of which is not to unveil
themselves) but I spoke with her, and her Friendship made her concerned in all
my Adventures, especially in my last (I mean what happened to me in the Battle
at Lens;) I was beholding to her good Counsels, for my avoiding the Snares
which the Coquets at Court laid to entrap me: Women are not taken with any
thing so much as with the Reputation of a Warlike and Gallant Man, and I had
the Name of being both. But I contented my self with bare Conversation, without
any particular Engagement, laughing at those Friends who were caught in the
Mouse-trap, sharing in their Pleasures and Debauches, and turning all to my own
Diversion.

Thus I lived, when my dear Carmelite told me, That since I had wholly forsaken
Poland, I must think of getting a Wife in France; and that she would help me to
one, whom she named; adding, The Lady was an intimate Friend of hers, and, to
her Knowledge, had a good Opinion of me. I had seen her, and liked her well,
but the flattering Thoughts, that she was charmed with me, gave her
Accomplishments such a Luster, that I fell desperately in Love from that very
Minute. I asked my Nun, Whether she could swear that so well-deserving a Lady
were not given to Coquetry? Oh! replied she, She is a Model of Modesty and
Virtue, and the only Fault that can be found with her is, That she runs into an
Excess of Preciseness. I desired her to bring us acquainted immediately; and
accordingly we appointed a Day, when we should meet in the Parlor, as by
chance. I was punctual, so was she, and after a Conversation on indifferent
Matters, I waited on the Lady home. We were no sooner arrived there, but she
said, in a very free and open manner: Sir, I will not detain you with
Expectation, my Design being, once more, to marry, I look for a Man that may
make me happy, and the good Character I have heard of you gives me Hopes you
will procure me that Felicity. I answered her with the most convincing
Expressions of Love and Gratitude I could invent: Then she gave me a List of my
Rivals, who were all Men of Quality and Merit; and concluded with an Assurance,
that I should ever have the Preference.

This engaged me more than I ever had been in my whole Lifetime; insomuch,
that transported with the Prospect of possessing a Lady of so high a Rank and
Fortune, I wholly abandoned my self to the deepest Passion, and was not one Day
without visiting her. Some Disputes, which arose about her Estate, were the
usual Themes of her Discourse, and I saw she designed me the Office of
Solliciter, before that of a Husband. Though I had an Aversion to Business, yet
for her sake, I gladly undertook to manage those Concerns, and the earnestness
wherewith I applied my self to it, soon made me a good Lawyer. Her entrusting
me in all her Affairs, and our being constantly together, occasioned a Report
that we were already married: This I acquainted her with, hoping it might
oblige her to hasten the Consummation of my Happiness; but she, on the
contrary, replied, That since my frequent Visits were so much taken notice of,
I must not see her so often: That her Circumstances would not permit her to
marry so soon, but by waiting her Leisure, I should give her an undeniable
Proof of my Affection. I was mad at this Delay, yet to show how much I loved, I
told her; That though it was a great piece of Self-denial, I would submit to her
Directions. She seemed overjoyed to find me so tractable, and having settled
our Meetings at thrice a Week, I never missed one, and, in the Intervals plied
her with Billets Deux. Her Answers were very obliging, giving fresh Proofs of
her Affection, and renewed Assurances she would marry none but me. In the mean
while the Campaign drew near, and consequently the Time approached when I must
leave my Mistress. She vowed to me, that she would espouse me at my Return;
and, indeed, I had not, during my Absence, any reason to doubt of her
Sincerity, her Letters, which I never failed of every Post, being an evident
Argument of it.

We did little Execution that Summer, the Enemy retook Ipres, and we balanced
our Fortune by taking Conde. Winter approaching, I returned to Paris, where I
found my Mistress in the same Sentiments I had left her.

My Duty often called me to S. Germains, where the Court was then. One Day
being obliged to attend his Majesty at his Couchee; I waited first on that
Lady. Having paid my Devoirs to her, I was going, when calling me back from the
Stair-Head; Hark ye, said she, What do you with all the Letters you receive
from me? Would you oblige me so far, as to return them me? I assured her, That
I kept them with all imaginable Care, as a Treasure I valued more than all the
World besides. However, continued she, Let me have them again, for my own
Satisfaction; pray send them me before you go for S. Germains. I very unwilling
complied; but, fearing to disoblige her, I obeyed. Two Days after my arrival at
S. Germains, it was said in the Queen's Presence, That a Prince of the Blood
was going to marry, and that the Match was wholly concluded. My Curiosity led
me to enquire who the Lady was, and heard, with no little Surprise, that it was
my intended Spouse. My Astonishment was yet greater, when they would have
persuaded me, That I had been the Promoter of it; I confess there was some
seeming Ground, the Prince being my intimate Friend, and every one imagining
the Lady never did any thing without consulting me.

I could not be persuaded at first of the reality of the Report; but calling to
mind the Assiduity wherewith the Prince had lately visited her, and how
earnestly she had demanded a Return of her Letters, I began to believe it too
true.

That Prince was then at S. Germains, and I thought the only way to know the
Truth was to wait on him, without taking any Notice of what I had heard. I did
so, and he no sooner saw me, but he came and embraced me, saying; There is the
dear Friend to whom I owe my Happiness, since my Mistress yields only upon his
Recommendations. My Blood boiled at these Words, and I whispered him softly,
That his Marriage was not so sure but he might meet with Opposition. I told
him, a Person waited for him in a Garden without the Palace, who had something
of Moment to impart; whither I entreated him to walk immediately. He wondered at
the manner of my Delivery, for the Fury I was in had strangely altered my
Countenance: However, he had the Complaisance to go with me, still asking me,
What was the Matter, and what had happened.

I replied not a Word till we were at the Place; then I asked him very
seriously, If he was really to marry the Lady he spoke of. Why do you ask such
a Question, said he, since you know it as well as my self? I assured him he was
mightily mistaken, for she was engaged to me. The Prince looked on me with a
Smile, and seeing I still maintained my Gravity; Are you mad, my poor Count?
said he, How long have you lost your Wits? Did not you make the Match? I am
sure the Lady told me so; I am your real Friend, and the Devil take me if I
ever thought of her while I imagined you pretended to her. But, prithee, What
Ties are between you? I answered, They are such, that it is but Three Days
since she swore solemnly, She would marry none but me; and I have brought you
hither to dispute my Right. Not so, continued he, I Will yield her, if what you
say be true. Then I proposed to adjourn the Controversy till she could decide
it.

I had not Patience till my Time of Waiting was over, but pretending some
Business, asked Leave to return to Paris, which was granted me. At my Arrival I
presently ran to the Carmelites, to acquaint my Nun with what had happened at
S. Germains; but she had Notice of it already, the Lady having wrote to her the
Day before, telling her, That my frequent Visits had raised a Scandal,
reflecting upon her Honor, which she would not confirm by marrying me,
therefore she had entertained the Prince's Proposals. Her Letter was much to
this Purpose, but her Arguments were not satisfactory, since it but too plainly
appeared, That Inconstancy and Interest were the only Motives of her Change.

My Carmelite advised me, finding her of so fickle a Temper, not to pursue my
Claim, assuring me, such Qualifications would be worse in a Wife than a
Mistress; but I would not hearken to her Reasons, and was resolved not to be
bafl'd.

From the Nunnery I went to the Lady's, and taking no notice of what had
passed, I asked her, When she would complete our Marriage? She asked me, If I
had heard any thing at S. Germains? And having answered No: Then, continued
she, your Friend at the Carmelites will acquaint you with what I dare not tell
you my self. Seeing, then, that there was no more dissembling, I confessed to
her, That I had understood she was to be married to the Prince de -- Well, said
she, and why do you deny it? I hate a Liar, and for that very reason would
discard you. I was enraged at this Reply, especially to see her do it with such
Assurance and Indifferency. Proteus never put on his various Shapes more
suddenly than I did mine, for I Swore, Threat'ned, Cried and Prayed all in a
Breath, and all to no purpose: So I left her, protesting I would use my utmost
Industry, to confirm the ill Reports which had been spread of her on my account.

It was, indeed, my first Resolution, by that means to ruin her in the Prince's
Esteem; but since, after all, it would have been a base Slander, for our
Conversation had been very innocent, I only gave him a Relation of all the
Promises she had made: Whether the Prince disliked her for her Inconstancy, or
suspected her Virtue, he assured me, That he would never think of her any more;
and in performance of his Word, did presently disingage himself.

The Lady finding I forbore my visits also, three Days after sent for me, and
having upbraided me with what she supposed I had given out against her Honor,
to occasion the breaking off of the Princes Match: She, in the conclusion, told
me, She was now reduced to a Necessity of Marrying of me, which she would
perform as soon as I pleased.

I never had so little inclination to it as when I saw the thing so near being
finished, for her Coquetry had something abated my Esteem; however, the real
Opinion I had of her Chastity made me consent; for at least, I concluded, I
should be sure of a good Fortune and a virtuous Wife.

Yet I was not so well resolved but my Heart failed me, and that made me yield
to a Delay for a Fortnight or Three Weeks, upon the Lady's Request; she having
pretended some Indisposition. Tho I saw no Simptoms of any, I told her she
might take her own Time, and looked upon my Wedding as a thing so certain, that
I really made Preparation for it.

Going to see her one Night, I was told she was in Bed; on which I offered to
retire, when her Woman proffered to conceal me in a Closet, next to her Lady's
Chamber, where I should discover strange things, yet necessary for me to know.
I inquired, what it was? She answered me, Her Lady was with Child, and actually
then in Labor. I was astonished, and she seemed in as great a Disorder, but
added, If I would go with her, she would convince me of the Truth.

This was of too great a concern to be neglected: I went with her, and in a
short Time I heard the Lady's Groans. All the Servants were sent out of the
Way, only the Midwife and that Woman remained at Home. Heavens! How great was
my surprise! beyond what can be described. I slipped into her Bedchamber
privately, hiding my self behind the Hangings, where I beheld all that passed.
My Rage was like to have made me commit some Extravagance, when my
Intelligencer approached, saying, Her Lady had perceived me, and desired to
speak with me. This Message did (if possible) increase my Amazement. Is she,
said I, in a condition to see me, and does she desire I should treat her
according to her Deserts? However, a Curiosity of knowing what she could say
for her self, made me draw near to her Bed: When she told me, in a languishing
Tone; Sir, It was by my Order you came hither, to let you see, that had not
your Obstinacy hindered my Marriage with the Prince, you had not received this
Trouble. Now you find how despicable a Creature you have made your Applications
to, and how little worthy of your Kindness. I remained dumb for a long time,
after which, At least, Madam, said I, let me know the happy Father. That, she
replied, will be no great Advantage to you: It is sufficient, you see, I am
unwilling to deceive you; I had not been so scrupulous, had you been of another
Character, but your Behavior has been so honorable and respectful that I
could never have the Heart to abuse you: Farewell, and consider now whether I am
a fit Bride for you.

The manner wherein she spoke moved my Compassion, which made me loath to leave
her. However, I returned Home, and threw my self upon the Bed, scarcely
believing the Adventure real, but that it was a Dream; for I had strictly
observed that Lady's Carriage, and never had any ground for the least
Suspicion. I was distracted with a thousand Thoughts, but with none so much as
the Desire of knowing by whom she had that Child. To satisfy my Curiosity, I
waited on her, as soon as I thought she might admit of my Visits, not doubting
in the least, after what I was already acquainted with, she dared conceal any
thing from me.

She spoke first, telling me, I had a greater Share in her Misfortune than I
imagined, and that the only occasion of it, was her too great Love for me. This
appeared to me very odd, and I fancied the whole Story would be a Riddle. I
desired her to proceed; then she informed me, She had loved me with the deepest
Passion; and, to her Sorrow, my Respects had kept me at too great a Distance,
since she earnestly wished I would have forced that Favor from her which she
was but too inclinable to grant. That, one Day, being in this amorous
Disposition, my Page brought her a Letter.

There she stopped, and left it to me to guess the rest. Truly the Task was not
very difficult, and I now began to find some Probability in the thing,
especially when I called to mind, That I had observed my Page showed her an
extraordinary Respect, which I had imputed to his Desire of pleasing me. I
questioned not but he had enjoyed her often, for when once a Woman yields, she
scruples not a Repetition.

Now I began to have a very mean Opinion of her; and taking no notice of her
pretended Kindness for me, I told her, She had extremely undervalu'd her self;
and the best advice I could give her, was, To marry the Page. Which said, I
left her.

Two or Three Hours after, I received a Letter; wherein she made great
Complaints, That I should use her so ill, who was my self the chief Cause of
her Affliction: And, in the Conclusion, earnestly begged me never to discover
her Folly. I returned no answer, but have faithfully kept the Secret. I
discharged my Page, who was big enough to serve his Prince and Country, and
resolved never to think of my Mistress more. Her Looseness was not so much the
Cause of my Aversion, as her want of Conduct; for I could never pardon her
Simplicity, in discovering to me a Secret, from whom, of all Men living, she
ought to have concealed it. She, on the contrary, thought she had done an
heroic Action, and had obliged me highly. I leave it to the Reader to
determine which of us was in the Right, but, for my part, I shall never advise
a Lady to own her Amors either to her Husband or Lover.

When it was known that I forbore visiting her, the World imagined it to be a
Consequence of the Dissatisfaction I had at her proposing to marry the Prince,
and suffered that Opinion to prevail. I know not whether she continued her
Intriegue with the Page, but, about a Twelve month after, a great Favorite
made a Match between her and one of his Relations; who was eldest Son to a
Noble and Ancient Family, from whom she has since been separated, and is grown
the most lewd and infamous Woman at Court.

It was certainly my evil Planet that governed in this last Amor, for instead
of the Fortune I expected, it put me to great Expense and Trouble, which made
me once more damn the Female Sex.

I resolved to court them no more, but in railery, and the first attempt I made
of that kind, was with one, who had been Mistress to a great Lord at Court,
wherein her Reputation had suffered, and whose Visits she was obliged to shun,
to avoid a farther Censure. She endeavored to persuade me, That she had wholly
left him for my sake, which, I only pretended at first to believe. But who can
resist the Artifices of a deceitful Woman? She seemed so indifferent not only
as to that Lord, but to all the World besides my self, that I thought she had a
sincere Affection for me. The Lady being extremely beautiful, and very
ingenious, I was pleased at having fixed on a Person of that Character, and
found, that inspight of all my Resolutions, I was running into a Relapse. My
first Endeavor was to inspire her with a more nice and refined Passion than
she had till then been sensible of; and she appeared so tractable, that I
thought my Preaching had wrought an unfeigned Conversion in her.

A neighboring exiled Prince was then at the French Court, and being a great
admirer of the fair Sex, it was thought he wanted not for Mistresses. I had a
great Interest in him, having often been a Sharer in his Pleasures. One of my
Friends, who also sometimes accompanied him, told me; That an unknown Woman had
addressed her self to him, about a very pleasant Business; which was, That a
great Lady at Court was willing to present any Person with Four hundred
Pistols, that would procure her a private Meeting with that Prince. I replied,
Four hundred Pistols were worth the looking after, and bid him assure the
Woman, That I would speak to the King; which I did the next day, and he readily
embraced the Proposal. My Friend followed my Directions, and it was agreed the
interveiw should be in a House near Paris, where that Prince should go
Incognito. She thereupon paid him down one half of the Money, promising he
should have the rest, when the Business was over. The King accordingly came to
the Rendezvous, attended by none but a Lord of his own Nation, my Friend, and
my self. As soon as we were arrived, the Woman, who was entrusted with this
Negotiation, entreated his Majesty to take no Body with him, because the Lady
desired to conceal her self: He only permitted the Lord to follow him, and bid
my Friend and I wait for him at some distance. A little while after the King
came to us, and told us, That the Lady knowing we were there, would not be
persuaded to stay, but was already gone, giving as a Reason, that she knew me
to be the most talkative Man in the World, and that I could not keep a Secret.
I wondered any Lady in France should have such a Thought of me, since my
Character was quite otherwise; and therefore asked his Majesty, What manner of
Person she was? To which he answered, He would show her me, for he knew she
went often to Court, and that this was not the first time he had seen her Face.

Three or four Days after, being at the Fair of S. Germains, with my Mistress,
who I believed, loved me with all imaginable Fidelity; I met that King, who,
smiling, whispered in my Ear, That the Lady I led was the aforesaid Party.
Observing that she had taken notice of our whispering, I acquainted her with
what that Prince had said; at which she seemed not much surpised, but asked
me: Why? Did you not know it? I could not think of a more fit Revenge, for your
baseness in selling your Mistress; I am very well satisfied, and so you ought
to be, since the Money has been paid you punctually. Oh! Perfidious, I replied,
who could have suspected you capable of such an Action? Take my Advice, said
she, and be silent, we are even as to that Point; and if it was mean in me to
prostitute my self to a Prince I loved, it is a greater Reproach to you, that
you should have delivered up your Mistress for Four Hundred Pistols.

I wondered at her Temper and Presence of Mind, while Passion almost provoked me
to affront her in the open Street. But Women endure a Conviction of Falsehood
with more Courage and less Shame than Men can do.

I broke off wholly with her, and acquainted the King with her Treachery. He
seemed to be concerned that I should lose my Mistress on his account; but,
however he proceeded in his Amor, I looked on it with a great Unconcernedness,
and this Indifferency persuaded me that I did not love her. While I used to
visit her, I often saw one of her Friends with her, who had a Daughter about
Sixteen or Seventeen Years old, whom she still boarded in a Nunnery, but sent
for home some times. This Maid was really Handsome, and had a great Stock of
Wit. I often conversed with her, but she was so young that I never ventured to
tell her seriously of my Inclination for her: Neither did I guess at here is for
me, till she discovered it in a Letter, wherein she expressed her concern most
tenderly for a slight Indisposition I had. Hoping, that after all the Tricks
Women had played me, I might now safely rely on a young Creature, who seemed to
follow the Dictates of her Heart. I returned a Passionate and grateful Answer;
and Two or Three Days after received a Reply; by which I was desired to stay at
Home till Ten the next Morning. I could not imagine to what end she made me
that Request, and did not in the least expect she would have come to see me.
Yet she did, telling me, She had given the Slip to one of her Relations, who
had fetched her from the Convent. It may well be imagined I was charmed with
this Action, and that my Flame was not a little augmented by it; she tarried
not long, that her Couzin, who was in a Church hard by, might not miss her. The
next Morning I received a very endearing Letter from her, and for a Month
afterward I never failed of one every Day, in the same strain, and I answered
them with all the Love I could express. Though I had great Reason to be fond of
her, and believe she was so of me, yet I durst not visit her in her Nunnery,
for she had enjoined the contrary, telling me, It would bring her into a great
deal of Trouble; and that she was desirous our Correspondence should be a
secret; so that sending and receiving Letters was all the Courtship I could
make.

This had lasted a Month when she wrote to me, That she was obliged to give it
over, being persuaded that it was a great Sin. Her Letter almost distracted me,
and fearing it was not sufficient for me to write, I owned my Love to an
Acquaintance of here is and mine, whom I conjured to assist me.

The Lady having been with her, told me the Scruple she seemed to have, was but
a Pretense, and that the true Reason (as much as she could apprehend by her
Discourse) was, That she had a new Gallant. I easily believed it; however, I
entreated her to return once more, and endeavor to reclaim her; but the young
Minx would not own any thing of it, only she wrote to me, That there had been a
great Struggle between her Devotion and her Love, but that the former had
prevailed: And, besides, she could no longer dote on a Man whom she could not
see, and who, besides, had a Thousand more Mistress. The Style of this Letter
was a greater Proof that she had forsaken me, than her telling me so; for let
all possible Care be taken to make a Billet Doux soft and amorous, it is no
longer so than while the Heart directs the Hand. This confirmed my Thoughts of
her Falsehood: But how it humbled me, when I understood it was her Father's
Valet de Chamber whom she had preferred before me!

However, I was so great a Dotard, that I endeavored to find Excuses for her
Frailty; and imagining the free Access he had to her, as Parent's Messenger,
was the occasion of her Change, I resolved to procure my self the Advantage of
seeing her as often. I confess it was not over honorable to persist in loving
one, whose sordid Soul could stoop to such a Man's Addresses; but I had no
occasion to be very jealous, since his Visits could reach no farther than the
Grate; nor did I think it so great a Wonder for a Maid of her Age to be
wavering in her Lover's Absence, but rather blamed my own Negligence, since I
might have found out a Thousand Ways of being admitted to her.

Immediately I thought of one, and having disguised my self like a Footman,
inquired for her, as if sent from her Mother. She presently knew me, and
expressed so much Joy for having given her that Proof of my Affection, that I
expected the Transport she was in, would have deprived her of her Senses. How
often did she repeat, Alas! is it possible you should love me still? I could
never have thought it. How happy am I! Well, I shall dye with Pleasure.

These Raptures, which seemed very natural, did so bewitch me, that I was no
longer angry at her Falsehood, only tenderly mentioned it, and she acknowledged
her Civility had encouraged that Man's Boldness, but vowed she would never have
endured his Insolence, had she not been provoked to it by the Indifferency she
fancied I had for her; and that, as a Confirmation of her Aversion to him, she
would cause him to be killed, or stab him her self, if I desired it. I told
her, I expected not so barbarous an Assurance, and that I should be satisfied
with her avoiding his Conversation; on which she made me a Thousand
Protestations of her future Fidelity.

This gave me an unexpressible Pleasure, and I was extasied at the Thoughts of
being the only Possessor of her Heart.

Before I left her, I gave her a Lecture about Constant Love: But having spoke
never a Word of Matrimony, she asked me, If I did not think her a Match good
enough? I replied, I did not believe her Friends would marry her so young; and,
besides, I feared her Fortune being much above mine, I should certainly be
denied, if I pretended to ask their Consent. Well! and what need have we of
Friends? said she, I Will get out of the Convent, and meet you when and where you
please: Then they must comply. I represented to her, It was safer to wait a
little, and in the mean while I would procure some Person to insinuate the
Matter to her Mother, at a distance, in order to try her Pulse. She seemed
better satisfied at these Words, but would not let me go till I had solemnly
promised to make her my Wife.

She was, indeed, so great a Fortune, that there was a Match concluding between
her and one of the first Quality, and all the necessary Preparations being
ready, she was taken out of the Nunnery, and it was generally reported, she was
going to marry the Duke de -- But she plainly told her Mother, that she would
never have him, because she was engaged to me.

This surpised her, for our Intriegue had been kept very secret: But the Match
in Hand being already agreed on, by the Relations on both Sides, her Mother
commanded her never to think more of me, which if she did, she should lead the
remainder of her Life in a Cloister. This Threat was a great shock to her
Resolution; but what more induced her to comply with her Parents Desires, was
the Sight of her intended Husband; whom she fell desperately in Love withal at
the first View, and married him the next Day.

She had before informed me by a Letter of what her Mother had said, and that
the only means I had left was to steal her, as she was going to Church,
assigning me the Time and Place. It was not without some Reluctance that I
undertook it, but the Prospect of a good Fortune, and an affectionate Wife,
made me wave all my Scruples, and having taken all necessary Measures, I came
to the Church-Door in a Coach. Just as I arrived, the Ceremony was beginning,
so that I took her Project of running away with me for a mere Banter, since I
thought it impossible her Mind should alter so suddenly. This I so highly
resented, that I was not sorry for losing her, and remained present during all
the Service; which was taken as a great Affront by her Friends, who have ever
since appeared my Enemies on all Occasions; for I could never come to a right
Understanding with them, nor with my Unfaithful Mistress, who seemed not to
have seen me; and indeed, I believe, did not, her whole Mind being possessed
with her Bridegroom.

Some will wonder, perhaps, that I should not seek to Revenge my self for her
Treachery; but Love being, in my Opinion, the freest thing in the World, I
never thought a Gentleman ought to resent those Injuries. I must confess, I
have not always been so moderate on that account, as will be seen by the sequel
of my Life.

Being thus jilted by this last Mistress, I believed it now impossible for me
to experience the Sweets of a real and sincere Amor, and that made me very
morose to a Sex I began both to hate and despise. But what surpised me, was,
the more I affronted them, the more complaisant and obliging they were to me.

I did by this Carriage gain the Esteem of a Lady, my Acquaintance with whom
was occasioned by a very odd Accident. This Lady had so henpeck'd her Husband,
that she had reduced him to a mere Changling, through her imperious Treatment.
Being very handsome, and absolute Mistress of her Conduct, most young Courtiers
had Intriegues with her, and she was famous for changing her Lovers every
Quarter. I could not forbear letting fly a scurrilous Jest or two against her;
which she hearing of, made great Complaints, insomuch that one Day, being by
chance in her Company, she abused me in a most affronting manner, which I
returned with Interest. This made a great Noise, and every one blamed my
Rudeness, which indeed I could not excuse. I was advised to give her some
Satisfaction, but my Resentment was too great, and, on the contrary, I used all
the means I could to express my Contempt of her.

The Issue was far from what I should have expected, for instead of her Hatred
I gained her Friendship. A Lady, who knew us both, desired me to meet her at
her House, assuring me I should not repent it. I could but expect a second
Scene of Billingsgate, which made me unwillingly consent.

She came there, and began to weep, saying, She was an unhappy Woman to be thus
hated by the only Man she loved. This somewhat mollified me, and before we
parted we were made such good Friends, that I became an assiduous Visitant. She
discarded all her Lovers, but seeing she paid a blind Obedience to all I
required of her, I began, to treat her with more Complacency. This was an
occasion of her admitting more Admirers, and my Passion began at last to cool,
especially when I understood she represented me as too good natured, and one
whose easy Temper made me unhappy with my Mistresses.

While I had this Intriegue, the Queen Mother imprisoned the Prince of Conde,
and the Interest my Brother and I had in him, having raised a Suspicion of us,
he advised me to retire to Poland, where my Children and Estate might need my
Presence. I took his Counsel, leaving him at Paris, much puzl'd how to
discharge, at once, his Duty to the Queen and his Obligation to the Prince; and
began my Journey, imagining I had too much Experience ever to be over-reached
by a Woman, but I was still the same Man, and more exposed than ever to their
Treachery, as we shall see in the following part of these Memoirs.

MEMOIRS OF THE Count de -- Compiled by Monsieur SAINT E. BOOK III.
I Passed through Germany, and arrived at Heidelberg, about the latter End of
April. It was Two or Three Years after Prince Charles Lewis of Bavaria's having
been restored to his Electorate. His Amors are so well known, that the Reader
may easily judge, Gallantry was no Stranger to his Court; and that I could
scarce avoid there the Dangers from which I designed to keep my self free. But
indeed those I met with, were such as I could never have foreseen, and which I
therefore escaped with the more Difficulty.

Among her Electoral Highness's Retinue, was a very handsome Frenchwoman, who
neither knew what part of France she was born in, nor who were her Parents. All
the Account she could give of her self was, That one of her Country-women had
brought her into Germany when she was yet but Ten Years old; who for a long
Time was taken for her Mother, but on her Deathbed declared, that she had only
been entrusted with her, and did not so much as know who she belonged to. For
this Reason they called her the Lady Errant; a Name which she had indeed a good
Title to, as we shall see anon.

The great Character I had of her Wit and Beauty, made me desire to know her;
whom, accordingly, I sought an Opportunity to see, and we presently grew
acquainted. I perceived she stood much upon her Quality, for having the Liberty
to choose what Friends she would, she had pitched on very considerable ones, and
confidently assured, that she was Daughter to a Prince and Princess, who, for
certain Reasons best known to her self, had concealed her in Germany. I thought
it was in Jest that she pretended to so illustrious a Pedigree, but at my Third
or Fourth Visit found she was in earnest; and she also informed me, That her
Nativity had been calculated, and that the Astrologer had assured her, she
should go into Poland, where she would meet with her Friends, and a Husband
suitable to her Birth. In these Hopes she lived, expecting kind Heaven would
give her an Opportunity of accomplishing her Destiny, by affording her the
means to make a Voyage to Warsaw.

Hearing I was bound thither, she fancied the happy Hour was come, and offered
to accompany me. At first I thought she rallied, but seeing her very serious
upon it, I represented to her, That the Electress treated her so kindly that it
were Folly and Ingratitude to leave her; that I was obliged to ride Post, and
therefore she could not keep Pace with me; and that both her Reputation and
mine would suffer by such an Action: But she would not be dissuaded from it,
and replied, She was resolved to follow me.

Then I found my Error, in having too rashly engaged my self with that Woman;
for I must confess, that enticed by the easy access I had to her, and the
Beauty she was Mistress of, I had warmly courted her. She, thinking my Love
real, had relied on the Addresses I made to her, only for my Diversion, and did
not imagine I could have denied her any thing.

How to get rid of her I knew not: At last I thought I might do it, by finding
out some real Lover of hers, who would hardly bear her Absence. This was soon
done, and I understood that a raw German Lord had a sincere Affection for her,
and would have married her, had not the Electoress opposed his being matched to
one so much below him. I resolved to make him jealous, and to that end seemed
more assiduous than before; and fearing that was not enough for his dull
Apprehension, I caused him to be warned by a Friend of mine, that I was as
likely as any one to rob him of his Mistress, and he had best not only watch
her himself, but also desire the Electoress to have her observed. I knew not
whether this would take, for my German did not seem the more diligent for it,
only he opened wide a pair of heavy gogling Eyes upon me, whenever it was our
Fortune to be together. In the mean while it grew time for me to be gone, and
having, as I thought, dissuaded her from it, I set forwards, for my intended
Journey; but was scarce Two Leagues off, when being obliged to stay for the
Shoeing of one of my Horses, I was overtaken by Two Horsemen. It was no little
Surprise to me, to see that one of them was the Lady Errant in Man's Clothes;
but more, that the other should be her German Gallant. He said no more to me
than he used to do, only star'd at me with all his Might, while she told me,
That upon my scrupling to take her with me, she had persuaded him to attend
her, that she hoped I would not refuse them my Company during the rest of the
Journey.

I feared lest my having been one of her Adorers, while at Heidelberg, should
make People think I had run away with her; and besides, I could not but foresee
that she would have been a very troublesome Companion. I was, on the other Hand
astonished to see her Lover, who was a Man of the first Quality, in such a
Dress, and without Attendance, and (which increased my Wonder) ready to wait on
her into so far distant a Country, while she would have the Company of a Man
whom he must needs look on as a Rival. Growing impatient to know the meaning of
it, I took him aside, and asked what was his Design, and how I might be
serviceable to him. He made me a very low Bow, and answered me with great
Respect, That my Highness did him too great an Honor, in choosing him for an
Husband to the Princess my Sister. It may well be imagined I was struck with
amasement at his Discourse; but it was soon over, for, by what I knew of his
Mistress, I soon guessed at the Trick she put upon him.

However, to be better informed, I desired him to unriddle himself, and
understood she had made him believe, That I was her Brother, and Prince de --,
who had been obliged to go under a wrong Name at Heidelberg, for the same
Reasons as had also put her under a Necessity of concealing her Quality; and
had promised, If she would come with me into Poland, to marry them together,
and carry her into France, with an Attendance suitable to her Quality. One may
easily guess by what I have said, that my German Lord was no Conjurer; However,
when I had undeceived him, the Shame of having been such an Idiot, so animated
him, that he acted like a Man of Sense though not like a Man of Honor, and
brought me into farther Trouble.

His Resentment got the better of his Love, and posting back to the City, he
left me in Charge with the Lady Errant; who was more obstinate than ever to
give me the Trouble of her Company, though I absolutely refused it; telling her,
If she tarried there any longer, I would return to Heidelberg, and make her
Folly known to all the World.

She was not one that would easily quit her Hold, but seeing Entreaties could
not prevail, she begged of me with Tears, That I would assist her in the
fulfilling her Destiny. I hope the Reader will excuse my Weakness, considering
the Force of those, when trickling down a beautiful Face. I confess, my Heart
began to relent, and I should certainly have complied with her, had I not been
prevented; which shows, that let a Woman be never so great a Fool, she still
has Wit enough to make one of a Man.

While this Dispute lasted, in which the Victory began to incline of her side,
we saw a Company of Horsemen, who, coming up to us, seized on her, and told me,
That his Electoral Highness would willingly have an account of the Reasons I
had to run away with her. This was as much as to say, That they arrested me in
his Name; so I went along with them, without putting them to the Trouble of a
more rough Complement, and came to Heydelberg; where every one looked on me as
the Author of her Flight: For the German, ashamed of having given Credit to the
Extravagancies she had told him, was the most forward in publishing, That I had
persuaded her, thus disguised, to accompany me, thinking thereby to save his
own Credit* for he was returned before his Absence had been taken Notice of.

I sure had Reason to curse my ill Fortune, on this account, it being now the
Third or Fourth Time in my Life, that I had been, though innocent, suspected of
stealing Women. A Man must take great Care how he engages himself with
Strangers, for it often happens that by being too officious to them he hazards
his own Quiet and Safety.

I gave the Elector a faithful account of what had passed, and he readily
believed me, and laughing heartily at the German Lord's Simplicity, assured me,
That he would do his Endeavors to help him to the Wife he had so great a Mind
to.

Then I had leave to depart, but fell sick by the way, and spent above Six
Weeks in my Journey. I understood, before my arrival at Warsaw, That the only
Person I feared, was dead some Days since. The Readers Memory may soon suggest
to him, That it was the Poisoning and Daggering Lady that I stood in such awe
of. She had, since my leaving her, married the Lord I had surpised her with,
and (as it was commonly reported) being weary of her Husband, designed to have
poisoned him, but he was too hard for her at her own Weapons, and prevented her.

King Ladislaus had been dead ever since the Year 1648. and his Brother Prince
Casimir, had succeeded him, as well in the Enjoyment of his Queen as in that of
his Kingdom. I found her Majesty with Child, and ready to lie in; she told me,
I came in a very good Time, for Two Reasons: One, to deliver my Brother out of
the Trouble he had brought himself into, and then, to comfort a poor afflicted
Gentlewoman, who had had recourse to her, and made great Complaints of me.

I was acquainted in the whole, that my Brother had procured himself many
Enemies, by his Rash and Inconsiderate Behavior, especially in his Amors,
insomuch that he was forbid coming to Court. And, as for the Lady, I
understood, by the Description was given of her, thas it was my Heidelberg
Mistress, who was arrived into Poland almost a Fortnight before.

The Queen informed me, That she had given out, I had promised to marry her,
and having obtained my Desire, had ungratefully forsaken her. I satisfied her
Majesty in that particular, and gave her a true account of all I knew of her;
then her Majesty let me know further, That the King began to be in Love with
her; at which I was glad, hoping so potent a Rival might deliver me from her
Impertinence.

The Story of her leaving Heydelberg runs thus. After her Return, the Elector
endeavored to marry her to her stupid German Lover; but having less Wit than
he, and still fondly persuaded that her Stars directed her to Poland, she
refused so good an Offer. The Blockhead, eager in his Pursuit, and assisted by
his Prince, caused her to be confined, thinking by that means to make her
comply; but she found a way to escape, and, having put on Man's Clothes, came
to Warsaw, with a Woman whom she had persuaded to accompany her under the same
Disguise. Being arrived there, she inquired for me, whom not finding, she
thought of the fine Story she had told the Queen. But the King's Affection for
her, gave her other Thoughts, and she looked upon it as the Forerunner to her
future Glory.

We chanced to meet not long after, but with the same Indifferency as though we
had never seen one another, and the feigned Promise, nor the Adventures at
Heydelberg were not once mentioned in our Conversation. I found her free from
all those Extravagancies; she was now grown as sensible as she was fair, and I
must confess I never saw a Woman more charming. She made me the Confident of
her Intriegue with the King, which brought me into fresh Misfortunes.

The Queen being as jealous of this, as she had been of her former Husband,
would have had me acquaint her with all I knew of their Amor; but I, loath to
be an Informer, and fearing to displease her, in refusing to obey her Commands,
pretended I had an Intriegue with her my self, and that the King had wholly
forsaken her. The Confidence her Majesty reposed in me, made her give more
Credit to what I said, than to the Advices she had of the King's Falsehood; and
she could not forbear acquainting him with this Report, saying, She wondered how
People could have such mean Thoughts of him, as to imagine he could love a
Woman I entertained.

The effect of this was, that he suspecting me, ordered his Mistress to forbear
seeing me. When the Queen understood that I durst not visit her, she was
convinced I had deceived her, and resented it so highly that she began to hate
me, as much as she did her Rival.

My Brother's wild Conduct had, on the other Hand, made our Name odious to the
Polanders. Having, as I have already said, been obliged to quit France, about a
Year and a half before, he came to Warsaw, thinking to find me there, where he
met with the Gentleman, who had been my Second at Venice, who was but just
arrived. The Queen made them a very kind Reception, and Prince Cazimir's
Election and Marriage, having given an occasion to all sorts of Pastimes, the
Court was so much taken up with those Divertisements, that War had for some
time been wholly laid a side; so they had not an occasion of serving his Polish
Majesty against the Swedes, to which end they said they were come, and for want
of other Employment wholly spent their time in the Ladies Conversation. All the
Particulars I could hear were, That they had fought several Duels, and that
their rude Behavior to every Woman they liked, had at last obliged the Queen
to command them to come no more to Court; so that they confirmed the Opinion
Foreigners had then, That what the French are most famous for (I mean
Politeness) is what they least practice in their Amors; which Prejudice, I do
not see that those who have traveled since have effaced, for it is looked on
as a Miracle to see a young French Gentleman behave himself with Discretion.

Though I had highly disobliged the Queen, yet she made a great Distinction
between my Brother and me; and if she seemed not to desire me Stay in Poland,
it was because she did not think I could be serviceable to her there, being out
of Favor with the King. So when I had settled my Affairs, I resolved to be
gone, and first endeavored to persuade my Brother and his Friend to a more
decent Carriage; but thinking their Credit wholly lost there, they went into
Swedeland, where they thought they might sooner meet with an Opportunity of
showing their Valor, for they were already outlawed in France, whither they
durst not return.

I once more left Poland, much in the same Posture as I had done the Time
before, out of Favor with the Court, and still for a Woman's sake; for my
Heidelberg Lady was the Cause of all this, and had not that unlucky Accident
fell out, I should have had a great Share in King Casimir's Affection. That
Prince was much of the same Genius as his Brother, a Foe to Business, and a
Friend, nay, I may say, a Slave to his Pleasures, but Master of infinitely more
Bravery. He was not, naturally, daring enough for great Undertakings, which had
given the Queen an absolute Command over his Mind; but when once he had
resolved upon a thing, he wanted not Courage to put it in execution. His
predominant Vice was the Love of Women, and Constancy was what he was little
guilty of. His natural Levity was encouraged by frequent Remorses and a Dread,
lest God should bring some Punishment on him for his Lewdness: But it is
observable, that his Devotion increased but as his Love-Fits began to decrease,
and that he took Religion up but when he grew weary of an old Mistress, which
he would as easily lay down again when a new one pleased him better; thus was
his whole Life a mixture of Piety and Gallantry. As for his Conversation, he
was frank and very Complaisant; his only Fault was too little a Thirst for
Glory; and had not the King of Suedeland and A Polander, who excited a
Rebellion which lasted Fifteen Years.
Lubomirski disturbed his quiet, he would have preferred the Ease of a Private
Man to the Reputation of a great Monarch.

The Queen had an absolute Power over him, though she was still mistrustful of
her Authority; not that she wanted Wit, or thought her self a Fool, but she
feared the King, being of so easy a Temper, might be wrought upon by others;
and seeing he must have Mistresses, she took all possible Care to give him a
distate for those, who, she thought might be cunning enough to outwit and
supplant her.

Such was then the Posture of Affairs in Poland, which I had taken especial
notice of; for being grown in Age, and consequently more serious, I began to
observe the Characters and Intriegues of those I conversed with.

Before I was quite out of that Country I met with a new Adventure, wherein I
run great Hazard of my Life, and was a Witness of the most barbarous Sight Eyes
ever beheld, the very Thought of which strikes my Soul with Horror. Although my
Inclination for the fair Sex was the occasion of the share I had in it, yet I
cannot herein condemn my self, since any one who had the least Humanity or
Generosity would have acted as I did.

I was about Two Days Journey from Warsaw, when resting in a little Town, while
fresh Horses were providing for me, I spied a Woman in a great Disorder, who
running toward me, made Signs that I should meet her, being almost spent, and
not able to reach the Place where I was. Being gone to her, she threw her self
into my Arms, and, before she could speak fainted away. She was little, as are
most of the Polish Women, and, in spite of the Confusion she was in, it was
easily perceived she was as handsome as any that Country affords. Her Beauty
and Distress moved my Pity; I carried her into a little House, where my
Servants waited, and having laid her down, she recovered.

She told us, That she was born at Breslau, and that her Friends had married
her to a Tartar, who was so rude to her, that not being able to bear any longer
with his ill Treatments, she had left him, and was going to Warsaw, where she
had some Relations, who would protect her against her severe Husband. That was
all she told us at first; but at last she owned, that the Reason of her running
away was, That she had given him an Occasion to suspect her Virtue; that her
Lover had accompanied her in her Flight, and being fallen into an Ambuscade of
Cossaks, they had murdered him before her Eyes, and that having made her
escape from them also, she was still in great Fear of her Husband, who, to her
Knowledge, was in pursuit of her.

Indeed my Heart bled to see her in that wretched condition; but how to help
her I knew not, unless I carried her to Warsaw, which would have been a
considerable Stop to my Journey. However, I thought my self obliged in Honor
and Conscience to do it, and accordigly ordered one of my Men to take her up
behind him, and to follow me. But we had scarce rid half a Day, before we met
with her Husband, who with Ten or Twelve Tartars more, was in Quest after her.
He presently knew her again, and having drawn his Scymeter, came to him who had
her up behind him, threatening to take away his Life. I ran to his Relief with
my Pistol cocked, but the superior Number soon overpowered us, and we were
robbed of our Charge. I know not whether in the Passion he was in, he took me
for his Cuckold-maker, but having ordered his Men to seize me, I was forced
into a Stable he had already caused her to be shut into, where I beheld his
barbarous Revenge. He commanded Four of his Servants to grasp her tender Limbs,
while himself began to flea her. The miserable Creature looked sometimes on me,
and amidst the woeful Cries that dreadful Pain forced from her, did now and then
put forth some Ejaculations, to implore the Divine Mercy. At last her inhuman
Husband, seeing her dead, threw in my Face what he had of her Skin, whence I
expected to have been used in the same manner; which to prevent, I told him in
Polish, That I would have him take care of what he did; That I was a Stranger,
wholly unacquainted with his Wife, and whom he could have no quarrel against.
This made him look very earnestly on me; and, as I suppose, finding his
Mistake, he did me the Favor, having set my Men and Baggage at Liberty, to
turn me out of Doors.

Indeed I never was seized with so much Dread and Horror; it was above Ten Days
before I could destroy the frightful Idea of her Punishment; and I had so great
an Execration for the Tartar, that I often had, duing that Time, a violent
Desire, to seek out the Villain, and kill him with mine own Hand: But these
Thoughts did at last wear off, and gave Way to the Reflections I made on the
fatal Consequences which usually attend an unequal Match, and on the Misery
Women procure themselves by their loose Behavior.

I arrived at Paris about the latter End of January, having spent near Ten
Months in my Journey. About a Fortnight after my arrival, the Prince was set at
Liberty, and my Brother and I thought we might express our Gratitude and
Respects to him, without disobliging the Court: But we soon found it otherwise,
and the very first Time we waited on him, perceived he was contrving a a
Rebellion. He was of too great a Judgment not to discover the Queen designed to
to recall the Cardinal, who was then, I think, at Sedan, and openly protested,
That if he returned into France, he would send him out faster than he came in.
We well foresaw what would be the Event, and waited not long for a Confirmation
of our Fears. My Brother did not think fit to follow the Prince, but because I
was more Master of my own Actions, he not only consented to my attending him
out of the Kingdom, but also advised me to share in his Fortune; whether he saw
it impossible for him to advance my Preferment with the Queen, or that being
desirous to see the Prince in Favor with his Majesty, he was glad to have a
Friend with his Royal Highness, who should give him good Advice.

Whatever my Brother's Design might be, I am sure I would never have complied
with his Desires, had I not been glad to leave Paris, that I might divert my
Melancholy, occasioned by the Affliction I had, through the Perfidiousness of a
new Mistress, I had already engaged with, since my Return from Poland. This was
a troublesome Intriegue; and since that with my Carmelite, none had ever proved
so vexatious to me. Indeed it afforded me an Opportunity of discovering new
Characters in the Sex, which I had not till then been aware of, as may be
judged from the following Story.

Near my Lodgings there lived a Woman, whose Husband was lately dead, but who
had been separated from him a few Years after her Marriage. Every one would
have it that her Gallantry had been the only occasion of their Divorce, and I
was for some Time of the same Opinion; but being grown better acquainted with
her, I perceived there might other Reasons and very substantial ones, be given.
She was the most fantastical Woman in the World; and I think that the ill
Humor of a Wife is as insupportable as her want of Chastity; for though she does
less expose her Husband in Public, she is a greater Plague to him in private.

She had a Daughter, who shared the same Fate with her; for they had made it
their Bargain at parting, That the Father should provide for the Boys, and the
Daughter should be left to her Mother's Care. She was certainly the worst Tutor
that young Maid could have, not only because of her bad Repute, but also for
the unaccountable Sentiments she had on her Daughter's account, which till then
it never had entered my Thoughts a Mother could have been guilty of. This
Woman, who was, no doubt, well informed of the Aspersions that were cast upon
her Honor, was jealous at the Praise her Daughter might have won, by not
following her Example; and her greatest Care was to engage her into some
Intriegue, which might expose her to a like Censure; but through another
unaccountable Nicety, she was desirous that her Daughter might lie under the
Scandal of Folly as well as Debauchery, and to that purpose was very diligent
in keeping her from the Company of ingenious Men, whose Conversation might be a
Credit to her, and in admitting Blockheads.

Such was this Gentlewoman's Humor, which I did not at first discover,
thinking her encouraging the Addresses some Fools made to her Daughter might be
grounded on the Opinion, That they are less dangerous than others.

The young Lady was very lovely, had a brisk flashy Wit, but very little
Judgment, and was of a very violent Temper, and a great Indulger of her
Passions.

I was at first wholly unacquainted with either of their Characters, and only
visited them, as being agreeable Neighbors, whose Conversation might prove
diverting; but I had not seen the Daughter twice, e're I fell deep in Love. She
received my Declaration in such a manner as increased my Flame, and we
presently grew as Intimate as if we had known each other all our Lifetime.

She told me, I must not give any Jealousy to her Mother; and that the old
Gentlewoman should not suspect me, I thus excused the frequent Visits I made to
her Daughter: First, That I did it, to increase her Knowledge, by giving her a
Narration of my Travels, and then to make a Match between her and a Relation of
mine, who was very rich, and was wholly guided by me. But this was just the
Counter-part of what I should have done, for her Mother was unwilling she
should have any Merit or be well matched; and her only wish was, That she might
be thought to want both Sense and Modesty.

I soon found I was not welcome, and the most disobliging Methods in the World
were used to make me understand it: But while I was so ill treated, all
possible Favor was shown to a Man who possessed, in a high degree, all the ill
Qualities requisite to render his Acquaintance scandalous on all accounts, and
was therefore sovereignly accomplished for what the Mother designed him.

He was Five and Fifty, and had spent his Life under so universal a Contempt,
that I never heard any one speak well of him. The only good Quality he was
famous for, was, that he was a very peaceable and quiet Man, an Enemy to
Quarrels, and willing to put up all manner of Affronts rather than draw his
Sword, which had not hitherto seen the Light, though he was an Officer. Another
valuable Qualification was, That he was an eternal Visitant, where he once grew
acquainted, especially if it was a House of good Eating, and where it might be
thought he had some Intriegue, for he unwillingly parted with his Money, and was
very ambitous of being thought in Favor with the Ladies.

Being an old Acquaintance of theirs, I wondered not at first to see him so
assiduous; but the Daughter, who seemed to repose an entire Confidence in me,
informed me, That he was vehemently in Love with her. I, not in the least
mistrusting, that one, I thought so deserving could ever stoop to have a
Kindness for such a Fop, turned his Passion into ridicule, and only advised her
to avoid being in private with him, lest she should thereby encourage the
Vanity of that conceited Ass.

I questioned not but her own Inclination would have made her hearken to my
Advice; but was soon soon acquainted with the contrary, that she was with him
Day and Night, and that when the old Woman was gone to Bed they sat up
together till Two or Three in the Morning. I taxed her with it, which she
denied in part, and vowed what she did was only out of Complaisance to her
Mother. Then I found what Mettle the old Gentlewoman was made of, and by this
and several other Passages easily guessed at the Character I have given of her.
I imparted my Conjectures to her Daughter, whom I counseled, as well as I
could, how she should behave her self under those grievous Circumstances: But
my Admonitions came too late; for the Freedom she was allowed with my old
Rival, had so increased their Intimacy that I was clean forgotten. Use makes
all things familiar, and an amorous Woman, like an hungry Clown, greedily
devours all she meets in her Dish.

Though I was vexed beyond Measure to see how matters stood, I could not be
heartily angry at my Mistress, and accused her Mother only, but I soon
understood she was as much to blame.

Being insensibly fallen in Love with the old Officer, she was afraid I might
represent to her Mother the ill Consequences of their frequent Meetings, and by
that means deprive her of the Pleasure of seeing him, with the same freedom as
formerly. To prevent this she resolved to complain first, and accordingly told
her Mother, That I continually persecuted her with Declarations of a Love she
could not receive. I dare say my Affection for her did not so much displease
her Mother, as the good Opinion that old Gentlewoman had of me, for she could
not endure a Gentleman should court her Daughter, desiring, as I have already
said, she should appear ridiculous in the Choice of her Gallants.

The Mother, thereupon, affronted me downright, which I, not in the least
suspecting my Mistresses Treachery, attributed to her usual Fantasticalness. In
the mean while she obtained her Ends, for the old Officer's too frequent Visits
afforded matter for every one's Discourse. The Servants spoke very ill things,
and, in short, it occasioned a very great Scandal.

I found my Case very hard for a Man that loved Sincerely. Though I did not think
her as base as the Town-Talk represented her, yet I could not wholly disbelieve
what was said; however, out of an increedible Fondness, I everywhere took her
part, and strove to efface a Report, which I knew was but too well grounded.

It was impossible she should be ignorant of the Zeal I expressed for her; yet
whether she was ashamed of her Perfidiousness, or that she feared a troublesome
Advice, she did not design to follow, she shunned me with so much Care, that I
never could speak with her.

I knew not what to think of it, for I could never imagine that she should be
in Love with so disagreeable a Person as my Rival; and, besides, I had not
Courage enough to hate her, were it true. In the mean while, the Scandal
increased, and it was whispered about she was with Child. The Proofs of her
Shame were but too convincing, and I found my self in a most intricate Dilemma,
not knowing what to believe, and whether to love or hate her. At last, I
thought it my best way to make no farther Enquiry into the Matter, but by
Absence to seek a Cure for my Folly. By this Motive was I induced to follow my
Brother's Counsels; and, I may say, this Intriegue gave me more piercing Griefs
and more sensible Afflictions than I had till then received.

In Obedience to my Brother's Commands, I attended the Prince, whom I found
very chagreene, and much dissatisfied with the Spaniards. The Loss of Monrond
was a great Vexation to him, and taking me aside, he asked me what People said
of him at Paris, and whether my Brother would not follow my Example? I
answered, that both the Court and City were wholly devoted to him, especially
my Brother, who as a Token of his Respect for him, had sent me to serve him. He
asked me further, Whether my Brother designed to stay? And how he could agree
with the Cardinal. I replied, My Brother made his Court to the King only, and
had nothing to do with that Minister in particular. Then write to him, said he,
that I would have him be either White or Black, and that unless he can can be
content to cringe to the Cardinal it is his best way to come hither. I told
him, I thought he was fixed in his Resolution, and that he would keep where he
was. I see, replied the Prince, that he designs for a Mareschal's Staff. Indeed
he is in the Right, and were I in his Place I should not stop in so fair a
Course; but a Prince is certainly in an unhappy Station. Thereupon he unbosom'd
himself to me, and confessed, That he was sorry for having engaged into such a
Business. I laid hold of this Opportunity to persuade him to make his Peace
with the King: But, he answered, it was too late, and that now the Dice were
cast he must be content with his Chance. We had afterward several other
Conferences, and whether he reposed more Trust in me than in the rest of those
who were with him, or that having once unfolded his Secrets to me, it was
become habitual to him, he made me the Confident of all the Mortifications he
received from the Spaniards, and had each Day some new Discovery to impart to
me, of the little Fidelity was to be expected from them. This occasioned his
giving me a Commission I thought very disagreeable, being rather desirous to be
employed in the Army. The Prince, who ever since the Battle at Lens knew me to
be a good Soldier; would of himself have been inclined to give me that
Satisfaction, but seeing nothing was acted in Flanders, without express Orders
from the Council at Madrid, he thought it would not be amiss to send into Spain
a Person he might trust to, who should manage his Affairs with Don Lewis de
Haro, First Minister of that Court. He told me, He had at first pitched on the
Abbot de -- thinking I might have done him more Service, as an Officer, but
that the Abbot was too rash and giddy, and, he feared, would spoil all; then he
obligingly told me, My good Parts rendered me more fit than any one to
ingratiate my self with the Spanish Ministers; that this Employment, which
would not expose me to public View, would be more convenient for me than
bearing Arms against France, where my Brother might perhaps be the Object of
their malicious Revenge; that seeing my Brother adhered to the Cardinals Party,
he would, questionless, use his Endeavors to recall me, and that if my Mind
altered, I might return with more Honor, not having appeared in the Rebellion.

I yielded to these Reasons, and, besides, I found there was a good one he kept
to himself, to wit, the Jealousy, which the Interest I had in him, gave to
those who had some Share in his Favor: So I acquainted the Prince, That I was
ready to obey his Commands, and having received my Instructions, went for
Madrid, incognito, as a Stranger, who made that Journey on his own private
Occasions; for the Prince had not thought fit to give me a Public Character,
thinking my Negotiations, by being more private, would be more secure, and kept
my Departure so very secret, that none knew but himself what was become of me.

I spent near Two Years in Madrid, without doing him any other Piece of service
than representing the Wrongs he received from the Spaniards in Flanders, and
answering the Complaints which they made against him; for, as one might judge
from their Letters, they never could agree: And I discovered better there than
the Prince could do in Flanders, how wretched a Rebel's Condition is, who is
forced to depend upon Strangers. They found him too extravagant in his
Expenses, and too slow in his Progresses, for they would have had him conquer
all France in a Quarter of a Year's Time, without putting them to a Farthing
Expense. It Is true, they did all possible Justice to his Merit, but still the
Money was wanting, and some thought Don Lewis de Haro was of Intelligence with
Cardinal Mazarine, and had been bribed by the Queen Mother, to leave the Prince
destitute both of Men and Money. Whatever the Reason might be, all my Instances
prevailed little, and only procured him unperform'd Promises and empty Praise,

Having then but little to do, during the Two Years I remained at Madrid, it
was no wonder if I spent some part of my Time in Gallantry, especially in a
Country so fruitful in Adventures and Intriegues; and there I obtained a
farther Insight into the Female Sex's Character, which I have made it my
Business in these Memoirs to describe.

I lodged at a Frenchman's House, who by his Pride and Self-Conceit might have
been taken for a Spaniard, but there is little Difference between the Spaniards
and the Natives of Gascony, at least I found it so by him. He bragged much of
his Quality, but still did not disdain Trade, Pictures and Pieces of Tapestry.

Here, though it is not much to our Purpose, I cannot forbear relating the manner
wherein he bought some of them, which will perhaps seem odd and unlikely, but
is notwithstanding very true.

A Spaniard, whom he dealt with, carried him one Day into the King's Palace,
and having led him into the finest Apartment, where they took a View of the
Pictures and Tapestry, the Spaniard asked him, What he liked best of all the
Furniture? and the other having told him, He fancied a certain Picture and
Piece of Hangings he showed him; Well, quoth my Spaniard, and what will you
give me, if I procure them? The Frenchman, not thinking they were at his
disposal, took this as a Jest; but his Companion having assured him he was in
earnest, and that this was not the first Time he had sold the King's Goods,
they made a Bargain, and accordingly the Picture was sent, having been cut out
of its Frame, and some Days after the Tapestry, which the Receiver speedily
conveyed to Bayonne. Himself told me this Story, saying; It was a very usual
thing at Madrid, where they would in that manner sell the Goods of most of the
Palaces, having first agreed of the Price before they stole them.

I did not much like the Company of a Man, who was capable of countenancing
such a Villainy; but I meddled not with his Concerns, nor he with mine, and all
the Discourse we had together was only concerning the Intriegues of the Town.

The first I had at Madrid was with a Woman, whose Husband was a great
Favorite of Don Lewis de Haro's. My Employment occasioned an Intimacy between
us, for it was often through his means that I obtained Audience from his
Patron. I never had seen his Lady, nor so much as heard that he was married,
till one Day that she spoke to me, in a Church where we chanced to meet. I
found she knew me, and was willing to improve an Acquaintance, which her Youth
and Beauty made me but too desirous of. These Desires I expressed to her, to
which she answered, If I was sincere, the Week should not be at an End before I
should receive that Satisfaction.

The Frenchman, at whose House I lodged, was then at the same Church, and had
taken notice of our Conversation, though it had been but very short: We were no
sooner at home but he asked me whether I knew that Lady, and had seen her
before? I asked him the Reason of his Question. It Is, replied he, of some small
concern to me, having been her Gallant for above this half Year; and, when you
please I will show you some Twenty Letters of hers I have by me. Then he told
me, That he was scarce arrived at Madrid, when he first contracted a
Familiarity with her, having had an Opportunity at a Public Entertainment the
King had given, and that ever since he met her thrice a Week, at a certain
Place, where he offered to carry me.

I was not a little nettl'd at his Discourse, being vexed to see that a Lady,
whom I had a Kindness for, should be already engaged; and what was worse, that
so undeserving a Man (for indeed his Merit was but small) should have the
preference before me. However, I concealed my Thoughts, and pretending
Curiosity, desired to see some of those Letters, which he promised me: But he
delayed me Two Days, and then showed me Six or Seven anonimous Billets, which
he assured me, came from her, and all expressed a great Passion, and very
little Wit.

This gave me such ill Thoughts of the Lady that I resolved never to think of
her more; but having some Business with her Husband, I went to his House, where
I was informed he was out of Town, and one of her Servants whispered me, That
his Lady desired to speak with me. I could not tell at first what I had best to
do: However, the Desire of knowing what she had to say, prevailed, and I went
up to her, with a Resolution to tax her Baseness.

I did, and she protested it was all false; vowing she knew no Frenchman but my
self, and that no Man could ever boast of having received a Love-Letter from
her. The Confidence with which she spoke to me, made me begin to suspect my
Landlord, upon which I told the Lady, That I would produce some of them, by
which she replied, I should oblige her; then I left her possessed with a
Passion which nothing but a Confirmation of her Infamy could extinguish.

I took no Notice to my Landlord that I had visited the Lady, but pretending I
had found the Letters very ingenious, I desired him to let me see them once
more; and he accordingly drew one out of his Pocket, he said he had but just
received, which I read and put into mine, and he did not seem over-earnest to
have it again.

Then I presently waited on the Lady, whom I found ready to send me one, which,
she told me, she had wrote, that by comparing the Characters I might be
convinced of her Innocence. I was, and it plainly appeared that this was all a
Contrivance of his, whether out of a Vain Glory of being thought to have had a
good Fortune, or a Desire to perplex me, for he never had so much as spoke to
her.

Nothing could then have hindered my being seriously in Love with her, but the
oddest Fancy, I think, any Woman could ever have. The scandalous Story he had
made of her must naturally have have procured him her Scorn and Aversion. But
how strange are a Woman's Appetites! His Lies had a quite contrary effect, and
she desired me to bring him to her, saying, It was with a Design to be revenged
on him, for having abused her thus; but it seems that Man had unawares gained
her Favor, and indeed at the very first Sight they became very good Friends.

Let the most accurate Moralists tell me now, What could be the Motive of her
being charmed with that which would have made him Contemptible in any other
Woman's Eyes? As for me, I can assign none, but the flattering Thoughts, that
since he had pretended himself one of her Adorers, he must needs think her
adorable: Perhaps too, did she find the Letters just such as she would have
sent, and could not help admiring a Man who had so good a Guess.

Whatever the Reason might be, they improved their Acquaintance, and my
Landlord might since have shown me as many true Letters as he had done
fictitious ones, but he grew discreet when his Intriegue became real. I should
have disputed him the Conquest of a Heart he had so bad a Title to, had I not
then met with a Lady whom I thought more worth my Care.

The Duke de Guise was still at Madrid, having the City for a Prison. I waited
on him, and gave him an account of what I had suffered at Naples for his
Service, as also of his Mistress's Treachery, except that part of it wherein I
was concerned. He said, He was sorry he should have occasioned me all that
Trouble, and to make me some Amends, he would introduce me to a Lady who, he
was sure, would not receive me ill, and was worth my Acquaintance, being as
considerable for her Quality and Fortune as for her great Beauty.

This was a strong Temptation, and being of my self very frail, I was easily
won to make an Appointment, according to which he carried me Two Days after,
into a House, where he promised me I should see her. From the Freedom with
which the Duke entered, I judged he was no Stranger there: It was then about
Five in the Evening, and not so dark but I perceived the Furniture was
extraordinary rich, which confirmed part of what the Duke had said, and I began
to have a strange Passion for the unknown Lady.

I was left alone in a Closet, till very late at Night, while the Duke was
gone, as he told me, to acquaint the Lady with my being there. I had all the
Reason in the World to imagine that she was one of his Mistresses, and that
being weary of her, he had a mind to make her over to me; yet my Weakness was
such that I waved these Reflections, to dwell on the Thoughts of my future
Happiness. But how great was my Astonishment, when the Lady coming into the
Closet, I saw it was the same from whom I had received so ill Treatment at
Naples. The Duke ushered her in, and told me, smiling, That she came to expiate
her former Faults. I was possessed with Anger and Indignation at the unexpected
Sight, but the Duke's Presence commanding my Respect, I put a good Face on the
Matter, and seeing they both laughed heartily, I laughed too for Company, though
I had little mind to it.

I could not imagine whether his Design in surprising me, was only to make
himself Sport, or to reconcile me to the Lady; but whatever his Intention might
be, I thought I had Reason to be offended at it; and out of Revenge resolved
once more to be his Rival. There indeed my Passion proved stronger than my
Honor, which would have led me rather to abhor than court so perfidious a
Woman. Besides, what Madness was it in me to think of depriving him of a
Mistress, in whose Favor he seemed to be, and who having left her Native
Country, was come as far as Spain to enjoy his Conversation. But I ventured
through all, and, before I left her, whispered in her Ear, that I adored her
more than ever, and was a dead Man if she did not answer my Love. She squeezed
my Hand at these Words, which gave me Hopes I labored not in vain. The very
next Day she sent for me, and her Beauty and Conversation made me feel in
earnest a Flame I designed but to pretend.

She at first begged my Pardon for what had passed at Naples, alleging several
bad Excuses, which being varnished over with a few Tears, I readily accepted.
Then the Duke was the next Theme we went upon, and she made great Complaints of
him, telling me, That though she had come so far from Home for his sake, and had
made him very rich Presents, he cared little for her, and was in Love with one
of the King of Spain's Mistresses.

It will easily be thought that I did not endeavor to clear him, but made use
of his Falsehood as an Argument to persuade her to pay him in his kind. But she
told me, That she would bear with it a little longer, and that the Duke's
Departure being so near, she would not fall out with him now, but would manage
him so, that I should have no cause to be jealous. I took all this for Current
Coin, and left her as full of Love as if she had been the chastest Woman in the
World; but it was all a Plot she and the Duke had contrived, to make Sport with
me, as will appear by the sequel of the Story.

I had already heard that the King of Spain was a very amorous Prince, and his
Intrigues were so many that all Madrid talked of nothing else. I was also
informed that he kept a Strange Lady, whom he used to meet at the Count de --,
and that to that Amor the Duke de Guise owed his Liberty. The Duke himself had
also often mentioned her, in my Hearing, but without naming her, and I durst
not ask him who she was. But the Frenchman, with whom I lived, who was a very
inquisitive busy Fellow, said, He was acquainted at the House where the King
used to visit his Mistress, whither, if I pleased, he would carry me, to see
his Majesty, as he was going to her. I accepted of the Proposal, and we hid our
selves in a dark Passage, through which the King was to come, whom presently
after we saw in a Civilian's Habit; which so disguised him, that had I not been
told beforehand it was himself, I should never have known him. He tarried there
but half an Hour; and after he was retired, we were going down Stairs, when a
Servant bid us make Room, and looking up I saw the Lady, to whom my Companion
said the Visit had been made. Her Face was covered with a Veil, and passing by
me, she pulled me by the Sleeve, and told me in Italian, she would gladly meet
me in another Place, and walked by so fast that I had not the leisure to reply.

I did not doubt but she was taken with my Phiz; and flattered with the
Thoughts that she should fancy me above a Monarch, my next Care was to find out
who she was, and how I might speak with her.

I thought no Body could inform me better than the Neapolitan Lady, who had
made me believe she was her Rival, and therefore waited on her, and asked her,
Which of the King's Mistresses it was the Duke de Guise had an Inclination for?
She smiled at my Question, and desired to know why I asked it. I replied it was
only out of Curiosity; upon which she often renewed her Enquiry, and having
still returned the same Answer; Come, said she, you do not deal ingenuously
with me, I am better acquainted with your Thoughts than you imagine; the Lady
whose Acquaintance you so much long for is the best Friend I have; I know that
she loves, and has spoken to you, but if you are wise you will let her alone,
and I dare hope, that as things stand between us, you would not be false to me.
I at first denied she had ever spoke to me, but hearing her repeat the very
Words, I confessed the Truth, promising I would not think of her any more.

The Duke de Guise also told me of it, seeming as well informed as his
Mistress, and advised me to improve the Opportunity, assuring me that he would
not traverse my Designs, but, since he must shortly leave Spain, would freely
resign her. I had indeed but too great an Inclination to follow the Duke's
Counsel, but fearing to discover it to my Rival, I seemed to believe he
rallied, and did not express any Desire of knowing her, fearing he would have
told the Neapolitan Lady of it, whose Favor I was not willing to lose. So I
remained in my Ignorance, and by the Chimera's I framed to my self of my Fair
unknown, was deprived of the Sweets I might have enjoyed with my known
Mistress, whose Charms I thought much inferior to hers.

I never knew till then how fantastical a Passion Love is; for though I had never
seen her Face, I doted on her more than I yet had done on any Woman I ever
courted, and my Desire was so much the fiercer, because I knew not what it was
I wished for. My own Experience convinced me then, That your Knight Errants
running up and down the World after invisible Ladies, is not the most unlikely
Part of Romances, since I my self little differed from those fabulous Heroes,
being wholly taken up with a Lady whose Charms I was wholly a Stranger to.

To make this a true Romantic Adventure, the unknown Object of my Wishes sent
me some Letters, by which she promised in a short Time to rid me of my Doubts,
and admonished me in the mean while to remain constant and discreet. It was
very difficult for me to obey her, for whenever I had received a Billet Doux,
my Mistress told me of it, and seemed not to be ignorant of the Contents. I
remained a quarter of a Year in this uncertainty, when at last a Note was
delivered to me, to let me know that the Lady now designed to disclose her
self, and that she would be that Day at the Neapolitan Lady's.

Though I was heartily vexed at her choosing that House for our Interview, yet I
was punctual to a Minute, and then understood, that the King's Mistress, who
had spoken to me, was no other Person than my old Acquaintance. Having left
Naples to follow the Duke de Guise into Spain, she no sooner appeared at Court
but the King fell deep in Love with her; the Duke de Guise, who was not
over-nice in that Point, had promoted their Amor, and the Service he had done
his Majesty therein, was recompensed with his Liberty.

I was ashamed to own my self deceived, but pretended I had discovered the
Design long ago, and only connived at it, to see how far they would carry on
the Jest. But though the Lady had believed me, the Increase of my Fondness would
have undeceived her; for adding to the Charms she really possessed, those I had
attributed to my unknown Mistress, I grew more passionate than ever I had been.
This shows that Love must still have Fancy to support it, and is at the same
Time a Proof, that our Hearts are strangely deluded, when once they yield
themselves up to it.

I began to adore my Neapolitan afresh, as if I had never courted her before;
and the Duke de Guise's sudden Departure delivered me from a dangerous Rival. I
was surpised at the Indifferency with which they parted. The Joy of returning
to his native Country drowned the Grief he should have felt at leaving a Woman,
who had given him such Demonstrations of her Love; and she, on the other hand,
was not sorry for the Loss of him, being wholly taken up with the Glory of the
illustrious Conquest she had made. But what I most wondered at, was to see how
unconcernedly they talked of this Separation; for the Duke plainly told her,
That being obliged to quit her, he could not yield up his Pretenses to a more
worthy Person than my self, who had besides an unquestionable Title to her
Affection, from what I had suffered for her sake, which she heard with a Temper
I never thought Parting Lovers could have been Masters of. It is, no doubt, a
great Felicity to enjoy such a Tranquillity of Mind: But my Sincerity has
always rendered my Amors unfortunate, and I should certainly have been happy,
had I lived in those blessed Times, when in Love there was more Truth and less
Artifice.

The little good Nature she expressed in that Occasion, joined to the Memory of
my having been so often choused by her, should certainly have cured me of my
Dotage; but, on the other Hand, the Spanish Women live very much retired, and I
had a free Access to her; besides, I was very idle at Madrid, and wanted
Occupation: But, as for the great Leisure I had, she soon procured me
Employment, by the Troubles she brought me into.

The Duke de Guise was scarce gone, when she began to Grieve for his Absence.
While this Humor lasted I never had a good Word from her, for she accused me
as the Cause of his going, and of her Consenting to it.

When I saw this, I began to be angry too, and made the Intriegue she had with
the King, a Pretext to my Displeasure, saying, I would have all her Heart or
none. So we were continually quarrelling for Three Weeks together, after which
she became more complaisant, and gave over speaking of the absent Duke, as I
also did teazing her about the King.

But this Truce lasted not long, for visiting her one Evening, I found her in a
great Fury, and having inquired into the Reason, she replied, She was jealous
at one of her Rivals, whom the King affected better than her self. It was a
Surprise to me to see this Fit on her, for she had hitherto seemed very well
contented on that account; so I asked her, What new Accident had happened? she
told me, She had no fresh Reason to hate her, but that, upon several
Considerations, she had concluded it was a Shame to her to have but a Share in
the King's Favor. Tho this Scruple came, me thoughts, a little too late, I
would not let slip so fair an Opportunity of persuading her not to settle her
Affection on a Prince who was so general a Lover, since she was rich enough not
to need his Assistance. She did not relish this Doctrine, but told me, That, on
the contrary, she would use her utmost Endeavors to drive her from a Post she
could suffer no Body in but her self, and to grow the sole Possessor of his
Heart; upon which I represented to her, that it was impossible, seeing he was
of so fickle a Temper, that he each Day added a new Mistress to the many old
ones he had already: But was answered, That she would not desist, and that I
must help her in it too.

I was willing to know how I could assist her in her Design? She told me, I
must court her Rival; that she would make the King take notice of it, who would
doubtless grow jealous, and that her Plot was so contrived that her Antagonist
must bear alone the Weight of the King's Anger, and I should receive no Damage.
I did not like her Proposal, and answered, I durst not venture upon it; to
which she replied angrily, That if I did not, she would acquaint the King with
my Love to her self, and undo me that way.

I was extremely perplexed, not knowing which to do; but at last I chose to
comply with her, thinking that would be the safest, because it required more
Time, during which her Mind might alter, whereas by denial I exposed my self to
sudden Ruin. So I told her, I was ready to obey, if she would but put me in
the Way. She answered, That was not Difficult, and she would bring me
acquainted with her Enemy, who often visited her.

She was as good as her Word, and the Project was executed as she had laid it,
only I did not pretend Courtship to her Rival, but fell in Love with her in
good earnest. Here the Reader will give me leave to call Eleonor, who was a
young Maid, between Eighteen and Twenty; she could not boast of her Quality,
having been brought to Court during the Rebellion in Catalonia, by a Lady,
whose Husband being Governor of that Province, had been murdered by the
Rebels. But what she wanted that way was recompensed by an incomparable Beauty,
the best Nature in the World and the strictest Virtue, which had won the King's
Esteem, who had a real Passion for no other but her, he only knew her to be
chaste, for every Body else thought nothing could be refused a Monarch.

Being the most beautiful of the King's Mistresses, she was therefore the chief
Object of the Neapolitan Lady's Jealousy; and one Day, as she reproached the
King with his Kindness for Eleonor, he confessed to her, That he never could
obtain the least Favor from her, and that he began to be tired with Fruitless
Endeavors. This it was that put her so out of Humor, and fearing her Modesty
might gain her his Respect, she resolved to ruin her, by making him believe she
was chaste only to him: For that is the Way of such Women, to cry down and hate
those whose Virtues make their Vices more conspicuous.

I was charmed with her Beauty, at the first Sight, and being weary of my
Mistresses insupportable Humors, my Heart readily embraced a Change. I declared
my Love to Eleonor, who answered, That if I were sincere she would return it.
Then we appointed a Meeting in the same Place the next day, when the Neopolitan
Lady, whose Interest it was to promote our Amor, made some Excuse and
withdrew. Eleonor, seeing we were alone, unbosom'd her self to me, and having
protested that she never had granted the King any Favor Modesty would not
allow, assured me she would behave her self in the same manner to any Man who
should court her, unless it were with a Design to marry.

These Principles increased my Passion, and I answered, That I could wish my
self worthy that Honor, but must own to her my Estate in France was but small,
and what I had in Poland belonged to my Children, so that my being her Husband
would prove her Ruin. She replied, Riches was not what she desired, and that
she could be content with Necessaries. I told her, She must have more aspiring
Thoughts, and that all I could do for her Service was, to advise her to match
her self to Advantage. She said, It was only with that Design she had
entertained the King's Addresses, though she knew her Reputation suffered by it,
but being Friendless, and being not conscious of any Guilt she had committed,
she hoped Heaven would forgive, and not forsake her.

This made me call my Carmelite to mind, and I found their Sentiments so
conformable, that I wept at the sad Remembrance of that unfortunate Amor.

Eleonor was surpised at it, and having asked the Reason, I told her, It was a
consequence of Esteem I had for her, and the Trouble I was in, to see my self
incapable of possessing so Generous and Virtuous a Wife. This Reply pleased
her, and she told me, That since I was willing to counsel her, she would accept
my Offer, provided I would advise her how she should obtain of the King of
Spain, that he would make her rich enough to espouse me, without being a Charge
to me; For, said she, I must confess I fancy you more than any Man I know; I
have a great Desire to live in France, and wish for no greater Satisfaction
than to spend my Life there with you. I answered, I saw little likelihood of
our being married; which I repeated so often, that she was offended at it. Do
not think, said she, my being so willing to have you proceeds from a want of
Lovers, I might find enough who would not deny me, and one, among the rest,
whose Quality would dazzle the Eyes of any one but my self. Then she informed
me, That the eldest Son to the Duke de -- laid close Siege to her, and, had she
consented, would have stole her, but that she had still refused it.

By the concern I was in at hearing this, I found I had but too great an
Inclination for her; yet I was Master of my self to that degree, as to tell
her, That such an Offer was not to be slighted, and that I would use my
Endeavors to promote the Match.

There, I think, this Visit and Conversation ended; and the Neapolitan Lady
having asked me, How Matters went? I replied; there was nothing to be done with
her. This increased her Rage, and confirmed her in the Resolution she had taken
to undo her; to which end she went, and told the King, That Maid, who was so
proud to him, could stoop to other People, and that I boasted of some Favors I
had obtained from her.

The King, who had a real Esteem for Eleonor, informed her of what he had
heard, and she, believing I had done her that Injury, vowed it was all false,
and begged his Majesty to avenge her; which he promised. Not thinking she had
done enough, she excited the Lover, she had told me of, against me: Who
promised he would make me recant, or would cut out my Tongue. I, the while, did
not in the least suspect my Danger, and was filled with Love and Admiration for
a Lady, who was then contriving my Ruin.

One Night, as I was retiring homewards, I was set upon by Six Men, who, having
struck up my Heels, bound me, and carried me into a House; where the first
Person I saw was Eleonor, who coming to me in an unexpressible Rage, bid me,
Repair her Honor, or expect to be hewn in pieces. Upon that, in came the Duke
de -- 's Son, with a Dagger in his Hand, who seemed unwilling to hear me speak,
and desirous to have dispatched me immediately. All I could do in the Danger I
was in, was to cast a languishing Eye upon Eleonor; and I know not whether my
Looks moved her Compassion, but holding my Adversary's Arm; Speak then, Wretch,
said she, How have I deserved that Slander from you? This brought me to my self
again, and judging some Body must have misrepresented me to her, I began not to
be so much afraid, but looking tenderly on her; Who I, Madam! answered I, that
I should have injured your Reputation! For Heaven's sake forbear such Thoughts.
All the Crime I am conscious of, is having a greater Esteem for you than some
People will, perhaps, allow; and having been too free in speaking your Praise.

I spok these Words with such an honest Assurance as inclined Eleonor to
believe me. But I forgot I was in his presence who designed to marry her, and I
continued my Discourse with so much Passion, that by clearing my self in the
Lady's Opinion, I grew guilty in that of her Lover, who would still be
interrupting me, saying; I must dye. She answered, It was fit I should be
heard, and acquainted me with what the Neapolitan Lady had told the King; and I
vowed to her, That it was an Invention of her own, occasioned by her Malice and
Jealousy. This undeceived her quite, and being asked by her; Whether I would
maintain what I said before the King? I replied, I would stand to my Words, not
only in his Majesty's Presence, but before all the the World.

All this confirmed her Lover's Suspicion, who looking spitefully on her, What
then, Madam, said he, you have sent for this Man hither, only to let me know
that he is my happy Rival? Why, replied she, do you not see he is besides
himself, and that he caresses me only in Hopes I would save his Life? I
perceived not my Imprudence, and reflecting only on the Affront was given me,
in saying, I was afraid of Death, No, no, answered I, I am not afraid of dying;
I know what I say, and were I unbound, addressing my self to my Rival, we
should soon see which of us had the better Heart. At these Words the Coward ran
at me, to stabbed me, and would certainly have done it, had not the generous
Eleonor stopped him, and placed her self between us. The Spaniard, seeing she
took my Part, went away threatening her, and carried with him those who had
seized me. She did what she could to call him back, but in vain, and so we were
left alone. Then she untied me, and blamed me very much for having declared my
Love in so unfit a Season.

I comforted her as well as I could, and desired her to excuse my Error, since
the Vexation I was in, to think she should have thought me guilty of so great a
Baseness, had quite distracted me. I promised her I would let the King know the
whole Truth, and would revenge her Quarrel with the Neapolitan Lady. But she
said, We must let that alone for the present, and only think of Means to
sacrifice her Suitor. I assured her, I would obey all her Commands: The first
of which, she told me, should be, Not to see her any more. It was indeed the
hardest she could have laid upon me, yet I submitted to it, promising to
observe her Orders, tho with the Forfeit of my Life.

In the mean while, the Duke de -- 's Son had quitted her in such a Passion
(because she had not suffered him to stab me) that he gave out, He had
undeniable Proofs that what I had bragged was true. The King came to hear of
it, and this having confirmed my Neapolitan Mistress's Slander, he easily
believed her guilty. So she was every where defamed, and I became the innocent
Cause of the Wrong she suffered. I was sore afflicted at it, and though I had
promised never to see her more, yet I made several vain Attempts to do it,
designing, if I could, to have offered my Service to her, in vindicating her
Honor, or taking Vengeance of her Enemies.

The King being fully persuaded I had enjoyed her, thought, that having had
that Weakness she was not impossible to be gained, and redoubled his
Applications to her. Thus it is that a vicious Love is increased by that which
would extinguish an honorable Flame. Whether his Majesty prevailed or not I
cannot tell, but she was married a Fortnight or Three Weeks after, to a Spanish
Lord, and the Wedding was scarce over, when the King gave him the Government of
M --, ordering him to his Post, while his Lady remained at Court.

I had then broke off with my Neapolitan Mistress, and vowed never to see her
more; but she used such means to entice me back again, that I was once more
wrought upon, and renewed my old Acquaintance with her.

The King having of late been very cold to her, she told me, She was resolved
to refuse his Pension, and return to Naples. The first of these I confirmed her
in, but dissuaded her from the last; for I could not quit Madrid, and feared
that she being gone I should want an Amusement, and it was impossible to me to
live without an Amor, so great is a Man's Misfortune who has contracted these
ill Habits, which I would advise every one to avoid, who has any Respect for
his Ease and Quiet.

She yielded to stay at Madrid, but I soon repented my being the occasion of
it: For she renewed her Jealousies against Eleonor, and told me, I must lend a
helping Hand to her undoing. It was in vain that I represented to her, How
Odious and Unjust was her Design. The more I would persuade her, the more
obstinate she grew, so we fell out again, for I would never comply with her
Desires.

Seeing I had left her, she found means to charm the young Lord, who would have
killed me. His Love to his former Mistress turned to an implacable Hatred, upon
her preventing his murdering me, which was improved, by her being married, and
the Complacency she had for the King, all which rendered him the fittest Person
in the World, to promote the Neapolitan Lady's Designs.

Being both of a mean Spirit and cruel Temper, they resolved on no less than
stabbing her. I was informed of this by one of her Servants, who having been
the Confident of our former Amors, had still retained a Kindness for me, and
thought it my Duty to oppose it; first, because I stood indebted for my life to
her, then on the account of the Esteem I still retained for that generous Lady:
And besides, I was of my self enough a Gentleman, to have hazarded my Person
for the Prevention of an ill Design, had I been led to it, by neither of the
forementioned Motives.

The first thing I did in order to it, was to acquaint Eleonor with the Plot,
and to counsel her to give the King immediate Notice. She did, but having owned
to his Majesty whence she had it, he fancied I continued visiting her, and this
Jealousy made him believe I had done it only to make her value me the more,
and therefore gave no great heed to the Advice. However, he spoke of it to the
Duke de --, who having told his Son, I had discovered his Conspiracy; that
young Lord assured him, it was a groundless Imagination, adding, He hoped, he
had not so ill an Opinion of him, as to think he could be guilty of so base an
Action as murdering a Woman.

Thus my Honesty had no other Reward than Hatred on all Hands; the one
believing me guilty of Slander, and the others resolving, through my Death, to
make a Way to that of Eleonor. She sent me a Messenger, to bid me take Care of
my self, because his Majesty had given Orders to have me apprehended, but I
concealed my self so well, that I avoided both those who were commanded to
seize me, and those who watched to take away my Life.

Any one but my self would have made his Escape, but being persuaded I was the
only Person that could prevent the intended Assassination; the Desire of
preserving a Lady I loved, prevailed more with me than the Care of my own
Safety. I remained at Madrid, having caused a Report that I was fled; so the
Duke de -- 's Son and his Mistress, seeing no body stood in their Way, resolved
afresh on the Execution of their Project.

It will, perhaps be wondered at, that they should be so strongly bent on it,
since the Advices I had given, must needs have discovered them to be the
Authors, had it succeeded; but their Passion so blinded them, that they did not
foresee their Danger.

In the mean while, I was deprived of the means to avert the Fatal Blow, for
not daring to be seen, I could not hear from the Neapolitan Lady's Servant. I
thought at last of disguising my self like an Algerine-Slave, and accordingly
put on a false Beard, and black'd my Face, which, with my Clothes, so altered
my Countenance, that I scarce knew my self again. In that Dress I went to
Eleonor, to whom I said, I could not abandon her in the Peril she was in; that
I desired her never to go abroad without good Company, and to conceal me in her
House, for I knew her Life was aimed at, and would either save her or dye in
the Attempt. She did not doubt but her Danger was real, and pretended her self
ill, to have a Pretext for staying at Home; she also told her Servants that I
was a Slave, who had brought her a Message from her Husband; and before a Week
was over she felt the good Effect of her Precaution.

Some armed Men, in the Evening, assaulted her Servants, and pursued them into
the very Doors, of which having made themselves Masters, they soon were so of
the whole House. The first thing they did, was to come up to the Room where she
lay; and I alone opposed their Violence, which I did with so much Vigor, that
the rest of the Family, animated thereby, seconded me, and after a sharp
Dispute, in which Two of the Villains were killed, the rest run away. We made
after them into the Street, where the first I met was the Duke de -- 's Son,
who waited for his Companions, being himself their Leader in this honorable
Enterprise. At that Sight, I confess, I was no longer my own Master, but with
one Blow of my Cymeter laid him down at my Feet. The Watch hearing the Noise,
came immediately to us, and taking me and one of the Lady's Servants, carried
us to Prison. We were presently examined, and I had the good Fortune not to be
known. All the Witnesses justified what I had done, and I was set at Liberty,
to the great Affliction of the Duke de -- who was desirous to revenge his Son's
Death; but he was advised not to make the Story public, which was so Injurious
to his Son's Memory. I the while had the Pleasure to hear those blamed who had
neglected my Advice, and my self pitied, as having been forced to fly, for
being too honest. As for the Neapolitan Lady, she had disappeared as soon as
she heard her Lover was killed, and was, I suppose, returned to Naples.

The Algerine-Slave's Bravery was become Town-Talk, and I was taken no more
Notice of than if I had been in France, where every Body thought me to be, so
well was I disguised. Eleonor, who alone knew me, could not tell how to express
her Gratitude. She forced me to accept of a Golden Cabinet, wherein she had put
a great Quantity of Gold and Jewels, which amounted to a considerable Sum, and
not content therewith, she said, She would acquaint the King with it, that he
might Recompense me according to my Deserts; but I bid her have a Care what she
did, since that Prince would certainly be extreme jealous, should he hear what
I had done for her, and thus she would ruin me, by endeavoring to do me
Service. She took my Advice, and hearing me talk of returning to France, she
conjured me not to leave her, alleging, That the Danger was over, and that I
might now, without any Hazard leave off my Disguise, and appear as I had done
before. I complied with her, only desiring she would permit me sometimes to put
it on, that I might with more Safety wait on her, to which she readily
consented, my important Services having procured me her Love. So I remained at
Madrid, under Two different Shapes, which exposed me to several new Adventures.

MEMOIRS OF THE Count de -- Compiled by Monsieur SAINT E. BOOK IV.
THE Recital of my Adventures may have given more than one Instance, that Men
sometimes really have as strange ones, as the most fantastical Authors can have
invented: But this has not as yet appeared so visibly, as it will do in the
sequel of my History, especially in the Accidents that befell me, while at
Madrid, I played the double part, of a Gentleman and an Algerine-Slave. The
Reader will, no doubt, be apt to take it all for an agreeable Fiction, but
having promised to give him a sincere Relation of all my Amors, I must write
as well those which do not exceed his Belief, as those which may seem less
probable, and I must beg of him to give an equal Faith to all, being all
equally true.

Being resolved, or rather forced, to remain at Madrid, because I had not yet
acquitted my self of the Prince's Commission, the Business about the Duke de --
's Son was no sooner ended, but I appeared in public; and having obtained
Audience from Don Lewis de Haro, and then from the King himself, I told his
Majesty I had been forced to abscond, to avoid the dangerous Effects of his
Anger, at the Advices I had formerly given. The King made me a very good
Reception, and, out of a pretended Kindness, counseled me not to have any
thing more to do with Eleonor, whose Acquaintance had involved me into so many
Misfortunes; Besides, continued he, the Conversation of that Woman will soon or
late prove fatal, her Husband, tho absent, being extreme jealous of her. I knew
well enough whence proceeded the King's Care of my Safety, and assured his
Majesty, I would never see her any more; I meant, while I remained in that
Dress.

I appeared all Day in French Habit, and and sometimes at Night put on my
Algerine Disguise when I would see Eleonor. That lasted some time, but the King
hearing of it grew jealous, and told her, he wondered the Slave should tarry so
long at Madrid, since his Liberty had been the first Reward he had received.
She said, the occasion of his Stay was a little Traffic he made with the Money
her Gratitude had induced her to give him. The King resolved to be rid of his
supposed Rival, told her, He would send her Two thousand Ducats more, to
present him with, and that he desired her to send him away. The next Time, I
saw her, she gave me the Two thousand Ducats, and acquainting me with what the
King had said, begged me not to visit her, nor put on my Algerine Habit any
more, which I promised, and she made the King believe the Slave was gone.

Indeed it was with no little Sorrow, that I saw my self wholly deprived of her
Conversation. She shared in my Grief; however, since I still remained at
Madrid, we were comforted with the Hopes of another Meeting: But she made me
swear, That as long as the King should forbid it, I would not bring her into
Trouble, by endeavoring to speak with her.

Thus did I again relapse into an Idleness, which had been the occasion of all
my former Engagements, but soon found fresh Employment in a new Amor. I had
contracted some Familiarity with a Spaniard, whose Quality I shall conceal, and
call him Don Anthonio Manrique, that these Memoirs, merely designed for the
Public Good, may not give Offense to any one. He was willing I should see his
Wife, whom we shall name Dona Isabella, and frequently conversed with her, but
never in Private, her Husband or some Servant being always present. Among other
things, she talked much of the Algerine Slave, saying, She had seen him once,
and that his Air and Presence, as well as the glorious Action he had done,
showed him to be no mean Person.

I imagined by this, that she knew of my having been thus disguised; and, the
better to clear my Doubt, replied, I had been very intimate with him, while he
was at Madrid. What then, said she, is he gone? She spoke these Words with some
Concern, which (still supposing she was not ignorant who he was) I took to be
affected. I answered, He was gone, and would never be seen in Spain any more,
at which she felt a visible Grief, and told me, she would gladly have had the
Conversation of so extraordinary a Man. I knew not what to think of the Sorrow
she was in, at the Slave's Departure, but having still the same Thoughts as
before, believed she had a Mind to be better acquainted with me, and designed,
by that Feint, to inform me of her Intentions. But I soon found out my Mistake,
for having taken an Opportunity, as I was taking my leave, to tell her, That I
was obliged to her on my Friend's Score, and if she would appoint the Time and
Place, would send him to her, she pulled me back, asking me whether he really
was still at Madrid. This Action was so natural, that I was now convinced she
had taken a Fancy to the Slave, having no Knowledge that I was the Person, who
had appeared under that Disguise. I was confirmed in these second Thoughts,
when having told her, That I knew where he lived, and would bring him to her
when she pleased; she answered, I might spare my self that Trouble, by letting
her know his Lodging. I replied, he lived at a Merchant's, whom I named to her;
to whom I presently went, and prayed him, If any one came to enquire for an
Algerine, to answer he was not at Home, and bid them come again the next Night,
when he would certainly be within.

Two Days after I visited my Merchant, who told me, No Body had come as yet.
This made me once more think, that she meant to my self the Passion she
expressed for the Slave; and I waited on her, in hopes of a fuller Discovery.
It fell out there was no Body by, and to make Use of that Opportunity, I took
no notice of what she had said concerning the Algerine, but declared my Passion
to her. She entertained my Love with an unsupportable Pride, assuring me, She
would acquaint her Husband with my Insolence; and that if ever I presumed to
set my Foot within her Doors, I should repent it. Then, without giving me the
Leisure to reply, she rose up, and pusht me out of the Room, as though I would
have done her Violence. Her Husband entering in that very Moment, she told him,
That I would have debauched her; on which he swore, That were it not in respect
to the Prince I served, he would have my Throat cut. I replied, my Guilt was
not so great as he imagined; that what I had said to his Lady was only such
Complements as used in France to be bestowed on all Women, and had no Relation
at all to what she spoke of; and as a Proof that I meant honestly, I would
never return to his House. Manrique seemed satisfied with these Excuses, and I
took my Leave of him, enraged at his Wife's Behavior, and resolved to be more
wary for the future, being in a Country where Love-Intriegues are very
perilous. Yet, methought, I was the more charmed with her for it; I had fancied
her that Day fairer than she used to seem, and I found that Love is increased
by nothing so much as Opposition.

Thus was I wracked with Love and Despair, when the aforesaid Merchant gave me
notice, That a Woman was come to speak with the Algerine, and, according to my
Orders, he had desired her to call again the next Evening. I could not doubt
but Isabella had sent this Message, and went the next Day to the Merchants,
where I remained under my Disguise, waiting for the Messenger's Return, and
accordingly a Duena came, and assured me, That if I pleased she would carry me
to a beautiful Lady, who had an earnest Desire to see me. I answered I would
readily submit to her Directions; and she, without replying, beck'd to me that
I should follow her. I did, and having gone through many By-Alleys, we stopped
under a low Balcony, out of which, the Duena having cough'd once or twice, a
Rope-Ladder was thrown down; I was bid to get up, and obeyed hastily, being
spurred on by the impatience I had to know if it really was Isabella.

I entered into the Room, and by the means of a dim Light knew her to be the
same. She told me, That though she had never seen me but once, as I passed along
the Street, she had been extremely taken with my good Mien, and that the
Heroic Action I had done, persuaded her she might entrust me with her
Reputation. I could scarce be persuaded but she knew me; yet speaking in a
feigned Voice, as I had always done while I wore that Habit, I replied I was
very much obliged to her, for the good Opinion she had of me, but yet I could
not but resent the Injury she had done to the dearest Friend I had, nameing my
self. What then, answered she, did he tell you of it? Yes, Madam, replied I,
and that has something abated the Esteem I had for you. Ha! said she, do you
then know me? I told her, I did, and that my Friend had showed her to me, one
Day, as she was coming out of Church. And where were you then, cried she, that
I did not see you? I replied, she went by in such haste, that she took no
notice of her Admirers. But, continued she, I was told you was gone. It is
true, answered I, that it is thought so, some Reasons having obliged me to
abscond, but through the Desire of knowing the Woman who had disobliged my
Friend, I ventured abroad under a Disguise. She asked me, If I had found her so
despicable a Person. I assured her, I had done Justice to her Beauty, and was
very sorry that so handsome a Lady should be so cruel. Accuse me not of Cruelty,
said she, you see what Hazard I run for your sake, and I were undone, did you
inform your Friend of all this. Never mistrust me, Madam, replied I, but if you
would oblige me, let me know what reason you had to use him so ill. She
answered, I was my self the Occasion of it, and that ever since she had seen
me, she had taken an Aversion for all other Men, and having no Inclination for
my Friend, had been glad, at once to get rid of him, and give her Husband a
good Opinion of her Virtue. I inquired into the Cause of her Hatred to him, and
she replied, She could not fancy him, that she could not tell why, but she
hated him as much as she loved me.

This Discourse indeed surpised me, to see that the same Woman, who found me
so unworthy of her Esteem, while I was habited like a Gentleman, should have
such a Fondness for me, under the nasty Garb of a despicable Slave. But our
Passions are wholly unaccountable, especially those of Women. My Displeasure
was so great to hear my self thus despised, that I was tempted to discover who
I was, and though I forbore it at the present, I could not keep from
contradicting her bad Opinion of me, being as jealous of the Slave's Happiness,
as if it had been another. This hindered me from answering Isabella's Passion as
I should have done, and she soon perceived that my chiefest Care was to give
her better Thoughts of my Friend. She was so dissatisfied at it, that she told
me, I did not deserve the Honor she did me, since my Zeal was greater for my
Friend than for her. I perceived my Error, and endeavored to repair my Fault;
but she said, She dared not trust me, and if I desired to regain her Favor, I
must conceal this Adventure from my Friend, and not once name him in her
Presence. I promised I would obey her, and she said, We must put off our
farther Conversation to another Time, and that I should hear from her the next
Day. It was very unwillingly that I parted, but being forced to comply, I
returned to my Merchant's.

The Reader will wonder at what I am going to relate, if he considers not that
Self-love and Self-conceit, are still our predominant Passions. I was ashamed
of standing indebted to my Disguise for the Enjoyment of my Mistress, and
resolved, if I was sent for any more, to return in my own Clothes. In this
Humor I remained all Day at the Merchants, and the Duena being come at Night,
I put on my false Beard and a Vest, which covered my other Clothes, and thus
habited, I followed her, but before I got up the Ladder I left them in the
Street. Isabella came with eagerness to receive me, and knowing me again,
scream'd out, saying, she was undone and betrayed. I conjured her not to make
any Noise, and she came to her self again. I see, said she then, that the
Villain has a greater Kindness for you than me, since he has revealed this
secret to you; but if you love me you will assist me in being revenged of that
perfidious Wretch, and that is the only way for you to gain my Esteem. I will,
answered I, when ever you please. I love you above all that can be dear to me,
and had he a thousand Lives I would sacrifice them all to your Resentment; only
let me know how so base a Man can have merited a Heart you refuse me. Go,
replied she, and fetch me his Head, and you shall see what I will do for you.

I smiled at her Mistake, which I thought it now Time to bring to a Conclusion,
and assured her, I could not bring his Head otherwise than on my own Shoulders,
that I was the same who came to her the Night before, and who alone deserved
her Kindness. At which she was so astonished that she scarce heard what I said.
Her Surprise being at last over, she told me, It was impossible, and that
before she could believe me, she must see me in the same Habit I had then. I
answered, It was no very hard Task, and that I had left it under the Balcony.
She desired me to fetch it, but I was scarce down, e're she pulled up the
Ladder, and withdrew. I was surpised at it, and believed she still continued
in the Opinion that the Slave and I were two different Persons, and that I had
made use of the Passion she had for him, to deceive her.

It was so dark I could not tell where I was, and being desirous to know the
House, I resolved to remain there till it was Day, having first put on my false
Beard and Vest; but I had not waited long before I heard a Noise, and saw some
Men with drawn Swords in their Hands, just upon me. I threw off my Disguise,
which was troublesome to me, and drawing my Sword, run at the foremost of them,
and before the rest could come about me, made the best of my Way home.

Manrique was the Man I had wounded; for I was no sooner down, but his Wife,
enraged to be thus imposed on, went to him, saying, I had attempted to climb
into the Balcony; and was, she believed, still in the Street, with the same
Design. He immediately took Fire, and attended by some of his Servants, was
come out to murder me; but the Care they took of their wounded Master, had
favored my Escape.

They took up the Beard and Vest, which they carried to Isabella, who
remembering that was the very Habit she had seen her Algerine in, and comparing
his Shape and Features with mine, began to believe what I had said might be
true.

Manrique, through what Design I know not, concealed my being concerned in that
Accident, and it was soon reported, That the same Algerine who had killed the
Duke de -- 's Son at Eleonor's, had wounded him. But every Body thinking him
gone, took all this to be a Fancy of Manrique's, who was content with owing me
a secret Grudge, though his Wound had proved but very slight. Fearing the fatal
Consequences of a Spaniard's Resentment, I still kept on my Guard; but I was
freed from that Care, by a Person I should least have expected it from, where I
had another Instance of the capaciousness of a Woman's Temper.

Isabella, in the mean while, being now convinced I was the same with the Slave
she doted on, felt for me the raging Passion she formerly had for him, and
heartily grieved at having rendered her Husband jealous of me. She then thought
of several Ways to correct her Error, and at last pitched upon a very strange
one; which being resolved on, her next Care was how she should see me, and
acquaint me at once with her Plot, and the Love she had for me.

She easily obtained her Desire, and having understood I was at the Merchants,
came there, to my great Wonder, habited like a Duegna. She began by protesting
she was unacquainted with her Husband's Intentions to murder me; but being
better informed, I would not let her go on, till she had confessed the Truth,
which at last she did, as I have just related it; and then continued her
Discourse in this manner.

It is true, I took a Fancy to that Slave, not knowing it was you; but forgive
that one Fault, and you shall henceforth be the only Object of my Love. I have
rendered you suspicious to my Husband, but I know a certain Means whereby you
may regain his Confidence, if you will but follow my Advice. You must endeavor
to meet him at some of your common Acquaintances. There you shall wholly disown
to him that you ever had any Design upon my Honor, and protest that it is a
false Accusation I charged you with, finding you were acquainted with an
Intriegue I had with the Algerine. You may desire him, for his greater
Satisfaction, to examine the Duena, whose Name is Beatrix, and I will instruct
her how she shall answer him and justify you.

The Project seemed to me something Dangerous, and I asked her, Whether she had
well weighed all the ill Consequences that might attend it. She desired me to
do what she would have me, and assured me I should not receive any Injury by
it* I told her I would consider of it, but could not take my Resolution so
suddenly, and so we parted.

This gave my thinking Faculty no little Exercise, for I could not comprehend
how this Woman could be willing that her Husband should think her false to him,
as he must naturally do if her Design took effect; and besides, I feared, that
did I succeed, it would but make him the more jealous, and thus I should be
deprived of the Advantage I expected by it. But after all, I thought I might
trust her, since she ought to know her Husband better than I did, and I judged
it worth my while to venture something in order to free my self from the
continual Apprehensions I lay under. But, to speak the Truth, my Love was the
chief Motive that induced me to it, and flattered with the Esteem she had for
me, while she took me for an Algerine, I was impatient of confirming it under
my true Shape.

I sought for an Opportunity of entertaining Manrique, which having found, I
told him, I had something of Moment to impart to him. Then, seeing he was
willing to hear me, I did, according to his Wife's Directions, assure him,
That, as for my part, I never had any Engagement with her, but being the only
Man who was acquainted with her Intriegue with the Algerine, the Slave having
owned it to me, she had charged me with this false Accusation, on purpose that
he should not give any Credit to the Notice I might have given him of her ill
Conduct. Manrique, upon hearing this, embraced me with all imaginable Kindness,
saying, he was now no longer at a loss, to know why he who had wounded him, had
let fall a Vest; but that besides, a false Beard had been found, which made him
mistrust that some Body else was come to see his Wife under that Disguise. Then
he asked me, How long it was since the Slave had absented himself? I answered,
He had left Madrid the next Day after his being wounded, and that as for the
false Beard, he must not wonder at that, the Algerine using them sometimes when
he desired not to be known. Manrique seemed now to be fully satisfied, but
said, If I would oblige him thoroughly, I must contrive the Slave's Return to
Madrid, that he might be revenged of him. I promised to use my Endeavors, and
he begged me to remain his Friend, and visit him with the same Freedom I
formerly had done, assuring me he would not speak of this to his Wife, till he
could produce the Slave to confront her.

The easiness with which he seemed to credit what I said, made me suspect his
Sincerity, and it was some time before I dared trust either him or his Spouse;
but my eager Love did at last overcome my Jealousies. I continued my Visits,
being free from Suspicion, had the Liberty of conversing with his Wife, and
thus we enjoyed for some time the Fruits of our Artifice. But Manrique at
length grew impatient of the Slave's Absence: I told him, I could not help it,
and that let me write to Algier never so often, I had no answer, which made me
believe he was dead. But this did not content him, and he told me, That since I
could not hear from him, I must help him to get rid of his Wife; that he would
tax her with what I had informed him of, and that I must stand to what I had
said.

I conjured him not to carry things to that Extremity; but he was inexorable,
and all I could do was to acquaint Isabella with it. She heard me without the
least Concern, her Plot being so contrived, that I was to be the Object of her
Husband's Revenge. Her Answer was, That she neither feared me nor her Husband,
and knew well enough how to disappoint our Designs. I was astonished at this
Reply, and thinking she had mistaken me, repeated over-again what I had been
saying to her, vowing I would rather dye than assist her Husband to her
Prejudice. She seemed well pleased at it, and answered, If I did not bear
Witness against her, she had nothing to fear. I replied, I wondered how she
could suppose I should ever think of doing her any Injury; and thus we parted.

But this Woman was more mischievous than I could ever have imagined. I was no
sooner gone e're she went to her Husband, and told him, shedding abundance of
Tears, she found her self bound in Duty and Conscience to acquaint him, That he
entertained a Man whose whole Study was to contrive his Shame. I know,
continued she, what he has made you believe, to gain your good Opinion; he has
owned it to me himself, thinking me so mad as to love him. He was the only
Algerine that ever came to me, for it was under that Disguise that he would
have got up into my Chamber. From his Hand you received your Wound. All this I
knew, and if I have since endured his Company, the Reason was, because you were
so infatuated with him, that I could do no otherwise; but his Impudence is at
length grown to such a Pitch, that I can bear with it no longer.

All the Lies she imposed on his Belief, seemed to him so probable, that he
wondered how he ever had suspected her Virtue, seeing she ever had given him
notice of my endeavoring to cuckold him; and being now fully persuaded of what
she said, he tenderly embraced her, vowing he would be revenged on me. I, in
the mean while, suspected nothing of all this; yet fearing Manrique would
execute the Design he had made me acquainted with, I kept from his House; and
it was above a Week since the last Visit I paid him, when I received a Note
from Eleonor, to give me Notice, That my Death was decreed, and that I had best
quit Spain with all possible Diligence.

Though it was very Pressing, I could not trust to it, but resolved to speak with
the Person that sent it me. I had not seen her since the Promise I had made not
to visit her; but upon the Receipt of her Letter, I put on my Algerine Habit,
and waited on her, pretending I came from her Husband. Hearing I was there, she
ran down to me, and informed me in a few Words, That Manrique had given out, I
was the Person who under the Disguise of an Algerine Slave had killed the Duke
de -- 's Son; that the King was acquainted with it, and grew extreme jealous
thereupon; that he had quarreled with her, accusing her of having harbored me
under that Disguise, and had not seen her since, so that she thought her self
wholly out of Favor; and that as for me, the King, the Duke de -- and
Manrique, had agreed I should be murdered, so that my Ruin was unavoidable if
I did not immediately fly out of the Kingdom.

By the manner of her Delivery, I judged I had no Time to lose, and that it was
my best way to take her Counsel and be gone; but my Sorrow at leaving her, and
at my being the innocent Cause of all the Trouble she had received, made me
very loath to part, which she perceiving grew angry with me; telling me, She
saw I did not care what became of her, since I would remain there, though I knew
she were lost if it reached the King's Ears that she had spoke with me; which
said, she retired, ordering me to be gone.

I was vexed at heart to see my self thus severed from a Person, for whom I
still retained an unfeigned Passion, and from whom I had some Reason to expect
an equal return; and the Desire of seeing her once more, and bidding her a more
tender Adieu, prevailed with me above the Dread of my Danger. I had not the
Power to go out of Town, and my Love blinded me to that degree, that I
endeavored to find out some plausible Excuse for my Stay.

The Prince's Business were a Pretext sufficient to satisfy my self; and
however useless I might be to him, yet my fond Imagination made me fancy he
could not be without me, whenever my Dotage would not suffer me to think of a
Retreat. Here I again experienced, That Love soon grows stronger than all our
other Passions, when we yield our selves up to it; and those who once suffer it
to gain Ground, must expect it will make them deaf to all other Considerations.

But though the Hope of giving Eleonor another Visit were the chief Motive of my
remaining there; yet that of being revenged on Isabella did not a little
conduce to it, and, after all, that was my greatest Care; so unsteady was I in
my Wishes and Resolutions. I had indeed several substantial Reasons to hate
that Woman, yet I resented nothing so much as her preferring the Algerine
before me.

Thinking she was not fully satisfied that the Algerine and I were the same
Person, I attempted, by deceiving her once more, to work my Ends, and to that
purpose sent her the following Letter.

Madam,
YOU will perhaps be surpised at receiving this. But though the Hand may be
unknown, the Person I hope is not; I am Acma-Hamet, once happy in your Love,
and who have been obliged to abscond through the Perfidiousness of one, I,
(though undeservedly) called my Friend. However, I have now put it out of his
Power to injure me, since he is ignorant of my being here; which I have taken
all possible Care to conceal from every one, save the Person for whose sake I
have ventured hither. I lodge with Alonso Riberos, and (if you can still love
me) expect shortly to hear from you. My Landlord thinks I come from Morocco,
and am called Muley Asan. Under that Name it is I must be inquired for.


This being safely delivered, I went and lay at Alonso Riberos, whom I made
believe that I was a Morocco Merchant, and was come to Madrid, about some
Business relating to my Trade. Thus under this new Disguise, I was safe from my
Persecutors; I satisfied the Fancy I had to remain there, and fed the Hopes of
compassing my Designs.

When I reflect on my Madness, I am convinced that any one Passion is
sufficient to make a young Man venture on the most desperate Undertakings; for
the more perilous my Projects were, the more eager was I to put them in
Execution; and certainly Age and Wisdom can alone reclaim a Man from this
ridiculous Romantic undauntedness.

I was not long at Riberos's before I had an Answer to my Letter. It came safe
to Isabella's Hands, and it is not to be wondered at, if having formerly thought
the Algerine Slave and I to be two different Persons, she was confirmed in that
Opinion by the Receipt of this Letter. She rejoiced doubly that her Plot
against me had so well succeeded, since her Husband being now fully persuaded I
was the Algerine who had been so much talked on, would never suspect her
Intriegue, and that she might quietly enjoy the Man, for whom alone she ever
had a real Love.

The Duena Beatrix was sent to Alonzo Riberos, and I was carried, as at other
Times, to the low Balcony. Isabella, taking me for the Slave she had formerly
seen, received me with all possible Demonstrations of Kindness, and related to
me all that had happened during my Absence, and how she would have procured the
French Count's Death, by making her Husband believe that it was he who had
disguised himself under the Habit of an Algerine Slave. Then she blamed me for
my Indiscretion, in having acquainted that French Lord with our first
Interview, and thus given him the means to come to the Rendezvous she had
designed to none but my self.

My Love was so well extinguished that her Discourse proved but a Diversion to
me, and being no longer jealous of my self, I resolved to see how far her
Blindness and Impudence would go. I begged a thousand Pardons for having been
so talkative. But after all, Madam, continued I, you have no great Reason to be
angry with me, for having improved your Acquaintance with that Frenchman;
since, as I have been told, he did not wholly displease you, and you have been
pretty intimate together,

She denied she ever had loved him, assuring me, her admitting him, was only
with a Design to undo him, of which she had at last found an Opportunity. I
grew very uneasy at hearing her tell so many Lies, and so openly confess her
Perfidiousness, yet I did not discover my self, but at last took my Leave, she
not in the least suspecting me.

I thought things were now in a fair way for my intended Revenge, and began to
consider how I should make use of my Advantage. Alonzo Riberos traded much in
Foreign Countries, so that several Strangers usually resorted thither, which
had made me choose his House, the better to deceive Isabella. Among others, a
certain Algerine visited him frequently, whose dull Look made me judge him most
fit for my Purpose.

I had a very understanding Man to my Valet de Chamber, whom I wholly confided
in. Him I informed of my Intentions, and accordingly he fell into Discourse
with the Algerine, telling him; That one of the greatest Beauties in Spain
looked for a Man of Algier, having a great Appetite for a Gallant of that
Country. This Proposition was not so great a Temptation to him, as a small
Present my Man made him, with a Promise of as much more, if he would do what
should be desired of him, and be discreet.

The African promised an exact Performance, and my Man ordered him to wait at
Alonzo Riberos's, having first told him what he should do. Then he acquainted
me with the Success of his Negotiation, and Beatrix being come at her usual
Hour, which was always in the Dusk of the Evening, I sent the true Algerine in
my stead; who was carried to the House, and, as he had been directed, climbed
up the Rope-Ladder into the Balcony, and thence went into Isabella's Chamber.

My Servant, who had dogged him, no sooner saw him safe, but he carried a Note
I had given him for Manrique; by which I gave him advice, That the famous
Algerine Slave was then actually with his Wife. The Cuckold was in Bed, but my
Man, having told his Servants that it was about Matters of great concern, they
waked him and delivered it. The Hopes he had of surprising me rendered him more
diligent. He ordered part of his Servants to wait under the Balcony, while
himself, with Two or Three of them, went into his Lady's Chamber.

While things were in that Posture on his side, let us see a little what
happened on Isabella's. She did not at first suspect the Cheat, but finding
that Man was neither in Shape nor Voice like her dear Slave, she fetched a
Candle, and at first Sight discovered his Mistake. Her Surprizal was not so
great as it would have been, had she been less accustomed to these kind of
Intriegues. She asked him how he came there? And he confessed that one
Muley-Asan, an Inhabitant of Morocco, had, through the means of one of his
Servants, engaged him in that Enterprise.

What a Grief was it to Isabella, that the only Man she doated on, should be so
ungrateful as to expose her thus! But she concealed her Affliction from the
Algerine, and telling him, That those who had persuaded him to what he did,
only sought his Ruin, ordered him to be gone. His Danger made him more quick of
Apprehension than he had before appeared to be, and without giving her the
Trouble of repeating it a second Time, he soon found the Way down the
Rope-Ladder, which Isabella immediately drew up.

He was just setting his Foot on the Ground, and she shutting her Balcony-Door,
when Manrique's Men seized on him, and their Master entered into her Chamber. He
found her in a Disorder which confirmed his Jealousies, and was going to
examine her, when his Men brought up him they had seized in the Street. It is
not possible to express the Surprise he was in, to see it was not I: He doubted
not but those who had assured him, the Algerine Slave was no other than my self
under that Disguise, had imposed on his Belief, and this aggravating
Circumstance increased his Wife's Guilt more than he had thought her. He
resolved to carry his Revenge to the utmost, and having fast'n'd her
Chamber Door upon her, kept the Algerine closely confined.

The next Day it was reported, That the noted Algerine Slave, who had killed
the Duke de -- 's Son, had been caught in Bed with Manrique's Wife, and was
then in Custody at his House. This made a great Noise, and Eleonor, who heard
of it, concluded it to be me, who not having followed her Advice, had imbroil'd
my self into fresh Troubles. It came also to the King, and gave him new
Suspicions against Eleonor, who, he fancied, still concealed me in her House.

The Duke de -- no sooner heard of it, but desirous to vent his Spleen against
his Son's Murderer, he came to Manrique, and having both examined the Innocent
Prisoner, they discovered their Error. As for Isabella, she was under a
continual Fear, lest he should have declared who had sent him, and her false
Lover, being seized, should have confessed the whole Truth.

What she dreaded came to pass, but having foreseen it, I had removed my
Lodging; and soon after was informed, It was the public Discourse, That I had
personated one Muley-Asan, and had taken a Lodging at Riberos, on purpose to
act this Tragedy. By this I judged it high Time for me to be gone, and having
sent my Servants before, I left Madrid the next Day, accompanied only by my
Valet de Chamber.

I arrived at Bayonne, designing thence to go for Guienna, where I expected to
meet with the Prince, who, with his Army made Head against the Duke de
Vendosme. Berg was then besieged, which was in July 1653. But I was forced to
continue there some Time, being fallen ill, and wrote to the Prince to
represent to him part of the Reasons which had obliged me to quit Madrid. The
Answer I had from him was, That I might either go to Paris or the Duke de
Vendosme's Army, and that he would not be the occasion of my being of a
different Party from my Brother; whence I judged he was not over-wel satisfied
with my Negotiation.

It may well be thought I was vexed that I should have displeased him, and
often cursed those Adventures which had occasioned my Negligence. Then I
resolved to use my utmost endeavors to regain his Favor: And in order to it,
to return to Madrid, where, by a great Application to Business, I might make
some Amends for my former Errors. But, to my Shame be it spoken, my Love for
Eleonor was indeed the true Motive which induced me to it. The Care she had
taken of my Safety, obliged me to a grateful Return, and the dangerous
Circumstances I had left her in, did, (I imagined) require my Assistance. I
fancied that the King having forsaken her, her Husband's Jealousy and
Resentment might provoke him to a Fatal Revenge, and accused my self of
Baseness, in leaving her as I had done.

How wretched is their Condition who enslave themselves to the most unruly
Passion! It not only blinds them, but also puffs them up, with a Conceit that
none are so quick-sighted as themselves; for had all the World told me I was
mad, to dream of returning to Madrid, I should have thought my self wiser than
all the World, so clear and convincing did those Reasons seem, which induced me
to it. Not but I, sometimes, made slight Reflections on the Temerity of my
Design, but the more rash it seemed to me, the more desirous I was to go about
it, fancying it a Heroic Action, thus to venture my Life for the sake of my
Mistress. I hope none of my Readers will be of the same Opinion I was then of,
in commending an Amorous Generosity, which would have exposed me to greater
Hazards than any I had yet run, had not Sickness prevented my unaccountable
Folly.

Being fully bent on it, I sent the Prince a Letter, to acquaint him, That
preferring his Service before any other Considerations, I was returning into
Spain, and hoped he would do me the Honor, by writing more obligingly, to let
me know, I had regained his Favor; which being sent, I set out for Madrid, in
spite of my Indisposition; but the very first Day's Journey spent me quite, so
that I was forced to stop at Fontarabia, where I kept my Bed near Six Weeks,
under so violent a Disease that my Life was often despaired of.

I had, upon my falling sick, sent a Letter to Eleonor, to acquaint her, That
it was impossible for me to leave her, and that I designed to see her, as soon
as my Health would permit, to offer her my Service and Assistance, in a Time
when I feared she had need of them. I had also ordered the Messenger to enquire
what People said of me there; and especially concerning Manrique and his Wife.

He delivered my Letter to Eleonor, who replied by Word of Mouth, That I had
best keep away, and that she had no other Answer to give him. As for Manrique,
he was told, That Lord made strict Search after me, that his Wife had informed
him, I was Muley-Asan, who after several unsuccessful Attempts upon her
Chastity, had out of Revenge, contrived what had happened; that the Algerine
had been set at Liberty, after a sharp Reprimand; and that I must never think
of returning to Madrid any more. He brought me this Answer at a Time when I
began to grow better, and I think that had my Recovery been more perfect, I
would have ventured through all these Dangers, so much was I displeased at
Eleonor's not writing to me, and so great was my Desire of seeing her. But,
happily for me, I was too weak to undertake such a Journey, and found I had
nothing else to do but to forget her, and use all possible means to regain my
Health.

Thus I quite laid aside the Thoughts of Returning. But before I proceed any
farther, it will not, I hope, be unacceptable to my Reader, if I inform him of
what happened at Madrid since my being gone, which though I heard it but long
since, does, I think, naturally belong to this Place, having some Relation to
what I have lately been speaking of.

I left there my two Mistresses, Eleonor and Isabella, having loved them both,
though in a very different manner; for I esteemed the former, and the latter I
feared. The one had charmed me through her seeming Virtue and Generosity; and the
other, on the contrary, by her Forwardness and the Undauntedness with which she
satisfied her unruly Passions; but we shall find their Characters to be much
alike, when their Circumstances were the same: And from what I am going to
relate, the Reader may know what an Opinion he ought to have of those Women
whose greatest Care is to get many Lovers, not being contented with one Husband
or Gallant.

It being Isabella's Temper ever to give way to her Inclinations, she showed
her self in all her Intriegues as Fantastical, as when being enamored with me,
while under the Slave's Disguise, she could not suffer me, when in my own
Habit. So most of the Men she was concerned with, were but of an ordinary
Condition and such as she might easily sacrifice to her Husband's Jealousy:
Not but that she often met with Admirers of a higher Rank, as the following
Story will testify.

Scarce was she married and had appeared at Court, when her Beauty ensnared
most young Lords there; but the most sincere and passionate of her Lovers was
the Prince de -- the handsomest Man certainly in all Spain, and of the best
Presence. He was just upon marrying the Marquis de -- 's Daughter, who was
reckoned the greatest Fortune in that Kingdom, and by whom he was tenderly
beloved, when he grew acquainted with Isabella.

He was certainly rather bewitched than in Love, for his Dotage was such, that
to break off, or at least defer his Marriage, he pretended a Desire of entering
into Orders, and offered to resign his Birthright and his Spouse to his
younger Brother; his Father was almost persuaded to it, and the thing would
have been done, had he not been cured of his Folly.

Isabella returned his Passion with an unsufferable Pride, and according to her
usual Custom, informed her Husband of it, who was as kind to him, on that
Score, as he had been to me: So that the Prince, what through her Scorn, and the
impossibility of seeing her, fell sick with Despair.

He had a very cunning Fellow to his Valet de Chamber, whom he had sometimes
sent with Letters to Isabella. This Man knowing the Cause of his Distemper,
told him, He pitied him, and the more because his Mistress was chaste only to
him, having, to his Knowledge, an Intriegue with one of her Servants; which he
could have told him before, had he not feared his Displeasure.

The Prince was like to have killed him for talking so injuriously of his
Mistress; and he, seeing his Lord's Blindness was so great, resolved to open
his Eyes. He got acquainted with Manrique's Man, and by the Promise of a
considerable Sum, enticed him to make the Prince a Confession of the whole
Business. His Highness gave as little Credit to Manrique's Servant as he had
done to his own, and would scarce hear them, till they had offered to procure
him a Sight of what he doubted. Accordingly they took their Measures, which
having succeeded, the Prince was an Eyewitness to her Lewdness.

But his Flame could not be extinguished by so convincing a Proof of her
Infamy, and he resolved to let her know what he had seen, with a Design (so
mean and weak was he in that occasion) not to shame her by taxing her with so
base an Action, but by his mild passing it over, to engage her Gratitude.

He was so simple as to tell her, He knew of her Intimacy with that Man, but
did not love her the less for it, since he could impute it but to an
Enchantment, and did not imagine that a Lady of her Sense could have stooped to
one so much below her, had not some Infernal Power interposed in his behalf.
Nay, and he offered by his Death to free her from the Wizard, and restore her
to the Liberty of granting her Favors to those who should use no other Charm
but their Love. The Lady, who was no Fool, taking the Hint from what he had
said, pretended to believe her Servant dealt with the Devil, but persuaded him
that his Art had not been employed to make the thing real, but only to impose
on his Senses. The Story adds, He was so credulous as to disbelieve his Eyes,
and to take what he had seen for a Diabolical Illusion. However, Manrique's
Servant was murdered, and, as it was supposed, by the Prince's Order; who
being thus delivered from the Magician, persisted in loving Isabella, and being
slighted by her.

The Spaniards being naturally very superstitious, he imagined that his
Mistress's Cruelty proceeded from a continued Witchcraft, and caused Masses to
be said, to drive away the envious Fiend; and what would have been any where
else esteemed the greatest Impiety, was there looked upon as an effect of his
Devotion, which made him use the highest Mysteries of our Religion, to obtain
his vicious Ends. But, at last he came to himself again, and concluded his
Marriage, which he would not have put off so long, had he not loathed all other
Women, while he was charmed with the ungrateful Isabella. I had no Knowledge of
this ridiculous Story, when I courted her, else I should have believed her
liable to the same Enchantment, when she could not suffer me under my own
Shape, while she was distracted for me under that of an Algerine.

Manrique seeing I had left Spain, and thus secured my self from his
Resentment, gave out that it was I who had personated the Slave, and thus
deceived the King and all the World. The King, who had ever mistrusted
Eleonor's Kindness for me, doubted not but it was for her sake I had thus
disguised my self; which increasing his Jealousies, he inquired of Manrique how
he came to know it? who having replied, It was through his Wife's good Conduct
and Virtue, he was desirous of seeing her, to be farther resolved. I had never
told her of my Amor with Eleonor, so that she could not discover any thing to
that Prince which might confirm his Suspicion. On the contrary, her Vanity made
her so careful to persuade his Majesty, that the great Love she had inspired me
with, was the only occasion of my Disguise, that he could not believe it
possible for a Man, whose Passion for her was so great, to be at the same Time
in love with another. But it succeeded as ill for Eleonor as if the King had
still questioned her Fidelity, for that Prince being ever best pleased with the
newest Faces, found Isabella handsome enough to deserve his Affection.

The Knowledge Eleonor had of it, did her a great Injury; for she was then in
very good Repute, and every one was convinced that she suffered the King's
Addresses out of mere Complaisance, and was the only one of all his Mistresses
that had withstood his importunate Desires, and by her Virtue deserved his
Esteem: But she then destroyed that Opinion, for she no sooner saw the King
inclining to a Change, but used all possible means to reclaim him, and be
revenged of her Rival. Having some small Acquaintance with Manrique, she sent
for him, and informing him of his Majesty's new Passion, advised him to send
his Wife into the Country. The Success was otherwise than she had designed, for
she not only inspired him with a jealousy capable of hurrying him into the
most dangerous Enterprises (such as was that of crossing an amorous Prince's
Inclinations) but also with a Love more daring yet than his Jealousy could be.
He willingly followed her Directions, and having taken his Measures
accordingly, sent Isabella to a House he had, on the farthermost Confines of
Spain. Having thus rid her of his Wife, he hoped Eleonor would have requited
the Obligation; but the King having lost Isabella, and not thinking fit to use
his Authority in recalling her, renewed his Assiduity to Eleonor, so that
Manrique found himself under a Necessity to forbear visiting his Mistress, or
to recall his Spouse.

These were very hard Circumstances for a jealous Husband and a passionate
Lover to be in, and I believe his Love would have got the better of his
Jealousy, had he not feared by sending for the one to have disobliged the
other. He therefore left his Lady in the Country, and carefully watched the
King's Absence, to visit Eleonor; but whether she really had no Inclination for
him, or that the King caused her to be narrowly observed, he reaped no other
Profit from his Wife's Absence but the King's Displeasure: However, he resolved
Eleonor should not enjoy all the Benefit of it, and to that effect endeavored
what he could to persuade her Husband to send for her; but he who had more
respect for his Fortune than his Honor, was little moved with his Arguments,
and thus Manrique could neither gain his Mistress's Love, nor be revenged for
her Scorn.

Isabella, in the mean while, bore her Confinement impatiently, and hearing
Eleonor had, since her departure, grown more than ever in the King's Favor, it
redoubled her Grief. She was also informed, How she rivaled her as well in her
Husband's Affection as in the King's, and hoped, by giving his Majesty Notice
of it, to work a double Revenge. She did, and the Issue was, That Manrique was
made Governor of a Town far distant from Madrid.

I have not heard any more of their Intriegues, but when I was acquainted that
Eleonor, for whom I had so great an Esteem, had yielded to Manrique's Desires,
I thanked kind Heaven that had put a stop to my Journey. It would have vexed me
that a Lady, of whom I had so noble an Idea, should have sacrificed her Honor
to the Vanity of being Mistress to a Monarch, who (though very worthy of the Rank
he bore) was no ways accomplished for a Lover; but that a Man of so mean Parts
as Manrique should have won her Love, put me to a Non Plus.

I had, during my Sickness, the Leisure to reflect on my former Follies, and
though I was but Eight and twenty, my Experience of Female Falsehood was such,
that I began to lament the Time they had made me lose, and to curse them for
being the Occasion of the little Progress I had made in the Art Military; for I
found my Skill less than even in my first Campaigns, and I well foresaw that
while I could not resist that Temptation, I must never think of advancing my
Fortune. But how, alas! should I withstand it, I found my Inclination still
stronger than my Reason, and that I should never be my self, while I remained
in the World. This made me think of withdrawing from it, to which the Vexation
my Sickness and bad Success gave me, did not a little invite me.

While I was meditating on it, and taking a Walk, prescribed me for the
Recovery of my Strength, I met a Man who having perceived me, was retiring: But
his Habit agreeing with my Thoughts, I had a Desire to converse with him, and,
won by my Instances, tarried with me. We at first discoursed on indifferent
Matters, and then I asked him, Whether he was not an Hermit, and how he
relished a solitary Life? He answered, That he knew not whether he ought to
assume the Holy Name of Hermit, though he had lived retired for above Twelve or
Thirteen Years; since he must own it to his Shame, That he had still been too
much affected with the Things of this World, and was then actually endeavoring
to return into it; being persuaded that for a true Retreat, a greater Call was
necessary than any he had yet had. I asked him, If the fair Sex had not some
Share in the Motives that had led him to what he had done? To which he answered
with a Sigh, That they were the only Cause of his Misfortunes. I told him,
That, for my part, they had so perplexed me, that I was inclined to do as he
had done; Then, said he, I would advise you to go about it with more
Consideration than I did, else* it will be difficult for you to be more
resolute than my self. I thereupon desired him to give me an Account of his
Adventures, which he seemed unwilling to do, but at last my Entreaties
prevailed, and he made me the following Relation of his Life.

I was born in Portugal, and though my Habit and Looks may not, perhaps, speak me
such, I can assure you, That I am near related to King Don John, who has these
Thirteen Years since found the means to ascend on his Ancestors Throne. I was
bred up with him, while he was yet but Duke of Braganca, and should have shared
in his Prosperity, had I not had nearer Friends than he, who engaged me in the
contrary Party; or rather had not Love turned my Brain.

Never was any one, at once, so charming and so perfidious, as the Person I
adored. She was much about my Age, but of an unsatisfied Ambition; and had a
Kindness for me no longer than till she could fix on one, who might satisfy
her Pride. She had been placed with the Duchess of Mantua, then Vice-Queen of
Portugal; was born of an Illustrious Family, but much inferior to mine; and
though my Estate was but small, her Fortune was not answerable to it. I was
possessed with an unexpressible Passion, which she did, or at least pretended
to return; and though we did not at first talk of Marrying, (because the Duke of
Braganca would never have suffered me to match my self so much to my
Disadvantage) yet I swore to her, That I would never have any other Woman to my
Wife, and I lived in Hopes of enjoying her, expecting that Duke's Restoration
would so much better my Condition, that I should not need to marry for a
Portion.

The Conspiracy, which placed him on his Throne, was then contriving. I was one
of the first that was entrusted with that Secret, and I was so strangely
bewitched to my Mistress, that I could not keep it from her. It was the highest
Imprudency in me, since living with the Vice-Queen, I had cause to fear she
would discover it to her; but that was not the only Reason I had to complain of
her Indiscretion.

The Vice-Queen had one Vasconcellos to her Secretary, who, though a Portugueze
by Birth, was grown the Tyrant of his own Country, through the Imperiousness
wherewith he exercised the Power, which the Vice-Queen had Placed in him. He
was pleased to be in Love with my Mistress, but what you will perhaps wonder at
is, That she hearkened to, and encouraged his Addresses, so highly was she
charmed with the Passion of a Man, who only managed all the Affairs of the
Kingdom.

She at first doubted not but he meant honorably; but soon found his Design
was but to rank her with the many Misses his Fortune had procured him.

Her Virtue seemed to be too great to comply with such Desires, as tended only
to her Dishonor; and she told me one Day, That she now hated Vasconcellos as
much as she had appeared complaisant to him, while she had Hopes of becoming
his Wife. His Wife! cried I, in a great Surprise, How could you ever have such
a Thought? Why, replied she, is it not a strong Enticement to be his Mistress,
who commands the whole Kingdom? I reproached her for being guilty of that
Baseness; and she said, I must forgive her, since even in that, to be in a
Capacity of doing me some good, had been her chiefest Aim. This Complement
appeased me, and I doubted not but that the Scorn she expressed for my unworthy
Rival was as sincere as it ought to be, after the Discovery she had made of the
injurious Opinion he had of her. Yet I heard from several Hands, that it was
affected, and that she still kindly entertained his Visits and his Presents.
Indeed she grew more expensive than usually, and having asked her, How her
Stock had increased, she assured me it was out of the Vice-Queen's Bounty. I
was deaf to all the Proofs that were given me of the Reality of her Intriegue
with Vasconcellos, and I persisted in adoring her, with a Respect equal to my
Love.

In the mean while the Conspiracy broke out, as every one knows; the
Conspirators having made themselves Masters of the City of Lisbon, seized the
Vice-Queen and Archbishop of Braga. Vasconcellos was stabbed and thrown
headlong out of a Window, and the Duke of Braganca was Four Days after
proclaimed King of Portugal. My Hatred to Vasconcellos moved me to assist those
who were ordered to murder him; we went up into his Chamber, where one of his
Clerks having opposed us, I killed him at one Blow, and was the first that
entered. We could not find him, and while my Comrades were looking for him, I
espied a little Closet, half open, wherein were some Letters, which I took,
and, unperceived, disposed into my Pockets. At length, after much seeking, we
heard he was hid in a Corner of the Room; we pulled him out thence, and knowing
me again, he conjured me, for my Mistress's sake, to save his Life; assuring
me, I should oblige her highly in doing it. I thought he had lost his Wits, to
make me a Complement, he must needs imagine, I would take as an Affront, and
was going to force a Declaration out of his own Mouth, to clear her Innocence.
But I had not that Leisure, for he had scarce spoke to me when they threw him
down into the Street.

The Tumult being appeased, and the City quiet, my next Care was to read the
Letters I had found. They were most subscribed by my unfaithful Mistress, and
but too plain Arguments of her Infamy. Some of them contained an account of the
Plot, and I blessed my kind Stars, that had directed those Letters to me, which
were they fallen into other Hands would certainly have proved my undoing. I
kept them, with a Design to confound her, by letting her know, I had those
convincing Proofs of her Shame; but I knew not what was become of her, and
thought she might have been confined with the Vice-Queen: At last I heard, That
being a Portugueze, she was permitted to retire to one of her Relations. The
News of Vasconcellos cruel Death put her into such a Fury that she exclaimed
against those who had killed him, and against the new King, with such Passion,
that she was secured as a Disaffected Person.

I was informed of all this, and certainly none ought to have been more
indifferent than my self on that account: Yet I wished with earnestness to see
her, that I might tax her with her Baseness and Ingratitude. I fancied the
Hopes of being revenged were the only occasion of that Desire, and little
considered, alas! that my Love was the chief Motive, and that I was only
willing to reproach her, because I could not forget her.

I went to visit her in her Prison, and she asked me scornfully, Whether it was
by my Order that she was used so ill? I answered, Had it been so, I should but
have discharged my Obligations to her, since she was guilty of a higher Crime
to me, than any the Government could charge her with; in saying which, I
produced the Letters I have spoke of, asking her, If she knew that Hand. She
answered, without the least Surprise, That she was not ashamed to own them,
since whether I knew it or no, Vasconcellos was her Husband; and that she would
acknowledge none for her Friends or Lovers, but such as would assist her, in
revenging his Death. How great soever my Vexation might be, to hear her talk
thus, I had the Force to conceal it, and continued showing her the Letters
wherein she had so basely betrayed the Secret I had revealed to her. She told
me, It was for my sake she had done it, and that she never would forgive the
Secretary, who instead of making use of the Advices she had given him, relied
upon the Duke de Olivares, whose temporizing had ruined the King of Spain's
Interests. I interrupted her, desiring to know how that Discovery could be
advantageous to me; to which she replied, I must have but very little Skill in
State Affairs, not to see that the Duke of Braganca's Election could never
stand, because of the Discontent of the other Princes of the Blood, who could
not expect such Gratifications from him, as they might receive from the King of
Spain.

Her Discourse should have moved me with Indignation, and I ought, above all,
to have resented her marrying my Rival. But even that helped to justify her;
for I had rather hear she had made a Match so much beneath her self, than
suspect her of being guilty of a shameful Amor; and I found, that as she spoke
to me, my Heart willingly yielded to her Arguments, and took her Part against
my self.

I carried on my Blindness so far that I found some Probability in what she
said, of the ill Bottom which the new Government stood on, and grew inclinable
to a Revolt. But I did not then Discover it to her, and continued that
Conversation in the same Strain I had begun. But it is impossible for a Lover
to conceal his Weakness, and, in spite of my Dissimulation, she perceived the
Effect of her deluding Words.

I imagined the Sight of her had occasioned my Folly, but her Absence could not
cure it; for the Thoughts of her Misery moved my Compassion, and I judged it
not impossible for me to obtain her Liberty. I sued for it, representing, That
what she had said was spoke in a Heat of Passion, which had put her besides her
self, and that she was now grown very penitent. My Request was easily granted,
and it was not thought dangerous to release a Maid, too weak to act what her
Passion or Grief might prompt her to.

No better Token can be given of the Strength of my blinded Love, than the
Transport I was in. I ran to the Prison, and having kindly reproached her, told
her, That the better to let him know what a Lover she had been ungrateful to, I
was come to acquaint her, That through my means she was free. She was less
careful to thank me, than to repeat what she had already said about the present
Government, and to persuade me, That my Fortune had been more splendid, had
Portugal remained under the Spanish Dominion. Neither would I then let her know
how far her Arguments prevailed with me; but having taken her out thence,
carried her to that Relation, at whose House she had been arrested.

I visited her often, and persisted in loving her with as much Zeal, as if I
never had had any occasion to complain of her. She seemed also to have forgot
her former Lover, and I dared not make too strict an Enquiry into the Nature of
the Engagement she had had with him, lest I should thence have a Reason to hate
her, I was resolved to adore. Another would not make so open a Confession, but
I freely own it to you, who seem not to be unacquainted with the Enchanting
Power of Love.

She had not been long out of her Confinement, when I perceived the Duke of
Caminha, whose Name I shall not conceal, since his Misfortune is so publicly
known, visited her assiduously enough, to make me fear him as a Rival. The
Marquess de Villa Real, Father to that Duke, was nearly related to me, as we
were all Three to the new King.

I did not at first express my Jealousy to my Mistress, but his Visits became
so frequent, and they took such care to be in Private, that I could no longer
be silent. She answered me, That by disclosing a Secret to me, she would
discharge the Obligation she owed me, for that I had formerly discovered to
her; adding, She did not do it so much to satisfy my Jealousy, as to inspire
me with Thoughts worthy of my Birth, and to let me have a Share in a glorious
Design then on foot, which concerned me as much as any one. Then she told me,
The Duke of Caminha courted her, and that she had found in him the Noble
Sentiments she had in vain expected from me. In a Word, continued she, he does
not, like you, sit tamely while Don John enjoys a Crown he has no better Title
to than any of you, and we shall shortly behold our Country under the Dominion
of its lawful Sovereign. Having spoke these Words, she informed me of a
Conspiracy, which was then contriving, to assassinate Don John and his Queen,
and re-establish the Spanish Government. That the Archbishop of Braga was the
Head of it, and the Marquis of Villa Real, the Duke of Caminha, with several
other Persons of the First Quality, his Accomplices; adding, I might, if I
pleased, be admitted into Society.

I asked her, Whether she had been ordered to tell me of it? She said, No; but
that she loved me well enough to wish I should not be the only one of all my
Family, who had no Hand in so Noble and Heroic an Enterprise. Then I desired
her not to let them know she had; saying, It was not that I refused being
concerned, but resented their having done it without my Knowledge. She replied,
It was not too late, and that she would persuade the Duke of Caminha to
discover it to me.

Being returned home, I considered what I had best do. My Love would soon have
determined it, had not the Duke of Caminha's prevented it; for the manner
wherein she had acquainted me with his Passion, made me apprehensive, lest if
the Design succeeded, she would have preferred him before me, and I should thus
have contributed to my own Unhappiness.

But I perplexed my self to no purpose; for Two Days after we had this
Discourse, the Plot was discovered by the Archbishop's unadvis'dness, who was
so rash as to send a Packet to Spain, wherein was a very particular Account of
it, and a List of the Conspirators. They were all arrested, and my Name not
being mentioned, I was left at Liberty, though the near Relation I had to the
Marquis de Villa Real and the Instances I had made to procure my Mistress's
Liberty, gave Grounds for Suspicion. She was seized with the rest, and the
Accusations against her were so weighty and evident, that she was condemned to
lose her Life; but the Queen, out of a particular Favor, changed the
Punishment she was liable to, into a perpetual Imprisonment. The Marquis of
Villa Real, and Duke of Caminha were beheaded, and the Archbishop of Braga died
for Grief in his Prison; the rest of the Accomplices suffered, and thus the
whole Design was frustrated.

Although I was not in Custody, I soon saw that I was strictly observed, and
fearing to be secured, resolved to absent my self. Here you will have an
Instance of my Weakness, and of my false Mistress's Perfidiousness. I had not
the Courage to leave my Native Country, before I had used my Endeavors to
deliver her out of her Confinement, though the Favors she had granted to
Vasconcellos, and her later Engagement with the Duke of Caminha ought to have
procured her my Scorn and Hatred. But I thought by so convincing a Proof of my
Affection, to have obliged her to return it; and besides, my Passion was indeed
so strong that I expected no Happiness out of her Company; and therefore took
more care to find out means of favoring her escape than to secure my own.

It was in a Convent that she was kept Prisoner; and I caused a Note to be
delivered to her, wherein I gave her notice, That at a certain Time it should
be set on Fire, in the Corner next to her Chamber, and that she might, during
the Bustle, come to a Wall I described, on the other side of which I should be
with a Ladder, ready to throw it over when she should call for it.

I was as good as my Word, and my Project having been put in Execution, I came
to the Place appointed, where having tarried some Time, I got up, and saw no
Body on the other Side; however, I staid there till the Fire was over, when I
went away heartily vexed at my ill Success. But my Grief had been much greater,
had I known how I was prevented. The Ungrateful Lady, for whose sake I had
ventured on this desperate Attempt, had no sooner received my Note, but she
sent it to the Queen, thinking by that seeming Generosity to have gained the
Queen's Esteem, and the easier procured her own Liberty. The Queen gave little
Heed to it, but, upon Advice that the Convent was on Fire, she sent some Guards
to secure me. He who commanded them, on purpose, avoided me, for besides that
he had a great Kindness for me, he feared lest my Death, joined to that of all
my Kindred, should have occasioned new Discontents, and considering the
Government was not yet well established, thought he ought, for that Time to
wave his Obedience, since he might thereby at once oblige his Friend, and serve
his Prince more effectually.

The next Morning he sent me an Account of what had happened, and that all the
Reward which my Mistress had gained was, that the Queen had permitted her to
take a Nun's Habit, if she had an Inclination that way. Her Treachery sorely
afflicted me, and I was at last convinced of my Folly, in being thus
obstinately bent to love a Woman so unworthy of my Kindness.

In the mean while the aforesaid Note was a Presumption strong enough to render
me guilty; several concurring Circumstances were brought in, to prove me a
Traitor, and upon the whole I was Outlawed, and my Estate Confiscated. I have
always believed, that they were not desirous of having me apprehended; for had
any Search been made, I should soon have been found out; but it is very likely,
that my Absence was rather wished for than my Death.

I was so depressed with Grief, that I took no care to seek for a Refuge; and
hearing my Mistress had accepted the Queen's Favor, and taken the Veil, I
chose to imitate her. I have since endeavored to enter into several
Monasteries, under a fictitious Name, but none would receive me. I was at Rome
and at Paris, (where I continued some Time) with the same Design, but seeing I
could not succeed, I at last came hither, where I have led this Life above
these Six Years.

The Portugueze having ended his Story, I made him some Objections, which I had
forbore for fear of Interrupting him, for, indeed, I could scarce believe what
he said, and concluded, That if it was true, he must certainly have been mad.
He answered them; And I had the Comfort to meet with a Man whose Follies
exceeded mine. I afterward saw him very often, and understood, That wearied
with his Condition, he was soliciting for a Pardon, and to be once more
possessed of his Estate; but that he was afraid one thing would hinder it,
which was, That having not been heard of, since his leaving Portugal every one
there thought him dead, and his Sufferings having made a great Alteration in
him, he might be taken for an Impostor. But I endeavored to rid him of that
Scruple, and to encourage him in his Design.

I was much more sensible in his Company than alone; for then reflecting on my
former Adventures, I thought my Misfortunes at least equal to his. What he
would have made me fear, that though I had Courage enough to renounce the World,
I should soon be tired with that Station, had but a small Influence over me;
and I doubted not but being once engaged into the Austerities of a Monachal
Life, I should have Resolution enough to go through them; so great is the
Presumption of vain, ignorant Men, who rely on their own Strength, for what
they can expect, but from God's especial Mercy. With the like Arrogance did I
fancy my Constancy could be greater than that of the Portugueze, whose
Irresolution I pitied. But indeed my Hour was not yet come; and the Desire I
had of a Retreat, was only grounded on Laziness and Discouragement, the natural
Consequences of a tiresome unfortunate and unquiet Life; which, no doubt, was
the Reason why I was not more steadfast in my Purposes. God grant, I may now
with more Firmness effect, in my latter Age, what I had resolved on in my
blooming Years. The Truth is, I would have built a House before I had laid any
Foundation; for without any Knowledge of the chief Points of my Religion, or
the foregoing Practice of a virtuous Life, I would on a sudden have turned
Saint; and being wholly taken up with this Design, I took my Leave of the
Hermit, and took Post for Paris; desiring, before I entered into a Religious
State, to consult my Carmelite, or rather that she should applaud my
Intentions, which my Vanity made me conceive as very Praiseworthy.

That generous Maid, who was well acquainted with the Life I designed to
embrace, advised me not to enter too slightly into it; but before I did, to
submit, for some Time, to the Directions of a Holy Father, who might judge
better than my self, whether I was really fit for it. I was fright'ned with the
long Preparations which she, told me, were necessary, before I openly declared
my Intentions, and loath to defer so long the Pleasure my Vanity expected, from
hearing every one commend my Heroic Courage, in depriving my self, at that
Age, of the Pleasures of this Life. Though I was ashamed to own my Thoughts, she
easily perceived I was not such as God requires for his more immediate Service;
and told me plainly, That I must not think of it, unless I had Resolution
enough to retire into some private Place, and spend half a Year at least in the
most severe Austerities and sincere Repentance.

It was one of the most prudent Actions that ever I did, to consult a Woman of
so piercing and sound a Judgment; for how many would there have been, who
instead of duly weighing all these Considerations, would rather have hurried me
into what they would have fancied a glorious Enterprise; and thus my
unstedfastness would have exposed me to Derision. But seeing I could not submit
to those Examinations, which she thought absolutely necessary, she told me, I
must look upon this Maggot but as a Temptation of my Laziness and Idleness;
that it was not what God required of me, only she wished I would take more Care
of my Conscience, consider what I was born to, and, by fixing in the Army, put
an End to my Knight-Errant's Adventures. She added, I had a fair Opportunity to
lead a virtuous Life, in that having been some Time from Paris, and being thus
grown out of People's Knowledge, I might easily forsake my Rake-Hell
Acquaintance, and by beginning well, avoid the Censure of a sudden and
unexpected Change.

But being, by her Advice, entered into a Religious House for a few Days, that I
might the more undisturbed employ my self in repenting me of my former Errors,
and in an unfeigned Devotion, I found in their Library a Volume of Abaillard's
Letters. I had the Curiosity to read it, having seen some of them in Spain; for
though I had in that manner been tossed from Place to Place, and wholly busied in
an Active Life, yet I had not forgot my old Acquaintance with the Muses. I
found, in reading them, so great a Resemblance between Aloisia's Character and
my Carmelite's, and his Passion and mine, that it kindled afresh, and I loved
my Nun with more fervency than I had ever done.

I had but a Glimpse of her Face since my Return from Spain, and she had then
appeared so handsome, that the Idea of her Beauty, inflamed my Desires, which
were more strong than in the greatest Heat of our former Engagement. I dwelt
wholly on these Thoughts, and my only Pleasure was, to view my Heart in the
Description Abaillard made of his own. I imagined the ill success of all my
former Amors, was a Judgment on me, for leaving the only Person I had ever
really loved. I often reflected that she was my Wife, and that all the Law in
the World freed her from an Obligation she could not lawfully have taken upon
her self.

Thus was I taken up with these frivolous Thoughts; and certainly never was a
Passion at once more violent and unhappy than mine, for though I were married to
her, yet I judged it impossible to persuade her to leave the Nunnery; and the
less was my Hope, the greater was my Misfortune.

How often did I repent me of my Complaisance, in suffering her to take that
Habit! and cursed the unfortunate Minute of our Parting. I doubted not but my
former Flames were never well extinguished, and that the Kindness I had for
several others, had never reached my Heart. But now Love displayed its whole
Force in me, and had I a thousand Lives, I would have given them all to be in
the same state with her as formerly, when her Virtue was all the Opposition I
met with.

It Is Violence robbed me of Ease and Rest. I spent whole Nights in writing
Letters to her, which I burnt in the Morning; not daring to acquaint her with
my Sentiments. However, I at last resolved to tell her of my Sufferings, and
made her a Visit with that Design. Oh! how the charming Accent of her Voice
ravished my Soul! My Transport was so great it took away my Speech; when
perceiving my Disorder, she asked me, What I ailed? I fell upon my Knees and
conjured her to hear, and not to hate me. Then I disclosed the Fierceness of my
raging Love, begging she would at least afford her Pity. She yielded her
Attention, and only interrupted me with Sighs. Although I could not see her, yet
I heard her Weep. Ah! cried I then, May I hope you're moved with my Sufferings?
She could not curb her Tears impetuous Stream, and was some Time without
replying to me; but at last did thus express her self. I must confess, with
Shame, That I am moved, and give too much Way to the pleasing News, That you
can love me still; it is true that since the Moment I have known you, my
Thoughts of you have ever been the same; not Absence nor my Vows could e're
destroy, nor Time Deface that Charming, Dear Idea; with Jealousy and Grief I
have seen you engaged to other Women, and do still dote on you with the
Tenderness I ever did. She stopped, and I was seized with unspeakable Raptures,
but the dreadful Thought of the Condition she was in, and the invincible
Impediments which opposed my Bliss, soon dampt my forward Joy. Ah then, said I,
since we e're loved each other, why did we thus deprive us of those Sweets we
might together have enjoyed! What is there then no Hope? Oh! were you half as
willing as my self, there are no Ties which can keep as asunder.

There she stopped my Discourse, begging me not to entertain these idle
Thoughts, but to sacrifice to the Almighty, as she had done a Passion contrary
to his Commands; she told me too, She found her Death drew near, and by a
secret Warning, was admonished to prepare for it.

My Sadness at these Words was such, as I cannot express, and I desired her to
interceed with Heaven, That since we might not live together, I should at least
dye soon after her. This Conversation lasted some Hours, and was the last I had
with her; for though in a seeming good Health, she had no sooner left me, but was
taken with a violent Fever, and a short while after departed this Life: I
endeavored all I could to visit her once more, and often entreated a Nun she
loved to speak to her for me; but my Carmelite prayed her, to suffer her to
forget me, and all the World, that she might think of God alone. Then she
desired her to assure me, That she died with the same Affection for me she ever
had; and never mentioned me any more, only sometimes reflecting on the Gifts of
Divine Providence to her, she implored Heaven to be as merciful to me; and I
doubt not but it is to her Prayers I stand indebted for having lived to an Age,
when I may reflect on my former Wanderings.

I shall undertake to describe my Affliction. The Reader may well imagine it
was not small, for she died when my love was raised to it is highest Pitch.

I resolved to follow the good Counsels she had given me; and at once informed
my Brother with my Return, and design to lead a better Life. I was filled with
the best Desires in the World; but the sequel of my History will show, that I
kept not my Resolutions, and will afford as odd Adventures as those I have
already related; which will, I believe, be read with a greater Pleasure, since
I shall have occasion to give an account of the most remarkable Transactions
during those Times, wherein my self was often concerned.

FINIS.

