A PLAIN RELATION OF MY SUFFERINGS, by that Miserable Combustion, which
happened in Tower-street through the unhappy firing of a great quantity of
Gunpowder, there the 4. of January 1650.

Now Printed that the World may see what just Cause I had to complain of the
injuries then done me, and how little reason Mr. Glendon Minister of that
Parish had (especially after three years time and more) to defame me in Print
as a malicious slanderer of him (who though I had strong reason to suspect, I
did never positively charge with any thing.) Yet he with as much malice as
impertinency, has inserted his Vindication (as he calls it) into his Epistle to
the Reader, put before a Sermon of his, lately printed, Entitled,
Justification justified; wherein, however he has justified his Doctrine, he
has condemned himself (as in reference to me) in the judgment of all
rational Persons.

Prove. 18.17. He that is first in his own cause seems just, but his neighbor
comes and searches him. London Printed, 1653.

To the Reader.
I Am necessitated to publish this Narrative, in Answer to a Relation of my
sufferings by that sad accedent of Gunpouder which befell me and others the 4
of January 1650 made and set forth by Mr. Thomas Glendon Minister in that
Parish. You may please to believe, I can have no pleasure in reviewing that
direful Tragedy; wherein so many of my dear relations perished, together with
the increase of above forty years toilesome gleaning in the way of my
labourious Calling. But finding my self crowded into print with calumny and
reproach; I was the rather prevaled upon by some of my best friends, not to be
silent least mine innocence might thereby suffer. I have therefore according to
my capacity, in the the plain style of a weak woman (with all sincerity and
meekness, however provoked) laid before you the grounds and reasons, why I have
so frequently complained of that hard measure dealt me (before and after the
fire happened) as well by the Magistrate as by my Minister and neighborhood;
Ye that have or may read Master Glendons charge against me, look also on my
defense, and then judge as the Lord shall direct, for unto him have I always
left my cause;

Hester Shaw.

LOng before that sad blow in Tower street by Gunpowder, (some years before the
Fire in Thames street) I had intelligence given me of Gunpowder which was in
that house, where the disaster after happened, and that to a great quantity, so
that the neighborhood were much afraid of it. My house being next adjoining I
went to my neighbor and told him what I had heard, nor could he deny it to be
so; I did therefore pray him, it might be removed speedily, which he pretended
could not be done that night without increasing our danger, but promised to
remove it the next morning betimes, and in the mean time to watch it all that
night himself, but this his promise not being performed, I urged him to it
again, withal telling him that otherwise I would acquaint a Magistrate
therewith before whom said I, you cannot answer for it, it being prohibited any
man to keep above six or eight pounds of Gunpowder at the most in his house,
and that too, not allowed any where, but in an upper room: Thus not without
diverse hot words, I constrained him to remove eighteen Barrells, which he said
was all, but I, (suspending my belief) sent for a Constable to search his
house, whereupon we found twelve barrells of powder more; I then understood
that it had been long his custom to keep great store of powder in his house,
notwithstanding he had often been warned thereof: Therefore when the Wardmoo^
Enquest sat, I wit^ the Constable, went and complained thereof unto them,
telling them I went in danger of my life, and entreating them to take some
order about it; afterward also, I (being at home) seeing them when they came
about their view, went out unto them, and bespake them to this effect;
Gentlemen, I pray, search that house now, whereof I have complained unto you,
and judge whether it be a fit storehouse for Gunpowder. I had fair promises of
them, but nothing at all was done about it.

Afterward when the sire broke out in Thames Street, this was complained off
again to the Aldermen there present, who promised to take care about it but yet
nothing was done: wherefore M. Singleton who was then Constable, did (through
mine instigation) make complaint there of at the Sessions house diverse times,
from time to time, and by his continual solicitation procured it to be taken
into examination, but (as appears) it was laid aside again, and no result (to
any purpose) came thereof. Wherefore (for my part) I looked every night (when
at home) to be blown up, and would say to my maid at my lying down, I am now
laid sit for my Coffin, and it may be before to morrow morning, I shall be
blown into the Churchyard for it.

It happened that the morning preceding that unhappy accident, I was sent for
by my Lady Brent to come to her she being very ill, and with her I continued
until that sa^^ report came to mine ears, which was not until two of the
Clock in the morning after, for my Lady (being desirous to rest) had commanded
all out of the Chamber, but my self, so that when first the messenger came, I
could receive no intelligence, but yet my Ladies Gentlewoman, and Mistress Terry
with her, commanded my Ladies Coach to be made ready, and went to the fire, and
continued thereabout up and down, until they could inform themselves how
things went, and had seen my daughter carried wounded into Mr. Loes house in
Rood-Lane; after which they returned, and came into my Ladies Chamber, telling
her that she must needs let me go unto my daughter, which my Lady (as not
knowing how soon she might have need of me) was very unwilling to suffer,
until they promised her to accompany me, and bring me back to her; then after
they had brought me out of the Chamber, that a disaster had happened near my
house; I answered them, that truly I thought what I feared was fallen upon me,
and said, doubtless my next neighbor has blown me up with Gunpowder, (which
guess of mine they con^irming) said I, it is no more then I expected; and
therefore (blessed be God) I am in some measure prepared for it, having laid up
my treasure above the reach of Gunpowder, and being I had nothing, nor could
have, but what I received from mine heavenly Father, I was most willing to
suffer his righteous will, if to his only wise providence it had seemed meet
to call for away again, what he had once bestowed on me; and was desirous to
lay mine hand upon my mouth, preventing all complaints with this Consideration,
that the greatest evil on this side hell, was less then my demerit, by this
time we took Coach, and then came to Mr. Lo the Surgeon his house, where I
met him coming from my daughter, he having newly dressed her wounds, who when
she saw me, fell into a great passion, but I exhorted her to look up unto God,
and to compose her self to take some rest, and leave the care of her children
to me, for whom I would do mine endeavors. There were present there diverse
Friends, amon wghom was the Lady Mayoresse that now is, whose courteous and
charitable care I must ever acknowledge, for she lent my daughter of her own
clothes to cover her nakedness, and she with Mr. Lo and his wife were good
Samaritanes to me in the time of my extremity. I went thence unto the Lord
Mayor his house that now is, by whose advice Mr. Osburn the Bricklayer, and his
workmen, and laborers, were employed to look after the materials of my house,
and lay them up, whilst others of my friends-enquired after my goods scattered
by the powder, and also having taken order for that present concerning the
Bodies of my son in Law, his three children and maid, whom I found all slain. I
again returned to my Lady Brent, whom I found somewhat eased of her pain,
therefore I again left her about 6 of the clock in the morning went to Mr. Lo
his house, and sent for my Cousin White, and my Cousin Dewit, who (in
convenient time) went with me, together with Mr. Lo, unto Mr. Glendons house,
where we were desired to go into the Church, which we did, and Mr. Glendon came
to us, to whom I said, that I was informed, that some bags of money had been
brought into his house, and if any of them are mine, said I, they are sealed
with mine own Seal (showing him my ring, whereon was engraven the Arms of my
Fathers house) or else with my sons seal (whereon was engraven the Arms of the
Donns, quartered with the Binghams Arms) and then and there also Mr. Abraham
Parrot (who also went with me unto Mr. Glendons) testified unto him, that but a
little before, he had paid me nine hundred and fifty pounds of a Mortgage, all
which said he was sealed up with Mr. Donns seal, and the best of the money
marked with the figure of 8. Mr. Glendon answered, that what had been brought
to him he had sent to Mr. Gasteels house in Crutched Friars, which (said he)
was but two bags, not once naming ought else, as my friends then present with
me can witness. I did then press him to let me have my money, because of my
present necessity, but no argument would prevail with him to supply me with
one penny, nor did he express any sense of my affliction, nor give me any word
of comfort, and this was the very next day after the fire; and not some days
after, as Mr. Glendon has falsely (though in Print) represented to the world.

When I came back to my daughter, she had (as I found) sent my Chamber maid to
see if she could hear what was become of any of our goods, who hearing that
great store of goods had been carried into Mr. Glendons house (after she had
gleaned up some things in the Church yard, which she put into her apron) she
went thither, where she was civiliy admitted by Mistress Clendon, but when Mr.
Glendon saw her, he was very angry, and would let her look no longer, so she
came back and told me of it, and also certified me that she saw a black Chest
of Drawers of my Daughters, (where she put her wearing Linen) and my silver
Salt also in M. Glendons house, this my Lady Mayoresse, Mrs. Lo, with diverse
others then present know; but when afterward the Chest was brought home, all
my daughters best Laces, and finest Linen which lay at the bottom were taken
away, and the courser which were put uppermost were only left, but who did it I
know not, it seems that they had time and place to pick and choose.

My occasions for money increasing, I desired Mr. Lo (at noon) to go for my
money again to Mr Glendon, who went but in vain, then Mr. Hall (at my desire)
went for it, after that Mr. Gail, then Mr. Love the Minister, and at night Mr.
Lo again; but no person, nor importunity, nor argument, would prevail with Mr.
Glendon.

The same day in the afternoon, came to me one Mistress Hall with her son
Henry, and brought with them Mr. Twigs man, who informed me, that four bags of
money had been carried into Mr. Glendons house; but said I to him, Mr Glendon
says, he had but two bags, to which Mr. Twiggs man replied again, there were
four bags carried into Mr. Glendons house, for says he two of them, I carried
in my self, and then also I with others sealed up other bags and money besides
in a blew Apron, and delivered them at Mr Glendons; afterward finding a bunch
of Keys on a silver chain and this bag, (showing me a bag which he had in his
hand, and asking me if that were my seal on it) I put the money, said he that
was in it, into a Napkin, and left it also at Mr. Glendons; and after that
also, seeing Mr. Sanders and his wife in the Churchyard, I delivered the Key,
and bag to them, praying Mr. Sanders to take care that the seal might not be
broken, and telling them I was glad to sinde some body that I knew, and as I
was telling them, what I had done, a young man that was by hearing me, said to
us, that he also had carried two bags into Mr. Glendons, and said, he was a
Gunsmiths man in East Smithfield, but before we could question him further, he
was suddenly gone.

On the Lords day after the fire, I being at supper with my Lord Mayor (that
now is) at his house, took occasion to acquaint his Lordship with Mr. Glendons
hard usage of me, in detaining from me my moneys, though I had requested it of
him my self, and also by diverse of my friends, as Mr. Love, Mr. Gayle, Mr.
Hall; and Mr. Lo who had been twice or thrice for it, and that for the supply
of my present necessity: my Lord told me that he also had sent M. Gayle about
it, but as yet, said he, I have received no account of it: Then said I to my
Lord I perceive what is the reason of M. Glendon's evil dealing with me; It is
because I have withdrawn my accustomed Benevolence from him: When he came first
to our Parish, many of our parishoners were gone into the Country, whose houses
were left empty; and because also I saw he had a charge of children, I did over
and above the accustomed Tithes of my house, paid for 60 years by my husband
and his father, also pay unto him an additionall private Benevolence of eight
pounds a year, at such times as I saw fit; and this I continued till after Mr
Graves the Gun-smith was chosen Churchwarden, with whose wife falling into
discourse one day, as I went by, she told me from Mr. Glendon, that he would
take it very kindly if I would subscribe what I had given him, because it might
move other of the parishoners to a more liberal Contribution: I told her that
Mr. Glendon showed himself an unworthy man, in ^ot being contented with what I
had freely done, but also in seeking to make me his Lure to draw others on to
it; and oblige us all by a public Subscription to a thing which is but
arbitrary; but (said I) therefore I will withdraw my hand, and so I did And
this is the cause of his dealing thus with me; but (said I) to morrow I will
know whether the money be his or mine; If his, it is fit he should keep it, if
mine, I know no reason why he should detain it. I know moreover, that in all
probability all the bags of money must be mine; for none of my neighbors who
suffered by that sad blow could lose much in money by it; some of them being
known to be necessitous persons, especially at that instant, for Mr. Porter in
whose house, and by whose remisnesie it came, had purposely brought that Powder
into his shop to send it away for moneys to be lent upon it; the Shoemaker also
next door to him, confessed that he then wanted money to buy Leather for his
shop, (being always thought a poor man) and the other sufferers which were of
quality (as Mr Wormell the Vinetener at the Rose on the one side; and Captain
Compton on the other side, had their Closers quite backwards where the powder
could have no such power: But I was n^e^es^ to the power of the powder, and had
at that time onhappily drawn in my money for a purchase. I told my Lord also,
what occasion I had for my money, saying, I was loath to borrow so long as I
had any of mine own left me: And since I could not obtain it of Mr. Glendon by
fair means, I was resolved to seek it by public Justice; My Lord then desired
that he might first speak with Mr. Glendon before I took any other course: I
said, if he pleased to do it from himself, he might, but n^^ as from me. Then
my Lord would have sent presently for Mr. Glendon, but said, I, it is the Lords
day, and therefore no sit time, so after supper I went home to Mr Loes.

And the next day being the first Monday after the fire, I went again to my
Lord Mayors (that now is) who lent me a room to secure some of my goods
preserved for me by some faithful friends, and while I was there, my Lord came
in, but some other occasion called him suddenly back again, so that I saw him
no more that day; afterward being in the Parlour, by and by, came in Alderman
Andrews, and Mr Glendon, who stood by the Chimney, but the Alderman walked up
and down the room, seemingly very angry, saying, it was no marvel that my name
was up almost in every ones mouth, I asked for what, he said, for that I took
upon me so plainly to blame the Magistrate for not preventing that sad
accident. Sir (said I) I will own what I have said as to that business, having
complained thereof in mine own person, several times, and caused complaint
thereof to be made to the Enquest of the Ward, to the Aldermen, and at the
Sessions house; the Alderman then said, that he he marvelled that he had never
heard of it. So after some more discourse (to that purpose) he went with me to
Mr Felgates house, where he had secured some of my moneys, which had been
gathered up, and delivered to him in the time of that miserable combustion, but
when we came there, we found a padlock upon the door, and understood that the
money was carried to St. Katharines, (so the Alderman gave me order to receive
it there (which afterward I did accordingly) Then we came back to Mr Glendons
house, where the Alderman whispered Mr Glendon in the car, and so departed.
After this the blew Apron was brought forth sealed up, and also the money in
the Napkin with my name upon it (as Mr Twigs man had me) which Apron and
Napkin, with two bags mo^^ also I received, and gave Mr Glendon my bond to sav^
him harmless, which he needed not to have feared, the bags being sealed with
my sons seal, and the other things all evidently appearing to be mine, and more
also then I received; for whilst I was there, I saw one (...) my new green
Aprons in the hands of one of Mr Glendons daughters, who was stringing it with
mine own strings, but being busy, talking with the Lieutenant (...) the Tower,
and Colonel Witchcot (my very goo^ friends) she was suddenly called away before
I could challenge it. By and by, Mrs Glendon came in bringing two half Crowns
in her hand, which she said he children had taken up on the Church Leads; I
the^ told her I was informed, that great store of money w^^ (by the powder)
seartered there, but I would receive nothing, but what was marked with mine own
name or mark, nor did I. So when I had given Mr Glendon m^ Bond for his
security, I said to him, Sir, (as I understand) you have a silver Salt of mine
in your house, which sure you cannot but know, it having my name on it, (...)
had it not, you have been often enough at my Table (...) take notice of it; this
it ^^^urs (...) that ^^er Salt ^s not ^^led up in (...) blew ^^ron, as (...).
Glen^^^ deli^^^s in ^^^nt.
at which words he went in, and fe^ched it to me; and I, taking it into my hand
turned the mark toward him, (and shaking my head) sa^^ pray Mr Glendon, whose
Salt is this; but he gave m^ never a word, as my friends then present can
testifi^ for this was not done in a corner. I did expect that Mr Glendon would
have invited me to look what Goo^ of mine might be in his house, which liberty
he cou^^ allow unto strangers, but deny to me, which was m^ only an
unneighborly discourtesie, but great injustic^ and I think, had I fallen into
the hands of heathens, I should have found more righteous dealing then I did
from Mr Glendon and others. For besides the difficulties I met with, before I
obtained that little remnant of money out of the Parsons hands, it pleased the
Churchwardens of his Parish, to take from me the materials of mine house (unto
the use of the Parish) which cost me unto Mr Osburn the Bricklayer (before
named) 12 l. od money (as by his receipt appears) for his pains and his
Laborers to lay them up in the Churchyard for me, yet this I suffered, being
taken off from seeking to right my self, somewhat by the persuasion of my Lord
Mayor (that now is) but more by the duties of my Calling, having the lives of
diverse under my care (at that time) whom my conscience did command me to wait
upon, how evilly soever the world requited me. And thus I ^ost an estate of
above three thousand pounds, without any remedy or recompense, but of my good
God who has kept me in my wits, given me strength to labor, and blessed me in
my labors.

As for Mr. Blackwells coming to me from Mr. Glenden, I suppose it was thus
occasioned; Mr. Peck a Minister (now deceased) met me at Mr. Cutlers childs
baptizing; where falling into discourse of the fire, he told me, that he was
one of the first that after came to Mr. Glendon, who told him that when the
blow was given two bags of money were blown into his Study over the Table (he
sitting at it) and it was a great mercy that they hit him not, (for said he) they
would have killed me then: and Mr Peck told me also that he then went upon the
Church-leads, and saw there much money lie scattered; I told him, sure he was
mistaken, for Mr. Glendon, (said I) has no more then what others brought in
his house, which he says, are but two bags, and nothing was blown in; to which
Mr. Peck answered, that he had told me nothing but the truth: I replied to him
again, that I marvelled that Mr. Glendon would conceal the having of any thing
that was not his own from me, who in all probability had right to it. Mr. Peck
then willed me to call him in question about it; but then I must (said I)
examine all his family; and there is one of them has reported in the Minories,
that there were two Gown-rols belonging to my Lady Baker (who once lay at my
house) which Gown-rowls were quilted with gold, blown up with the powder from
my house, and that these rowls lay in Mr. Glendon's Garrets, until the
Inventory of some chief things which were lost, was printed, and then the gold
was ripped from the rowls, and the rowls were burnt which (said I) by the Law is
Felony yet thought loose all I have in the world, I will not endanger any man's
life about; and though they get never so much unjustly, yet it will do them no
good in the end but rather prove a Moath to them; and I know (said I my
heavenly father will provide things convenient for me; Mr. Peck then told me
that he would speak with Mr. Glendon about it; and after this Mr. Blackwell
came to me from Mr. Glendon, to whom, when I had related how jewishly Mr.
Glendon had dealt with me, he seemed to be very sorry, and wished that the
business might (...) taken up by some Ministers or others; But Sir, said I,
(...) thing of this nature is more fit to be decided by a Magistrate, so Mr.
Blackwell departed; And as for Mr. Calamy and Mr. Cranford, they never come to
me from Mr. Glendon, and believe them to be wiser men then to meddle with the
matter.

Thus, as well as I could, and without injury to the truth, I have set down a
review of that late unhappy blow by Gunpowder, with those circumstances which
were necessary to vindicate mine own innocence, and make up a clear
representation of Mr. Glendons dealing toward me; For which, if any shall
Judge him worthy of thanks, let them give credit unto what Mr. Glendon delivers
in his printed Vindication (as he calls it) viz. That Mr. Lo came to him, to
give him thanks in my name, for preserving so much of mine estate for me.
Indeed, I sent Mr. Glendon twenty shilling by Mr. Lo, for the burying the
bodies of my Children, and what Mr Lo in way of Complement might say to him, I
know not; but as for that particular, that I should give him thanks, etc.
Since, I perceive, Mr. Glendon by the relation of that, would insinuate, that
after I had found and was fully satisfied of his neighbourly and upright
dealing toward me (for else sure none will think I gave him thanks) I should
(being through malice and covetousnes inclined to give credit to every flying
report) slander him and detract from his good name. I must out of love to the
truth, and respect to mine credit, utterly deny, and profess, that I never
sent him one word of thanks for preserving any of mine estate; and how he
preserved it, these particulars may show: First, Neither he nor his Wise ever
sent me word of money or ought else that were brought into their house; and for
ought, I know, I should never have known he had any, had I not heard of it by
others; and those more than a few, who told me, that great store of money and
goods were carried into Mr. Glendons house. Secondly, he never permitted me to
see what goods of mine were in his house, nor would he suffer my Maid to see,
but chid her forth after his wife had let her in. Thirdly, though Mr. Glendon
had my silver Salt in his house (marked with my name) yet he never gave it me
of himself, nor told me of it, no, though I had received other things of him,
and given him my discharge and had not my maid told me, she saw it there,
whereupon I challenged it, I think I should have lost it. Fourthly, when I came
with my friends to Mr. Glendon's and showed him my Seal, and told him of my
Sons; he then confessed but two bags he had, which he had sent to Mr. Casteels
(as he said) though Mr. Twigs man told me of four bags, two which himself had
carried in and two others which a Gun-smiths man had carried in: And also Mr.
Peck the minister told me of two more which Mr. Glendon himself confessed were
blown into his Study. Had others dealt no better with me, all the Evidences of
my Land had been lost, but they were sent me home safe, and that by Strangers,
who sought me out, when Mr. Glendon, whose wife I had laid of two Children, and
one mischance freely, and done other courtesies besides to them both, would not
easiely let me have mine own with entreaty.


It now remains, that I make use of this opportunity, to clear the truth from
that false report, which makes me a gainer by this blow, (if considering the
loss of my Son, and three Grandchildren I may be said to be so) But
abstracting that, compare three thousand pounds, (which is within the value of
what I lost there) with all which I after received from others (by way of gift)
whether in Money, Linen, Woolen or Stuff, whose utmost value amounts not to
above fifteen pounds, (excepting a silver Tankard, which was given me by
Alderman Viner (mine ever honored friend) and I say, if this exceed 3000 l. I
will then confess my self a gainer by my loss. However I desire to be content
and thankful that God has given me an honest Calling, and strength to follow
it in mine old age, and does continue his blessing to me in it, and as my long
continued experience of his mercy does encourage me, so also I desire to cast
my self wholly upon him with full confidence, that (as he has said) so he will
defend the widow and fatherles, and though men be unrighteous, I doubt not but
God the righteous judge will plead my cause which I leave to him, praying him to
show them more mercy then they did me; for their mercy to me was cruelty, and
had my life (as my goods were) been in their hands, perhaps they would have
taken that too; but all the powers of darkness I know are limited; Satan could
not touch Jobs substance, nor person without Commission; nor can all the world
do more to me then God has appointed, who will ( I hope) give me a willing
mind to bear what he sees good to lay upon me, and also sanctify it unto me.
By his grace, I not only pray thy will be done, but also endeavor to do and
suffer it, desiring so to be crucified to the world and it to me, that being
loose from creature comforts and relations, I may with more freedom aspire
unto him, and finish my course here with joy to receive an inheritance hereafter
with him, where I shall know no more sorrow, for which come Lord Jesus, come
quickly.

FINIS.

