Die Veneris 6. November. 1691.
IT is Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled,
That the Thanks of this HOUSE shall be, and are hereby given to his Grace the
Lord Archbishop of York for his Sermon preached yesterday before this HOUSE in
the Abbey-Church at Westminster. And he is hereby desired to Print and Publish
the same.

Matthew. Johnson, Cler. PARLIAMENTOR.

A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE Lords Spiritual and Temporal IN PARLIAMENT
ASSEMBLED, IN THE ABBEY-Church at WESTMINSTER, On the Fifth of November, 1691.

By the Archbishop of YORK.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishops Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1691.

Romans x. 2. For I bear them record that they have a zeal of God, but not
according to knowledge.
THese are St. Paul's words, and he spoke them of the Jews, those unbelieving
Jews that were so tenacious of the Traditions of their Fathers, and so utterly
averse to any Reformation of Religion: That though it appeared by undeniable
evidence that Christ Jesus was by God sent into the World for that purpose,
yet, did they to the last stand out in their opposition of him and his Gospel,
even to the final rejection of their Nation.

To these People does St. Paul in this Chapter express a great compassion,
heartily wishing and praying for their Conversion. Brethren (says he in the
first verse) my hearty desire and prayer to God for Israel is, that they may be
saved. That is, that they may come to the knowledge of the Truth in Christ
Jesus, and by that means obtain everlasting Salvation. And one reason why he
was thus concerned for them, he gives in the words following, which are the
words I have read unto you. For I bear them record (says he) that they have a
zeal of God, but not according to knowledge. It was a great motive to him to be
concerned for their happiness, that they were zealous, for Religion; though he
knew at the same time, that the Religion they were then so zealous of, was not
the right Religion; nor did the zeal they showed for it, proceed from right
Principles.

According to the account I have now given of this Passage, Three things we may
take notice of from it, viz.

I. The Apostles approving and tacitly commending that Zeal which his
Countrymen expressed for Religion. II. His meek and charitable behavior
toward them, even when their Zeal for Religion was very faulty and blameable.
III. His discovery of the faultiness of their Zeal, which lay in this, that it
was not according to knowledge.
These Three things I shall take for the Heads of my following discourse upon
this Text, and shall afterward make such Application of it, as the Business of
this Day calls for.

I. First, I desire it may be observed, That Zeal of God in general, that is, a
hearty and passionate concernment for Religion, The Apostle here finds no fault
with: On the contrary, he approves it as a commendable thing. For you see he
represents it, as a piece of virtue in his Countrymen, and speaks it to their
commendation, that they had a zeal of God. I bear them record (says he) that
they have a zeal of God. As much as to say, that he owned, they had that good
quality, and they were to be commended for it; and for that reason he both
wishes them well, and affectionately prays for them.

That which I would from hence take occasion to put you in mind of is this:
That Indifference and Vnconcernedness for Religion is not to have a place among
any ones virtues and good qualities; it is rather a very great fault; howsoever
it may some times pass for an instance of Wisdom and Prudence.

If indeed Men had no Passions, or had so mortified their Passions, that they
were rarely earnest or zealous about any thing; their unconcernedness for
Religion and the things of God might be the less reproveable. But when Zeal and
Passion is more or less wrought into every Man's temper, and the calmest Men
may be observed on sundry occasions not to be without it; it is an inexcusable
fault to have no passion, no zeal for God and his Cause.

How can a Man answer it to his own Conscience, to be heartily angry when an
affront in word or deed is done to himself; and yet to be altogether
insensible, when God is affronted in his Presence? To make a mighty bustle,
when his own Right and Property is at stake, though in never so small a matter;
and yet to show no concernment for the Rights and the Honor of that God who
made him, and by whose favor alone it is that he can call any thing his own
that he has.

O! What a world of Good might we all do, if we had a true zeal of God. How
many Occasions and Opportunities are there put into our hands every day (in
what condition or circumstances soever we are) which if we were acted by this
principle, would render us great Benefactors to Mankind, by discouraging Vice
and Impiety, and promoting Virtue and Goodness in the World.

But perhaps I have set this business of Zeal for God too high: because none
are capable of being thus Zealous, but those that have attained to a great
degree of Virtue and Piety, which we cannot suppose of all, nor the most. But
however, it will be a shame to all of us, if we do not come up to that pitch of
Zeal which the unbelieving Jews are here commended for. I bear them record,
says St. Paul, that they have a zeal of God. What was this Zeal of theirs?
why, as I told you, (and as it plainly appears from the whole Chapter) it was
an earnest and passionate concernment for the Religion of their Country. Sure
all Men among us both good and bad may come up to this degree of Zeal for God,
and it is a reproach to us ^f we do not. Especially considering that their
Religion at that time, was not God's Religion, but Ours is.

Indeed the Public profession of Religion in the right way, is as much every
Man's Interest, and ought to be as much every Man's Care, as any the dearest
thing he has in this World. Nay to all Men that believe they have Souls to
save, it is more valuable than any other Worldly privilege. It concerns us all
therefore to be Zealous in that matter. The Duty we owe to God, to our
Country, and to our Selves, does require it. In vain it is to be busy about
other things, and to neglect this. A Man will have but small comfort when he
comes to die, to reflect that he has been Zealous of the Privileges and
Property, and Rights of his Contrymen; but it was indifferent to him, how
the Service of God and the affairs of Religion were managed.

II. The Second thing we observe from this Passage, is, The Apostle's carriage
to the Unbelieving Israelites, who though they were zealous for God, yet were
in a great mistake as to their notions of the true Religion. He does not
bitterly censure them. He is not fierce nor furious against them. He does not
excite any person to use force or violence to them. But he rather pities them.
He makes their Zeal that they had of God, an Inducement the more heartily to
pray for them, that God would direct them in the right way that leads to
Salvation. Though he is far from approving their blind Zeal, in so obstinately
opposing the Righteousness of God, that is, that method which God had
prescribed, for the attaining of Righteousness by the faith of Jesus Christ;
and setting up a Righteousness of their own, which consisted chiefly in
observing the Ceremonials of Moses his Law and the Traditions of their Fathers,
as it follows in the next Verse after my Text: Yet he thinks them the more
pitiable and the more excusable, in that this their Opposition proceeded from
their Zeal of God, though it was a misinformed irregular Zeal.

This practice and carriage of the Apostle toward these Ignorant Zealots,
ought to be a rule for us to walk by in the like Cases. If Men be of a
different way from us, as to Religion; if they hold other Opinions, or though
they be of another Communion from us: and though too we are sure they are
mistaken: nay and dangerously mistaken too; yet, if they have a Zeal of God, if
they be serious and sincere in their way; if their errors in Religion be the
pure results of a misinformed Conscience: Let us, as the Apostle here did,
take occasion from hence to pity them, and to put up hearty prayers to God for
them; and to endeavor all we can, by gentle methods, to reduce them to the
right way: But by no means to express contempt or hatred of them, or to treat
them with violence and outrage. So far as their Zeal is for God, let us so far
show tenderness and compassion to them; and if their Zeal be in such instances,
as are really commendable, let us in such instances not only bear with them,
but propose them for our examples. This, I say, was the Apostle's practice, and
I think it is so agreeable to the Spirit and Temper of our great Lord and
Master Christ, that it will become us in like cases to act accordingly.

But then after I have said this, These two things are always to be remembered.

First, That our Tenderness to mistaken Zealots, must always be so managed, as
that the true Religion, or the Public peace suffer no damage thereby. And
therefore how kindly and compassionately soever, we, as private Christians, are
to treat those that differ from us, and pursue a wrong way out of Conscience:
Yet this does not hinder, but that both wholesome Laws may be made for the
restraining the exorbitances of mistaken Zeal; and when those Laws are made,
that they may be put in execution.

The consideration of Lawgivers and Magistrates, is different from that of
private Christians. Their business is to see that Nequid detrimenti respublica
capiat, to see that the Government be secured; that the common peace be kept,
that the Laws of God be observed, that God's Religion as it is delivered by
Jesus Christ be preserved sincere and undefiled, and that the solemn Worship of
God be purely and decently performed. And therefore there is no doubt, but that
in all these matters the Government may make Fences and Securities against the
Insults of intemperate Zealots, and when these Fences are made, it should be at
their Peril if they transgressed them, supposing Magistrates did their duty.
And all this we say is very consistent with that tenderness and charity that
all Christians, and even Magistrates themselves in their private Capacity, do
owe to misperswaded erroneous Consciences.

And then Secondly, it is to be remembered that that Kindness and Tenderness to
mistaken Zealots, which we are speaking of from the Text, is not to be
expressed to all alike; but to some more, to some less, to some perhaps in no
degree at all; according as the nature and quality of their Errors are, and
according as the Men that are guilty of them, may more, or less, or not at all,
be thought to have a real Zeal of God, and to act out of principles of
Conscience. Thus for instance,

In the First place, Those that set up for Patrons of Atheism or Epicurism;
that make it their business in their Conversation to expose all Religion, and
to bring it into contempt; that ridicule the Professors of it as a company of
easy credulous Men; that make no Conscience of blaspheming God and all things
Sacred, as occasion is given them: Why, these Men may have Zeal enough for
their Opinions, and we find that they often have a great deal too much; But are
such to be treated with that sort of Tenderness and Compassion that we are now
speaking of? No, by no means; For they are quite out of the bounds of my Text,
They have a Zeal indeed, but it is not a Zeal for God, but for the Devil and
the Interests of his Kingdom. And if one were to measure the greatness of
Crimes by the mischief they do to humane Society; I should think that this sort
of People were not to expect so much favor and respect from mankind, as some
other Malefactors that yet by our Laws are to pay for their offenses at no less
a rate than their Lives.

Again, Secondly, If there be any Men that under a pretense of Religion do
teach or encourage or promote any sort of Vice or Immorality; or whose
Principles do necessarily lead to debauch Men's manners in the plain matters of
Sobriety, Chastity, Truth or Justice, or the like; such kind of People are by
no means Objects of that Tenderness and Compassion that we are now speaking of:
For the Laws of Nature as to moral Virtue and Vice are so plainly writ in every
Man's heart, that he must be supposed to be an Ill Man that can easily entertain
any Principle (let it come never so much recommended under the name of
Religion) that contradicts them. And whatever allowance may in charity be made
for a Man's mistakes, there is no reason that much should be made for his
Wickedness.

Again Thirdly, If there be any Men that whilst they express a great Zeal for
the Purity of Religion, and exclaim against the Corruptions of it (as they term
them) which are introduced into the Public Establishment, and turn every stone
to have all things settled in another method; yet all this while God and their
own Hearts know that all this concernment and Zeal of theirs for Religion, though
it make a great show, is only pretended; and that there is another thing that
lies at the bottom, that is to say Worldly Interest, and Dominion and Power,
which they hope to compass by such a Regulation of Matters as they desire: I
say, if there be any such Men, they are likewise no way concerned in that
compassion my Text speaks of. For though they may be very Zealous, yet it is a
Zeal for their own secular advantages that acts them, and not a Zeal of God. If
such Men could be known; instead of being kindly and charitably thought of for
their Zeal in Religion; the Virtuous part of mankind would look upon them as
the worst of Hypocrites. But since God only knows the Hearts of Men; all such
pretenders to Zeal for Religion, must, till we know them also, be treated
according to the merits of the cause they pretend to be zealous for.

But then Fourthly and Lastly, All that I have now said is with respect to
those that are out of the limits of my Text, such as have no Zeal of God, though
some of them may pretend it: But then as for those that really act out of
Principles of Conscience, and have a real Zeal of God, though in a wrong way;
These are true Objects of our Tenderness and Compassion, though yet in different
degrees. For according as their Principles and Practices do more or less injure
our common Christianity, or are more or less dangerous to our Government and
Constitution; in the same proportion, the greater or less Tenderness and
Indulgence is to be expressed toward them. But most of what concerns this
matter being already settled by Law, I will not be so bold as to meddle in it,
and therefore I proceed to the Third Head of my Discourse.

III. The Third thing I told you we might observe from this Text was this, The
Apostle's tacit Reprehension of the Jewish Zeal upon this account, that it was
not according to Knowledge,

The Use I make of this is, that from hence we may be able to gather to our
selves a true rule for the governing our Zeal in matters of Religion, and
likewise for the judging in others, what Zeal is commendable, and what is not.

For be our Zeal of God never so great, yet if it be not a Zeal according to
knowledge, it is not the right Christian Zeal. And though we see others never
so fervent and vehement in pursuing a Religious Cause, and that too, out of
Conscience; yet if this Zeal of theirs be not according to knowledge, it is a
Zeal that justly deserves to be reproved. And though both we and they may for
our sincerity in God's Cause, expect some Allowances, both from God and Man,
yet neither they nor we can justify it, either to God or Man, that we are thus
foolishly and ignorantly Zealous.

I wish this mark of right Zeal, that it ought to be according to knowledge,
were more considered. For it seems not often to be thought on by those that are
most zealous in their way, of what persuasion soever they be. This same
business of Knowledge, is a thing that is most commonly forgot to be taken in
as an ingredient or Companion of Zeal, in most sort of Professors. For as the
World goes, those Men are generally found to be the greatest Zealots, who are
most notoriously Ignorant. Whereas true Zeal should not only proceed from true
Knowledge, but should also be always accompanied with it, and governed by it.

But what is it to have a Zeal according to Knowledge? What does this Character
of justifiable right Zeal contain in it? I answer, it must at least contain in
it these five following things.

First, To have a Zeal according to Knowledge, does import, that we be not
mistaken, as to the matter of our Zeal; that it be a good Cause, that we are
zealous about. And since it is Zeal for God that we are here speaking of, it
must be something wherein our duty is concerned, that must be the object of our
Zeal.

So that a right Zeal of God implies, that we do so well inform our selves of
the nature of our Religion, as not to pretend a Religious Zeal for any thing
that is not a part of our Religion. If our Zeal for God be as it should be, it
must certainly express it self in matters that are good; about such objects as
God has made to be our duty. It is good (says St. Paul) to be always
zealously affected in a good matter. But if we mistake in our Cause, if we take
that for good which is evil, or that for evil which is good, here our Zeal is
not according to Knowledge.

Secondly, As the object of our Zeal must be according to Knowledge, so also
the Principle from whence our Zeal proceeds, must be according to knowledge
also. That is to say, We must have solid and rational grounds to proceed upon
in our concernment for any thing; such as will not only satisfy our selves, but
all others that are unbyassed: In a word, such as we can justify to all the
World.

If it be every Man's Duty (as St. Peter tells us it is) to be ready to give an
answer to every one that asks him a reason of the hope that is in him: Then I
am sure, it is much more every Man's Duty, to be able to give a reason of the
Zeal that is in him. Because this business of a Man's Zeal does more affect the
Public, and is of greater Concernment to it, than what a Man's private Faith or
Hope is.

But yet how little is this considered by many zealous Men among us. Some are
zealous for a point to serve an Interest or a Faction. But this is not to be
owned as the ground and reason of their Zeal; for indeed if it should, it would
not be allowed of. Others are zealous for no other reason but because they find
their Teachers, or those they most converse with, are so. They follow the
common Cry, and examine no more of the matter. Others indeed have a Principle
of Zeal beyond all this. For they are moved from within, to stand up for this
or the other Cause; they have Impulses upon their Minds which they cannot
resist: But that in truth is no more a justifiable ground of any Man's Zeal,
than either of the former. For if these Motions and Impulses that they speak of
be from God; there will certainly be conveyed along with them, such Reasons and
Arguments for the thing that they are to be zealous about, as will, if they be
declared, satisfy and convince all other reasonable Men, as well as themselves.
For it is a ridiculous thing to imagine, that God at this day does move or
impel Men in any other way than what is agreeable to the Reason of Mankind, and
the Rule of his holy Word. And if the Man's Zeal can be justified by either of
these, there is no need of vouching Inspirations for it.

Thirdly, As the Zeal which is according to knowledge has a good matter for
its object, and proceeds from a right Principle: So it is also regular as to
the Measures of it. He that has it is careful that it do not exceed its due
Bounds, as the Ignorant Zeal often does; but he distinguishes between the
several objects he is zealous for, and allows every one of them, just so great
a Concernment as the thing is worth, and no more. If the thing be but a small
matter, he is but in a small measure concerned for it. If it be of greater
moment, he believes he may be allowed to be the more earnest about it. But he
looks upon it as a rash and foolish thing, and an effect of great ignorance or
weakness, to be hot and eager for all things alike. We should account him not
many degrees removed from a Child or an Idiot, that upon the cut of a Finger
should as passionately complain and cry out for help, as if he had broken a
Limb. Why just the same Folly and Childishness it is, to make a mighty bustle
about small matters which are of no consequence, in which neither Religion, nor
the public Peace, are much concerned; as if indeed our Lives and Souls were in
danger. It therefore becomes all prudent and sober Men to take care, that their
Zeal do not spend it self in little things; that they be not too passionate and
earnest, and vehement for things that are not worth much contending for. If we
lay a greater weight upon a Cause than it will bear, and show as much warmth
and passion for small matters, as if the Fundamentals of our Faith were at
stake, we are zealous indeed, but not according to Knowledge.

Fourthly, The Zeal that is according to knowledge, is always attended with
hearty Charity. It is not that bitter Zeal which the Apostle speaks of, which
is accompanied with Hatred and Envy, and perverse Disputings: But it is kind,
and sociable, and meek, even to Gainsayers. It is that Wisdom which is from
above, that is first pure, then peaceable, gentle and easy to be entreated. It
is a Zeal that loves God and his Truth heartily, and would do all that is
possible to bring honor and advancement to them: But at the same time it
loves all Men. And therefore in all things where it expresses it self, it
purely consults the Merits of the Cause before it, but lets the Persons of Men
alone. It is a certain Argument of an Ignorant and ungoverned Zeal, when a Man
leaves his Cause and his concernment for Gods Glory, and turns his Heat upon
those that he has to deal with, when he is peevish and angry with Men that
differ from him: When he is not contented to oppose Arguments to Arguments, and
to endeavor to gain his point by calm Reasoning; but he flies out into Rage
and Fury; and when he is once transported herewith, he cares not what undecent
bitter Reflections he makes upon all those that have the Fortune to be of a
different side. But in these Cases Men would do well to remember, that the
Wrath of Man works not the Righteousness of God, as the Apostle expresses
it. All this kind of behavior savours of the Wisdom of this World, which is
earthly, and sensual, and devilish.

Fifthly, and lastly, Another inseparable Property of Zeal according to
Knowledge is, That it must pursue lawful ends by lawful means; must never do an
ill thing for the carrying the best Cause. This St. Paul has laid down, as a
Rule, to be eternally observed among Christians, when in the third of the
Romans, he declares, that their damnation is just, who say, Let us do evil that
good may come. Be therefore our Point never so good, or never so weighty, yet
if we use any dishonest, unlawful Arts, for the gaining of it; that is to say,
If we do any thing which is either in it self evil, and appears to be so by the
natural Notices of Mankind, or which the Laws of our holy Religion do forbid: I
say in all such Instances we are Transgressors. And though our Cause be very
good, and our Ends very allowable; yet since the means by which we would
accomplish those ends are unwarrantable, the whole Action, though proceeding
from never so much Zeal for God, is very Bad. For true Zeal, as it always
supposes a right Information of Judgment, as to the matter of it, so likewise
it supposes, that a Man should act in honest ways, and endeavor to attain his
ends by lawful means.

And thus have I laid before you the Properties and Characters of that Zeal,
which is according to knowledge, which was the third and last thing which I
proposed upon this Text; And I pray God we may always remember them whenever we
have occasion to express a Zeal, for any thing, especially in matters of
Religion. All that remains now, is to make some brief application of my Text,
with reference to the business of the day.

These words, as I told you, were spoke of the Jews. But the Character here
given of them does so well fit a sort of Men, whose fiery Zeal for God and
their Religion, gave occasion to the Solemnity of this Day; that it looks as if
it were made for them. It is the Bigots of the Church of Rome that I mean; to
whom we must do the same right that St. Paul here did his Countrymen, We must
bear them Record, that they have a Zeal of God, but not according to Knowledge.

Zealous they are sufficiently, as the Jews were, no body doubts of it. But as
for their Zeals being according to Knowledge, there is great reason to doubt,
they are as faulty in that point, as St. Paul's Countrymen were. Indeed if you
were to draw the comparison between the Jewish and the Popish Zealots, as to
all the several particulars that our Savior and St. Paul take notice of as
Instances of blind Zeal in the former: You would find in all those particulars
both their Zeals to be much of a piece, not only as to the Fervor, but as to
the Blindness of them.

Was it an instance of Ignorant Zeal in the Jews that they set up their
Traditions to the disparagement of the Law of God? I pray, who are those that
disparage the holy Scriptures, by setting their Traditions upon an equal foot
with them?

Were the Jews to be blamed for that they were so zealous for their old
Religion, as to oppose that Reformation of it, which our Lord Jesus endeavored
to introduce among them, because they thought it was an Innovation. I pray who
are those, who upon that very ground oppose all Reformation at this Day, though
yet the wisest and best Men among themselves are sufficiently sensible, that
there are great Corruptions, both in their Doctrine and Worship?

Was it a fault in the Jewish Zeal that it placed Religion too much in
Ceremonies and Formalities, in washing Cups and Platters, in tithing Mint and
Cummin, and the like to the neglect of the weightier matters of the Law,
Justice, and Mercy, and Faith? I pray wherein is Image Worship, Invocation of
Saints, Penances, Pilgrimages, the use of Relics, Holy Water, etc. I say
wherein are these things better than those? And yet we know who they are that
lay so great a stress upon these and such other things, that it may be truly
said, a great part of their Religion is made up of them.

It would not be difficult to run the parallel between the Zeals of the two
Religions, through several more Instances; But it is an unpleasant Argument,
and therefore I will pursue it no farther.

Only one instance more of the Jewish Zeal I must not pass by, because it comes
up so fully to the business of this Day.

So zealous were they for their Religion, that they did not care what sort of
means they made use of for the promoting of it, were they never so wicked and
unnatural. Our Savior they hunted to Death with false Witnesses; Stephen they
stoned out of pure zeal in a popular tumult. Forty of them solemnly bound
themselves under a Curse, that they would neither eat nor drink till they had
killed St. Paul. But all this, and a great deal more our Savior had foretold
they would do, when he told his Apostles, that the time would come, when
whosoever killed them should think that he did God good service. A Blessed way
of doing God service is this, to act such wicked inhumane things as these! But
such inhumane things as these does a Blind Zeal for Religion sometimes put Men
upon. And that it does so, we cannot have a greater proof (except what I have
already mentioned) than the practices of the zealous Men of the Church of Rome.

How many unlawful Arts have they used to subject all the Christian World to
their Lord and Master? How many Forgeries for this purpose have they been the
Authors of, and maintained them afterward? How many disturbances have they
given to the Peace of Christendom, in the most unjust and unnatural ways, for
the advancement of the Papal Cause? It was Zeal for Gods Service and the
Interest of holy Church, that so many Princes have been Excommunicated and
Deposed; that so many Tumults and Rebellions have been raised; that so many
Crusados, for the extirpating Heretics, have been sent out. By which, and such
like means, it may justly be computed, that as much Christian Blood has been
shed for the establishing Popery, as it now stands, nay, and a great deal more,
than ever was during all the times of the Heathen Persecutions for the
supporting of Paganism.

But if there were no other instance extant in the World to show what is to be
expected from a blind Zeal, especially a blind Popish Zeal for Religion, that
instance which the deliverance of this Day does give us occasion to mention,
would be alone sufficient to inform us. When for no other end, but for the
advancement of Popery, and the rooting out that Pestilent Heresy of the
Reformation, which infested these Northern Climates, a Company of Popish
Zealots entered upon the most barbarous and inhumane Project that ever was
undertaken by Men; even neither better nor worse, than the destroying the King
and his Parliament at one blow; and had put all things in such a readiness in
order thereunto, that they certainly had effected it, as on this day, had not
their Conspiracy been detected in a wonderful manner.

But thanks be to God, their designs then, and ever since, have been defeated,
and some of them even miraculously; and we trust in the Mercies of God that
they will ever be so.

God has been wonderfully Gracious to us, in the preservation of our Church
and Religion from Popish attempts to destroy it, ever since it was settled among
us.

How many Plots and Conspiracies were laid in the time of the glorious Q.
Elizabeth, to put an end to her Life, and with it, to our reformed
Establishment?

What a dreadful one was this of the Gunpowder Treason, in the reign of her
Successor?

How many dangers have threatened us since that time, from that quarter?

What a horrible storm but of late did we apprehend, and justly enough too, was
impending over us?

And yet blessed be God (who has never failed to raise up Deliverers to his
People in the day of their Distress) that storm is blown over. And we are here
not only in Peace and Quietness, in the full possession of our Native Rights
and Liberties, and in the Enjoyment of the Free Exercise of our Religion (which
is one of the most desirable things in the World) But such is the deliverance
that God has wrought for us, that we also seem to have a fair prospect of the
Continuance of these Blessings among us; and according to humane Estimate, to
be in a good measure out of the danger of our old Inveterate Enemy, Popery I
mean, which one would think had now made its last effort among us.

Is not this now a great Blessing? And must not all sincere Protestants (of
what persuasions soever they be in other respects) necessarily believe so?
Certainly they must, if they think it a Blessing to be delivered out of the
hands of our Enemies, and to be in a Condition to serve God without fear.

Let us all therefore own it as such to God Almighty; let us thankfully
remember all his past Deliverances from Popery, and especially, let us never
forget those of this day; neither the former, nor this late one.

We have reason to believe, that God has a tender Care of his Church and
Religion in these Kingdoms, not only because he has so many times so signally
and wonderfully appeared for the preservation of it: But more especially,
because we know, and are convinced, that our Religion is according to his Mind
and Will; being no other than that which his Son Jesus Christ taught unto the
World; that is to say, no other than that which is in the Bible, which is our
only Rule of Faith.

It infinitely concerns us all therefore so to behave our selves, as to show,
that we are neither unthankful for Gods past Mercies, nor unqualified for his
future Protection.

And in order to that, I know no other way but this, that we all firmly adhere
to the Principles of our Religion; and that in our Practices we conform our
selves to those Principles. That is to say,

In the first place, That we sincerely love and fear God, and have a hearty
sense of his Presence, and Goodness and Providence, continually abiding in our
minds. That we trust in him, depend upon him, and acknowledge him in all our
ways: That we be careful of his Worship and Service, paying him the constant
Tribute of our Prayers, and Praises and Thanksgiving, both in public and
private.

And then secondly, that we be pure and unblameable in our Lives; avoiding the
Pollutions that are in the World through Lust; and exercising Chastity, and
Modesty, Meekness and Humility, Temperance and Sobriety, amidst the sundry
Temptations we have to conflict with.

And thirdly, that we have always a fervent Charity to one another, that we
love as Brethren; endeavoring to do all the good we can, but doing harm to
none. Using Truth and Justice, and a good Conscience in all our dealings with
Mankind. Living peaceable, if it be possible, with all Men. And not only so,
but in our several Places and Stations, promoting Peace, and Unity and Concord
among Christians, and contributing what we can to the healing the sad Breaches
and Divisions of our Nation.

And then lastly, that we pay all Submission, and Duty and Obedience to the
King and Queen whom God has set over us; endeavoring in all the ways that are
in our Power, to render their Government both as easy to themselves, and as
acceptable to their Subjects, and as formidable to their Enemies as is possible.

If all of us that call our selves Protestants, would charge our selves with
the Practice of these things, how assured might we rest that God would bless
us; that he would continue his Protection of our Nation, our Church, our
Religion, against all Enemies whatsoever, and that we might see our Jerusalem
still more and more to flourish, and Peace to be in all her Borders.

May God Almighty pour upon us all the Spirit of his Grace, and work all these
great things in us, and for us: And in order hereunto, may he send down his
Blessings upon the King and Queen, and so influence and direct all their
Councils, both Public and Private, that all their Subjects may be happy in
their Government, and lead peaceable and quiet lives under them in all
Godliness and Honesty. And after such a Happy and Peaceable Life here, may we
all at last arrive to God's Eternal Kingdom and Glory, through the Merits of
his dear Son, To whom, etc.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
TEN Sermons Preached upon several Occasions: With two Discourses of
Conscience: By the Most Reverend the Lord Archbishop of York. Printed for
Walter Kettilby.


