THE REWARD OF DILIGENCE.

By JEWS SHARP, Rector of Moreton-Hampstead in the County of Devon.

LONDON, Printed for James Collins in the Temple-passage from Essex Street.
MDCLXXIX.

TO THE HONORABLE Sr. WILLIAM COVRTENAY OF Powderham-Castle, Baronet, my Noble
Patron.
SIR,
IT was not from too tender indulgence to mine own Conceptions, that I have
given this ensuing Discourse this public Birth, and endeavored to immortalize
it by dedicating it to your Name: but taking a just measure of my Obligations
by your Favors, I easily discerned, that my grateful Acknowledgments ought to
be as open and manifest, as They have been notoriously free and bountiful; and
although by this I am so far from requiting them, as I was from deserving or
expecting them, yet I do hereby recognize and set up for them This, as my
Pillar of remembrance. Sir, I am so conscious, that my weaknesses are derived
to all the issues of my studies and labors, that I fear this Address will
rather enhance, than in any degree lessen my debts to you, because what I here
present is unworthy of you, and might rather affect an everlasting Concealment,
than a short Animadversion from you; and therefore I must appeal to the
generous tenderness of your compassions to sanctuary me from the severity of
your Judgment; being confident, that when you consider it as the result of
Duty, performed with Love and Thankfulness, it will not only obtain your
Pardon, but your Acceptance too. If my Present be like Jacob's to Joseph, in
that it is little; it is also like it in that it is the best I have; and I
heartily wish it were much in a little, the goodness of the Quality might
compensate for the scantness of the Quantity: but if the perusal of it prove to
be little pleasing and profitable, it is some relief to me to foresee, that it
cannot be much disgustful and wearisome. It Is manifest from the purport of this
Sermon, that He in the event will be the best man, who employeth and improveth
his proper Trusts and Talents to the best purposes: and if it contribute any
assistance toward a faithful management of your great and excellent Gifts and
Interests, and provoke you to improve the many fair and inviting advantages you
partake of, to be yet more serviceable to God and his Church, to your Prince
and Country, I shall have cause to bless God, that he has put it into my heart
thus willingly to offer it to your perusal and service.

That your Honor, your Exemplarily Virtuous and Honorable Lady, the many
gallant and flourishing Branches derived from you, and all those other
Relations which depend upon and serve you, may constantly first seek the
Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, and be more and more blessed, especially
with Spiritual and Heavenly blessings, is, and shall be the instant and
incessant Prayer of him who is,

Sir, Your most obliged and humbly devoted Servant JEWS SHARP.
Moreton-Hampstead Nov. 20. 1674.
THE REWARD OF DILIGENCE.
For unto every one that has, shall be given, and he shall have abundance; but
from him that has not, shall be taken away even that which he has.

Matt. 25.29.
SECT. 1.
THE particle [For] in the front of the Text, suggests the connection thereof
with the precedent Discourse; which is a Parable of a Man traveling into a far
Country, and delivering several Talents to his Servants to trade withal, with
the issue thereof upon his return. Whether we are to conceive the words of the
Text as Christ's own words, upon the recitation of the Parable, inferring from
it, (...), a moral for our Instruction; or as the words of the Lord of the
Servants, mentioned in the Parable, upon the Sentence he passed against the
slothful, to the advantage of the faithful Servant; is a matter of some Doubt,
but of no Moment. It Is certain, our Savior used the same words upon various
occasions, and that with such a signal Emphasis, that they are recorded by
three of the Evangelists, and more than once by two of them, ( Matt. 13, 12.
Luke 8, 18. and 19, 29. Mark 14, 25.) and it is plain, that the (...), to him
that has in the Text, is an allusion to the Participle (...), to him that has
ten talents, in the former Verse; and the taking away from him that has not,
refers to the taking away of the Talent from him that hid it; and consequently,
that the words are our Saviors Reddition or Application of the Parable to the
thing fignified by it.

Sect. 2. The words in their general sense are proverbial, and are here
translated from a civil to a mystical sense. And it is usual with God to apply
himself to us Men in such a way as has agreement with our Natures, as guided
and acted by innate principles of Reason, Judgment, and Righteousness, and to
observe in his dealings with us, such Rules and measures as we our selves think
reasonable and necessary to observe and conform unto, in the transaction of
common affairs amongst our selves. As men which are directed by the prescripts
of common prudence, do not commit the highest Trusts to untryed Persons, but
first commit a lesser proportion of their Concerns, and then a greater, only in
case of approved faithfulness and Diligence; and on the contrary, in case of
Negligence and unfaithfulness in lesser matters, will not entrust greater, but
remand former trusts: so God walks by a rule of like sympathy toward us,
first, he bestows a meaner measure of good Gifts upon us, and then a richer
proportion, only in case of a regular and faithful management of them; and on
the contrary, if the gifts of a lower account be not well managed, he denies
such as are of an higher, and will not think us worthy of those already
conferred.

Sect. 3. And this is the design of my Text, to represent from our ordinary
practice, (...), the equity of that decree and method which God has
established, and ordinarily observes in the dispensation of his Gifts to us,
and how unquestionably reasonable the distribution of his Rewards and
Punishments is. My Text being applied to persons of contrary dispositions and
deportments, and of opposite states and conditions before God, contains a
Thesis and an Antithesis; the former promissory, signifying the good portion of
the faithful and diligent; the other minatory, declaring the evil portion of
the unfaithful and negligent. 1. A Thesis, Unto every one that has shall be
given, and he shall have abundance. 2. An Antithesis; But from him that has
not, shall be taken away, even that which he has. The first will be the
Subject of my Discourse.


1. Here is a Thesis, Unto every one that has shall be given, and he shall
have abundance. That my Discourse may be the more distinst and satisfactory, I
will first consider the (...), the natural sense of the words, as they propound
a Truth to affect our Understandings; and then the (...), the rational force of
them, as they propound an Argument to affect our practical Judgments, and are
designed to sway our choices, and excite our endeavors.

Sect. 4. First, we will consider the (...), the natural sense of the words, as
they propound a truth to affect our Understandings. And here note;

1. A Subject, Unto every one that has. In which let us examine

1. The nature of the Subject simply considered, (...), what is meant by
[Having] according to the notion and intent of the Text. A man may be said to
have a thing two ways.

1. Simply, and absolutely. In a Grammatical and Literal sense, every one which
has an occupancy or propriety, is said to have a thing. This way of [Having]
barely considered, is not here meant. For so the wicked and slothful Servant
from whom the Talent was taken, was said to have a Talent as well as the good
and faithful Servant. So the Gentiles are said (...), to have God in their
knowledge, Romans 1.28. and the Jews are said to have the Law and the Prophets,
Luke 16.29. and having eyes see not. Mar. 8.18. What Aristotle affirms of the
Man which has the true Notices of righteousness but is disturbed with unruly
and mutinous passions, may be said of him that thus Has only, (...), he has
as if he had not. We may be said to [Have] a thing

2. Effectively and relatively. In a Moral and Theological sense, They only are
said to have a thing, which have it upon worthy and comely terms, and carry
themselves suitably to what they have: which is done, 1. When they esteem and
value what they have, answerably to the worth and excellency thereof. 2. When
they are careful to keep and preserve what they have, as a Trust they are to
account for: as they do not make light of what they have, so neither do they
prodigally wait what they have. 3. When they use and employ what they have to
the uses and purposes for which they have it: when they receive not the grace
of God (that is, the gifts of grace) in vain, as the Apostle exhorts 2. Cor.
6.1. 4. When they declare and make it appear by their exemplary practice that
they have what they have. Our Savior much affected to speak after the manner
of the Hebrews, and with them a thing is often said to be when it appears to
be. That this is the genuine notion and import of the [Having] in the Text, is
evident from the tenor of the precedent Parable; for the Servants received not
the Talents to be Proprietaries but Stewards of them: they were delivered to
them as Deposita, stocks of Trust to be traded withal, and increased by a
public commerse. Let us examine,


Sect. 5. 2. The Extensiveness and universality of this Subject, it is (...), to
all, or every one (at least under the Gospel) which has, without exception or
limitation. God is no respecter of persons, but to every person in every nation
which so has, it shall be given, and he shall have abundance. For God having
constituted and declared this as the Law and way of his proceedings toward the
Children of men, he is under a bond of engagement to his own Wisdom, Goodness,
Justice, and Faithfulness, constantly to give to every one that so Has, and
will at no hand depart from the terms he has imposed on himself respectively
to our advantage. Note we,

Sect. 6. 2dly, The Attributes here affirmed and ascribed unto every one that
Has; and they are two, first, shall be given; secondly, he shall have
abundance.

1. Shall be given. This may be understood two ways, either 1. In opposition
to the taking away spoken of in the Antithesis, and then the meaning is, He
that Has, Has what he has to Have and to Hold it, as we say in our Law, the
Gifts he has shall be ensured to him upon terms of continuance and
establishment. This is not the whole truth here intended; for a gift properly
being something imparted to the advantage of the Receiver, and then made the
Receiver's when first given ( Data eo tempore quo dantur, fiunt accipientis,
says the Law) by giving to him that Has, I conceive is meant something which
is given. 2. In contradistinction to what is already received, if not of a
different kind, yet at least of different degrees. Adimplebit and cumulabit
quod dedit, He will fill up and increase to higher measures that which he has
given, says St. Austin. All Gifts which are used according to the mind and
Will of God, become through his blessing like the Bread with which our Savior
fed his Disciples, which multiplied in the using ( Mat. 14.20.) and like the
Widows Oil, which increased in the spending.


Sect. 7. 2dly, Shall have abundance. (...), Shall be given in all abundance,
as the most learned Annotator renders it. Whether this refer to a greater
proportion of Gifts in the same kind, or to an addition of Gifts of another
kind and of greater worth and excellency than the former improved ones, is a
matter of doubt with some: but it seems-plain to me by the purport of the
Parable, that a variety of more choice and excellent gifts rather than a plenty
in the same kind is here meant. for the expression [Shall be given in all
abundance] refers to the advantageous sentence passed on the behalf of the good
and faithful Servant, declaring how just it was upon the improvement of his
Five Talents, that he should obtain such acceptance and success as he did;
that is, that he should be judged meetly qualifyed to enter into his Masters
joy, and the wicked and slothful Servants loss should be His gain. And that
which makes it most evident is this, as the casting the unprofitable Servant
into outer darkness, where there is weeping and gnashing of Teeth, is an Emblem
and representation of hellish damnation and destruction (which is described
diverse times in the same words) Mat. 8.12.22.13.24.51. and denotes the great
wrath and severity of his Lord toward him, so the good and faithful Servants
entering into his Masters joy, is a type and representation of an exaltation to
a state of heavenly glory (which is also sometimes described in words of
Affinity with it ( Ps. 16.11. Heb. 12.2.) and denotes his Lords singular
delight in him, and the transcedent favors and privileges with which he
graced and honored him. So that, by giving in all abundance is meant, a
bestowing, upon the employment of what he has, the most enriching endowments,
such Gifts and graces which capacitate for the Highest seize we can
desire. He that so Has shall have that Life which Christ came that he might
have, and that he might have it more abundantly, Joh. 10.10. And thus I have
finished what I had to say concerning the (...) or literal sense of the words.

Sect. 8. 2dly, We will consider the (...), the rational force of the words as
they propound an Argument to affect our practical Judgments, and are designed
to sway our choices and to excite our endeavors; and that is this: That every
man which sincerely bestirs him, and faithfully to his power acts and
manageth in a regular way those abilities and Gifts with which he is invested,
of what kind soever they are, natural or supernatural, common or special,
acquired or infused, weak or strong, many or few, he shall not only better his
said estate of abilities and Gifts, but is also in a ready way to receive
abilities and Gifts of a nobler nature and higher concern. The drift of our
Savior in this and the former Parable, which begins the Chapter, is to provoke
us to Watchfulness and Diligence in our duties, that we may be prepared for the
coming of our Lord to judgment. And the argument urged in the Text shows the
necessity of this Watchfulness and diligence in order to our standing in
judgment before him, and that we may be accounted worthy to escape the
punishment which shall be inflicted on the careless and slothful, from the rule
and order which he observes in his distribution of rewards and punishments. If
we obtain acceptance with our Lord in the day of Account, and partake of the
benefit and comfort of the approving and justifying Award and remunerating
grace of that day, we must unfeignedly and impartially stir up our selves to
the utmost of what we are able, for the Improvement of the abilities and Gifts
we have received, for the honor of God and good of Men.

Sect. 9. I find upon diligent inquiry and examination, that Commentator do not
concur in judgment concerning the nature of these Talents to which the Text
refers. Some understand by them the Gifts of Nature; others, others, the
principles of reason; others, common grace; others, the gifts of the Spirit;
others, ministerial abilities; others, the publication of the Evangelical
Doctrine according to men's various capacities: but they are generally agreed so
far as I have inquired, that the Talents were of the same nature, and
consequently equally capable of improvement, and upon improvement equally
capable according to their proportion of the like acceptance and success.

Sect. 10. I think it is easily discerned, that the Talents were not in their
immediate natures and appropriate qualities, of a regenerating and saving
import: for the Parable describes the state of Mankind in general, and shows
how it is eventually both with good and bad; and it is expressly said of him
which had the one Talent, that he was statu quo, whilst he had the Talent, a
wicked and slothful Servant, and therefore these Talents had not a necessary
conjunction with an heavenly condition of a saving consequence. And if it
should be granted that these Talents were in their proper and immediate natures
regenerating and sanctifying graces, then it will unavoidably follow, that
regenerating and sanctifying grace may be totally and finally lost, which some
men will by no means believe to be possible. What is premised seems to me a
sufficient inducement to conclude, that the Talents were in themselves of
indifferent Nature; not things absolutely good, but things of good or bad
abode, as they were used by them which had them. Yet be pleased to observe, as
the nonimprovement of the Talent was an equitable consideration on which to
exercise an act of vindictive Justice, so the improvement thereof would have
been an equitable consideration on which to exercise an act of remunerating
Grace. I do not mean, that the improvement would deserve ex condigno, a reward
of grace as the non-improvement did deserve a reward (if I may so say) of
punishment; but that the improvement by the just ordination of God (who will
have mercy upon whom and upon what terms he pleases) would have had eventually
a gracious acceptance and a bountiful reward, as the non-improvement heavy
displeasure and punishment. For as he which hid his Talent was severely
punished, so they which improved their Talents were bountifully recompensed.
From whence we may very rationally infer, That God is propitious to our
faithful endeavors, and does so bless us with the presence of his grace when
we lay out our power to our utmost to serve him in our places and callings,
that he will derive to us the most enriching Gifts and Graces.

Sect. 11. Donteclok against Castellio concludes, That all the care, study and
diligence which men can use to promote their salvation, is vain and to no
purpose, rather hurtful than profitable, before Faith (he means justifying
Faith) and the Spirit of renovation. And the Divines of Hassia with others of
the Dort confederacy suffrage to the same effect. Which Assertion seems to me
to have a most malignant aspect on all the ministries of Religion: for it
cramps all rational and manlike endeavors, indeed cassates the very bonds of
Duty from all irregenerate men, and frustrates the grace of God which has
appeared to the world to the purposes of salvation.

Sect. 12. I do not affect to make the Pulpit look like a Cockpit: but yet such
is my zeal for every Doctrine which is according to godliness, and aversation
to all pernicious errors, especially such as have directly an ill influence on
a good Life, and discourage men which are bad from endeavoring to be good, as
the aforerecited assertion does, that I shall propugne and justify to my power
that Doctrine which my Text suggests against these men of interest which have
opposed and condemned it, and withal endeavor to rescue those unregenerate men
which have received the forementioned Doctrine from those prejudices they are
under against working out of their salvation. And this I shall do so
practically, that you shall have no just reason to blame and censure me for
preaching of a controversy upon such an occasion as this is, which is not
designed to instruct us in the Science of Controversies, but to make us honest
Men, good Christians, and most exemplary Ministers.

Sect. 13. That Position which I infer and shall discourse from my Text in
opposition to that ill-natured Doctrine, taught by the aforenamed Doctors, and
too too many also here amongst us in England, is this: That whosoever under the
Gospel faithfully imploys and improves the abilities and gifts of Nature and
common Grace, (though his works are not pleasant to God. Yet) he shall find
such a degree of acceptance with him (though comparatively low and imperfect)
that he shall be in a ready way to obtain from him Spiritual, and Special
abilities and graces. etc.

For unto every one that has shall be given, and he shall have abundance. That
is, He which exercises himself in the employment of the Gifts already
received, and makes it appear that he has what he has by using it faithfully
to the ends and purposes for which he has it, he shall not only have what he
has continued and multiplied to him, but shall also have gifts of a superior,
and of a more excellent and perfective Nature conferred upon him. This is the
genuine sense of the Text, and my Position a legitimate deduction from it, and
as naturally flows from it as a Stream from a Fountain. Hierocles tells us,
that he which will be made a (...), a Godlike-person, he ought first to be made
an (...), a Man, that is, he ought to live (...), as a reasonable Creature. And
a greater than he, the Apostle speaking of the last Resurrection says, that
was not first which is Spiritual, but that which is Natural, and then that
which is Spiritual. 1 Cor. 15.46. So it is in the spiritual Resurrection (for
the (...), the word used by the Pythagoreans to express the Souls return to
another Body after its departure from a dead one, the Regeneration, as we
English it, or the translation of a man from under the power of Satan into the
Kingdom of Christ, is called the First Resurrection, Rev. 20.16. a making alive
to God, Romans 6.11. and such a making alive as the making alive from the dead,
Romans 6.13. I say here too) there is first that which is Natural, and then that
which is Spiritual: we must first be fit to do the works of men, before we can
be fit to serve the ends of God. I mean God will not prefer us to his heavenly
Kingdom, till we have first learned (...), to live according to the conduct of
a reasonable Soul, as Saint Clement speaks.

Sect. 14. Because the Grecian learning abounds with strict precepts and
directions against unruly Passions, and brutal Appetites, charge man to
restore Reason to her Scepter, to consult her as an Oracle, and to attend her
motions as the (...), the supreme directive faculty, and to obey her as a Law,
to live temperately, righteously, lovingly, discerning betwixt good and evil,
contemning the world, and exercising the mind in excursions toward God,
expecting a reward in case of well-doing and fearing a punishment in case of
evil-doing, and to be (...), like a cube or dye, a square and upright man under
the alternative, and interchangeable courses of fortune, as Reason suggests we
should. St. Basil exhorts Scholars to the study of it, and gives this Reason
for it, that they may be prepared (...), to those things which are from above.
Albaspinus observes, Antiquitus fieri non nasci Christianos, that anciently
Christians were made not born. Made so by long and laborious steps and degrees.
First they were made Catechumeni, instructed in the first principles of
Religion, in the reasonableness and goodness of Christ's institutions; and upon
a conviction of judgment and reformation of manners they became competentes,
suitors and petitioners for Baptism, the laver of Regeneration, Tit. 3.5. and
so were forced by slow paces and approaches (or as the first general
Constantinopolitan Council expresses it) (...), to creep on with time and
leisure into the bosom of the Church; and sometimes, many years preparation
was the Preface to their admission into the society of the Faithful; but the
more they improved themselves in their attention and obedience unto the Reason
of men, the sooner and easier were they brought to give assent and obedience to
the faith of Christians. for the understanding of a man (as Solomon speaks)
is the candle of the Lord (Prove. 20.27.) that is, a most excellent candle set
up within us to show us our way and work. This is that (...), that
superintendent power the Stoics and Platonists so often speak of, which God
has given to every man to be the Guide and overseer of his Life; and as this
Candle is lighted and kindled originally from God, so it still shines in his
beam, directing us to distinguish betwixt good and evil, and finally tends
and leads unto God as the prototype of all truth and goodness which can
either perfect our minds or satisfy our wills. Here the Apostle speaking of
the Gentiles who had no other Candle to guide them but this, says, that they
do by Nature the things contained in the Law, and so show the work of the Law
written in their hearts. (Romans 2.14.15. That is from the natural notions of
good and evil suggested to them from the exercise of Reason, they were
convinced, that it was meet and right that they should practice those things
which God in his written law had commanded: the matter and substance of that
which was effected by the written Law was wrought by the dictate of natural
Reason, and consequently as the one so the other in its primary designment and
proper use was an apt means to lead unto God, and to captivate all the
reasonings and thoughts of men's hearts unto the obedience of the Faith of
Christ.

Sect. 15. St. Augustine (who was no friend to Pelagianism) observes in his
Book De Vera Religione, that he which is furnished with the knowledge of
Philosophy plurimum juvari, is very much helped for the understanding of the
Christian Faith. And tells us, that many of the Platonists, who were much
addicted to the study of Philosophy, and the practice of moral Virtues, very
readily became Christians in his time. It Is said the Sect of the Epicureans
were better fed than taught; and perhaps some amongst other Sects were better
taught then manner'd: but certainly diverse of them were so well taught and
manner'd too, that there was a very great alliance betwixt their Doctrines and
Practices, and those of Christians; which made Octavius think Philosophers and
Christians to be terms convertible, and to say, that the Christians were now
Philosophers, or the Philosophers were then Christians. The humane nature being
(...), a systeme of rational notions, as Clemens speaks, and Philosophic
studies and endeavors the manurance and improvement of them. I think he said
not amiss when he called Philosophy (...), the elementary principle or first
inlet of the Christian Faith. For the Religion of Christ being the most
reasonable Religion in the world, is so well suited to the constitution of our
rational Beings, that (adventitious prepossessions and prejudices being lain
aside, which a Philosophic ingenuity and deportment will provoke, and in some
measure help us to do) when it is presented to our view and propounded to our
choice, we shall be ready to say of it, as Adam of Eve when God first brought
her to him. This is flesh of my flesh and bone of my bone, and instantly desire
and embrace it. And I am confident in the point of morality, there is scarce
any thing so peculiar to the Church of Christ: but it was liked and recommended
to us by the Schools of the ancient Philosophers; which is a plain argument,
that our Christian prescripts for morality are not merely from external
imposition, or arbitrary obligation, or to be found only in those sacred
volumes we call the Bible, but are natures own Tables of the Law in another
edition and promulgation, and in truth a fair Copy of the impressions of Reason
upon our own Souls, and discoverable and legible within our selves. And because
the moral precepts of Christ are thus underprop'd with the steadfast Reason and
approbation of mankind, and do on every side square with the common principles
and sentiments of every man's Soul, they must needs gain hugely upon the minds
and hearts of Philosophic tempered men, who have a great reverence for the
dictates of Reason, and from an honest moral integrity hate whatsoever they
apprehend will debauch their Natures as they are reasonable Creatures. And
therefore Origin called Celsus to consider, if it were not the agreeableness of
the principles of the Christian Faith (...), with common notions, the
correspondency of them with the universal Reason of the world, which rendered
the preaching of the Christian Faith so prevalent and successful with all
candid and ingenuous hearers.

Sect. 16. Therefore (says the Apostle, of the Beraeans) many of them
believed: wherefore? because (as he tells you in the former verse) they were
more noble than those of Thessalonica. Act 17.11.12. (...), the comparison
refers not so much to their civil pedigree and extraction as to their moral
temper and disposition. They were more generous and ingenuous. The Greek
Fathers (says Grotius) interpret the word by (...), more moderate and
equitably minded. They were a people of a proper becoming temper; of a
rational, affable, pliable deportment toward all; full of candor and
equanimity toward the Apostles; inquisitive after the truth, free and loyal to
it: they were a sort of people which proportioned their regards suitably to the
nature of Things, Persons, and Doctrines, and consequently judged of, and
affected the Apostles preachments answerably to the weightiness and concernment
of them, and according to the evidences of Truth they discerned in them; all
which appears, in that they received the words with all readiness of mind, and
searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things were so. The Beraeans were
not biassed with unreasonable passions and interests, as the Jews of
Thessalonica were, as you may see in the fifth Verse; but acquitted themselves
(if I may so speak) like noble Gentlemen; hearkened to the promulgation of the
Truth attentively and patiently; examined matters carefully and diligently, and
judged thereof impartially; all which are acts of Reason, Labor and Industry,
and as the Apostle intimates, preparatory to the entertainment of the Christian
Faith.

Sect. 17. I doubt not but you observe, that the reason generally assigned why
the Jews rejected the Christian Faith, is, because their Wills and Appetites
had the predominancy of their Understandings and Judgments, Joh. 5, 40. Mat.
23, 27. Joh. 4, 48. their Reasons and Consciences were oftentimes persuaded and
convinced, but because their carnal affections and secular inclinations were
not accommodated and gratified, they repented not that they might believe.
Matt. 21, 32. Joh. 8, 43, 44, 45. When the Turks (as an Honorable Person
reports) design to drink to drunkenness, they first make a very great and
unusual noise, to drive down their rational Souls (as they pretend) to the
remotest parts of their Bodies, that being at a great distance from their
intoxicating cups, they may not observe and be conscious of their brutish
Intemperance. Thus it is in a manner with all men which addict themselves to
habituate wickedness, and make provision to fulfill the lusts of the flesh;
they dethrone and assassinate their Understandings, and as it were, drive and
force their rational faculties out of their coasts, and give themselves over to
the Empire and government of their seditious Appetites and saucy Passions;
which is such an irrational and brutish way of acting, that with Trismegistus
it is (...), a sort of drunkenness, yea, (...), an appearance or species of
Madness; and we may truly say of such a man, as Jacob when he saw Joseph's Coat;
It is my sons coat, but evil beasts have devoured him, Genesis 37.33. Here is the
outward garment and habit of a Man, but evil Beasts have devoured the Man; he
has the outward shape, and unweildy body of a Man, but he has not the inward
form, the proper differencing Essence of a Man: those evil Beasts his Passions
and Lusts, have torn in pieces and devoured his reasonable Soul: he has the
name of a Man, and still retains the unprofitable and troublesome Carcass of a
Man, but the informing and active part of the Man is departed: his Vices have
so corrupted and tainted him, that he is quite unmanned and become like Babylon,
an habitation of Devils, and the Hold of every foul Spirit, and a cage of every
unclean and hateful bird, Rev. 18, 2.

Sect. 18. Questionless you observe, That before the Prodigal Son in the
Parable returned home to his Father, or was resolved so to do, he is said to
come to Himself, Luke 15, 17. that is, he returned to a sober and regular use
of his Understanding and Reason; he acquitted himself like a Son of Reason,
before he acquitted himself like a Son of God. Whilst a man departs from God he
is beside himself, distracted and mad, a fugitive from a Rational, as well as a
Divine Life, and a mere exile from his own original Essence and Being. Solum
hoc animal Naturae fines transgreditur. Man is the only Creature which
transgresses the bounds of Nature, said one, of sinning man. Other Creatures
are conducted by the instinct of Nature, but sinning Man contradicts it; and
how can man return to the God of Nature, who returns not to the Order of
Nature? you shall therefore find, that when God most passionately desires and
pursues the Reformation and welfare of a people, he exhorts and wishes them
to awaken and stir up those noble Principles of Understanding and Reason which
are within them, as a means to it. O that they were wise, that they understood
this, that they would consider their later end, Deuteronomy. 32, 29. Consider your
ways, says God, by the Prophet Haggai, once and again, Hag. 1.5, 7. and the
Prophet concludes, that the Rebellion of Judah and of Jerusalem, proceeded from
their defectiveness this way, the Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his masters
crib, but Israel does not know, my people does not consider (Isa. 1, 3.) Did
men (under the Gospel especially) exercise their Understandings and reasoning
Faculties, as they should and might do, and comport with their Dictates and
Instigations as other Creatures do with their Instincts and and Inclinations,
they would be as serviceable to God in their relations to him, as other
Creatures are to their Owners and Benefactors. For, when God speaks of his
Peoples forsaking him, that is, Objects, Ways, and Engagements, which are
Spiritual and Heavenly, and effective to their Perfection and Happiness, and
their turning to Objects, Ways, and Engagements which are Temporal, Carnal and
Earthly and Ineffective to any good, he represents it as a thing very monstrous
and quite beside the tendency and course of Nature. Be astonished O ye Heavens,
and be ye horribly afraid; be ye very desolate, says the Lord; for my people
have committed two Evils, they have forsaken Me the Fountain of living Waters,
and hewed them out Cisterns, broken Cisterns that will hold no water. Jer.
2.12.13. q. d. this fact of yours bespeaks you so far degenerated from the
spirit and actions of men, that you are grown quite out of kind, and the whole
course of Nature upbraids this as a most stupendous exorbitancy, and a most
enormous and intolerable practice.

Sect. 19. It Is remarkable that the man to whom our Savior said, thou art not
far from the Kingdom of God, (Mar. 12.34.) is said to answer Discreetly; (...),
from (...), says Erasmus on the place. He answered like a man accustomed
Secundum intellectum vivere, as St. Austin speaks. Like a Man which had his
wits about him, as we say: he was (to use Ennius his Phrase) egregie cordatus
homo, a man of an enlarged Soul and great freedom of Mind: he was in a great
measure rescued from a sensual vassalage, and acted by the generous principle
of Understanding and Reason. He answered skilfully, wisely, learnedly, for so
the word often signifies amongst the Greeks. From which we may collect with
St. Hierome, that Ignorance is farther from the Kingdom of God than Knowledge;
and that they which show themselves Men, as the Prophet exhorts the Jews, in
order to their reformation and reconciliation with God ( Isa. 46.8.) and
faithfully comport with the dictates of Reason, abstaining from the things
which that prohibits, and practicing the things which that requires; they are
in the suburbs of religion, and near borderers on the Kingdom of God; and may
seem to say to Religion as Ruth to Booz, spread the skirt of thy Garment over
us, for thou art our near kinsman, and are not far from the Kingdom of God.

Sect. 20. I confess I think the habits and acts of moral Virtues and some
common Graces to be materially the same with the habits and acts of Spiritual
and Evangelical Graces, and to differ only as the less perfect from the more
perfect: but yet I take them to be specifically distinct. For such is the
Nature of these things, that a gradual perfection constituteth a specifical
difference. As in Numbers, a variation of Degrees alters the species and makes
one number formally distinct from another. e. g. the number Ten differs only by
the addition of degrees from the number Five, and yet Ten is not only
individually but specifically a distinct number from Five. And though Nine be
specifically distinct from Ten as well as Five, yet Nine is nearer and may more
easily be brought up to Ten, than Five can. So though moral Virtues and common
Graces are things of a dictint Kind and Nature from Divine and Evangelical
Graces, yet they have more alliance and sympathy with evangelical Graces than
habitual Vices have. It Is true, he which is in the Churchyard is formally and
indeed out of this Congregation as well as he which is distant from it a
thousand miles; yet the one is nearer and may more easily come into this
congregation than the other can: so a moral man and one endowed with common
Graces, I mean, a man which does follow the conduct of Reason so far and as
much as an unregenerate man can do, in shunning the Vices his Reason condemns,
and in practicing the Virtues his Reason commends, which has an honest
integrity of heart as Abimeleck had Genesis 20.6. and keeps all the known
commandments of God, as the young man which came to Christ had done, ( Matt.
19, 20.) which fears God, works Righteousness, and gives Alms to the Poor
as Cornelius did, ( Act. 10, 37.) and has a Zeal for the worship of God, as
the Jews had, ( Romans 10, 2.) and intends well as to lower inferior ends, as
Paul before his conversion did, ( Act. 23.1.26, 5.) I say, though such an one
be really, and in truth out of the Kingdom of God, as well as the man debauched
with Vice, and distracted with the perturbation of his Passions, and Lusts, yet
he is not so far from the Kingdom of God as the other is: ( Mark 12, 34.) he
has not so much to do; so many hindrances to remove, and so many inducements
to gain, so much preparation to make, so many degrees of enmity against God and
Religion to abate, and so many steps toward a resolution of reformation to
take, as a lewd Ruffian has. I know that God is able of Stones to raise up
Children to Abraham: but I know also that God will not do all that he is able
to do; for God does not administer and manage the affairs of his heavenly
Kingdom as a Physical Agent in a way of Natural power, but as a Sovereign Lord,
by a Rectoral Power, determining how things shall be effected according to the
Council of his own Will; and it is the Will of God as affected and inclined by
potent Considerations, and congruous motives suggested to him by his Wisdom and
Righteousness, which directs and draws forth his Power into Action, when he
regenerates a man. And though he may in some extraordinary cases now and then
occurring, to subserve his own Glory and the general good of Mankind, translate
a Man from under the power of Satan into the Kingdom of his Son, without
respect had to previous workings to harbinger and make the way ready for it;
yet ordinarily it is not so, there is a mediation of initial Graces and
preparatory Dispositions, (...), to forward and fit the subject for it. Hence
it is said of those Gentiles which believed upon St. Paul's preaching to them,
that they were ordained to eternal life, Acts 13.48. (...), marshalled or
trained up, orderly disposed and in a ready posture, that is, prepared
according to Gods order and appointment, to obtain eternal Life. The progresses
of Grace imitate the methods of Nature, bring the designed effects to pass by
degrees, and do not pass from one extreme to another, without the mediation. of
some preparatory Dispositions. Not that these initial preparatory Dispositions
do efficiently cooperate with Gods Spirit to the production of habitual,
sanctifying, and saving Grace, as temperate Endeavors produce in Morality an
habitual Temperance, or Natural Qualities dispose to Natural Forms, by a
natural and necessary Connection, or as if by a supervening adjutorial power of
Gods Spirit, moral Virtues and common Graces did lose their specific Forms,
and were materially wrought up into an higher Species, and transformed into
Spiritual and special Graces: but these imperfect things through the ordination
and assistance of God, and by a moral connection, are blessed and crowned with
Perfection, and are ordinarily conditions presupposed in us to render us
capable Subjects of habitual and special Graces, and concur to the production
of them, like Sacramental Causes to their Effects, only from Gods Institution,
and the conjunction of his Gracious Presence with them. And it is manifest from
the Parable of the indebted servant, who obtained forgiveness because he asked,
that an act which does not proceed from an accepted justified person, though it
be not acceptable and pleasing, may yet be the condition or occasion moving God
to an act of special Grace. And I am sure of this, if acts of moral Virtues and
common Graces do not Please God as acts of special and sanctifying Graces do,
yet they do not Provoke him as acts of habituate Vices do; and the further we
are from Provoking God, the nearer we are to Please him.

Sect. 21. Methinks our Saviors reddition of and inference from the Parable of
the Steward which wasted his Lords goods, fully evinceth, that the faithful
employment of the abilities and Gifts of Nature, and common Grace, and
Providence, will be propitious, and contribute influence toward a capacity for
spiritual and special abilities and Graces. Make (says he) to your selves
friends of the unrighteous Mammon, that when you fail they may receive you into
everlasting habitations. He then that is faithful in that which is least, is
faithful also in much. If therefore ye have not been faithful in that which is
another man's, who shall give you that which is your own? Luke 16. from 9. to
13. That is, lesser Gifts well improved are a means to befriend us to obtain
greater: and if we are faithful in smaller matters, the same Principle will
incline us to be so in greater: but if we are unfaithful in lesser, God will
not commit to us greater Trusts. If we abuse Gifts of a present temporal
concern, God will not entrust us with Gifts of a future spiritual concern: for
if men abuse those Gifts which they have as Stewards, only for a time, there
can be no engaging motive offered to confer upon them those Gifts which men are
to have as Proprieties for ever. So that it seems most plain and evident to me,
that there is a certain connection betwixt the collation of superior Gifts and
the good use of Gifts of an inferior nature. And when Christ commands us to
strive to enter in at the strait gate, (Luke 13.24. to labor for the meat
which endures to eternal Life, Joh. 6, 24. and promises that he which comes
to him, he will in no wise cast out. Joh. 6.37. that is, will certainly receive
and accept; I say in these Scriptures Christ plainly intimates, that God will
not ordinarily give spiritual and heavenly Graces without the mediation of our
faithful Endeavors; and if we do engage our selves in good earnest, and lay
out the utmost All within us to seek after Spiritual and Heavenly Gifts and
Graces, our labor in probability shall not be in vain. The Reasons of my
Position are these:

Sect. 22. Reas. 1. Because the faithful employment of the abilities and Gifts
aforesaid is by God decreed and ordained to this end. And God who is infinitely
wise, great and good, brings every thing to that period and perfection to which
he does design and determine it. God does not impose Duty upon us only in
Sovereignty, as a mere Task to try and exercise our Subjection and Obedience,
but in Goodness and Mercy also, as a means in order to our Benefit and Comfort,
Deuteronomy. 8, 16. and 6.24. and 10.13. Joh. 3.17. Tit. 2.11. Hence that Maxim in the
Schools, omne officium est propter beneficium. And accordingly when we do a
thing which God commands, it is not accepted and rewarded simply and merely
because commanded, but because in doing it we act becomingly, acquit our selves
agreeably to the ducture of that Reason and Judgment which God has planted and
enlightened within us to direct us to the acknowledgment of our dependence upon
him, subjection to him, and the pursuit of those things which make for our own
perfection and Happiness. Though we do a thing in it self very good, and
strictly commanded of God, yet if we do it not from conscience of duty to God,
and perhaps as commodious and profitable to our selves, it will not be accepted
with God: for every command implies a promise, and consequently every duty
implies a reward, and therefore it is almost if not quite as essential to a
duty to respect Gods Bounty, as his Sovereignty, Heb. 11.6. And to look to the
End for which, as well as to the Warrant from which it is to be done. And
certainly God which encourages our hope in case we perform a Duty, will
accomplish to us the end we hope for by a Duty.

Sect. 23. Indeed the connection (as we formerly intimated) betwixt our
faithful employment of the abilities and Gifts of Nature and common Grace, and
our obtaining an estate in spiritual and special abilities and Graces, does not
arise from any Merit or considerable worth and obligingness in our faithful
Diligence, nor is it strictly and properly the natural production or the result
and force of any strength and virtue in the faithful exercise of our natural
and common abilities and Graces: but it is from Gods gracious vouchsafement,
and from the mighty and irresistible force and virtue of Gods decree which do
here interpose themselves for our good, and unto which God will subject himself
as to Laws and Rules of his own making and establishment in his dispensations
toward us. Hence that of the Psalmist, thou have magnifyed thy word above all
thy name. ( Psa 138.2. that is, God has and will subject all his glorious
Attributes to his gracious Promise to that word of his which is gone forth out
of his mouth to serve and bless the children of men, which walk uprightly
before him. Ps. 84.11. I do not believe that Gods dispensations of Grace are
allured by man's moral goodness, or that his gracious purposes are so bound up
to man's good behavior that he can do good to no man upon other terms: but
ordinarily, and according to Gods revealed will, his stated rule and promise of
communicatings to us, such a Demeanor and qualification as we have been
speaking of, sits man to receive higher Grace, and puts God into an honorable
capacity, if I may say so, to bestow Grace upon man. And if God will perfect
and crown our faithful moral Diligence, and imperfectly good Endeavors, with
such a blessed success, who shall say unto him why do thou so? God has
said, that the diligent hand makes rich, Prove. 10.4. and may not God grant in
Spiritual matters as well as in Temporal, what Privileges and Prerogatives to
Diligence He pleases?

Sect. 24. Reas. 2. Because God in love to Judgment measures his Rectoral
Administrations by the rules of Equity, and proportioneth his Acceptance and
Rewards of Service done him answerably to the Abilities of those which perform
it. This is the purport of several texts of Scripture; unto whomsoever much is
given, of him shall much be required. Luke 12, 48. God gives to all, but not
in the same measure: some have five talents, others two, others one. And the
Accounts of each shall be answerable to his Receipts. He that has received but
one Talent, shall be accountable but for one; for God does not expect to reap
where he strewed not, as it is in this Parable: but he lays judgment to the
Line, and righteousness to the Plummet, Isa. 28.17. and will summa equitate jus
reddere, render to every one in a rational way; according to an equitable
proportion. That is, God expects much from him to whom he has committed much,
and but little from him to whom he committed but a little. And answerably in
this distribution of Favors and Rewards he proceeds by a Geometrical and not
by an Arithmetical proportion: he which by his diligence improved two Talents
to four, found as favorable an acceptance as he which improved five to ten:
there was the same Consideration and as much Reason, that he which had improved
two Talents should be commended and rewarded, as there was that the other
should, who had improved five; for, all things considered, the one had done as
much as the other.

Sect. 25. Our Savior said of the poor Widow which cast two mites into the
Treasury, that she cast in more than all they which cast in much. Mar. 14.42,
43, 44. What she cast in was not simply and absolutely in it self, and
according to Arithmetical proportion more than all that which they cast in, nor
yet so much: but considering her Ability and the readiness of her mind and
according to Geometrical proportion it was more; for they could have given
greater matters out of their greater estates but she that gave all could give
no more; and therefore she gave More, respectively to Gods Acceptance and
commendation, than all the rest. The Apostle speaks full to our purpose, If
there be first (says he) a willing mind (that is, if a man be sincerely
willing either actively or passively to perform a signal service to God, and be
ready to go forward with the work, but through a deficiency of strength, means
or opportunity cannot actually accomplish it, he shall not be rejected for such
a deficiency but God will accept the Will for the Deed; for as it follows, a
man is accepted according to that which he has, and not according to that
which he has not. Cor 8.12. that is, God measures and regards a man
proportionably to the employment of his particular ability, and if he go as far
as he can toward performance of service to him, he finds as favorable
acceptance with him as he would have done, if he had actually performed it in
circumstances of more abilities, assistances and opportunities.

Sect. 26. The frequent appeals which God makes to our reasoning Faculty, to
judge and determine of the Rational Equity of his way of dealing with us, is a
convictive evidence, That in all his Administrations toward us, he observes a
rational Equity and Proportion, and never does any thing which bears any way
hard upon the Principle of Reason, and Rule of equitable Dealings: so that,
when men, placed under the Gospel, and assisted by God, do their utmost to
please God in a way of Nature and common Grace, faithfully comport with, and
follow the light and ducture of their natural Understandings and Reasons, and
diligently and conscienciously go along with God in the use of the Means of
Spiritual and special Grace prescribed and enjoined by him, they do that which
is of such consideration and account in the sight of God, that they are in a
ready way to obtain from him, answerably to their capacities, Spiritual and
special Abilities and Graces.

Sect. 27. Men that dye in their sins, and are damned for their sins, are so
far from doing their best, that they seem to do the worst they can to hinder
their Conversion: they hated knowledge, the fear of the Lord they chused not,
they would none of my counsel, they despised all my rebuke, Prove. 1.20, 30.
Though their estate be never so bad, they like and love it as if it were best
of all, Jer. 5.31. and prefer it before a state of Grace, John 3.19. And
accordingly you shall find, the Equity of Gods Justice in rejecting men from
Grace, and condemning them to Punishment, is no where said to be founded on any
natural or invincible want of power in them to attain Grace and prevent
Destruction; but it is always charged on the faultiness of their Wills, Prove.
1.24. to 32. Luke 13, 34. Joh. 5.40. Act. 7.5. Implying, that if men did awaken
those Principles of Light, Understanding and Judgment which God vouchsafes to
them, and stir up their executive powers to join issue with the gracious
assistances of Gods Spirit for the pursuance of that Grace and mercy which God
offers to them, they might have avoided the evil portion of Sinners, and have
partaked of an inheritance amongst the Saints in Light.

Sect. 28. Reas. 3. Because God delights to discover the kindness and
bountifulness of his disposition toward the children of men. There is in God
(...), a goodness and love toward Men, as the Apostle tells you, Tit. 3.4. The
Nature of which affections dispose him to communicate favors and Gifts to us.
From hence he preventeth us with the blessings of Goodness, as the Psalmist
speaks, Ps. 21.3. And so loved the World that he gave his only begotten Son
etc. We are all the offspring of God, said the Apostle, from the Heathen Poet,
Act. 17.28. And nothing is more natural to him than to support and cherish the
productions and free effluxes of his own omnipotent Love and goodness. Hence
St. Peter calls him faithful Creator, and wills us upon that account to
commit our selves to him in well-doing. 1 Pet. 4.19. Implying, that Gods
relation to us as our Creator, is a kind of natural promisory engagement upon
him to protect, preserve, and do us good when we deport our selves toward him
as becomes rational Creatures. And we find that Job represented and complained
of it as a very incongruous thing, as a thing unbecoming the relation of a
Creator to a Creature, to make it as it were purposely to destroy it, without
the consideration of any notable unrighteousness in it, or provocation from it.
Thine hands have made me and fashioned me round about, and yet thou do
destroy me Job 10, 8. q. d. Thy Making of me promised Preservation, provision,
and goodness from thee, and will thou [yet] notwithstanding the natural
obligation of that relation ruin me for thy mere pleasure? and you shall find
that God does often insist upon the consideration of his Relation to his people
as their Creator, to suggest and inculcate to them from thence his regular and
due care, yea, his tender love and abundant goodness and bounty toward them
Isa. 44.2.45.11.46.3, 4.49, 15. God is not only merciful and gracious, but he
is the Father of Mercies, 1 Cor. 1.3. and waits to be gracious. Isa 30, 18.
that is, it is natural to God to be ready to acts of mercy, and Mercy so
pleases him, Mic. 7.18. that he looks out and seeks for, yea, watches and
waits for a fair opportunity to exalt his mercy in the gracious succor and
relief of poor miserable sinners endeavoring all they can to seeek and find
him.

Sect. 29. Our Savior exhorting his Hearers in his Sermon on the Mount, to
pray for the Spirit, (that is, the good Gifts and Graces of the Spirit our
Discourse relates unto) encourages them to believe that their Prayer shall be
prevalent and effectual, from the consideration now before us, viz. that God is
their Father; that is, because their Beings are originally from Him as Children
are from a Father. And the strength of his Argument stands in a comparison,
and is drawn from the less to the greater; If ye then (says he) being evil
(that is, degenerated in a great measure from that kindness and benignity which
was once impressed upon your Natures: for Evil here is opposed to a Liberal
Disposition, and a forwardness to Help and Relieve when requested) know how to
give good gifts to your children, how much more shall your Father which is in
Heaven give good gifts (another Evangelist says, His Spirit, Luke 9.13.) unto
them that ask him, Matt. 7.11. For as the Psalmist reasons in another case,
He that made the eye, shall not he see? and he that planted the ear, shall not
he hear? Psalm: 94.9. So, shall not God, who has only copied out his own
Bowels, Love, and Goodness, in dark Characters upon Men, investing their
Natures with such Principles which incline and carry them forth to acts of
Kindness and Bounty, show Himself to be much more full of Kindness and Bounty;
and answerably bestow upon all such as diligently and faithfully serve him,
according to the utmost of their Capacities and Circumstances, that which is
best for them?

Sect. 30. Optimus and Maximus, Most Good or Bountiful, and Most Great or
Powerful, were two Attributes which the ancient Gentiles most especially
ascribed unto God, and they ever gave, from the dictate of Nature, his Goodness
or Bounty the precedence of his Greatness or Power, implying, That God
principally looks after the manifestation and acknowledgment of That. And the
truth is, God never acts more like himself, with greater Royalty and
Magnificence, than when he gives ample Gifts unto Men, and rewards their
Services above the strict Worth and natural Value of them; for hereby, as in a
Glass, is represented a Scheme of his excellent Greatness, and the design he
has to affect us with awful apprehensions of his Greatness and Excellency. We
say, There is no service to the service of a King, because such a service is
not recompensed in proportion to its proper worth, but in proportion to the
Greatness and Munificence of the Prince which gives the Recompense. As
Alexander said when he gave one a greater gift than he desired or expected, Non
quaero quid te accipere deceat, sed quid me dare. He considered more what was
fit for him to give, than what was fit for the other to receive. So it is here,
when we obtain from God spiritual and special, upon the faithful employment of
natural and and common Abilities and Graces, God gives in a way of proportion
to his own unbounded Goodness and Majestic Munificence, rather than in a way
of suitableness to the nature and value of the thing rewarded. That of God to
St. Paul may be applied to the case in hand, My strength is made perfect (that
is, declared to be perfect) in weakness, 2. Cor. 12.9. And elsewhere, we have
this treasure in earthen Vessels, that the Power might be (that is, clearly
appear to be) of God, and not of Us. 2 Cor. 4, 7. so here, God has engaged
himself to such a dispensation as we have under consideration, that his Love
and Goodness, Care and Providence, Greatness and Munificence toward us, may
appear and be made know to the World in greater exaltation and splendour.

Sect. 31. Reas. 4. Because God will justify himself most triumphantly in all
the judgments and punishments which he inflicts on obstinate sinners. Let God
be true (says the Apostle) and every man a liar, as it is written, that thou
might be justified in thy sayings, and overcome when thou art judged, Romans
3.4. The place refers to Psalm 51.4. where it is thus read, That thou might
be justified when thou speak, and be clear when thou judge, Psalm. 51.4.
which words are to be understood in a forensick sense; for (...) used by the
Apostle for the Hebrew word Titzdak in Kal, signifies that thou may appear
to be just, as one acquitted upon Trial does: and (...), signifies such a
contention as a Party in a Lawsuit makes when Judgment ensues. And (...),
such a fort of overcoming and victory as a contending Party obtains when he
carries the Cause in Judicature. And the import of the words is this; Suppose
God should be questioned concerning his proceedings in his condemnation of
impenitent and obdurate Sinners, he will so manage his Cause, and make such
provision against all Inditements and Impleadings, that he will be sure to have
the better of the day: and whatsoever Bills of Inditements he prefers against
his Adversaries, whatsoever Rebellions he charge upon them, whatsoever
Sentence he passes against them, whatsoever penalty and torments he inflicteth
upon them, and of what nature soever his proceedings against them be, they
shall be managed on such unquestionable terms and rules of Equity and Justice,
that they shall not be able to plead any matter of Defense, Apology, or Excuse
for themselves.

Sect. 32. Now nothing will render Sinners more inexcusable in the day of
Judgment for deserting and refusing the Service of God, and more clearly
illustrate and justify the righteousness of that punishment thereupon
inflicted on them, than this consideration; That God had plainly declared, that
he would not in any degree by any Person whatsoever be served for naught, but
did constantly from time to time assure them, either by his Words, or Works, or
both, that their meanest Services, the most imperfect and weak, should be
rewarded with a liberal and full hand, exceedingly above the just value of them
and (did not his Decree, promise, or bountifulness of his Disposition intervene
in his consideration) above all reasonable expectation concerning them. If men
could plead that they had not an Interest of their own to account upon, and
carry on in their tradings with their Talents, or employing their Abilities and
Gifts to the purposes for which they have received them, they might have some
pretense for hiding and suppressing them; for Rational Creatures will not think
it good for them to be engaged in doing that which will do them no good when it
is done: but God having inseparably linked our interest to our duties, and
animated our hopes by our diligence, we can find no matter of excuse, but shall
be speechless in the day of God. Have I been a Wilderness unto Israel (says
God) or a Land of darkness? wherefore say my people then, we are Lords: we will
come no more unto thee? Jer. 2, 31. q. d. If when they served me I had done
them no good, but hurted them rather, then they might have some provocation and
pretense to assume to themselves power to dispose of themselves and services to
the neglect and contempt of my interest in them, and expectation of service
from them.

Sect. 33. And God seems contented that men should renounce him and his service
if men could find out a way to employ themselves to purposes of greater
Advantage to themselves, than that they are already possessed of, by keeping to
him and his service, as that of God by his Prophet Elijah intimates, when he
said, How long halt ye between two? (that is, why are you so indifferent,
neutral, and undetermined in your inclinations to whom and whose service to
adhere unto and abide by? why, like a man which halts, do you bend and incline
sometimes on the right hand, and sometimes on the left; now are for one
Religion, and anon are for another; sometimes for the worship of Baal, the Idol
of the Zidonians, and sometimes for the worship of the true God, the God of
Israel?) if Baal be God then follow him (that is, if he be the author of your
Protections and Mercies, and if you have sufficient grounds and reasons to
induce you to expect from him greater rewards by serving him than you can
expect by serving the true God, than deal with him as faithful servants with
their Lord and Master, who follow him wheresoever he goes, and do whatsoever he
requires, be resolved men and determine your Service and Worship unto him, and
be for him and not for another:) but if the Lord be God then follow Him, 1
King. 18.21. That is, if there be none so good in himself, and so good to you
as the true God, as there is not: if the service of the same God be the best
Service, more agreeable to your rational Principles and most subservient to
your truest and biggest interest; then let the Lord be your God and follow him
fully, and forsaking all other cleave only to him, and to his Worship and
Service, or else you will be condemned of your selves. So that, the
bountifulness of Gods disposition toward his servants and the experience the
world has of the richness of those rewards which he offers unto, and confers
upon men, to encourage them to serve him, will with an high hand justify the
vengeance he takes and executes on the disobedient and impenitent.

Sect. 34. Could the unfaithful servant which hid his Talent spoken of in this
Parable, to which my Text refers have pleaded, that he had not a competent
ability or such a sufficiency of power to employ and improve his Talent as his
fellow Servant had, or that it was impossible for him to please and content his
Lord and Master by the employment and improvement of it as they did, or that he
should have lost his labor to all such like advantages as his fellows hoped
for and were rewarded with, he could have made a rational apology and
justifiable excuse for his sloth and negligence: but that every mouth may be
stopped and all the World (that is, of impenitent and obstinate sinners) may
become guilty before God, [or be subject to the Judgment of God] as the old
translation rendered it) upon justifiable and equitable terms, Romans 3, 19. God
has given assurance that the lowest sort of reasonable services, if men serve
him with a moral sincerity, do their best endeavor to please him, they may be
enabled to do that which will in some degree be acceptable to him, and useful
to themselves.

Sect. 35. Reas. 5. Because otherwise the express and literal promulgation of
the Gospeldispensation; could not be such a peculiar favor and special mercy
to a people as it is. For, not working upon us physically, by a natural influx,
as fire warmeth us or meat nourishes us, but morally, by a rational influx, as
it represents intelligible and alluring objects of Truth and goodness to affect
our understanings and Wills, it is no otherwise a ministration of Salvation to
us, than it is that instrument or means by which Gods Spirit moves and
exciteth our understandings and hearts, and conveyeth influence and efficacy to
rectify our mistakes, estimations, choices, affections and prosecutions, which
is done by an active interposition and exercise of our own natural Abilities
and common Graces: for unless our faculties and gifts be awakened, stirred up,
and exercised, unless we have Eyes to see, Ears to hear, Understandings to
apprehend and attend, Memories to receive and retain, Judgments to discern and
consider, Wills and Affections to embrace and pursue, the revelations of Duty,
Grace and Mercy propounds to us, no saving Effect can thereby be impressed
and wrought upon us. All the Powers of the Gospel are like sanative Medicines,
which lie by a sick man unapplied, ineffective to any saving good to us, till
we apply our selves to the use of them, and do what we can to subject our
selves to the workings of them.

Sect. 36. The weightiest matters in the World, yea, those which most nearly
concern us, which are most necessary, profitable, delightsome and contentful,
do not affect us if we think not of them: the noblest Rewards of infinite
Grace, Heaven and Happiness, do no more allure us, than the smiles of a Varlet,
if we think not of them: the highest Punishments of infinite Justice, the
Horrors and Torments of Hell and Damnation, do no more affright us, than the
frowns of a dying wretch, if we think not of them: the Commands and Example of
Christ have no more force with us, and do no more encourage and quicken us to
Obedience, and the pursuit of Glory, than those of the Great Mogul, which we
never saw or heared of, unless we think of them. Our Souls indeed are active
Principles, and will be working on something or other, and the end of our
Reason is to put us upon the consideration of such matters as are most
excellent, and necessary, and which do chiefly concern our Eternal welfare: but
our thoughts are so much under the power and command of our Wills, that we
ordinarily employ them about what Objects we please: we send them hither and
thither, busy them about this thing and that, call them off, and bring them
on, determine and fix them how and where we please; so that, the faithful
employment of our natural Abilities and common Graces is a condition
presupposed to the reaping of a saving benefit from the promulgation of the
Gospel to us. Perceive ye not yet (said our Savior to his Disciples upon their
unbelieving reasonings) neither understand? having eyes see ye not? having Ears
hear ye not? and do ye not remember? Mar. 8.17.18. q. d. If you do not make a
regular use of your Understandings and Senses, all that I say and do, both my
Words and Works will be as a thing of naught with you: the Doctrine which I
preach to you unless you attend and consider it, and the miracles which I work
to confirm it, and to convince you of the truth of it, unless you observe and
remember them, cannot be transferred to their proper use, and work any good
upon you: and when your rational Faculties and Senses are not thus employed,
they are to you as if you had them not, vain and useless Matt. 13.13.

Sect. 37. In this consists the great advantage the Christian part of the World
has from the Preaching of the Gospel, that by it, Life and Immortality is
brought to Light, 2 Timothy 1.10. That is, to partake of a divine Life, and to
attain immortal Felicity, and Glory is distinctly, plainly, and evidently,
discovered and manifested by it: and withal it is the ministration of the
Spirit, 1 Cor. 3.8. That is, contains such spiritual Powers, such quickening
Influences from the Spirit, such efficacious Arguments, and persuasive Motives,
as are most apt to affect and incite our Spirits or rational Faculties to the
exercise of their proper offices and acts for to embrace and pursue that divine
Life and immortal Glory, which is so clearly discovered and offered to us by
it. God knew that Sin had unmanned us, lost us the use of our Reason, where we
had most use for it; and therefore he contrived this means both to pardon our
Sin, and to recover to us our Reason, and to make us men again. Yea, the very
graces of the Spirit, are to make us more unreasonable. For those inherent
Graces of the Spirit which we call sanctifying and saving Graces, are a
rectifying of our natural rational Faculties, and make such impressions on them
as bring them into a due order, subordinate our Understandings and Reasons to
God, and our Wills, Appetites, Affections, Passions and Senses to our
Understandings and Reasons, and that which facilitateth or makes them fit and
ready to operate suitably to the Nature of their proper Objects: for all habits
whatsoever, both Spiritual and Moral, are nothing else almost but a
facilitation of our rational Faculties, and are scarce otherwise distinguished
from the natural Powers in which they are, than the straitness of a stick from
the stick it self, or the expansion and contraction of the hand from the hand
it self, not by a positive absolute Being and Existence of its own, but as the
modification or odering of a Being after such a manner, is distinguished from
the Being it self. So that, the literal Promulgation of the Gospel to us,
carries with it a peculiarity of Favor and Mercy, because it is the most
excellent Instrument to excite us to a regular use of our natural Faculties,
and the most efficacious Organ of the Spirit to derive to us a Divine and
Heavenly Life.

Sect. 38. Reas. 6. Because God has rewarded those which have been serviceable
to him only for the execution of his Will of Purpose to punish, and such as
have only hypocritically fulfilled his Will of Command, with the highest
temporal Rewards; and therefore we have good ground to hope more comfortably
and confidently that he will reward those more abundantly and excellently, even
with Spiritual and Special Gifts and Graces, which with a moral Sincerity do to
the utmost of their Power accomplish and fulfill his Will of Command. Behold,
your heavenly Father (says Christ) feeds the Fowls of the Air! are ye not
much better than they? he cloatheth the grass of the Field, and will he not
much more cloth you? Mat. 6.26.30. q. d. If things of lesser worth partake of
his Care and Bounty, things of a greater Excellency shall much more, in a
higher measure. Which speech is reducible to that which is under our
Consideration, and may in my apprehension be as fitly applied to it as to that
to which it was immediately referred.

Sect. 39. Nebuchadrezzer King of Babylon and his Army of Caldaeans, were the
worst of the Heathen, as the Prophet says, Ezekiel. 7.24. And they,
comparatively, but bruta Instrumenta in Gods hand: they did not knowingly and
designedly, from any Conscience of Obedience to God, or aim at his Honor and
Service, execute his Judgments upon his Enemies, but did what they did from
their own impetuous Lusts, to serve their own evil Purposes and Ends; and yet
because they were subservient to Gods Providence in executing the Punishment he
had decreed against Tyrus, he rewarded them very highly, gave them one of the
greatest and richest Kingdoms in the World. Son of man, Nebuchadrezzer King of
Babylon, caused his Army to serve a great Service against Tyrus: every Head was
made bald, and every Shoulder was peeled; yet had he no wages nor his Army for
Tyrus, for the Service that he had served against it. For when the Tyrians saw
their imminent danger, they transported, as St. Hierome relates, their choicest
Goods to Carthage, and other neighboring Islands, and at length deserted their
City, and left nothing but empty and ruinated houses and Walls to their
Enemies. Therefore, thus says the Lord God, behold I will give the Land of
Egypt unto Nebuchadrezzer King of Babylon, and he shall take her Multitude,
and take her Spoil, and take her Prey, and it shall be the Wages for his Army.
I have given him the Land of Egypt for his labor wherewith he served against
it, because they wrought for me, says the Lord. ( Ezekiel. 29.18, 19, 20.)
Howbeit they meant not to fulfill Gods Will, and to execute his Purpose,
neither did their Hearts think so: they had no Apprehensions that they were
working for God and serving his design: but it was in their Hearts to destroy
and cut off, as it is elsewhere. Isa. 10.5. yet because they were instrumental
to execute Gods decreed Punishment, and to serve his Ends upon the Tyrians,
they shall not lose their Labor.

Sect. 40. So, although Cyrus King of Persia were an Heathenish Idolater, yet
because he performed all Gods Pleasure, accomplished all that he purposed as
necessary for the Redemption of his People from the Babylonish captivity, he
held his right hand to subdue Nations, and loosed the loins of Kings before him
-- and gave him the Treasures of Darkness and hidden Riches of secret Places.
Isa. 44.28.45.1, 2, 3, 4.

Jehu was none of the best, for he never departed from the Sins of Jeroboam,
from the Idolatrous Worship of the Golden Calves in Bethel and Dan, and took no
heed to walk in the Law of the Lord God of Israel with all his heart; yet
because he pretended a Zeal for the true God, in executing the Command of God
to destroy Ahabs Family and the Idolatrous Worship and Priests of Baal, God
rewarded him largely, and his Posterity too for his sake; Because thou have
done well in executing that which was Right in mine Eyes (that is, in part that
which was Right, a thing good in its Kind and Nature, being materially
agreeable to my law) and have done unto the house of Ahab all that was in my
Heart, thy Children of the fourth Generation shall sit. upon the Throne of
Israel. 2 King. 10.30. And what God graciously promised was faithfully
accomplished in the successions to the Throne of Jehoahaz, chapter 31.1. Joash, chapter
13.9. Jeroboam, chapter 14.16. and Zachariah chapter 14.29.

Sect. 41. Now may we not rationally infer, that if God so graciously and
bountifully rewarded such as ignorantly and preterintentionally, without having
any respect at all to God and his Ends, became serviceable to him in the
execution of his Will of Purpose, in a particular Instance, to gratify their
own carnal Appetites and Ends; and such as hypocritically and partially yield
an outward conformity to his Will of Command, to serve their own Lusts and
interest upon his bounty, that he will much more amply and liberally recompense
those which knowingly, purposely, universally and uprightly endeavor, as much
as mere natural men in a state of declension can, a conformity to His holy,
just and good Will of command. With the Upright man God will show himself
Upright; God will not altogether neglect a plain, honest, faithful exercise of
Moral Virtues, and common Graces, as he does not neglect the practice of true
Piety, but he will give the Laborers their hire, to every man his proper
penny, Matt. 20.8.9. will as we may reasonably infer, bless, and prosper the
one, as he certainly does the other after their kind, not according to their
own worthiness, but, according to his abundant Goodness and Mercy; and his
Liberality in rewarding the one which has labored less worthily than the
other shall be no prejudice to his Faithfulness, Goodness, or Righteousness, in
rewarding the other.

Sect. 42. If the humiliation of a Ninive, Jon. 3.7, 10. of an Ahab, 2 King.
30.30. be a consideration for the removal and adjournal of Judgments and the
collation of temporal Blessings, may not that man have encouragement to hope
for Spiritual and Special Blessings from God who seriously resolves in all good
Conscience to avoid and shun all gross, wilful, and habituate Wickedness, and
to apply himself with all his might to keep every one of Gods Commandments? if
God said to a bloody Cain, if thou do well shall thou not be accepted? Genesis
4.7. and heard a scoffing Ismael when he cried unto him; Genesis 21.17. and told a
brutish Nebuchadrezzer, that if he brake off his Sin by Righteousness, and his
Iniquities by showing Mercy to the Poor, it should be a lengthening of his
Tranquillity; Dan. 4.27. will he not hear and accept every person in every
Nation which fears him and works Righteousness? Act 10.39.

Sect. 43. I am not willing (my Conscience is witness, and God which is greater
than my Conscience, and knows more by me than it) to impose upon the Faith or
Reason of any, the meanest Person in the world; but methinks, when I thus
consider Gods ordinary practice of Grace in conferring rewards upon the lowest
sorts of Service imaginable done for him, that it is not illogical, or a far
fetched Inference to conclude from thence, that he will more liberally and
honorably reward those Services which are done from better Principles to
better Ends, and more agreeably to his holy Will and Pleasure, and which do ex
natura rei, repress in some measure the Exorbitancy of men's Lusts and Passions,
and materially Dispose, and prepare them for greater Blessings, even for those
Spiritual and Special Gifts and Graces our discourse refers unto.

Before I shall draw any inferences from my Position I shall endeavor to
remove two Objections which are by some men made against it.

Sect. 44. First. Some will not have unregenerate men encouraged to moral
Virtues and common Graces, because they are apt to be proud of, and to rest in
them; and from thence assert, that there is more hope of the Conversion and
Salvation of the most debauched Ruffian, than of such men. When men (say they)
by the external Practice of moral Virtues have obtained good Acceptance, and a
great Reputation in the World, and by the internal workings of common Graces,
which have the semblance of Faith and Repentance, have got a good Opinion of
themselves, and conceit their present course commendable, and in Probability
safe, they from hence trust in their own Righteousness, and so lay the
strongest and most dangerous bar in the way to a through Conversion and the
true Power of Godliness, that can be; and therefore (say they) to excite to
endeavor after moral Virtues and common Graces, is to persuade them to become
like the Proselytes to the Pharisees, more the Children of the Devil than they
were before.

Sect. 45. Ans. This kind of reasoning has more of noise and clamor in it
than of Substance and Strength; for Pride and carnal Confidence is neither an
Effect, or necessary Adjunct, but a mere accidental thing to moral Virtues and
common Graces; for nothing can be more contrary to the dictates of Reason and
the common restaints of Grace, than such Pride and Confidence. What is more
unreasonable than Pride and Self-conceitedness? and what tendency has a sense
of Sin and Misery, and an hope of Grace and Mercy, which are the effects of
common Grace, to a trusting and a reposing of our selves in our own Worth and
Righteousness? that moral Virtues and common Graces are sometimes a dangerous
temptation does not proceed ex naturis rerum, from the natures of the things
themselves, but ex vitiis personarum quibus insunt, from the immoral
Corruptions of the persons which partake of them. So that, it is a casual
contingent argument and may altogether as plausibly be urged against Spiritual
and Special Abilities and Graces, because men are apt to take occasion to be
proud of them and to trust in them, as the Instances of David, Hezekiah, Peter
and others, evince.

St. Austin, and after him the Schoolmen, when they define Gratia gratum
faciens, that Grace which we are speaking of, regenerating or sanctifying
Grace, they teach us, that it is such, Qua nemo male utitur, which no one uses
amiss. But it is of easy apprehension, that they speak of Grace efficiently and
not objectively considered: for though sanctifying Grace cannot in its exercise
be abused to evil Purposes, yet it may accidentally by its presence and
practice both be an occasion of drawing out of those Lusts which war against
our Souls, and so may objectively be misused. But suppose it were constantly
and necessarily true, that moral Virtues and common Graces were accompanied
with Pride and carnal confidence, is it not more easy to cast out one or two
Devils than to cast out a whole Legion? and are not one or two Enemies more
easily vanquished than an whole Army?

Sect. 46. Secondly, Some others, because the Apostle says, where Sin abounded
Grace did much more abound, Romans 5.20. Infer against our Position, that
therefore Quo sceleratior eo gratiae vicinior, by how much the more any man is
a Sinner, by so much the nearer to the Grace and Mercy of a Savior. And
because Jesus Christ told the Priests and Elders, that the Publicans and
Harlots did go into the Kingdom of God before them, Mat. 21.31. Therefore say
they, the excess of wickedness is a better qualification to make men capable
Subjects of regenerating Grace, than moral Virtues and common Graces.

Sect. 47. Ans. This Objection seems to intimate to us, that God does Love
that which Nature it self does Loath; and as if that were nearest to God which
is furthest from Goodness; and that they which are more like Devils than men,
were most likely to become Christians; and Heaven were beholding to Hell for
Saints. I cannot but think, that Agrippa, who was almost persuaded to be a
Christian, was better disposed toward Christianity than Saul was when he
breathed out threatenings and slaughters against any that professed it. Acts
9.1.2. and certainly the Scribe which was not far from the Kingdom of God, Mar.
12.34. was fitter for and nearer to an entrance into it, than those Scribes,
Pharisees and Hypocrites were who did shut the Kingdom of Heaven against
others, and would not go in themselves, nor suffer those who were entering, to
go in. Mat. 23.13. And the Young man which had observed all the Commandments
of God from his youth up, and yet lacked one thing, Mar. 10.21. was not so much
indisposed to the Power of Religion, and so unmeet for the Kingdom of God, as
Ahab was when he sold himself to work Evil in the sight of the Lord; 1 King.
21.20. or any other which wants more things and rejects the Commandments
of God, and has no fear of God before his eyes, and speaks against the Holy
Ghost. Hos. 4.6. Romans 3.18, Mat. 12.32. or as he who has trodden under foot the
Son of God, and has counted the blood of the Covenant wherewith he was
sanctified an unholy thing, and has done despite unto the Spirit of Grace.
Heb. 10.29. For my part I cannot believe, that he is ever likely to become a
Saint who lives as if he were a Devil, renouncing the dictates of Nature and
the restraints of Grace. Surely a just and an honest man is more nearly related
to a Christian than a Thief, or an Oppressor, or a Deceiver; and he that
walks humbly, meekly, soberly, charitably, instructing the Ignorant,
relieving the Poor, extending compassions to the Prisoners, and captives,
acknowledging his unworthiness by reason of Sin, begging Pardon of God, and
falls down and worshippeth God in hope of Reconciliation and Salvation, as
every one man does which lives in the practice of moral Virtues and common
Graces, is more likely to become a sound Believer, than he which walks
proudly, stubbornly, riotously, faring deliciously every day, without regard to
the hungry and needy, scorning at Godliness and Honesty, and despising the
means of Grace and Mercy. I shall conclude with the recital of the concurrent
suffrage of the Profound Bradwardine, A servile fear (says he) a sight of some
inconvenience and the moral habit of Virtue, do very much withhold from Sin,
incline to good Works, and so prepare and dispose to Charity, and Grace, and
Works truly pleasing and acceptable. Bradw. De Gausa Dei. l. 16. c. 37. With
whom Mr. Robert Bolton consented, who says, that moral Honesty and outward
Religiousness are in themselves good and necessary, and a good step to
Christianity. I now proceed to consider what Inferences and Consequences are
deducible from my Position.

Sect. 48. First then, the Reason why so few are spiritually converted and
saved, is, because few do faithfully employ their Natural Abilities and common
Graces; or in the words of our Savior, because they seeing see not, and
hearing they hear not, neither do they understand; and in them is fulfilled the
prophecy of Isaias, which says, by hearing they shall hear, and shall not
understand; and seeing they shall see and not perceive: for this peoples Heart
is waxed gross, and their Ears are dull of hearing, and their Eyes have they
closed, lest at any time they should see with their Eyes, and hear with their
Ears, and should understand with their Hearts, and should be converted, and I
should heal them. Mat. 13.13, 14, 15. q. d. They have Faculties and Powers
naturally capable of observing and understanding the Miracles I have wrought
amongst them, and the Doctrine I have preached to them, and of receiving
blessed Advantages from them; but they have not stirred up themselves to the
use of them this way, but have carried it as if they had neither Ears to hear
what was said, nor Eyes to see what was done, nor reasonable Souls to perceive
the End unto which both as Means referred; and they are just such another sort
of People as they were which the Prophet speaks of, who were so judicially
besotted by the predominancy of an obstinate stubborn Will, that they wilfully
stop their Ears, and shut their Eyes, and run on like mad Men upon their Ruin
and Destruction: they so perversely abuse their natural Abilities and common
Graces, as if they purposely signed to render themselves in disposed for, and
incapable of Conversion and Salvation; and by the just Judgment of God for
their neglect and contempt of the means of Conversion and Salvation, are so
confirmed and hardened in their brutish Stupidity and Sensualities, that they
are never likely to become stirring and active in the use of their natural
Abilities and gracious Assistances, and therefore never likely to be converted
and saved.

Sect. 49. There was never any man in the World, (at least under the Gospel)
who dyed in his Sins and was damned for them, which endeavored the best he
could to be saved. When God commands men to repent and to be converted, that
their Sins might be blotted out, Act. 3.19. and to make a new Heart and a new
Spirit, and to turn themselves that they may not dye but live: These Commands
suppose that they have Powers naturally capable of yielding Obedience to them;
for otherwise these Commands would be grievous to them; and God would tempt
them above what they are able, which his Justice and Goodness will not suffer
him to do: and being given to unregenerate men, which are morally weakened by
sinful corruptions, and with an express reference to their corruptions, which
render them averse from and hinder the performance of Obedience to Gods
Commands, they also suppose such a supereffluence of gracious Power from God as
is sufficient to remove this weakness, and to conquer this Hinderance of
obedience; for otherwise they would not be capable Subjects of these and the
like Laws, and God would exact from them that which they could not do, and
would promise them forgiveness of Sin and Life upon an impossible condition,
which his Graciousness and Wisdom will not suffer him to do. This (as I
conceive) is the purport of the New Covenant founded upon Christ's Mediatorial
Obedience, to relieve Man respectively to his Moral Impotency; I mean, to
vouchsafe him sufficient Means to remove the hindrances he had brought upon
himself by his Wickedness, to perform the Obedience he owed to his Maker and
Ruler, and to restore him to a Capacity of attaining Salvation from Sin and
Misery, and to stand possessed of the Image, Favor, and Fellowship of God. And
answerably, what God here commands them to do for themselves, he elsewhere
promises that he himself will do for them, Acts 3.26. and 5.31. and 11.18. 2 Timothy 2.25. Jer. 31.33. and 32.39. Ezekiel. 36.26. Which plainly implies, that God
gives men sufficient Abilites and Helps to do that which he commands them to
do, and when they faithfully use their Talents, Abilities and Helps in order to
their Conversion and Salvation, he will concur and Work with them, and in the
end derive to them, and bestow upon them, that which they labored and wrought
for. So that, if Men did go so far, and do so much as they are enabled to do,
their Conversion and Salvation might certainly be accomplished.

Sect. 50. When Christ upbraided the Chief Priests and Elders for not believing
St. John the Baptist, as the Publicans and Harlots did, Mat. 21.32. He clearly
intimated, that they were as well appointed and fitted by Nature and Grace to
believe, as the other were, and that it was merely from their own Obstinacy
that they believed not: for if they had not been in capable circumstances of
believing, had not been as well furnished with Abilities, Graces, and Aids for
the work as the other were, it would have been no disparagement to them not to
believe as the other did. A man is not to be blamed and upbraided for that
which necessarily and irresistibly befalls him: where there is no room for a
Choice, there can be no just or warrantable matter of Blame and Disparagement.
Actus voluntatis est actus hominis. In a legal and moral Construction that is
not done which is not willingly done. It was therefore their Wilfulness, and
not any invincible Impotency natural or moral which kept them from believing,
that is, there was no hinderance to their Believing but such as was conquerable
(together with Gods assistance) by the endeavors and Means they might have
used.

Sect. 51. And when God commands men to save themselves, Act. 2.40. I presume
the words are not to be understood formaliter but consecutive, the meaning is
not, that they must be the Authors of their own Salvation, or that they must do
that from which Salvation will by a natural emanation result and issue as an
effect from its proper cause, but that if they did to their utmost sincerely
comport with those Abilities, Graces, and Means for Salvation which they at
that time enjoyed, Salvation should undoubtedly be the necessary Consequent of
it; because God by his irresistible Decree has determined, that Salvation
shall be the necessary Consequent and issue of such faithful endeavors.

Sect. 51. God considered simply and absolutely in himself is agens liberimum,
under no Obligation as a Debtour to any Creature whatsoever gives what Favors,
when, and to whom he pleases: but God considered relatively to his own
internal Determinations and external Administrations, may and has brought upon
himself an Obligation respectively unto Us. Divina voluntas (says the great
Schoolman) licet simpliciter libera sit ad extra, ex supplicatione tamen unius
actus liberi, potest necessitari ad alterum. Although the Will of God be simply
or entirely free, respectively to all external administrations toward his
Creatures, yet upon the supposition of one free Act toward them, he may be
necessitated to another. Thus, God having commanded Sinners to pursue the
Salvation of their Souls by endeavoring conversion from Sin, and engaging
themselves in the service of the Gospel, and walking worthy of him, unto all
well-pleasing, he has obliged himself to furnish them with sufficient
Abilities, Assistances, and Means for the expediting and fulfilling of their
Duties. And having encouraged them to their Duties by propounding a Reward to
their Hopes, he has bound himself upon the performance of their Duties to
accomplish to them what they aim and hope for. So that, God by an act of
Sovereignty obliges himself to an act of Grace, and by one act of Grace
obliges himself to another. Thus some interpret that of the Evangelist, of His
fullness have all we received, and Grace for Grace. Joh. 1.16. That is, God
through Christ dispenses to us one Grace in order to another: he does not
bestow Gifts and Graces upon us sparingly, or for once, or one turn only, but
accumulateth Grace to Grace; that is, when former Graces are well dispensed and
rightly used, he adds others to them, to fill up the measure of a Christian
Stature, a perfect man in the fullness of Christ, as the Apostle terms it. Ephesians.
4.13.

Sect. 53. It Is the observation of a Rabbin mentioned by Casaubon, that Merces
praecepli est praeceptum, and merces transgressionis est transgressio. The
meaning is this, that when a man keeps one commandment he obtains such a
reward of Grace from God, that he is made able and ready to keep another, and
as his diligence in obedience is increased, so his Graces are multiplied and
perfected: so on the contrary, he which transgresses one of Gods Commands, by
Gods just Judgment is disposed to transgress another, and as his negligence to
Obedience increases, so his aversation from Obedience is heightened.

Sect, 54. Surely, God which has appointed a course of Means in order to
Conversion and for the acquisition of Salvation, and strictly commanded the use
of them, he does so honor and bless them with his gracious Presence, that they
cannot be in vain to any man which uses them as well as he can: but he which
seriously and diligently applies himself though with a lesser disposition to
Subjection and Obedience to God, shall be blessed with a greater by the Use of
them, till he be thoroughly disposed and duly prepared for the End of them; for
he that waits on the Lord and keeps his way, shall not be ashamed but
saved. Psa. 25.3, 37, 34. That so few therefore are converted and saved in a
great measure, is, because so few do faithfully employ their natural Abilities
and common Graces: few use as well as they should and could the Gifts already
received, and therefore better are withheld from them; for he that is unjust in
the least, is unjust also (that is, praeparatione animae) in much. Luke 16.10.
and he must not expect Special Favors who is unworthy of Common ones.

Sect. 55. Inference 2. Then Employment is Gods way to Improvement, and if we
then intend to better our estates of Abilities, Gifts, and Graces, let us make
the best Use of them we can, refer them to their proper Ends, and combine with
them to prosecute those Ends with all our might, and the enterprise will
certainly prosper in our hands. To him that [Thus] has it shall be given, and
he shall have abundance. The Talents of Abilities and Graces are from an act of
Almightiness in God, but the faithful Management and Use of those Talents is an
act of Duty and Obedience in us: as the former depend upon Gods Grace, so the
latter upon Our Industry; for all matters of Duty and Obedience are
appropriately ours, and properly belong to Us, as all matters of Grace are
appropriately Gods, and properly belong to him. And therefore we are to
account, that the Employment, and consequently the Improvement of our
particular Talents, is our own proper work, unto which we are to exercise our
selves with all Care and Diligence. Certainly, God would not have condemned the
slothful Servant for hiding his Talent, if it had not been his proper Work and
Duty to have Employed and Improved it. Do not then in favor to your carnal
Ease infer, That because God works in you to will and to do, Phil. 2. that
you cannot bury his Talent, nor contradict his motion; that you must only have
a Passive capacity to Receive from God, and must Do nothing, but God must do
all: for according to the Spiritual Logic of the Apostle, that Principle is a
premise to a quite contrary Conclusion; for, he thence infers our sollicitous
Care and wary Industry, saying, Work out your salvation with fear and
trembling, Phil. 2.12, 13. St. Chrysostom on the place well observes, that
it is not simply said (...), work, but (...), work out, implying, that we must
be Workers together with God, till the work of Salvation be brought to a full
Perfection; and all the way we must fear and tremble, lest by inward
Reluctations or outward oppositions, the Work miscarry, and so God be offended,
and we destroyed.

Sect. 56. Chamier well observes, That when many Causes concur to produce one
and the same Effect, the Scriptures sometimes ascribe the Effect to one of
these Causes, and sometimes to another. This is the Case here under
consideration, God works in you to will and to do of his good pleasure; and
yet you are commanded from thence to work out your Salvation: which implies,
that if the Abilities and Graces imparted to us from God, be in the end and
issue actually Operative and Effective to our Salvation, it is in concurrence
with our faithful Endeavors; and that our Endeavors subordinately to the
Superintendency and Instigation of the Grace of God, contribute Influence
toward Salvation. Hence Men are said to save Themselves, 1 Timothy 4.16. Act.
2.40. and in order to that, are said to Recover Themselves out of the snare of
the Devil, 2 Timothy 2.25. and are said to keep Themselves pure, 1 Timothy 5.22. and
to keep Themselves in the Love of God. Jude 21. and to guide their Hearts in
the way. 1 John 3.3. Prove. 23.9. All which expressions teach us, that we are
not saved by a mere passive Recipiency of saving Impressions, but by an active
industrious Cooperation with the powerful Aids of Grace. It Is said, that the
blessing of God makes rich; and yet in the same Chapter it is also said, that
the Diligent Hand makes rich. Prove. 10. the meaning undoubtedly is this, there
must be Diligence on our part, or else there will be no Blessing on Gods part.
Be content therefore to believe, that some thing belongs to you, that you have
a Talent to manage, a Gift to exercise, Assistances to comport with and use, a
Diligence to maintain, and a work of Salvation to do.

Sect. 57. It is with the generality of men in the matter of Conversion or
cleansing from Sin (as it is sometimes called in Allusion to the legal
Cleansings) Ephesians. 5.26. Jam. 4.8. 2 Cor. 7.1. as it was with Naaman in the
matter of his cleansing from his Leprosy, who when the Prophet counseled him
to go and wash seven times in Jordan in order to it, he presently fell into a
great Passion, and said, I had thought he would have come to me, and have
called on the name of his God, and laid his hands on me, and so I should have
been healed. 2 King. 5.11. that is, he would have been healed his own way, he
would contribute nothing of Submission, Obedience and Endeavor toward it, but
would only be the Subject recipient of it: God and the Prophet must do all. So,
many pretend they are willing to be converted or cleansed from the leprosy of
Sin, but it is upon their own terms; if God by his omnipotent Impulse will
overpower and irresistibly determine their Wills to choose the better part,
they must submit; for who has or can, resist his Will? but for their parts
they will be at no expense of Study, Care, or Pains for it: God and his
subordinate Instruments must do it without them, if he will have it done. It is
not (say they from the Apostle) of him that wills, nor of him that runs,
but of God that shows Mercy, Romans 9.16. And therefore the Work of Salvation
is Gods work only, and not at all theirs, and if it be wrought it shall cost
them nothing. Thus many abuse the Grace of God to Wantonness; because the terms
and conditions of Justification are only of Gods prescribing, and no other
qualifications whatsoever but those specified and limited by his Law can admit
us to a participation of it, (to which that spoken of by the Apostle, only
refers) therefore they, by a perverting of the Apostles words, conclude, that
the work of Conversion is a work which God is to do upon them without them.
That is, because God enacteth and imposes Laws and Terms of Justification and
Salvation without our Consent, therefore also Submission and Obedience to them
shall be yielded and performed too without our consent. If I understand the
force and design of such Reasonings, the scope and import of them is this, that
God does his own part and man's too, makes and imposes Laws upon us, and
obeys and fulfilleth them himself for us too, and so acts the part both of
the Sovereign and the Subject.

Sect. 58. That famous saying of St. Augustine so much celebrated in the
practical discourses of Divines, is a manifest and weighty Truth, That he which
Made thee without thee, does not Justify thee without thee. Qui fecit te sine
te, non te justificat sine te. Aug. Tom. 10. De verbis Apostoli Ser. 15. p. 335.
You could not concur to the one because you were not, but you ought and must
concur to the other because you are what you are; I mean, creatures of a proper
capacity to do it, by the constitution of your Natures to be conducted unto God
and all perfective enjoyments knowingly and electively. Conversion is an act of
duty as well as of Grace, and man's share is so great in all acts of Duty, that
they are properly denominated Man's act only, and not Gods. Would it not be
absurd, if not worse, to say, that God cease to do Evil and Learneth to do
well; that God turns from Sin to God; that God repents unto Life and
Salvation; that God believes and brings forth fruits worthy of amendment;
which are all Scripture-Phrases, importing the same with Conversion and
Regeneration? Although the Fire burns not without Gods concurrence, yet it is
not God (according to a strict propriety of Speech) which burns, but the Fire;
because notwithstanding Gods concurrence, the Fire acts according to the
essential properties of its Nature. God concurreth with the Water as well as
with the Fire, and yet that burns not but cools, aye, and can quench the
Fire; and therefore notwithstanding Gods concurrence with things they act and
move according to the intrinsecal properties of their Natures. So though
Conversion or Regeneration be Gods workmanship, and no man quickens his own
heart to turn it from Sin to God, without Gods concurrence, yet man converteth
and turns himself from Sin to God, because notwithstanding Gods concurrence
man acts according to the essential Properties of his Nature, knowingly,
judiciously, voluntarily, freely; and is not divorced from Sin, and contracted
unto God without his own Knowledge, Election and Consent. Why should those
Truths which are directive to Conversion be propounded to our Understandings,
and we be obliged to consider and meditate upon them? and why should those
motives which are exciting to Conversion be propounded to our Wills, and we be
obliged to comply and close with them, if we had nothing to do, and were not to
bear a part with God in the Work?

Sect. 59. God which gave the Waters of the Pool Bethesda an healing Virtue,
Joh. 5.2. and sent an Angel at a certain time to trouble the Waters, to draw
forth their Sanative Virtue, did not send an Angel too to drag the impotent
from all quarters of the Country into the Pool, but if they obtained cure
thereby they must either come themselves and go in, or else be brought and put
in by others, that is, were to get into the Pool in an ordinary way of such
endeavors as they were capable of using. So, God which has given the Waters
of the Sanctuary an healing Virtue, and at certain Seasons sends his Angels to
stir these Waters for your healing, expects that you come to them, and exercise
the Powers you have to obtain healing from them, or else you are never like to
be the better for them. For the Ministers of Religion do not cure the diseases
of our Souls as a Charm or a Medicine the Diseases of our Bodies, without the
interposition or use of our reasonable Faculties, but produce and work in us
hatreds of Sin, and fruits in all Goodness, Righteousness, and Truth, by
propounding efficacious arguments and motives to persuade our Reason, incline
our Will, excite our Affections, and to engage our earnest and vigorous
endeavors. Be not deceived (says the Apostle) God is not mocked, as a man
sows so shall he reap. Gal. 6.7. q. d. You may by your fair Pretenses and
plausible Reasonings impose upon and deceive your selves, but you cannot do so
by God, for he knows and will judge of things as they are; and as the Crop
which the husbandman reapeth at harvest is answerable to the Nature of the Seed
sown, so, such as your Endeavors are shall your Successes be, and you shall eat
the Fruit of your own proper doings, be they what they will, and of none other.
And as the husbandman cannot reap without sowing, nor sow without Labor and
Industry, so neither can you reap in Mercy without sowing in Righteousness,
partake of Gods Blessing without doing his Work, nor can you do his Work
without exercising your selves in painful Endeavors.

Sect. 60. When the Apostle beseeches us not to receive the Grace of God in
Vain. 2 Cor. 6.1. and to look diligently lest any of us fail of the Grace of
God. Heb. 12.13. He plainly insinuates that our Study, Cares, and Industry are
concerned in the good Issues and Effects of it upon us; that we may by the
Power of our Wills, hinder and prevent the Powers of Gods Grace from prevailing
to that desirable End and Issue to which God has designed them. Certainly, had
not the Eunuch addicted himself to reading of the Scriptures for to inquire
after the mind of God concerning the things of his eternal Peace and Salvation,
Philip had not been sent unto him to instruct him, and if Philip had not
instructed him he had not understood them, nor consequently believed them, or
ever received any advantage from them. And here I shall bring to your
Remembrance a passage full to our purpose, in the Second part of the Homily of
our Church, exhorting to the knowledge of Holy Scriptures, the words are these.
And whosoever gives his mind to Holy Scriptures, with diligent Study, and
burning Desire, it cannot be (says St. Chrysostom) that he should be left
without help. For either God Almighty will send him some Godly Doctor to teach
him, as he did to instruct the Eunuch, a Noble man of Ethiope and Treasurer
unto Queen Candice, who having affection to read the Scripture (although he
understood it not) yet for the desire that he had to Gods word, God sent his
Apostle Philip to declare unto him the true Sense of the Scripture that he
read: or else if we lack a learned man to instruct and teach us, yet God
himself from above will give Light unto our minds and teach us those things
which are necessary for us and wherein we be ignorant. If we read once, twice,
and understand it not, let us not cease so, but still continue Reading,
Praying, asking of others, and so by still Knocking, at the last the door shall
be opened, as Saint Augustine says. And that blessed Martyr Bishop Hooper in
his Sermon, glossing on that Text in St. Joh. chapter 6.44. No man comes unto me
except my Father draw him: says thus, Many understand these words in a wrong
Sense; as if God required no more in a reasonable man than a dead post, and
mark not the words which follow, every man that hears and learneth of the
Father comes unto me, etc. God draws with his Word and Holy Ghost, but man's
Duty is to hear and learn: that is to say, to receive the Grace offered,
consent to the Promise, and not to impugn the God that calls.

Sect. 61. You have formerly heard that there was no difference betwixt the
Talent employed and that hid: and the seed sown in the Highway and in good
Ground were of the same kind too: but yet these did not produce the same
Effect. It was not from any natural defect in the Talent hid that it was not
employed and improved, nor from any imperfection of the Seed sown that it did
not fructify and increase, but the fault was wholly in the owner of the
Talent, and in the Ground. Each Parable shows, that the different Success of
the Gifts and Graces of God dispensed to Men, is not to be ascribed to the
different Nature, Degree, and Tendency of them but to the different
Constitutions, Dispositions, and Behaviors of those that partake of them. The
Lord (says Athanasius) sows liberally, but the fructification is (...),
according to the Subject recipient of the Seed: when the Seed does not
fructify, it is not because there is (...), an impotency of the Seed, (...),
but an ill habit or indisposition of the Ground. The Seed of God has sometimes
lively Effects, and works kindly toward a lively Faith and a Life according
to Godliness, and yet through men's Faultiness miscarryeth and comes to naught.
The Spirit is not said to force our Powers, but to help our Infirmities. Romans
8.26. (...), Helps together. It is in re quapiam suscepta, auxilio adesse
laboranti, to assist with help one laboring in any undertaking, says Erasmus.
and accordingly, Adjuvari non dicitur qui nihil sponte conatur, He is not said
to be helped who does nothing of his own, says Saint Augustine. The word
(says the Assemblies Annotations) properly implies such an help as when
another man of Strength and Ability steppeth in to sustain the burden that
lies upon our Shoulders, setting his Shoulders under, to lift up and bear part
with as. We must be employed or the Spirit will not help us, we must be upon
our feet and in a readiness to go on in our way, or the Spirit will not succor
and lead us: we must work or we cannot be workers together with him. I labored
(says the Apostle) more abundantly than they all; yet not I, but the Grace of
God which was with me. 1 Cor. 15.10. That is, non solus, sed gratia Dei mecum,
ac per hoc, nec gratia Dei sola, nec ipse solus, sed gratia Dei cum illo, Not I
alone, but the Grace of God with me, and by reason hereof, neither the Grace of
God alone, nor I my self alone, but the Grace of God with my self, is St.
Austin 's Paraphrase of the Place. That is, Gods preventing Grace enabled him
to labor, and his subsequent Grace cooperated with his labourings, and brought
them to a good Effect.

Sect. 62. And because men can do that which God by his preventing Grace
enableth them to do, the Grace of God is represented as our Duty as well as
Gods Gift, Let us have Grace [that is, let us exert and put forth that ability
God has given to us to take hold of and retain, to comport with and use in a
regular manner the Grace of God bestowed upon us] that we may serve God
acceptably with Reverence and Godly Fear. Heb. 12.28. and answerably to this
Truth let me exhort you in the words of the Apostle, watch ye, stand fast, quit
your selves like men, be strong. 1 Cor. 16.13. wait for Seasons and
Opportunities to employ your Talents, and do not by a drowsy sluggishness miss
a Seed-time of Grace: when God knocks, open, and do not stubbornly repulse but
carefully entertain and pursue, to the utmost issue, the good motions of the
Spirit: do not give place to thy Spiritual Enemies, but keep thy ground against
the World, the flesh, and the Devil: let not Difficulties and Dangers
emasculate thy Spirit, and weaken the succors of thy Soul, but set out and
keep on in a way of well-doing: show the strength you have by the Oppositions
you conquer, the singular exploits you do against Sin, and the advantage-Ground
you gain to further the Perfection and Salvation of your Souls: and so the
actions of Nature shall pass into the relations of Grace, and that which was
imperfect shall be raised up to greater perfection.

Sect. 63. A Stoical lazy dependence on a fatal predestination is an instrument
effective enough to produce a strong carnal Presumption, and to infer upon us
the guilt of Damnation: but Salvation and Happiness is an interest too great,
and good to be secured by faint Velleities, confident groundless persuasions,
and weak sickly endeavors. If ever we enter in at the strait Gate, we must
strive for it. Strive to enter in at the strait Gate [(...), Strive like an
Olympic Agonist contending for Masteries] for many I say unto you will seek to
enter in and shall not be able. Luke 13.24. He which valueth slightly, prays
coldly, and labors carelessly to enter in at the strait Gate, he is not
disposed for it according to the conditions of God, and therefore shall not
enter.

Sect. 64. In secular and temporal matters we are wise enough to proportion our
Affections and Endeavors suitably to the Nature of the things we aim at and
pursue: to the biggest Interests and the most difficult Ends we appropriate the
most careful Attendances and vigorous Prosecutions. We rise early and go to bed
late, and eat the bread of carefulness that we may be Rich and Honorable, and
live in Pleasures: but in matters of a Spiritual and of an eternal Interest who
stirs up himself? here for the most part we deal very foolishly, we do not
proceed according to those steps and degrees the Nature of things requires. We
do not measure the pains we are at, and the means we use, and the strength we
exercise by the worthiness of the End we aim at and Pursue, but presume to
obtain and secure the most important concern of our Souls by the slenderest
Provisions and lowest Degrees of Care and Industry. What a strange Folly is it
to think, that a provision for a temporal Life is to be gotten and secured with
much Labor and Cost, and yet a provision for an eternal Life is to be obtained
and secured upon very cheap and easy terms? What a doleful case is it, that
the Objects of our Sense should prevail so much with us, and the Objects of our
Faith so little? That we should cherish so fond an indulgence to the Appetites
of the Flesh, and so perversely disregard the immortal Capacities of our
precious Souls? That men in their Wits should prefer matters comparatively of
no moment, in their Estimations, Choices, Resolutions, and Endeavors, before
matters of an everlasting Consequence? That they should be careful and troubled
about many things, and neglect the One thing needful? How can we pretend to be
the masters of Reason and not set our hearts upon the better part? shall not
that which is best have greatest Interest in us and sway most with us? let us
then awaken our sluggish careless Faculties of Understanding, Judgment, and
Reason, and employ most of our Strength in the Pursuit of that which is most
necessary, profitable, and useful for us. Labor not (says our Savior) for
that meat which perishes: but for that which endures to everlasting Life.
Joh. 6.27. It Is a supposed and pretended rather than an absolute and a real
Necessity which provokes you to think that you have other Matters to look
after, besides this; for if you faithfully mind and follow this, God himself
has undertaken for all other supplies which are needful and proper for you;
seek ye first the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, and all these things
shall be added unto you. Mat. 6.33.

Sect. 65. I pray remember, when God gives you temporal and earthly Gifts it is
in order to Spiritual and Eternal Purposes, and answerably our Savior commands
you so to use them, make to your selves friends of the unrighteous Mammon, that
when ye fail they may receive you into everlasting habitations. Mat. 16.9. Use
temporal things in such a manner as agrees with the design of Gods Trust, and
then you shall secure to your selves eternal things by the use of them. Wisdom
(says Solomon) is good with an Inheritance. Eccl. 7.11. That is, an Estate
governed by the rules of Wisdom is good, because then it is referred unto and
concludes in our Spiritual and Eternal Good. And indeed nothing that we have or
can have is good further than it is related and used as a means to this End.
Brutes are as capable of sensual good things as we; they can eat, and drink,
and play, and satisfy such Lusts as are proper to the Flesh, as well as we:
but herein we excel them, in having and using these things we can possess and
use them as the Gifts of God, and enjoy God in them, and so refer them to
higher ends than the pleasing of the Flesh, even ascend by them unto God, and
extract out of them an heavenly treasure for our Souls. And this is the use you
must make of them if you ever reap any true Good from them. And thus a little,
a matter very small and inconsiderable in it self, faithfully managed and
employed will turn to a great advantage. Two Mites are not much, and a cup of
cold Water is less, and yet such a stock as this, well used, shall abound to
our account, Mar. 12.43. Mat. 10.42. Phil. 4.17. Where little is given, little
is expected; for God accepts according to what a man has: but he that has
least and can do least, may do that which shall be with the Lord, and for which
the Exchequer of Heaven shall be accountable, and is as good an Estate as if it
were in his hands.

Sect. 66. The learned and judicious Camero says, that where there is (...) ad
Virtutem, an inchoate disposition to Goodness and Virtue (for that is the
design of his assertion) that man is not Plane improbus, altogether or quite
and clean wicked, as we say. For when a man's Nature is cultivated or improved
by moral Virtues and common Graces, as he does things vel sapienter vel sancie,
either discreetly or religiously, as Saint Hierome speaks in this Case, he
may be termed in a Sense not to be despised by considering men, a Good man,
secundum quid and in tantum, so far as he has performed part of his duty, and
is in some measure made ready and prepared for those Gifts and Graces which
denominate a man Evangelically Good. If he that acknowledged there is one God,
does well, as Saint James teaches, James 2.19. Then he that frames and
orders himself and actions so far as Nature and common Grace can carry him,
according to that acknowledgment, does better; as the young man in the Gospel
did, and the man we are speaking of does, and therefore he may analogically and
comparatively be termed a Good Man. Yet I must tell you, if this temper and
deportment be the utmost any man aims at and pursues, and any of you shall
chance to come so far, and rest here, and go no further, you will be of the
number of those which are not far from the Kingdom of God, and strive to enter
into it, but shall not be able to enter. This was the Reason why God was so
angry with the Angel of the Church of the Laodeceans and threatened to spue him
out of his mouth, Rev. 3.16. because he rested in this intermedial State;
whereas it is not a State desirable for it self, but to be endeavored after
and obtained in order to a better. For Vallesius upon the place tells us, that
most think, that men of a certain remiss and imperfect kind of Virtue are
called Lukewarm, and are more blamed than others, not because they are simply
in themselves worse, but because they do not endeavor to be better than they
are, by using their present imperfect State as a passage to a more perfect. And
it is certain, that if men think too well of themselves for the sake of such an
imperfect State of Mediocrity, and are less careful to repent and aspire after
a perfect Virtue than others of lower seize (though it do not arise
properly from the Nature of the thing, but accidentally from the mistake and
corruptions of the Persons) they will for the sake thereof be loathsome and
abominable unto God, and make themselves obnoxious to an utter Rejection from
God, like those Saint Jude speaks of, who were twice dead, and plucked up by
the Roots.

Sect. 67. Application. Every man (says the Apostle) has his proper Gift of
God, 1 Cor. 7.7. and answerably, every Man has his proper Work to do for God,
Mar. 13.34. One must be serviceable unto God after this manner, another after
that, according to the diversity of Gifts received from God. Every man has a
stewardly Work to do, and therefore must be faithful as one that must give an
account of his stewardship.

Sect. 68. First, Have you the Gift of Government? then make it appear by
exercising your selves as the Ministers of God for the good of those you
govern. Romans 13.4. acquit your selves as ordained and sent of God for the
Punishment of evildoers, and for the Praise of them that do well. 1 Pet. 2.14.
I must suit my discourse to the present Occasion, which wholly refers to matter
Ecclesiastical, and therefore shall exhort you to the use of your Talent that
way. December praeceptorum Custos Carolus, Charles the Keeper of Ten
Commandments, was the Motto written on the Sword of Charles the Great. and
Defender of the Faith, is the Honorary Title and Engagement of King Charles the
Second, of England. And so far as Authority is derived from him to you, are you
concerned in the same Title and engagement. For we must not only pray for
Kings, but also for all in Authority under them, that we may lead a quiet Life
in all Godliness and Honesty, 1 Timothy 2.2. Which supposes that your Government
must influence and subserve our Religious and Spiritual as well as our Civil
and Moral Affairs. You are called Gods, Psalm 82.1. John 10.34. and you were
Catachrestically and Abusively so called on Purpose; you were despicable
terrestrial Animals if your Authority were not to be concerned in the matters
of God, and for the preservation of men's Souls as well as Bodies and Estates.

Sect. 69, I know that Donatus and his Sectarian Followers are still crying in
your Ears, Quid Imperatori cum Ecclesiis, what has the Magistrate to do with
the Churches? but I hope you will answer them from the Prophet crying aloud to
you as a trumpet, that you are to be as nursing Fathers to the Church, Isa.
49.23. Which you cannot be, if you permit Seducers to poison her by Heretical
Doctrines, or Schismatics to destroy her by Divisions.

Sect. 70. Give me leave to mind you, That Religious Dissentions amongst all
sorts of Persons, in all Ages, have been transacted with vehement Passion and
Violence, and have proved most Fatal and Bloody. For this Cause (says our
Savior) the Brother shall betray the Brother to Death, Father the Son, and
Children shall rise up against their Parents, and shall cause them to be put to
Death, Mar. 13.12. For Religion being the greatest Interest in the World,
Religious Affections are strongest, and more prevalent than Natural, and
consequently Men will resist with greatest Earnestness whatsoever tends to
subvert and destroy it, and they will spare the Destruction of no man to
preserve it. This was the ground of Campanella's Speech to the Spanish King,
Religio semper vicit, praesertim armata, Religion, especially being armed, has
always conquered. And therefore Innovations in Matters of Religion must needs
be of dangerous consequence to the public Peace: for he that pretends one
thing false, may easily question the truth of another, and so by degrees bring
the whole under suspicion. And if once the People apprehend that their Rulers
have abused them in a matter of dearest Concern, and that they do not Rule them
from Principles of Conscience, and Reasons of Religion, but from Design, and
Reason of State, they will soon become as weary of them as of their Religion,
and answerably will seek out other Rulers as well as another Religigion; as
your own experience has taught you.

Sect. 71. It is therefore a Prudential way, for the securing the Ends of
Government, that the Penalties inflicted on the Violaters of Ecclesiastical
Orders respectively to Gods public Worship, have respect, not so much to the
simple Nature and Merit of the Offense in it self considered, as to the
malignant destructive Influences and dismal Consequences of it, respectively to
the public safety of Church and Commonwealth. Behold, how great a matter a
little Fire kindles! says Saint James, James 3.5. small matters in Nature,
Art, Providence, and Religion too in their progress and ultimate Issue become
very great. You know the immediate Issue of a departure from uniformity is
diversity, and because every man is well affected to that which is his own,
thinks his own Opinions and Practices best, he that worshippeth God one way
dislikes, censures, and condemns him which worshippeth God another way, and
most commonly the lesser the difference, the greater and more severe the mutual
Animosity and Censure, because then each concludes that it is Humor, Pride,
Faction, Faction, and Interest and not constraints of Conscience and Religion
which is the ground of the Distance and Separation. And from this spring
Debates, Rancors, Enmities and Oppositions in the Church, and thence by a most
natural progress Factions, Seditions, Tumults and Rebellions in the State. For
they that will not patiently admit and submit unto other men's Opinions,
Impositions and Practices, they cannot endure that their own should be
neglected, contradicted, and rejected.

Sect. 72. Factious minded men are always proud, and erroneous Opinions being
fermented with Pride, efferate the hearts of men, make them touchy, fierce and
contentious, Prove. 13.10. And finally urge them to go in the way of Cain, as
the expression is, Jude 11. The instances of the Circumcellions, Arrians,
Donatists of old, and of the Sectaries of latter time both at home and abroad
attest, that false Doctrines and new ways of Worship and Discipline which are
weak in themselves, cannot be supported without Blood and Cruelty. And when
once men pretend to be so certain of the Truth of their conceits as if
immediately inspired by God, and arrive to an infallibility, they that can
judge and do nothing amiss being most fit to sway all, they presently by a very
easy step of advance, arrogate to themselves a Supremacy too, and then it is
their unquestionable prerogative to throw down and destroy all that oppose
them. Presumptuous are they, (says the Apostle) self-willed, they are not
afraid to speak evil of dignities, 2 Pet. 2.10. And when men are so bold and
insolent, as to speak contumeliously, how easily are they induced to proceed
from words to blows, and to act rebelliously?

Sect. 73. It is therefore certainly the Magistrates Interest as well as Duty,
to restrain open and professed Dissentions and Divisions in the Church, and by
Coercion and Penalties to compel those which profess the same Religion to
Glorify God with one mouth, Matt. 14.23. Romans 15.6. Thus Josiah, 1 Chronicles.
38.2. Asa, 2 Chronicles. 14.13. Solomon did, 1 King. 8.1. 2 Chronicles. 8.14. and 18. and
herein they did that which was right in the sight of the Lord. And the reasons
from whence they did it, to wit, in Zeal to Gods Honor, and for the prevention
of Infection by Evil Examples, for the curing of Offenders, and the preventing
or removing of Judgments, Deuteronomy. 13.5. and 11.16, 17. 1 Timothy 1.20. Zech. 13.6.
are reasons of Immutable Equity and Moral Obligation, and extend to Magitrates
indifferently in all Times and Ages. And you shall find when Artaxerxes
decreed, that whosoever will not do the Law of God, and of the King, that
Judgment shall be executed speedily upon him, whether it be unto Death or unto
Banishment, or to confiscation of Goods, or to Imprisonment, Ezra blessed God,
that he had put such a thing into the Kings heart, Ezra 7.26, 27. This being
done by an Ethnic Prince, it is easy to collect from it, that there is a
Naturalness in the thing, and belongs to Magistrate, as such, to compel men
professing a Religion, publicly to own, and observe the Institutions and
Ordinances of it, and consequently it is not a Persecution of the Professors of
Religion, as such, but a just Prosecution of them as Evil Doers, Enemies and
Rebels against the Government of Jesus Christ, to punish them for refusing to
attend and observe the Ordinances of that Religion they profess.

Sect. 74. And let me beg the liberty to tell you, that it is not the contriving
and Enacting, but the Execution of good Laws which gives them a Real and an
Effective Being to the purposes of Government. Our large Volumes of good
Statutes, without a due Execution, and their Penal Enforcements, are like a
Picture curiously drawn, only to show the skill of the Limner, or a bundle of
antiquated Almanacks, or the Laws of an Vtopian State, matters of mere Form,
farther than to be a (...), a reproachful Sarcasm to us, that though we had the
Authority and wit to make good Laws we had not the Honesty and Prudence to use
them.

Sect. 75. I have conceited that our late Indulgence or Toleration was designed
by some politic Statesmen (and if it were not so, I hope it will prove so) to
be to us as the (...), Stobaeus speaks of, the five Days lawless Liberty was to
the Persians upon the death of their King, in which every man might do as he
pleased without fear of Punishment, that seeing the mischievous Consequences of
being lawless, we might prize the more highly, and yield Obedience the more
cheerfully to those Laws which are compulsive to Uniformity in Gods Worship.

Sect. 74. Our Savior, who had no design of cruelty either upon men's Bodies or
Consciences, when he apprehended men professing Religion, upon religious
Pretenses perverting the institutions thereof, he did not only severely reprove
them but disgracefully whipped them, and violently drove them out of the Temple.
Deuteronomy. 14.24, 25, 26. Exodus 30.13, 14, 15. comp. with Jo. 2.13. to 18. Our
Savior presumed, that they which had been instructed in Religion all the Days
of their Lives understood it, and therefore does not enter into a dispute with
them to convict their Judgments, and change their Hearts before he proceeds to
Punish them, but bitterly reprehends them in Words, and then falls to Blows,
and forces them from their irreligious disorders. And those Christian
Magistrates, that are inspired and acted by the same Principle and Spirit of
Zeal their Lord and Master was, whose Vicegerents they are, will not tamely
endure but courageously revenge all public Doctrines and Practices which tend
to the subversion of Religion and the desolation of the Church.

Sect. 76. Secondly, Is it given to thee to be a Steward of the Mysteries of
God? then, it is required (says the Apostle) that thou be found faithful. 2
Cor. 4.2. And the faithfulness of the Servants in the Parable relating to my
Text, consisted in the diligent employment and improvement of their Talents to
those Purposes their Lord designed them. though you are (...) to the People,
and are authoritatively to instruct, rebuke, exhort and rule them, yet you are
(...) to Christ, and Servants to God, and must manage and discharge the Office
entrusted with you, just as he has appointed and no otherwise, do all in his
Name with respect to his Ends. As Agents therefore for God communicate to them
what you have received from the Lord, 1 Cor. 11.23. And that in due season as
their Needs require, and opportunity offers; and remember, that it is not enough
barely to minister to the needs of your People; for God expects that you do it
with Care, Labor, and Diligence. Study to approve thy self a Workman, 2 Timothy
2.15. do not distribute to them that which comes next to hand; Jacob's Venison
which was soon got, was not altogether of the best, but consider what is most
suitable to their Conditions, and what likely will be most serviceable to the
End of your Ministry. the Preacher sought to find out acceptable words. Eccl.
12.10. He that designs to be useful to the Church will not grutch to be at some
Pains to find out what will be most effective to her Edification. I am willing
(says the Apostle) to spend my self and to be spent for you, 2 Cor. 12.15.
(...), for your Souls, according to the Pythagorean Dialect (...), thy Soul is
Thou. Love of men's Souls should be a greater constraint than fear of
Punishment. Feed the flock of God which is among you, taking the oversight
thereof, not by constraint, but willingly: not for filthy lucre, but of a ready
mind. 1 Pet. 5.2. And I will be bold to tell you, that a willing and ready Mind
rarely wants a fit and fair opportunity to do Good. Saint Paul's advice is,
that we be instant in Season and out of Season. 2 Timothy 4.2. That is, that we do
not only take hold of those Opportunities which are most fairly offered, and
most especially probable and hopeful to conduce to the furtherance of the
Purposes of our Ministry, but we must watch for Opportunities, and make
attempts to do Good, when our Corruption, Laziness, and secular Regards would
fain serve a Writ of Ease upon us, and when outward circumstances are not so
fair and promising as we could wish they were. Non fieri potest, ut non
aliquando succedat, multa tentanti, said the Cynick in Seneca. And a wiser than
he says, in the Morning sow thy Seed, and in the Evening withold not thy
hand: for thou know not whether shall prosper, either this or that, or
whether they both shall be alike good. Eccl. 11.6, For God, on whom all our
Labors and Successes depend, however uncertain events are to us, may bring all
we do to a good Effect and Issue. Whatever come of the thing you do, if you do
it willingly, as unto the Lord, you shall have your Reward, 1 Cor. 9.17.

Sect. 77. And now, that my discourse may end agreeably to the design of this
our solemn Assembling, let me beseech you, my Reverend Fathers and Brethren, to
commend to your Peoples acceptance that you dispense to them, by your own
Practice and Example. When your Ministrations and Sermons are (...), animated
and quickened by your Practice, they are more operative and impressive, more
amiable and apt to affect your people than when only nakedly transacted and
delivered, because then they have a material and active demonstration that the
design of them is possible and practicable. But let me tell you, if you exact
more from your People than you do your selves, men will say of you as our
Savior in the like case, that you bind burdens on the Peoples shoulders, which
you your selves will not touch with the top of your fingers, Mat. 23.4. Luke
11.46. And consequently, that you secreetly mock and laugh at them for stooping
down, like Issachars Asses, to take up unnecessary burdens from which you
excuse your selves. You cannot be such strangers to the humor of some People,
but you must know, that nothing is more agreeable to their temper than
Comedies, Satyrs and Sarcasmes dealt out against the Clergy as Holy-Cheats,
and he that is most ready to justify his own Omissions of Duty from his
Parsons neglects, and is most witty in his Comments and Reflections on the
Follies and Miscariages of his Ghostly-Father, whether real or imaginary, he is
the most agreeable Companion. Take heed, that you do not act a part in such
Raileries against your selves. Let them be only a Narration of the malevolent
Images of their own vitiated Fantasies, and not a Representation of your
Actions.

Sect. 78. Aristophanes attempted to make Socrates ridiculous, when he
represented him upon the Stage, measuring the leaps of a Flea: but never so
bitterly exposed him as when he brought him gravely discoursing and prescribing
the measures of Justice and Honesty, and in the mean time stealing a piece of
Plate from his Neighbor. You may be contemned, but never will be contemptible
till you Love and Practice that your selves, which you forbid and declaim
against. For when you partake of the same Guilts you reprove in others, you
upbraid your selves, and give a strong Evidence that you are exceeding weak or
very wicked. And if you despise your own Ministries, will not others do so too?
will others approve and receive from you that which you dislike and reject? and
be sure of this, the People are not so metaphysicall as to despise your Offices
abstractedly from your Persons: and if they have no respect for you, they will
insult over you rather than obey you. It Is well known, that you have so many
good Friends about you, that there is one Woe they will certainly secure and
save you from, Woe be to you when all men shall speak well of you, Luke 6.24.
Be persuaded to deliver your selves from that Woe too which our Savior
denounced against the Pharisees, because they Said, but Did not, Mat. 23.4. Let
Soundness of Doctrine be seconded by an unblameable Conversation, and then
whatever entertainment you meet withal from the World, you shall surely obtain
a farther improvement in your Gifts and Graces, a comfortable Conscience within
your own Breast, a good report in Gods Church, a gracious Protection from God
in this World, and a Crown of Righteousness in the World to come.

FINIS.

