A SERMON Preached before the King and Queen AT WHITE HALL, ON CHRISTMAS DAY,
1691.

By the most Reverend Father in GOD, JOHN, Lord Archbishop of YORK, Primate of
England and Metropolitan.

Published by Their Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1692.

A SERMON Preached before the KING and QUEEN.
Heb. ix. 26. Now once in the end of the World has he appeared to put away Sin
by the Sacrifice of himself.


THis Text does naturally suggest Five things to be insisted on, most of them
proper for our Meditations on this Day; which therefore I shall make the Heads
of my following Discourse.

I. In general the Appearance of our Lord. Now has he appeared. II. The Time
of that Appearance. In the end of the World. III. The End and Design for which
he appeared. To put away Sin. IV. The Means by which he accomplished that End.
By the Sacrifice of himself. V. The Difference of His Sacrifice from the Jewish
ones. His was but once performed; Theirs were every day repeated. If his
Sacrifice had been like theirs; then (as you have it in the former part of the
verse) must be often have suffered since the Foundation of the World; But now
once in the end of the World has he appeared to put away Sin by the Sacrifice
of himself. This is the just Resolution of the Text into its several
particulars, of each of which I shall discourse as briefly and practically as I
can.
I. I begin with the first, The Appearance of our Lord in general. Now has he
appeared.

Let us here consider, first, Who it was that appeared. And then, How he did
appear.

The Person appearing we will consider both as to his Nature and as to his
Office.

He that appeared as to his Nature was God and Man; both these Natures were
united in him and made one Person. He was God with us. So the Angel styles him
in the first of S. Matthew.

He was the Word that was with God, and was God, and by whom all things were
made. He was, I say, that Word made Flesh and dwelling among us. So S. John
styles him in the first of his Gospel.

Lastly, He was God manifest in the Flesh, so S. Paul styles him in the first
Epistle to Timothy.

This was the Person that the Text says, Now appeared, that is, the Son of God
in Humane Nature. God of the substance of his Father begotten before all
Worlds, and Man of the substance of his Mother born in the World. Perfect God,
and perfect Man, and yet but one Person. For as the Reasonable Soul and the
Body make one Man; so here God and Man make one Christ. As our Creed expresses
it.

And this leads me to his Office. This Divine Person, God-Man, that the Text
here says appeared, was, by his Office, the Christ, the Messiah, that is, that
great Minister of God, that Anointed King and Priest and Prophet, which from
the beginning of the World he promised to send down upon Earth for the
salvation of Mankind. Who was believed in by the Patriarchs; Typified by the
Law; Foretold by all the Prophets; Shadowed out in all the Economy of the
Jewish Nation; expected by all the Israelites; And wished for by the best of
the Heathen World.

This Person invested with this Office at last appeared; and in what manner,
you all know from his Story in the Gospel.

He was by the Holy Spirit of God conceived in the Womb of a Virgin, as was
foretold of him by the Prophets; of which an Angel of the highest order in
Heaven first brought the happy Tidings to the Virgin her self.

This Virgin, by as strange a Providence, when the time of her delivery drew
near, was brought from her own City and Habitation in Galilee, to Bethlehem a
City of Judah, where she brought forth this Illustrious Babe; And thereby
fulfilled another Prophecy concerning him, namely, That he should be born in
Bethlehem, which also the Scribes at that time acknowledged.

The circumstances indeed of his Birth were far from any outward Pomp and
Magnificence. The Virgin his Mother was poor and a stranger; and so ill
befriended, that in that Confluence of People with which the City was then
crowded, she was able to procure no better a lodging than the Stable of an Inn
^ so that a Manger was the place that first received the Lord of Glory. This
Slur, this Affront God then thought fit to put upon all that external Splendor
and Grandeur which usually does so much dazzle the Eyes of mortal Men.

But God failed not to make abundant amends for the meanness of this Birth, by
giving sundry other demonstrable Evidences of the Dignity of the Person that
was then born.

For the Magi from the East ( Princes shall I call them, or Philosophers?)
being conducted by a new Star, came and paid their Homage, and brou^ht their
Offerings to this King of the World in a Manger. And the Shepherds, that were
watching their Flocks in the Fields by night, were surprised with the Glory of
the Lord shining round about them, and an Angel that thus spoke to them; Fear
not, for behold I bring you Tidings of great Joy which shall be to all People,
for unto you is born this day in the City of David a Savior which is Christ
the Lord. And this shall be a sign unto you, ye shall find the Babe wrapped in
swaddling Cloths lying in a Manger. And suddenly there was with the Angel a
Multitude of the Heavenly Host, praising God, and saying; Glory to God in the
Highest, on Earth Peace, Good Will toward Men.

After this manner was the Appearance of our Savior, and much after the same
manner was his following Life. It was a life of much Poverty and Meanness as to
outward cirumstances; but it was a life in every Period of it fraught with
Wonders. Whether we consider the admirable Goodness and Charmingness of his
Temper; or the exemplary Virtue and Piety that did shine out in all his
Conversation; Or the Divinity of his Sermons and Doctrines; Or his prodigious
inimitable Miracles; Or the Attestations which were given to him from Heaven;
Or the usage he received from Men; Or the Events which followed upon all these
things in the World.

But it is his first Appearance in the Flesh that we are this day met together
to commemorate. And never had Mankind so Noble an Argument given them, to
exercise their Thoughts and Meditations upon.

If we consider the Quality of the Person appearing, that he was no other than
the Eternal Son of God: How ought we to be wrapped with Wonder and Astonishment
at the Infiniteness of the Divine Condescension? How ought we to be affected
with Love and thankfulness at such a never-to-be-parallell'd instance of God's
kindness to us, that he should so love us as to send his only-begotten Son into
the World, that we might live through him.

If we consider that this Son of God resolving to appear in the World, of all
other ways chose to do it in our Flesh, and so united both the Deity and
Humanity in one Person: O what a sense ought this to impress upon us of the
Honor that is hereby done to our nature, and the Dignity it is advanced to?
And how ought that sense, either to fright us, or to shame us from prostituting
this our Nature to any vile unworthy Mixtures and Communications which God did
not disdain to take into so near a Relation to himself.

If we consider that this God, in humane Flesh, came as the Messiah, the
Savior of the World, so long before promised, and so long expected: How ought
this to fill our hearts with Joy and Thankfulness? How should it move us to
pour out our Souls in Benedictions to God for having thus Visited and redeemed
his People? And putting us into that dispensation which so many Holy Men, for
so many Ages, wished to see, but did not see it; nay, and which the Angels
themselves desired to look into; and which the Jews for rejecting, at the time
it was published, are, to this day, a standing Monument of God's Displeasure
and Vengeance.

If we consider the many Evidences, that this our Savior gave at his
Appearance, of his being the true Christ; How exactly in all the Circumstances
of his Nativity, and all the Passages of his Life, he fulfilled the Prophecies
which went before of him; and how convincing the Testimonies were, which God
gave to the Truth of his Mission: How ought this Consideration to strengthen
our Faith in this Christ? To make us constant to the death in owning him for
our Savior, our Messiah, in Opposition to all the Pretenses of the Jews, and
Infidels, and Atheists, and Scepticks to the contrary.

Lastly, If we consider the mean Circumstances that this our Christ chose to
appear in; so say below the Dignity of so great a Prince, that there is not the
poorest Beggar's Child among us, but generally finds better Accommodation when
it comes into the World: O what a Check, what a Rebuke ought this to be to that
Spirit of Ambition, and Pride, and Vainglory, that too often possesses us poor
Mortals? How ought it to take off our admiration, and lessen the too great
esteem we are apt to have of all outward Pomp and Greatness* Nay, and to make
us despise all the glittering Shows and Bravery of the World: Since God has
given us so visible a demonstration, by the sending his own Son into it, how
little a Value he sets upon these Things. But,

II. I proceed to the Second Point, which my Text leads me to speak to, and
that is the Time of our Savior's Appearance here mentioned, Once has he
appeared in the end of the World.

You see here that the time of his Appearance is said to be the end of the
World. But how is that to be understood? If we take the expression in the
literal sense, and as we commonly use it; the thing is not true. For there have
already passed near seventeen hundred Years since our Savior's Appearance; and
yet the end of the World is not come, nor do we know when it will.

But there will be no difficulty in this matter, if we carefully attend to the
Phrase the Apostle here uses, and interpret it according to the Propriety of
the Language in which it is delivered. The word in my Text is (...), which
every body, that is versed in the style of the New Testament, knows may be
better and more naturally rendered the Consummation or Conclusion of the Ages,
than the End of the World.

For the understanding this Phrase, we must have recourse to the known Idiom of
the Jews, who used to speak of the several Oeconomies and Dispensations, under
which the World successively had been, or was to be, as of so many (...) or
Ages. The last of which Ages, and the Accomplishment and Completion of all of
them, they held to be the Age of the Messia^; beyond which they knew there was
to be no other Age or Economy. With reference to this way of speaking, the
Times of the Gospel dispensation are frequently called in Scripture, the Last
Times, the Last Days, the Fullness of the Times, and in the Text, the
Consummation or Shutting up of the Ages. The meaning of all which Phrases is no
more than this. That the Times of the Gospel, that is, the Appearance and
Revelation of our Savior; though God intended them from the beginning, yet
should they be the last of all Times. There should be several Dispensations set
on foot in the World before they came; and when those times were fufilled, when
the Ends of those Dispensations were accomplished, then should our Savior
appear, and begin his Kingdom which should never be succeeded by any other.

This is the true meaning of Christ's appearing (...), as the Text expresses
it, that is, not (as we translate it) in the end of the World, but in the last
of the Ages, or at the time when the Ages were fulfilled and accomplished.

Now what use we are to make of this Consideration, the Apostle himself does
fairly intimate to us in the beginning of this Epistle: God, says he, who at
sundry times and in diverse manners, spoke in times past unto the Fathers by
the Prophets, has in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom he has
made heir of all things, and by whom he made the worlds. And so he goes on to
set forth the incomparable Dignity and Pre-eminence of this last Messenger of
God, above that of either Angels or Men, by whom he had spoke to mankind
before. But what is the inference he draws from all this? Why, that you may see
in the beginning of the second Chapter. We ought therefore (says he) to give
the more earnest heed to the things we have heard (that is to say, the Doctrine
of the Gospel) lest at any time we let them slip. For if the word spoken by
Angels was steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience received a just
recompense of reward; How shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation as
was spoken to us by the Lord Jesus?

The Apostle's Argument here proceeds on this manner. God's Revelation of his
Will to Mankind, and the discovery of his Grace and Goodness was not all at
once, but gradual and by parts.

He first spoke to Mankind by the Patriarchs who were burning and shining
Lights in their Generations.

He afterward singles out the Nation of the Jews to be his peculiar People,
and to them he gives a written Law which was delivered to them by Angels in the
hand of Moses their Mediator (as the Apostle speaks in the third of the
Galatians) which Law was a shadow or dark representation of the Good things
which were afterward to be revealed.

After this he sends Prophets in a continual Succession for several Ages, who
do more clearly discover God's will to them; who call upon them to Holiness and
Virtue; and who speak in very plain Terms of that Great Salvation which God
should one day manifest to the World.

And last of all, as the Lord of the Vineyard in the Parable dealt with his
Husbandmen, who after he had sent Servants one after another, of different
Qualities and Degrees, at last sent his own Son: so at last, I say, did the
great Lord of the World, when the fullness of the time was come, send his own
Son to be his Ambassador to Mankind, his own Son who was the Brightness of his
Glory, and the express Image of his Person.

If now, as the Apostle here argues: If under the former Dispensations when God
only declared his Will by Angels or by Prophets, he was yet so severe that no
Transgression or Disobedience escaped without a just recompense of Vengeance;
How can we escape if we neglect so great a Salvation, as that was, which in
these last days was preached by Jesus Christ? How can we escape, if these last
and greatest Methods of God for our good, and in which all the Treasures of his
Wisdom and Goodness are displayed; I say, if these have no effect upon us in
order to the making us both Holy and Happy.

What Teachers, what Instructers can we further expect? What new Lights or
Assistances do we yet wait for? Can any one think that God should set on foot
some other new Dispensation for the bringing off those wretched People upon
whom this last could prevail nothing? Do we dream of another Covenant, or
another Mediator between God and Man, besides Christ Jesus? Do we fancy that
God will send some other Ambassador or Savior into the World after he has
sent his own Son? Or that the Son of God will come a second time in Humane
Flesh, and again be crucified for us?

No certainly, God has afforded the last and greatest means for Man's
Salvation, and no other is ever to be expected. Christ has once appeared in
the end of the World to put away Sin by the Sacrifice of himself; and to those
that believe in him, and love him, and obey him, will be appear the second time
to their Salvation. But never will he appear again to make a new Reconciliation
for those Men, that are not reconciled to God by his first Appearance. To such
(as our Apostle speaks in the tenth Chapter) There remains no more Sacrifice
for Sin, but a fearful expectation of Judgment and fiery Indignation to consume
the Adversaries.

III. The Third General Point I am to insist on from the Text is the End of our
Savior's Appearance; and that is here said to be the putting away of Sin. Once
in the end of the World has he appeared to put away Sin.

This is that which the Scripture every where assigns as the Business and
Design of Christ's coming. To run over all the particular Texts would be
tedious in so plain a Case. I shall therefore only name one or two.

This is the account that S. John gives of his Appearance, 1. Ep. Chapter 3. Ye
know, says he, that he was manifested to take away our sins.

And again, this is the account that the Angel gives to Joseph a little before
his Birth, Mat. 1.20. Fear not, says he, to take unto thee Mary thy Wife, for
that which is conceived in her is of the Holy Ghost. And she shall bring forth
a Son, and thou shall call his name Jesus, for he shall save his people from
their sins. He was called Jesus because he was designed by God to be our
Savior; for so much that word imports. And he is therefore our Savior,
because he saves his People from their Sins, which is in the words of the Text,
to put them away.

But what is it to be saved from our Sins, or to have our Sins put away? Since
the Salvation we have by Christ does consist in this, it is fit we should a
little more particularly insist on it. In answer therefore to this Question, we
say that two things are employed in Christ's putting away Sin.

First his saving or delivering us from the Guilt of our Sins, and the
Punishment due to them. Secondly his saving or delivering us from the Power and
Dominion of them.
In these two things consists the Salvation obtained for us by Jesus Christ;
and if either of them was wanting, or was not effected, he would not be a
complete Savior.

First Christ appeared to put away Sin, by delivering us from the Guilt and
Punishment of it; that is to say, by procuring for us the Pardon and Remission
of it.

This is the Salvation which Zachary in his Hymn foretells John Baptist should
publish to the World, Luke 1. To give knowledge of salvation to his people for
the remission of their sins.

And this is that Redemption of Christ which S. Paul speaks of, 1 Coloss. 14.
In whom we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins.

And lastly, S. Paul s Sermon to the Gentiles is, Be it known unto you Men and
Brethren, that through this Man Jesus Christ is preached unto you the
forgiveness of sins, and by him all that believe are justified from all things
from which ye could not be justified by the Law of Moses, Acts 13. And
therefore much less certainly by the Law of Nature.

The effect of these Texts is, That all Mankind are Sinners, are concluded
under Sin, are become guilty before God* as the Apostle speaks. The most
innocent Person is not excepted. All without exception have by their Sins
fallen short of the Glory of God. Means now for the freeing themselves from the
Guilt of these Sins they have none, nor is it possible they should have, for
that wholly depends upon the pleasure of Him to whom they have rendered
themselves obnoxious; and that is God, the Governor of the World. Here
therefore appears the infinite Mercy of God, and the Kindness of our Savior.
The Eternal Word interposeth and offers himself to become Man, and in that
Person to make satisfaction for the Sins of the World. And God accepts the
Terms. And hereupon a Covenant is made between God and Mankind; wherein God for
his part upon account of this Mediation of Christ, promises Forgiveness of all
Sins, to all true Penitents all the World over.

O joyful Tidings these! What ease is here to wounded Consciences? What comfort
to despairing Sinners? What encouragement to all Men every where to repent.

If we consider Mankind in their pure Naturals, and as without Christ Jesus,
this plainly was their Case. They did believe a Supreme God; and their Reason
it is likely would tell them that God was Good and Merciful. But yet this
Reason could discover no more than God's general Goodness to them that all
along endeavored to please and approve themselves to Him. But as for his
Willingness to pardon and forgive Sinners, especially those that had offended
Him by very grievous Crimes, or lived in a long habitual course of Wickedness;
this they could not conclude from their Reason. Nay if they did reason as they
justly might, they might rather be inclined to believe that he would not pardon
such Criminals. For as their Reason told them, that God was Good: So the same
Reason told them that He was Just, and had an infinite Regard to the Honor and
Reputation of his Laws. Which Laws, their own Consciences told them, they had
heinously transgressed; nor had they any thing wherewith to compensate or make
satisfaction for the Transgression of them: And therefore what could they
expect from so Just a God, but to undergo the punishment they had deserved.

This was a very uncomfortable Reasoning. And yet such a one it was, as there
was no answer to be given to, in the State of Nature; and therefore in what a
melancholy Condition were Mankind all the while? What encouragement had they
seriously to set upon the Amendment of their wicked Lives? Or, if they did,
what Fruit, what Comfort could they promise to themselves by such amendment?

But Blessed be God that has removed us out of these uncertainties; Blessed be
God that has given us the greatest assurance that is possible, of his Love and
Kindness to the greatest of Sinners; and consequently laid the greatest
Obligation upon all Mankind to turn from their evil Ways.

He has sent his Son, his only Son into the World, on purpose to assure us of
his good Will to us; to give a demonstration of the unfeigned Love and Kindness
that He bears to every Soul of the Sons of Adam; that he would not have any of
them perish, but that they should all come to the knowledge of the Truth, and
be saved. This Son of His, does most Solemnly in the Name of his Father,
proclaim Pardon and Remission of Sins to every one that should believe in Him.
There is no Sinner excepted, even the Oldest, the Greatest, the most Enormous
of Sinners, if they will come in and and submit to the Yoke of Jesus Christ,
have his certain Promise that they shall be received.

And least any one should fear the Divine Justice, upon account that there is
no satisfaction made to it for his Sins: Our Lord has taken care to remove
that Objection. For he by the unvaluable Merits of his Person, and the free
unconstrained Offering up of Himself to an ignominious Death upon the Cross, on
the behalf of Mankind, has made a full, complete, and entire Satisfaction to
God's Justice for all the Sins of the World, from the beginning to the end
thereof.

So that now every one has free Access to God, and a Right to his Favor
through the Blood of Jesus Christ. And tho we have been never so bad, never so
unworthy; yet if we have but the Hearts to forsake our Sins, and to come to
Jesus Christ, we shall as certainly obtain the Acceptance and the Love of our
Heavenly Father, as if we had been Innocent and never sinned at all.

Nay God is not only willing to receive us, but he earnestly begs and sollicits
us to take his Mercy. And so pleased he is at the Return of a Sinner, that our
Savior has told us there is joy in Heaven over such a one. Nay more joy among
the Angels over a sinner that repents; than over ninety nine just persons
that need no Repentance.

O how welcome ought this News to be to us? How transported should we be at the
infinite Kindness of God manifested to us by our Savior? O! praised be God for
his astonishing Love. For ever adored be our Lord Jesus, that has made a
Propitiation for us by his Blood. O let us for ever kiss and hug the precious
unvaluable Scriptures of the New Testament, if there was nothing else in them
but that faithful Saying, that Saying, worthy of all Men to be received, That
Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners; to save you, and me, and all
Sinners, even the greatest of Sinners.

O, who is there that is in his Wits, would choose to be out of the Christian
Dispensation; or be left to the Methods of Nature and Philosophy for the
attaining their Happiness, as some loose People among us do sometimes talk*
Were the natural Talents of Mankind exalted far above what they either are, or
ever have been; yet I would value that one Saying, That Jesus Christ came into
the World to save Sinners, more than all the Notions and Speculations of Reason
and Philosophy. I would desire to know nothing but Jesus Christ, and him
crucified. I would, with the Apostle, count all things as loss, nay, as Dung,
in comparison of the Excellency of the Knowledge of Christ Jesus my Savior;
and that I may be found in him, not having my own Righteousness, which is by
Nature, but that Righteousness which is by the Faith of Jesus Christ, who gave
himself for me. And thus much of Christ's appearing to put away Sin, in the
first Notion of that Expression.

But Secondly, Christ appeared also to put away Sin in another sense: That is
to say, To destroy the Power and Dominion of it from among Men; to abolish it,
so as that it should not henceforth reign in our mortal Bodies. To free us from
Sin, as the Apostle speaks, that is, to enable us to lead holy and virtuous
Lives. So that whereas Mankind heretofore yielded their Members Servants to
uncleanness and to iniquity unto iniquity; so they should now yield their
Members Servants to righteousness unto holiness.

Thus to put away Sin was as principal an End of Christ's coming as the other
before mentioned, nay perhaps more principal: For the other, in true reasoning,
may be said to be wholly in order to this. Certain it is, unless this End be
attained, the other will signify nothing to us: For we are not capable of any
Benefit from the Remission of Sin which was purchased for us by Christ, until
our Sins be put away by Repentance, and we become holy Persons by the change
and renewal of our Natures.

Never therefore let us deceive our selves. Though Christ has actually put
away all the Sins of the World in the former sense by his satisfaction; that is
to say, has procured the Pardon of them; has taken away the Sting of them, so
as that they shall not be deadly to any: Yet all this is upon supposition that
the Strength of them he taken away in us; that they (...) no Dominion over us;
that we mortify them in all our Members; that we daily die to them, and live a
Life o^ Righteousness. All that Christ merited or purchased for the World, will
not do us the least good, unless we be made conformable to him in his Death and
Resurrection, by our dying to Sin and living to Righteousness.

And in truth, if we will mind it, the putting away Sin in this sense of it,
has as great weight laid upon it in Scripture, and is as often assigned for
the great End and Business of Christ's appearance as the other.

S. John tells us plainly, that for this purpose was the son of God manifested,
that he might destroy the works of the devil.

And S. Paul likewise tells us, that he therefore gave himself for us, that he
might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar people
zealous of good works.

And lastly, S. Peter gives the same account of his coming, Acts 3.26. where he
tells us, that therefore God raised up his Son Jesus, that is, sent him into
the World (for his raising up there spoken of, as any one will see that looks
into the Context, was not his being raised from the dead, but his being
manifested to Mankind. For here the Apostle's business is to apply that Promise
or Prophecy of Moses unto our Savior, viz. that God would in due thim raise
up to his People a Prophet like unto him, whom they should all be obliged to
hearken to.) I say therefore God raised up his Son Jesus, i.e. sent him into
the World, that he might bless his People, in turning every one of them from
their Iniquities. This turning every one from their Iniquities was the great
End for which our Lord Jesus Christ was manifested unto Mankind.

And indeed Reason will teach us all this as well as Revelation. For in the
nature of the thing, none can be truly Happy but those that are truly Pious.
And in the same degree and proportion that any one is wicked, or is under the
power of his Lusts in the same degree he must needs be miserable. So that if
Christ came to be our Savior, and in that, meant either to make us happy, or
to keep us from being miserable; there was an absolute necessity that his first
and principal Design must be to root our of our Nature all Sin and Wickedness;
and to restore the Image of God in our Minds, which consists in unchangeable
Purity and Holiness and Goodness.

Away therefore with all those Hypotheses that give such an account of Christ's
coming into the World, as to make the ultimate End of it, to be the freeing us
from Hell and Damnation, and purchasing Heaven and eternal Life for us, but
without any respect had to the renewing our Natures, or the making us sincerely
Holy and Virtuous. All such Accounts of Christ's Undertaking, are monstrously
unreasonable and absurd.

For not to insist upon the manifest Affront they put upon God's Justice and
Holiness, in making Him the great Patron of Sin, whilst they assert Him to be
the Justifier of wicked Men even whilst they continue wicked.

You cannot, as I said, but see (in the first place) how very much such
Doctrins do disparage the Love of our Savior and lessen his Undertaking* For
whilst He is here supposed to have Redeemed us only from his Fathers Wrath, and
the Punishment consequent thereupon; leaving us in the mean time to the
wickedness and impurity of our own Nature, which alone without the accession of
any other external Evil, is a misery great enough: He is hereby rendered but
half a Savior; One that freed us indeed from an External Evil, but left us
irremediably exposed to an internal one, as grievous as the other. One that
delivered us from the apprehensions of a Gibbet, or an Executioner* but could
not or would not cure us of the inward Sicknesses and Maladies, under which we
languished.

But this is not all. In the second place, it ought to be taken notice of, what
an absurd inconsistent Notion this kind of Doctrine gives us of the Happiness
of Mankind. For whilst they suppose that a Man under the Power and Dominion of
Sin, is capable of that Happiness which Christ purchased for us in the other
World (which Happiness as both Scripture and Reason testify, does chiefly
consist in the enjoyment of God, and of his Excellencies and Perfections): They
must at the same time suppose, that a Man may be rendered happy by the enjoyment
of that of which he has no Sense, no Perception; or rather, to speak properly,
that he is the happiest Creature alive in the enjoyment of an Object to which
he has the greatest a version and antipathy in the World. Which, if it be not
an absurdity, I know not what is. When Light can have Communion with Darkness,
when God can have Fellowship with Belial; Then, and not till then, can a wicked
Man, a Man that lives in Sin, and loves it, he capable of that Happiness which
Jesus Christ has purchased for us.

IV. The Fourth thing I should speak to from this Text, is the Means by which
our Savior brought to pass the great End of his Appearance. viz. the putting
away of sin. Which Means are said to be the Sacrifice of himself. Now once in
the end of the World, has he appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of
himself.

Two things should be done in order to a just Discourse upon this point.

First, To give an account, how the Death of Christ was a Means for the putting
away of sin in the first Sense I gave, that is, the procuring the Pardon of it.
Secondly, How it was a Means of putting it away in the other Sense, that is,
the destroying or mortifying it in us.
But these things being Foreign to our present Business, and more proper for
the Argument of a Good Friday Sermon. I shall say no more of them, but proceed
to my last point.

V. The Fifth and last thing observable from the Text, is the difference of
Christ's sacrifice whereby he put away sin from the Mosaical ones. Which
difference so far as it is here taken notice of, consists in this. That the
Legal Sacrifices for the Expiation of Sin were daily offered; But Christ
offered the Sacrifice of himself but once. Once in the end of the World, etc.

The Apostle in this Chapter is discoursing of the Difference between the Law
and the Gospel. And as to that Point, he insists much on the Difference of
their Sacrifices. The Christians that owned the Gospel had but one Sacrifice,
the Sacrifice of Christ once offered; whereas those that were under the Law
were forced to have many. Nay even the most solemn Sacrifice that God had
appointed for the Expiation of their Sins was repeated once a Year, as the
Apostle tells us in the Verse before my Text. But now the Sacrifice of Christ,
which he puts by way of opposition to theirs, that was but once offered, and
was never to be repeated. This is the Point with which he concludes this
Chapter; two Verses after my Text, Christ, says he, was once offered to bear
the sins of many, and unto there that look for him shall be appear the second
time unto salvation.

This is the Apostle's Doctrine, and I insist on it now, because all those that
design on this day to receive the Holy Sacrament are concerned in it.

Let us from hence take notice, that in this Service of the Holy Communion, we
are not to pretend to offer Christ as a Sacrifice to his Father* His Sacrifice
was but once to be offered, and that was done 1600 Years ago, and in the Virtue
of that Sacrifice once offered, all faithful Christians and sincere Penitents
shall receive Remission of Sins, and all other Benefits of his Passion* But for
us to think of offering Christ again as a Sacrifice, is in effect to put our
selves into the same rank and condition with the unbelieving Jews, that is, to
need the repetition of the same Sacrifices every Year, nay every Day, which is
the very reason for which the Apostle denis the Efficacy of them.

We do not indeed deny, but that every time we approach to the Lord's Table for
the receiving of the Holy Communion, we offer Sacrifices to God: For we offer
our Alms, which we beg of God to accept as our Oblations; and these in the
Language of Scripture, are Sacrifices with which God is well pleased.

We likewise offer our Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving to God for the
Death of our Savior. And all our Prayers and Supplications we put up in his
Name, and in the Virtue, and for the Merits of that Sacrifice he offered to God
in our behalf: And in so doing we commemorate that Sacrifice both to God, and
before Men. And this is all, we are confident, that the Ancient Church meant,
by the great Christian Sacrifice or the Sacrifice of the Altar.

But if we go further, if we will in the Communion pretend to offer up the Body
and Blood of Christ in Sacrifice to God, that was once sacrificed upon the
Cross: It is intolerable. It is a thing that was never dreamed of in the first
Ages of the Church: It is directly contradictory to the Foundation of all the
Apostles Argument and Discourse here in the Text; and the very supposal of it
brings along with it many grievous* Absurdities in the Theory, and something
that looks like impious in the Practice.

And yet this is the constant and avowed Doctrine and Practice of the Church of
Rome, in every Sacrament they have, and that is in every Mass that is said
among them. The main business of that Mystery they make to consist in the
Priest's offering up to God the very Body and Blood of Christ, the same Body
and Blood that was once offered up at Jerusalem; this they pretend to offer up
as a Sacrifice every day: and they attribute to this their Offering the same
Virtue and Efficacy that the Apostles and all Christians have always attributed
to the one Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross; that is, that it is a true
propitiatory Sacrifice for the Living and for the Dead: And none among them
dare deny this, under pain of an Anathema, as the Council of Trent has ordered
the matter.

Good God! whither will Interest and Faction and Zeal for a Party transport
Men? But it is not my business to expose them, but to put you in mind of what
concerns our selves, namely, as I said, that when we come to the Lord's Table,
we do not approach thither with a belief that our Lord Jesus is there again
offered, but only with a design to commemorate his Sacrifice that was once
offered. We come not thither to sacrifice Christ, but to be Partakers of his
Sacrifice. We are not to feast God; but God there feasts us, and that with the
best Food in the World; such Food as will nourish us to eternal Life, if we be
worthy Guests: Only we must not appear before God empty at this Solemnity: We
must offer to him of our Substance: We must offer our Prayers and
Supplications, not only for our selves, but for all the World; but more
especially for all that are called by the Name of Christ; and among those, most
particularly for our own Church and Kingdom, and all Orders and Degrees of Men
therein. We must offer likewise our selves, our Souls and Bodies a living
sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God, which is our reasonable service. And
lastly, to conclude, we must offer our most hearty and affectionate Thanks to
God Almighty, for that incomprehensible Instance of his Love, in sending Christ
Jesus to us to be our Savior; for his wonderful Birth, for his holy Life, for
his precious Death, for his glorious Resurrection and Ascension, and for his
Intercession for us at the right hand of God.

And O thou Blessed Savior that have done all this for us, give us such a
lively Sense of thy marvelous Love in leaving thy Glory, and taking Humane
Flesh upon thee, that thou might dwell among us, and instruct us in our
Duty, and assist us in the performance of it, and encourage thereto by the
glorious Hopes of a never dying Life, and at last make thy self an Offering for
our Sins: O let these things sink so deeply into our Minds, and so wholly
possess our Hearts, that we may entirely give up our selves to thee: That we
may with our whole Souls embrace all thy Doctrines and Revelations: That we may
endeavor in all our Actions to conform our selves to thy Example; and make it
the Business of our Lives to be obedient to thy Precepts, to submit to thy
Will, and to be contented to be disposed of by thee in all the Circumstances of
our Lives. O let nothing in thy Religion ever be an Offense to us. But enable
us to hold the Profession of our Faith in thee without wavering, in all the
Trials and Difficulties thou shall think fit to expose us to that so in Faith
and Obedience, in Patience and Perseverance, we may ever wait for, and at last
obtain that Crown of Righteousness which thou have laid up for all that love
thee, and expect thy second and more glorious Appearance.

To thee, O eternal Son of God, thou great Lover of Mankind; to thee, who
tookest upon thee to deliver man, and did not abhor the Virgins womb; to
thee, who overcamest the sharpness of death, and did open the Kingdom of
Heaven to all believers; to thee, O most dear, O most beloved, O most adorable
Jesus, be for ever given by us, and by all the Souls whom thou have redeemed,
and by all the Creatures in Heaven and Earth; all Honor, and Glory, and Praise,
all Service and Love and Obedience, henceforth and for evermore.

FINIS.

