NO Reformation OF THE ESTABLISHED Reformation.

By JOHN SHAW, Rector of Whalton in Northumberland.

GALAT. IV. It is good to be zealously affected always in a good thing. Qui non
zelat, non amat. LONDON, Printed for Charles Brom at the Gun in S. Paul's
Churchyard. 1685.

TO The Right Honorable AND RIGHT REVEREND FATHER in GOD, NATHANIEL, Lord
Bishop of DVRHAM, His honored Diocesan.
My LORD,
WHEN I designed the publication of the ensuing Treatise, it was my resolution
to present it to your Honor, as once I notified to you, which I have now
presumed to put in execution, though then I had not your express license to
prefix your Honor's name, yet by some expressions of respect, I conceived you
would not be offended if I did. Upon this presumptive allowance as I was
encouraged, so upon other obligations I was engaged to do it. I have received
high respects from your Lordship upon several occasions and instances, which I
ought, whenever an opportunity was offered, to acknowledge with all due
veneration, neither could I pitch on a more fitter than this, how mean and
little soever it is. The old Rule was, He who could make no better payment,
should readily confess the debt; Reddit, qui libenter debet, holds still good
with noble and generous Spirits. But this is only a debt of gratitude and
common honesty, and an argument of good nature to honor those who have
deserved honor: but an higher obligation from a more divine principle is due
from an inferior Priest to his Diocesan. That Order, Let nothing be done,
(...), without the permission or consent of the Bishop (I wish it were better
observed) is so strongly binding, that, I think, every Curate (without offense,
I hope, to the greatest Rectors or Vicars) is to apply himself in all doubts
and emergent cases of difficulty to his Diocesan for resolution; and all his
Clergy should in all public Undertakings have either his express, or
reasonably presumed consent, especially if they be such as this Treatise makes
a show of, viz. The asserting the excellency of our Reformed Church for its
strength and beauty, surpassing all others both for soundness of Doctrine,
purity and comeliness of Worship and Apostolicalness of Government. A Church
for this reason, the more excellent, because most opposed; for as the hardest
things are the most excellent, so the most excellent are most aimed and shot
at. One sort perfectly hates, because they fear her, as long as she holds up
her head, they must lowr, fret and storm, and never perfect their projects; yet
they most malign and vilify her, who by all humane and divine Laws should live
in obedience to her. No Church has had more furious assaults made on her, but
her enemies were still repulsed: a Church of that firmness, that the Gates of
Hell, even when Satan was let loose, could not prevail against her. This is her
comfort, all the Reformed Churches of any good figure give her the right hand
of Fellowship, and of preeminence too. The very attempt then to defend this
Church is both Heroical and Christian, how weak soever the Undertaker be, he
may have and has a good heart, though his hands be feeble. It is true, Non
eget auxilio tali, nec defensoribus istis; yet if a Puny manage a Cause under
dispute with good success against an old experienced famous Lawyer pleading on
the other side, he himself gains a little esteem, but its great reputation to
the Cause; That Cause was good which so mean a man could defend. This is my
case, who am sufficiently sensible of mine own weakness, but very hearty to
defend that Church whereof I have been a Priest for full forty eight years,
ordained by one of your Lordship's Predecessors; for this I have suffered, and
do yet suffer in some sort; (sufferers may have leave to speak) this I will
defend, when I can do no otherwise, by Pen, while I am able, yet always and no
otherwise but permissu Superiorum, upon which account I tender this address,
begging your Ghostly Benediction, and that you will still repute me as,

Right Honorable and Right Reverend Father, Your most obedient Son and Devoted
humble Servant, John Shaw.

PREFACE.
THEY who understand what Reformation means, need not trouble themselves for a
solution to that captious silly demand of the Papists, Where was your Church
before Luther? for to reform is but to amend what is amiss, to correct and
rectify what is faulty, the same numerical subject still existing. Reformation
is like the renovation of a sinner, Ephesians. 4. 22, 23, 24. Saul the Persecutour
was the same man in kind with Paul the Professor. The Prodigal, who took his
journey into a far Country, was the same individual person who returned to his
Father's House a penitent. But because Reformation is sometimes necessary, yet
at all times dangerous, men being apt to run violently from one extreme to
another, jumping over the golden mean; therefore that it be warrantable it
ought to be duly circumstantiated by just methods and measures, which by the
good providence of God, and, I think, direction and guidance of his Holy
Spirit, hit on the right way, observing all requisites for the happy management
of that great work, when she reformed her self. For,

1. It was done by just and lawful Authority, the King and Clergy of the
Kingdom concurring, as our late excellent King observed, saying, I am confident
to make it clearly appear, that this Church did never submit, nor was
subordinate to the two Houses of Parliament, and that it was only the King and
Clergy who made the Reformation, the Parliament merely serving to help to give
the civil Sanction. His Majesty's Second Paper to Mr. Alex. Henderson, Part 1.
fol. 165.

2. They had good grounds to undertake the work; for that there was a necessity
of Reformation the Testimony of Adrian the Sixth, and Cardinal Pool, de Conc.
p. 86. will assure; besides, it was the desire or pretense of all Kingdoms in
the Western division of the Church; especially by the Emperors of Germany and
Principalities therein.

3. That they proceeded with due moderation is declared, Can. 30. For we
profess, as they did, our Separation was not from the Church of Rome but its
Errors; our Church is the same it was before, only differing as a garden
weeded from the same unweeded, as the body purged from the same unpurged. What
they did was to separate the precious from the vile, the dross from pure,
metal. The Church was then like Jeremy's Baskets of Figs, Jer. 24. there were
good, very good Figs in one, in the other the Figs were evil, very evil; so in
the Church there was on one side good, very good things, in another part evil,
very evil things; and our Reformers as they cast out the evil, so they were
very careful to retain the good.

What can we think then of our desperate Dissenters, who despise these
Dominions and speak evil of these Dignities, who have undertaken this work with
courage, and perfected it with a happy success, even to the envy and admiration
of the Christian world? Certainly there has not in any age, in any part of the
world, in that space of time, appeared such a race of Kings as our five
Reformed Princes, for all manly, Kingly and Christian accomplishments; neither
has there been a more Clergy-like Clergy than has been under their Reigns. We
can esteem them to be no other than such as S. Paul, Tit. 3. 10. notifies to be
men subverted, that is desperate, utterly perverted in understanding and will,
whom the Governor of the Church is to reject, excommunicate him after two
admonitions, which if they work no good effect, he is to reject with a severe
censure, take no pains to dispute with them any more, hearken no more to their
Replies and Objections (faith Diod. they have by their contumacy and
non-submission to their Governors put themselves into an helpless and hopeless
condition, they have excommunicated themselves without the Sentence of a Judge
(says Dr. Ham) there is no hopes of them, and so leave them to the judgment of
heaven, as has been accustomed.

What shall we say of half Conformists, conforming Non-conformists, who when
they take the fit can come to Church, and attend there by outward Conformity?
This will not clear them from the guilt of Schism, bonum est ex integra causa,
and it is to be feared there is hypocrisy in the case; outward conformity may
cheat the Law and mock men, but it cannot be an holy, living, acceptable
sacrifice to God; because the good works of Faith must be done with a good and
honest heart, in sincerity and truth, out of a pure heart, and of a good
conscience, and of faith unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1. and every duty must be done with
respect to God's Commandment.

But do you see them come to Church?
Thanks to the King who will have Laws put in execution; but when they come,
they come as Contrymen do to Fairs and Markets, some sooner, some later; and
with the same reverence that they enter their Inn, some not at the beginning,
or not till Sermon begin, some go out in an hurly burly after the Sermon is
ended; this is contrary to the Act of Uniformity, so that this coming to Church
is neither Christian nor Legal.

Tea, but many come early, neither loll nor lubber, nor hang down their heads
like a bulrush, as too many do, but hold out to the last, and demean
themselves, unless sometimes through inadvertency, as the Law requires.

This is confessed, but for all that it will not denominate them true Members
of the Church of England, because many of them dispute, scruple, deny and
undervalue the Authority of the Church, rebel against its Governors,
Associate, pack Juries in a design to ruin the Church, and, as opportunity
serves, take to a Conventicle, hold correspondence with its professed enemies,
familiarly converse with the excommunicated by the Church, and now and then
commend them for their piety: nay, we are sure several of these late
Conspiratours and Associatours were such as these, all which acted directly
contrary to the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church, and shall these pass for
true Conformists, who are but counterfeits? do not the grossest Fanatics
reproach and upbraid us with them, when they tell us tauntingly, Take up your
Church of England men? you often declaim against us as Traitors and Rebels,
but who are such now? Were not most of the Conspiratours such as observed and
kept the Church? They did so, in part, but we disown them, because we look upon
them as the most dangerous enemies to the Crown and the Church; being most
false to both by their juggling pretenses to them both. Church-Papists and
Church-Puritans do undermine the Church, whilst others profess an open
hostility against it; but a declared enemy without is not so dangerous as a
pretended traitorous friend within.

But what esteem is to be given to new Converts?
Thanks to the King again, my Lord Chief Justice, and the Reverend Judges: we
have old Converts too, if they prove not better than most of them have done we
have no great reason to confide in them. If the new be Converts indeed, they
are to be treated with all civility and by love without all dissimulation; to
be entertained and welcomed with the same rejoycings and caresses the Father
ordered for his penitent Son; to lay them on our shoulders as the Shepherd his
stray Sheep, because we have found what was lost: yet this we cannot either
with prudence or safety project till we have good security for their sincerity.
Let the old Converts be as forward and active for the service to the Crown and
Church as they have been for the Ordinances of the Junto 's, Keepers and
Oliver, as respective to the Episcopal Clergy as they were to the Presbyterian,
Trimmers, etc. then welcome good Friends, if not, adieu; but for this we need
not look into their hearts, they may be known by their fruits and overt Acts:
Let the new bring forth fruits worthy of repentance, promote the concerns of
the Crown and Church, as faithfully and strenuously as they have of the
Faction, of Conventiclers and Associatours, let them come and welcome; but if
they cross or the King's service, and dally in their duty, good night to them
also.

What is your opinion of those learned men, who think there is no determinate
Government of the Church?
I do not like a walking Church; but for this Mr. Alexander Henderson in his
Second Paper, thinks that is built on a sandy foundation which is not built
upon the foundation of Christ and the Apostles, and all they do so, who
content themselves with the Constitutions of the Church, and munificence of
Princes. I desire them to satisfy his late Majesty's Quaere, How can it be
made appear, that our Savior and his Apostles did so leave the Church at
liberty, as they might totally alter its Government at their pleasure? I think
if we once think of an ambulatory Church Government, at the next turn we must
expect an ambulatory Creed.

Lastly, Whereas we have had four successive excellent Princes to maintain the
Reformation, and many Parliaments too, and one King with his Clergy thought it
a necessary duty to reform this Church, its therefore the indispensable duty of
their Subjects to conform; not barely because it was established by their
authority, though that is necessarily required, but also from the nature,
reasons, excellency and goodness of the establishment it self, which to
evidence is the design of the following Treatise, both in regard of it self,
and in comparison of other late Models, both a priori and a posteriori; which
if I have sufficiently cleared to the satisfaction of any considering men who
are willing to be convinced or confirmed; I have done one part of a Christian
Priest of the Reformed Catholic Church of England.

No Reformation OF THE Established Reformation.
EVER since the Reformation was happily completed in this Kingdom, there has
been a great noise and bustle for a better in the chief Materials and
Superstructures thereof. It is confessed, Doctrine, Worship and Government are
the Essentials of a regularly constituted Church, each of which has been
impugned, traduced and defamed. The Doctrine has been least debated, though
too much; the Worship has been more scrupled, and with great heats opposed;
the Government most of all canvassed and bandied against. Upon which account,
this, being most contemned by all Sectaries, and least respected by many who
retain a kindness for the Doctrine and Worship, is first to be reflected on;
where it will not be amiss, before that be considered, to premise something in
general relating to all and every of the contested particulars.

CHAP. I.
Sect. 1. MAny things conducing to the well-being of a regularly formalized
Church may be and are in their kind alterable, which yet (as Mr. Calvin
observes, nec subinde, nec temere, nec levibus de causis) should not be
altered. Considered precisely in themselves they may, but if the reasons of
their Constitution be regarded, they are, practice and moraliter, unchangeable.
These terms are borrowed from a great Jesuit, yet made use of by several
reformed Divines in several important instances, and approved by them for this
reason, because the first reason of their origination is moral and perpetual.
Those of this nature being not merely occasional temporary Proviso's, which
often vary, either upon some sudden unexpected emergent, or for the avoidance
of some greater evil, but were ordained for the great end of Christian Society,
and in the ordination founded on the general rules of the Gospel. Whereupon
with the Greeks they passed as (...), Divine Constitutions for their
serviceableness to the great Concerns of public Religion; with the Latins, as
Divina Magisteria, Divinae Dispositiones, and Divinae Sanctiones, quae publica
Lege celebrantur, quas universa Ecclesia suscipit. Mr. Calvin says of them,
Sic sunt humanae ut simul sunt divinae, which (if I understand aright) has
this clear sense, They are humane in their composition, but divine in their
foundation, and reason of their Constitution.

Sect. 2. To attempt a second Reformation will be a great reproach to our first
Reformers, who confessedly were men of great learning, piety and zeal. For if
they failed in their undertaking either through ignorance, oscitancy or
interest, it will be readily concluded they designed only a Change, and
endeavored an innovation, which at once blasts their reputation, and justifies
all the imputations of their Romish Adversaries, who impeached them of novelty
and Schism; And if we set upon a new refined Reformation, as their former
charge will hardly be evaded, so with difficulty will we solve their latter
Objections, viz. Protestants have no Principles, or, which is as bad, are so
given to change they will not stand to their principles; whereas if we maintain
the Reformation to be only a Reduction of affairs to the primitive Apostolical
and Catholic order and state, we do not only thereby render a second
Reformation unpracticable, but also invalidate all the Romish contumelies and
calumnies. This was the avowed profession of our first Reformers, they would
only retrieve the Primitive Christianity, and settle this Church according to
the Catholic Pattern, concluding all other methods of Reformation to be
irrational and schismatical. Bishop Jewel in his famous Apology, p. 176, 177.
fully declares it, Accessimus quantum potuimus, asserting the whole and every
main part to be Apostolical and consonant to the judgment and practice of the
ancient Catholic Bishops and Fathers. This Apology not only Peter Martyr in
his Epistle prefixed to it, but also the learned Divines of Tigur, Bullinger,
Gualther, Wolphius, etc. have so highly approved, that they resolved, no Book
extant in the Protestant cause was comparable to it. Other eminent Transmarine
Divines might be mentioned, yea a Jesuit in his Pamphlet against Mr.
Chillingworth has confessed, that of all other courses in the Reformation that
which the English followed was the most effectual for the establishment of our
Religion against the Romish Church. The more shame for a presumptuous Ignoramus
publicly to remonstrate, We might as easily persuade the modish Ladies of
Court and City to Queen Elizabeth's Ruffs, as to gain him and his rabble to be
content with her Settlement of Religion.

Sect. 3. This Church being thus Reformed, and restored to its primitive
strength and splendor, to move for a second Reformation dissonant therefrom is
in effect to renounce the Communion of the Primitive Catholic Church; with
which all successive Churches ought to hold (as near as possibly they can) a
perfect correspondence, and where this cannot be obtained, by reason of some
cross circumstances to reflect upon it as an infelicity. The reason hereof is
obvious; for the primitive and successive Churches are but one Body, having the
same dependencies upon, and relation to the one Lord, one Faith and one
Baptism; and the Catholic visible Church and every regularly constituted
particular Church is an organized Body, having several Members for several
Offices, all which conspire for unity, that there be no Schism in the Body,
which certainly would happen, if successive Churches observe not the same Laws
and retain not the same Government, which the primitive maintained: For that
which makes the Church one, is the unity of these; and that which
distinguishes one Body or Society from another is the diversity of Laws and
Government, and so long as the same Laws and the same Government are in force,
the Body is still the same. Now as Jesus Christ is the same, yesterday, and to
day, and for ever, so is his Church, which at first was embodied into an
indeterminable Society. For the Scripture assures us the Church is a Body, and
that Body whereof Christ is the Head, Col. 1. 18, 24. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 15, 16.
which we profess to be Catholic, not only in respect of persons and place,
but also of time; The Catholicism whereof not only includes variety of
places, and multitudes of men, but is to be extended to universality of
succession. Now evident it is, that all Bodies Corporate, whether aggregate
(such as the Church is) or sole, by their succession are immortal as long as
they retain the same fundamental Laws, and remain under the first settled
Government. If therefore we condescend to a new Reformation distinct from the
first Settlement or opposite thereto, we design a schismatical separation from
the primitive Catholic Church, if we put it in execution we fall under the
same condemnation we sentence against the Romanists; this being the common
Protestant Apology, We have departed from Rome no farther, than she has from
the ancient Church and her self; and if there were no other reason for this our
secession (as there is, viz. That we embraced Christianity before S. Peter
planted a Church there, and when the Western apartment was set out by the
Fathers, this of ours had the honor of being one of the Seven Diocesan or
Patriarchal Churches, as well as Rome) yet even this would justify our
Separation, because it was our duty, to reunite our selves to the Catholic
Church, all several Churches being but, parts simulares, homogeneal parts of
the whole. Whereupon it follows that that Church which keeps closest to the
primitive Catholic Pattern, and holds the nearest alliance with it, is the
purest, and that several Churches having such a relation to, and dependence
upon it, neither particular persons, nor particular Churches, are to act as
divided Bodies by themselves (which is the ground of all Schism) but are to
teach, and to be taught, and to do all other Christian duties as parts
conjoined to the whole, and as Members of the same indeterminable Society.

Sect. 4. Suppose we should yield to another project of Reformation, the issue
will be confusion and desolation; for if we may conclude their intentions from
their former practices and present principles, the design is to overruled or
abolish all, their way was to strike at all, root and branch; and now they are
for removing the Laws. Their course of regulation is to raze the Walls of the
City if they can, if not to undermine them. Down with the Church of England is
the Popish Plot, and the direct way to this, is to divide it: All the Papist
Pot Cannons and Sophisms could never batter or shake our Jerusalem till some of
the Citizens thereof made breaches in it; Nay the Romanists never made an
approach upon it, till the Puritans had made an assault, these gave the other
both the opportunity and encouragement to attack it. Tush (say the Popelings)
let us level this, the Mushrome Sectaries will either fall in the ruins of
it, or else into our hands; they have been very serviceable Tools to us in all
our attempts, and no doubt will be so on to the end, if ever we effect it, and
then we know how to engage their tender Consciences, let it but appear to them
(which we will not fail to do) they can gain by the barter, they (forsooth)
have a new light, a new dispensation of Providence, and they must wait on
Providence and follow that light.

Sect. 5. What will the consequence of this work be, if it go on? Is it to
remove what is established before we resolve where to fix? This were certainly
mad work to demolish old Structures before we have advised of the fashion of
the new. Perhaps a model is fansied, but are all the Dissenters agreed about
it? When they had power too much, and time too long to resolve on a settled
way, even then they neither would or could unite, nor ever will or can. This we
are sure of, none of the schismatical Parties can have their own ends, unless
all be taken away, which crosses their humors or interests; and if this be
done by violence or by Law, not one of ten shall have his own ends, which
because they cannot obtain, their feuds will be high till one party get the
full mastery, and then the Plot of Union is marred. But who shall be taken into
this motion to have the benefit of it? If all, nothing can follow but confusion
without remedy, and scandal beyond an Apology; If one only Party (which yet is
unknown what it is) then the others if they dare will stand out and oppose it;
if not, they will murmur and repine, and thus expostulate; Why should they be
secluded Members debarred of the privilege of Comprehension? This (say they) we
can say for our selves, we were drawn into the Lines of Communication by the
persuasions and solicitations of their gratified Partisans and Comrades, and
though they say it, have as much promoted the good Old Cause. In this indeed we
are all agreed, we shall never enjoy Liberty of Conscience till we have power
to kill and take possession, neither likely to have Free Trade till, without
any respect to Law, we can plunder and sequester Malignants, and shall we who
are fully accorded with them be laid aside? If it be pretended the favored
will give good security for their good behavior for the future, (whereof there
is yet no evidence) we are as free as they, not doubting to affirm, we are the
more sober and peaceable, in whom there is a more sweet and gracious spirit of
love and zeal, and have been more constant to their principles than they; For
we can prove many of them were active Conformists, soon after proved
persecuting Presbyterians, then dough-baked Independents, and now again have
tacked about, and are Cologueing Compliers. However, if some be received into
favor and others rejected, there is plain partiality in the case, if all must
be entertained, a downright unaccountable Schism follows. But to wave the
Persons to be comprehended, what Things must be granted them for an Union? If
only a few (unsatisfactory) alterations be tendered, the project is baffled;
we should be as far from Unity as now we are, for then the clamor would be,
our burdens are a little mitigated but not removed, our grievances are abated,
but not fully satisfied, we must not leave an hoof behind us when we go out of
Egypt. If many and great alterations be submitted to, then they triumph in
their Conquests; they had not only Providence on their side but reason also
and argument; and then we shall hear of nothing in Pulpits, Clubbs and
Coffee-houses but stories of their mighty Acts, that their Enemies are now
under great convictions, that they are the Godly conscientious, Gods secret
Ones, and the good Old Cause must needs be God's Cause.

Having premised these Considerations, let us next reflect upon the matters on
which this motion of Reformation must proceed, and first of that which is most
opposed, the Government.

CHAP. II.
COncerning it, the most proper method will be to discuss these following
Propositions.

1. That Church Government is necessary. 2. That necessary Church Government
ought to be one and the same throughout the Christian world at all times. 3.
That one Church Government is Episcopacy, which has prevailed ever since the
first plantation of Christianity.
Sect. 1. Church Government is necessary for these reasons; The Church is a
Society which cannot subsist without it: It is a Body whose parts are
compacted, each whereof has its proper Office and Service, it is that Body
whereof Christ is the Head, who therefore will provide for its preservation and
peace, by placing Governors over it, which de facto he has done, 1 Cor. 12.
28. It is the House of God whereof Christ is the Lord; who has reserved this
prerogative to himself, to nominate and constitute the Stewards of his Household
and Family, as he did, Luke 12. 42. hence those commissionated by him are
called the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the Mysteries of God. Therefore
for any to exercise a power in his House who is not authorized by him, or to
reject those powers which he has entrusted to provide for his Family and rule
his House, is a most sacrilegious invasion and presumption. This House is his
Kingdom too, Matt. 13. 24, 31, 33, and 34. Temporal Monarchs, if they have
occasions to absent themselves from their Dominions, will always depute and
substitute such as shall take care for the preservation of their Kingdoms in
peace and tranquillity; certainly we have lower thoughts of Christ than we have
of an earthly Potentate, if we can conceive that he having designed and formed
a Kingdom of Heaven here upon Earth, would at his departure hence be so
careless and insensible of its after state and condition, that he would not
make sufficient provisions for its due management, stability and perpetuity;
especially since we are ascertained this his Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom,
to continue unto the worlds end, and he has promised so long he will be with
it, Matt. 28. ult. which he effectually ordered, Luke 22. 29. I have appointed
you a Kingdom. I who have full authority, for all power is given me, Matt. 28.
18. have appointed you as my Ambassadors, 2 Cor. 5. 20. to transact and
negotiate the affairs of my Kingdom in all quarters of the world, setting you
on Thrones, whereby ye are empowered by Commission to rule under me and for me;
and I have appointed all my faithful Servants to give you double honor and be
obedient unto you, 1 Timothy 5. 17. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12, 13. Heb. 13. 17. viz. I have
actually conferred the pre-eminence and dignity upon you, (not left my Kingdom
at random to be ordered by contingent and infinitely variable votings, not to
be new modelled 1536. when Jesuitism and Presbyterianism first peeped out, nor
to be reformed to confusion in 1641. nor to receive amendments in 1648. and a
refinement in 1680.) and made a full grant to you and your Successors for
ever: what was then demised stands still in full force and virtue, even the
more prudent and sober of the Sectaries will subscribe to this, there ought to
be a Government in the Church, that it continue not as a City without Walls, or
a Vineyard without a Hedge, and many of them have stood stiffly for the Jus
Divinum of the several opposite and contradictory Models.

Sect. 2. It being now proved that Church Government is necessary both in
respect of the appointment of its Head, and from the constitution and nature of
that Body, it will necessarily follow that that necessary Government be always
one and the same, because the Head and the Body is always one and the same. If
once we admit several contradistinguished Governments we must grant several
Heads and several Bodies. It can never be proved from Scripture God will
approve several Governments in his Church, or that he has permitted any
degrees or orders of men to alter that which was from the beginning. This is
one of the great crimes we charge upon the Pope, that he has altered the
Government of the Church, which will appear to be unjust if the Government
thereof be ambulatory and ad placitum. Article what we can against him on this
score, if there be no one perpetual determinate Government, he will easily
abate the impeachment; for he will clear himself by this, that he being a
Temporal Prince, as well as an Ecclesiastical Prelate, has power upon reasons
of State and Discipline to alter the Polity of the Church, if God has not
fixed a constant unvariable Form; For if it be arbitrary and precarious, why
should any Kingdom or State deny that power to him which they assume and usurp
themselves? In a well-ordered Kingdom, he is not only a Traitor who disclaims
the jus Regnandi of his natural Liege Lord and Prince, but he also, who,
without any authority derived from him, or contrary to his pleasure, shall
presume to exercise any of his Regalities, or powers annexed to and inherent in
the Crown; so they who will readily grant Christ to be Head of the Church, yet
withal pretend a power to form another Government than that which he observed,
and ordered in his Church, are formal Schismatics, and Traitors to Christ the
King of Kings. This is obvious if we reject the authority of the Church, we
renounce Christ's authority, and if we level and cashier the Catholic
Government, we schismatically divide and so far separate from the Catholic
Church; which receives that denomination not only in respect of that Faith,
which is universally professed, but also of the Government, which has been and
is universally observed. It is true there are many particular Churches in the
Catholic, which are distinct locally and in a foreign account, but really and
morally are only one, because they all and each of them adhere to the one
Lord, one Faith and one Baptism, and retain the unity of the Spirit in the bond
of Peace. For this distinction is not in essentials, or integrating requisites,
but only happens to them upon an extrinsecal and adventitious account,
inasmuch as it does not spring from any diversity or contrariety in Faith,
Sacraments or Government, but does only accrue to them from the diversity of
several Kingdoms, independent one from another, into which these are
incorporated. It is true there was some distinction of Churches before the
Kingdoms of the earth were Christian, yet this arose upon an accidental respect
from the respective Plantations. There is an ancient Tradition which is
probable, that every Apostle had his peculiar circuit appointed by Christ,
whereupon they, some sooner some later, dispersed themselves into Twelve
several Regions and parts in the world to fix their Plantations: if this be
admitted, they were necessitated to suit their Rules and introduce such Customs
as were most proper for the inhabitants and possessours of their several
Assignments; this then will afford a probable reason of that variation of
Orders and Customs in the Jewish and Gentile Plantations, who were of different
tempers and principles, whom the Apostles would endeavor to please, as S. Paul
witnesses of himself, 1 Cor. 9. 19. 20. Now though hereupon several
circumstantial observations were taken up in several places and Provinces; yet
still the same Faith and the same Government in the main was maintained. The
Conclusion then is, all the Churches of Christ, Primitive or Successive, have
but one Lord, one Head, one King, are but all one Body, one House, one Kingdom;
therefore they all, de jure, are under one Government, which what it is, is
next to be considered.

Sect. 3. That one necessary Government is Episcopacy or Prelacy, which because
it has prevailed in the Catholic Church ever since the first plantation of
Christianity, is therefore undoubtedly Apostolical, and if so, then certainly
Divine. To demonstrate this, the method will be to produce the Evidences in
order.

Number. 1. Prelacy was founded originally in the person of Christ, as the true
Messiah; It was foretold, Isa. 9. 6. the Government should be on his shoulders,
and this to be perpetual, v. 7. and this he founded in an imparity of
Ecclesiastical Officers, settling two distinct Orders for Church Ministeries,
the twelve Apostles and the seventy Disciples, which were not empty Titles, but
had distinct Offices, the former not only invested with dignities above the
other, but with power over them; as appears by the Election of Matthias. Now
Christ was entrusted with the Keys, Isa. 22. 22. and honored with the Scepter,
Psalm. 45. 6. God committing the Government to him as the great Shepherd and
Bishop of our Souls, 1 Pet. 2. 25. having the Key of David, Rev. 3. 7. This he
ordered by an immutable Law, which neither could expire or be repealed. For all
power was given to him both in Heaven and Earth, Matt. 28. 18. a power not
only to protect but to rule the Church, not only to rule the Consciences of
its Members, but externally to order and administer it, as a public Society, a
power to rule in himself, or by Proxy and Delegates, therefore it follows in
the exhibition thereof, that charge, Go ye, etc. v. 19. without demurr or
dispute; For I have the power to commission you, and do command you to execute
it; I have received it from my Father thus to exercise that power, and empower
you, and to it I was solemnly consecrated by the descent of the Holy Ghost, as
S. Luke expresses it, Act. 10. 38. God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the
Holy Ghost and with power, which at least imports thus much: As by the ceremony
of anointing, God promoted persons to high Dignities and Offices; so Christ was
regularly advanced to his prelatical Function, to be the first and chief Bishop
in the Christian Church, from whose fullness all others were to receive grace
for grace.

Number. 2. Christ having performed this Office in person, took care that after
his Ascension into Heaven, the holy Apostles should succeed him, whom he
separated for this Office, and over and above authorized them to depute and
substitute others to keep the succession of Rulers. This he consigned and
passed over to them, Luke 22. 29. I appoint you a Kingdom, as my Father has
appointed me; Accordingly at the octaves of his Resurrection he both confirmed
them, Joh. 20. 21. As my Father has sent me, even so I send you, and also
consecrated them by that solemn Form ever since observed in the Catholic
Church either in terms or words equivalent, ( Receive ye the Holy Ghost.) This
fully conserred on them the habitual power which actually they were not
licensed to exercise till (as he was) they were authorized by the descent of
the Holy Ghost, and endued with power, Luke 24. 49. which happened soon after
his Ascension, Ephesians. 4. 11. when he took off this suspension, and at Pentecost
sent the promise of the Father upon them, the Comforter, Joh. 15. 26. the Holy
Ghost, Act. 1. 8. And so they were baptized with the Holy Ghost, and with Fire
which sat upon each of them, Act. 2. 3. that every of them might be a
respective Plenipotentiary in the Administration of his Kingdom. This sitting
of the Fire upon each of them as it destroys the Erastian Supposition (for
the Apostles were neither Civilians nor common Lawyers, or Statesmen) so it
prejudgeth both the Papal and Presbyterian pretensions. The Papal, because it
sat not upon one, (S. Peter) which might have entitled him to a Jurisdiction
over the rest, but upon each of them, that what power one of them had, all and
each of them had. For before, Christ had warranted to them twelve Thrones, for
every Apostle one, Matt. 19. 28. as Camero has observed, that every one might
enjoy the same entire authority and supremacy. The Presbyterian, because it
sat not upon all as fellow Colleagues or Common-council-men, but as so many
single Persons, not that they could not, or did not for a time act jointly, but
that it sat upon all and every of them; so that the power was granted to them
jointly and severally, whereupon when they took their circuits to their several
apartments, they severally exercised their Function and Office. Bullinger's
conjecture is, We have no Canonical Records of the Government of the Church but
in the Acts of the Apostles, where the Platform is described and exemplified in
the person of S. Paul, from whose example and practice we are to conclude how
the rest of the Apostles first planted and then governed the Church, Bull. part.
2. Epit. Tempor. and rerum Tab. 6. de Apostal. etc. But evident it is S. Paul
acted as a single person without any dependence upon all or any of the Twelve.
Therefore (if this observation hold) all the rest planted and governed
severally; if this fail, the state and condition of their employment will
enforce it: For if they depended, after the College was broken up, upon any one
or the whole Community, they could not effectually have executed their
Commission, because upon every exigent, especially when they removed from one
Province to another, they must have had the consent of that one, or the whole
to license and authorize them, which was utterly impossible to obtain. For they
then being dispersed into several Regions of great distance one from another,
they must give up their work till at every occasion they had received orders,
whether to undertake and how to manage it. Very few or none of them knew where
to find S. Peter, if they did, they had no Post Office to transmit and return
expresses; and the College after it was dissolved, never assembled again.
Impossible therefore it was for them to execute their Commission validly under
those circumstances, unless each of them had been a Plenipotentiary by the
tenor thereof.

Number. 3. As Christ invested the Apostles with this power in a due subordination
to himself, so they in virtue of his investiture were to constitute others to
succeed them in the principals thereof. Confessedly the Apostolical Office was
to reside in the Church for ever. So J. O. Independ. Catech. p. 119. and the
ordained by them were of the same Order with them; so Walo, p. 43, 44, and 144.
upon which account the title of Apostles was allowed in Scripture to many of
those whom the Apostles had separated for the work of the Ministry. Calvin
speaks faintly to the point on 1 Cor. 4. 9. Tales interdum vocat Apostolos,
malo tamen, etc. yet at last he comes off more frankly, telling us plainly who
those ( us Apostles last) were, Qui in ordinem Apostolicum post Christi
Resurrectionem asciti fuerunt. As Apollo Sylvanus Pisc. etc. is very liberal,
S. Paul gave them this title, Eo quod eodem munere fungerentur. Saint James was
ordained Bishop of Jerusalem by the Apostles in the nineteenth of Tiberius
(says Blondel in Chron. p. 43.) the next year after Christ's Ascension by his
account, which, in his censure of the Pontifical Epistles, he affirms from all
antiquity: and Walo, p. 20. assures us he was none of the Twelve, yet he is
called an Apostle, Gal. 1. 19. which Blondel, Apol. pro sent. Hier. p. 50. thus
confirms; Saint Matthew the Apostle was a Bishop, and Saint James the Bishop
was called an Apostle, the Apostles as Governors over their Plantations were
called Bishops; and Bishops with respect to the ministerial Mission were called
Apostles. Timothy and Titus (says Walo, p. 44.) were styled Apostles, but in
very truth were Bishops by the same right, and of the same order, that those
are of this day, who govern the Church, and have authority over Presbyters.
This he undertakes to prove, p. 62. Bishops hold the chief degree in
Ecclesiastical Order, as heretofore they did who were called Apostles, but the
Apostles and the Presbyter-Bishops were of a distinct Order, as he labors to
assert from Act. 15. 6. 22, 23. in these words, Tunc dicebatur in Conciliis ex
utroque ordine compositis, etc. Then it was said of the Council molded up of
both Orders, that of the Apostles, and that of the Presbyters, id. p. 269. This
he seconds with an observation from the Greek Interpreters, p. 26, 27. who
concluded the Apostles were of an higher dignity than the Presbyters, fairly
resolving with them they were several Orders, p. 269. and that Ordination could
not be common to both, p. 229. Cast all this together, viz. The Order of the
Apostles was of higher dignity than that of Presbyters, the Apostles then were
in truth Bishops, these Bishops had command over the Presbyters, they were
distinct Orders, all this in the Age of the Apostles, and that Ordination could
not be common to both, the result will be, there was then a disparity in Church
Officers; the identity of Name will not conclude an identity in Office;
Presbyters were under the Jurisdiction of Bishops, to them, and them only
Ordination appertained, which is to assert from Scripture Diocesan Bishops in
the Prelatists sense. Calvin and Beza acknowledge there is a Subordination of
many Ministers to one President by Divine appointment, hoc fert natura, etc.
This we have from nature, the disposition of men requires it. So Call. l. 4.
Inst. c. 6. sect. 8. It was, it is, and ever will be necessary, ex Ordinatione
Dei perpetua, by the perpetual Ordinance of God there be one President. So
Beza, defen. p. 153. But has this President any power? yea a double power,
first, regendae communis actionis jus, to govern the common action, summon
Presbyters, appoint time and place, and propose matters, etc. The second is by
authority to execute what is decreed by common consent, Call. l. 4. Inst. c. 4.
sect. 2. But is he not capable of a standing power? yea, he may receive a
farther latitude from the positive Laws of men, who, without any violation of
Divine Ordinance, may settle it on one man for his life; For either in the days
of the Apostles or immediately after, the Episcopal Office became elective and
perpetual to one man. Quod certe reprehendi nec potest, nec debet, Bez. defens.
p. 141. and inde. But is not the application hereof merely humane? No, not
wholly, humanum, non simpliciter tamen sed, etc. I may call it humane, not
simply but comparatively, without any injury to the Fathers, or so many
Churches. In good time! The consectary of this (if I mistake not) is, to reject
this Presidentiary-power, as such, is repugnant to God's Ordinance, to reject
it upon the form of application is an injury to the Fathers and many Churches;
It is necessary from nature and the Divine Institution, and the fixing of it in
one person for life, to distinct acts and purposes, is Apostolical either in
the Apostles Age, or immediately thereupon, and is Catholic ever since. Very
right, for the conceit of a successive annual Presidency held by turns, is both
novel, never any Church for 1500 years received it, and also particular, those
who after did, are so few, that 500 for one have opposed it. All antiquity has
avouched several persons whose names are found in the Scriptures to have been
Bishops. These names following are in the Scripture, and Ancients of undoubted
credit have averred them for Bishops, as,

1. James, surnamed the Just, to have been Bishop of Jerusalem, we have
Blondel's Testimony for this from antiquity.

2. Timothy was Bishop of Ephesus, the Post-scripts (which Beza says were to
be seen in all the Manuscripts he could meet with) of the Epistles directed to
him, which if authentic, strongly prove this; if they be suspected, these
great names will make it good, Epiph. Hier. Chrysostom. Aug. Doroth. in Synop. who
lived in Dioclesian's time. Eusebius. l. 3. Eccl. Hist. c. 4. to whose authorities
Bucer. in 4. ad Ephesians. Pelican. in 1 Timothy 1. Zwinglius de Eccles. and Walo, as
before is cited, have subscribed; but that which fully clears it, is, that the
Fathers assembled in Council at Chalcedon have witnessed that until their time
twenty seven Bishops had successively sat at Ephesus from Timothy; where it
was granted so many there were, though it was disputed whether all of them in
that time were ordained at Ephesus, or some of them ordained at Constantinople.

3. Titus was Bishop, Prelate of Crete, as the Scripture declares, Tit. 1.
where the two claimed Prelatical powers are found to be settled on him; that of
Ordination, verse. 5. in every City of that Territory or Region, and that of
Jurisdiction in the same verse, to set in order the things that are wanting or
left undone, as we translate the words, but (...), may rightly be rendered,
Correct things out of order; which supposes a power to censure, and reform
irregularities. The voice of Antiquity is clear here, Theod. Hier. Chrysostom. the
Scholiast, etc. of both of them we have good warranty for their authority over
the Clergy. S. Paul, 1 Timothy 1. 3. besought Timothy to send out a prohibition
against false teachers, and he commanded Titus sharply to rebuke vain talkers
and deceivers, and if they will prate on, to stop their mouths, and to silence
them, Titus 1. 11, 12, 13.

4. Onesimus spoken of, Col. 4. 9. and Philem. 10. was from a Servant to S.
Paul advanced to be Deacon, Hier. advers. er. Joh. Hier. and from a Deacon to
be Bishop, Eusebius. l. 3. c. 30.

5. Linus, mentioned 2 Timothy 4. 21. and Clemens, Phil. 4. 3. were Bishops of
Rome by universal Tradition. Diodate upon these words [ my yoke fellow and
fellow-labourer] notes, The Apostle here speaks to the chief Pastor, who was
to read the Epistles directed to him in the public Assembly, Bidel. Exerc. in
Ign. Ep. c. 3. is very clear. Clemens after the death of Linus and Cletus,
being the only survivor, alone retained the name of Bishop, all others being
styled barely Presbyters, for which he assigns these reasons; First, for that
he alone remained of all the fellow-la-bourers with the Apostles; Secondly,
because the distinction of Bishops and Presbyters then prevailed. This was in
the Apostles times, for Clemens was Bishop of Rome, an. 94. as Gualt. reckons
in his Chronol. when Simon the Canaanite was living, as Bulling. thinks in his
Annot. in Tab. 6. certainly S. John was, for he died not till an. 102. the
ninth and last year of Clemens.

6. Simeon, named, Act. 15. 14. (after his Kinsman James the Brother of our
Lord was martyred) consecrated his Successor at Jerusalem, an. 63, or 64.
Eusebius. l. 3. c. 10. and 16. so that for full eleven years he was of an
inferior Order, for so many passed after the mention of him in the Acts.

7. Dionysius spoken of, Act. 17. 24. was the first Bishop of Athens, Eusebius. l.
3. c. 4.

To these may be added Archippus Bishop of Coloss; Apollo of Corinth;
Epaphroditus of Philippi; Tychicus of Chalcedon; Sylvanus, Sosthenes, etc. but
it will be sufficient to review the Catalogue of the four Patriarchal Sees.

1. After James, the first Bishop of Jerusalem, fourteen of the Circumcision
succeeded him, Eusebius. l. 4. 5. whereof Justus was the last, who died an. 131.
which is full twenty years before Blondel's Ara.

2. At Antioch, after S. Peter, Euodius was Bishop till an. 98, then Ignatius
till an. 108; after him Cornelius, who died before 140.

3. Eight successive Bishops sat at Rome till 140. in which year Higinus was
consecrated Antonini Pii Tertio.

4. At Alexandria five are accounted from S. Mark, the last whereof, Eumanes,
was ordained, an. 134.

Number. 4. That all these had the same power which is now claimed by Bishops is
evident from Rev. 1. 20. where, as the seven Angels of the Asian Churches are
distinguished from the Churches, so every of those Angels had a power of
Jurisdiction in their respective Churches to redress abuses. For why should
they be particularly taxed for scandals and irregularities therein if they had
no power to reform and remedy them? It seems too severe to charge neglects on
them, who have no power to take cognizance of crimes and to correct them. That
those Asian Churches were fixed and determinate, distinct Churches, the
Presbyterians cannot deny, who affirm they were governed by Presbyters; for
that must needs be a determinate Body which is governed by one or by many. The
Independents shift (we find here a Congregational Church wherein were many
Congregations, many Ministers, many Believers, many Pastors) is frivolous; for
there might, and many such there were, yet these might be and were under one
President over them in Chief; for such as these many are to be found in our
Cities where there are Bishops to rule them, and it is evident that those
Prefects were and did exercise authority over both Laity and Clergy, from the
rule given to Timothy by S. Paul before alleged. John Frigivile of Gaunt writ
his Reform. Pol. an. 1593 wherein he avers, p. 64, etc. Q. Elizabeth maintained
the Government and State of the Clergy in England as God had ordained in the
Law, and confirmed in the Gospel; for said he, p. 14. Though the Apostles were
equal among themselves concerning authority, yet no sooner was the Church
increased but different degrees began: S. Paul charged Timothy (who was Bishop
of one of those Seven Churches) not to admit an accusation against a Priest;
therefore he might admit or reject an accusation against a Priest, and
therefore he had Jurisdiction even over a Priest. Dr. Raynolds's Conference
with Heart, p. 535. thus states it, In the Church at Ephesus were sundry Elders
and Pastors to guide it, yet among those sundry there was one Chief, whom our
Savior calls the Angel of the Church, (here then is our Savior's
approbation for the Chiefty of the Order) and this is he, whom, afterward in
the Primitive Church, the Fathers called Bishop.

Number. 5. The Apostles having ordained Bishops to succeed them in the Government
of the Church, they who were so ordained were thereby authorized to ordain
others, and so on to the end of the world, Matt. 28. ult. which in the judgment
of the best Interpreters imports, Though the Apostles continued not in their
Persons, yet should in their Successors. That there should be such a
Succession is concluded from Scripture, Act. 1. 20. must one be ordained to
take Judas his Bishopric, which by Divine disposition fell upon Matthias, who
(as Eusebius. reports l. 2. c. 1.) was of the Seventy, an inferior because a
distinguished Rank to that of the Apostles, which seems probable from v. 21. it
being the employment of the Seventy to accompany and attend them. Saint Paul
appointed Timothy to depute faithful persons to officiate in the Church, 2 Timothy 2. 2. yea so great care had the Apostles for a Succession, that, as
Clemens reports, they Note, Lift, or Catalogue of approved men who should
succeed the present Bishops in each Church.

Number. 6. In the Apostles times, certainly immediately after, there were three
Orders in the Church, not as Calvin (who first conjured up Lay Elders to be his
officious Agitatours) recites them, nor as Mr. Dallee conjectures, but as they
are accounted in the Church of England, Bishops, Priests and Deacons. Indeed it
is very likely there was first but one Order, the Apostolical or Episcopal, the
Apostles or Bishops, discharging all Church Administration and Offices. But
they having a power entire in themselves and radically, they were enabled to
derive and communicate what they thought fit for the necessities of the Church
to others: Accordingly the Church increasing, as it is recorded in the Acts,
the Order of Deacons was instituted, who were not empowered only to collect,
receive and distribute Alms to the necessities of the poor, but to higher
Ecclesiastical Offices. For we find Philip both preached and baptized. Acts 8.
35, 38. That this Philip was not the Apostle, but the Deacon; Calvin thinks
so, because he supposes the Apostles were not then removed from Jerusalem;
Gualter is positive from the Testimony of Epiph. de Sim. etc. and all ancient
Writers. Certainly Saint Cypr. ad jub. is clear; A Philippo Diacono, quem iidem
Apostoli (Petrus scil. and Johannes) miserant, baptizati erant. Beza, reckoning
the Pastoral Offices and duties, adds, Sub quibus, etc. under which we
comprehend the Administration of Sacraments and the blessing of Marriage, from
the perpetual use of the Church, in which particulars, the Deacons often
supplied the place of the Pastors, so he, Confess. c. 5. Aphor. 25. This he
attempts to prove from Joh. 4. 2. 1 Cor. 1. 14. with him concurrs Bull.
Fleming. Magdab. who all received it from Just. Mar. Ambr. Hter. Aug. the Greek
Par. and Tert. who is most express, Dandi quidem, etc. The chief Priest, that
is, the Bishop has the first right of administering Baptism, then the
Presbyters and Deacons. How long these two Orders continued in the Church is
not fully resolved; Some conceive from Act. 14. 23. about an. 49. Claudii
Septimo, the third Order, that of Presbyter was superinduced; others conjecture
not so early: however Cities and their Territories submitting to the Scepter of
Christ, Presbyters were constituted before all the Apostles died, yet the
Bishops still reserved the power of Ordination, and by consequence of
Jurisdiction, as in the Greek Chruch even to this day. Bishops alone Ordain, as
Arcud. de Concord. l. 6. c. 4. sect. Igitur, observes. Indeed in the Latin
Church Presbyters did lay on hands with the Bishop at the Ordination of a
Presbyter, yet this was observed, not for its validity, but for its solemnity
and attestation. For the African Fathers who ordered it, ascribed the entire
power to the Bishop, Cod. Afric. c. 55. 80. and even at Rome besore S. John's
death Presbyters were settled in several Parishes by Enaristus. Caron. p. 44.
and therefore we may believe before that the same was done in earlier converted
Churches. Mr. Tongue in his Notes on S. Clem. 1. Ep. ad Cor. out of a Book which
Mr. Petty brought from Greece has this Sentence, S. Peter was in Britain,
(...), settled Churches by laying hands on Bishops, Priests and Deacons. It
will not be amiss to superadd how far the Waldenses concurred in judgment upon
this case with the Church of England, which we find Parsons third part of the
Three Conversions of England, cap. 3. p. 44. who relates from Vrspurg. Trithem.
Antomin. and others that they only approved three Ecclesiastical Orders (at
which his tender Conscience was moved) viz. That of Deaconship, Priesthood and
Bishops; which is very probable, for the Fratres Bohemi, to continue a
succession of Bishops, sent twelve men to the Waldenses in Austria to be
ordained Bishops by their Bishops, which was accordingly done, and Corranus, a
Spaniard, one of the Waldenses flying thence into England was retained a
Preacher at the Temple, and dedicated a Dialogue to the Lawyers there, an.
1574. in the close whereof he makes a confession of his Faith, where he
declares his judgment herein, I hold (says he) there be diverse Orders of
Ministers in the Church of God, viz. Some are Deacons, some Priests, some
Bishops, to whom the instruction of the People and the care of Religion is
committed. This we are sure of, S. Bernard complains heavily many Bishops were
of their Communion. This was the primitive Establishment, Conc. Cart. 3. and 4.
Chal. Act. 1. for which reason Nazian. in Vita Basil. enforms us, that he rose
to his Bishopric (...), By the order and rule of spiritual ascent, one degree
after another: So S. Hier. writes of Nepot. in Ep. Fit Clericus and per solitos
gradus, etc.

Number. 7. If S. Augustine's known and generally approved rule be admitted, then
the Order of Bishops is truly Apostolical, because maintained in all
Apostolical Chruches, before any general Council had determined it; And Tert.
his Sorites will make it good, which was, that is truest which is first; that
is first which was from the beginning; that was from the beginning which was
from the Apostles; that was from the Apostles which was inviolably and
religiously observed in all Apostolical Churches: Calvin speaks fairly to the
case, and so does Beza too, (if their words may be taken who have tricks to eat
them in) the former says, the Bishops of the ancient Church made many Canons
with that circumspection they had nothing almost contrary to the word of God in
their whole Economy, l. 4. Instit. c. 1. sect. 14. but more fully thus, they
did not frame any other form of Government in the Church than that which God
prescribed in his word. The latter averreth, what was then done was done optimo
Zelo; if so, then they did it from warranty either from the Scripture or
universal Tradition. S. Hierome himself once said, it was an Apostolical
Tradition, and when he said it was a Custom, he proved it a good one, because
ordered for a good end, as a safe remedy against Schism; and an Apostolical
Custom, because taken in the Apostles times, when one said, I am of Paul, etc.
which happened an. 58. The disparity of Bishops and Priests was so religiously
maintained in the primitive Church, that the Fathers in the Council of Chalc.
Act. 1. adjudged it sacrilege to bring down a Bishop to the degree of a
Presbyter, and the Doctrine of parity was condemned as flat Heresy in Aerius,
because he positively affirmed that there was but (...), etc. one Order, one
Honor, one Dignity, in the Priesthood. Dr. Crack Defens. Eccl. Anglic. contra
Arch. Spal. p. 242, 243. Bishops then as they were settled in matricibus
Ecclesiis, the Apostolical mother Churches, so have been continued in all
successive Ages without any considerable opposition for 1500 years, which is so
strong and cogent an argument to some who have not been over-fond of
Episcopacy, they have resolved it unanswerable, since, the Order has been
canvassed by some, yet is still retained either in the Name, or Thing in all
the Eastern and Southern Churches; generally in the Western and Northern,
reformed and others, unless in two or three petty Associations in comparison of
the rest, where by reason of some cross circumstances it cannot be obtained,
though highly approved and much affected by most of their learned men, never
disowned or abominated by any but those whose zeal for the good Old Cause is
immoderate, S. Augustine's expression, insolentissima insania, insolent madness.

Number. 8. If these Structures be built upon the Foundation of the Apostles,
Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner Stone, the Fabric is as firm as
Mount Sion which may not be removed. For if the Apostles did settle Bishops in
their several Plantations, and these such as the Prelatists plead for, then
that is the one necessary Government to be retained in the Church. For the
Apostles being inspired by the Holy Ghost, they did then act and order the
Church according to his directions. Amesius himself resolves, what is
Apostolical Stands by Divine Right, his words are, Med. Theol, l. 2. c. 15. n.
28. The Apostles were acted by the Divine Spirit no less in their Institutions
than in the very Doctrine of the Gospel propounded by word or writing. This he
delivers to assert the Divine Authority and unalterableness of the Lord's day,
and will therefore hold here. For if Episcopacy stand in the Church by the same
authority that the Lord's day does, which Dr. Hammond has fully proved, then
it has the same Divine Authority for its Establishment. This King James saw,
and so, Premonition, p. 44. is very positive, That Bishops ought to be in the
Church I always maintained as an Apostolical Order, and so the Ordinance of
God. The Dissenters, who allow of Church Government as such, have often
declared what concerns the rule of Government in the Church by Officers
appointed by Christ is unchangeable. Now that the Bishops are those Officers
has been evidenced from Scripture Rules and Precedents, and confirmed by the
suffrage of a cloud of Witnesses, who as they accord in their Testimonies, so
were faithful unto death; some whereof were the chosen Witnesses of Christ's
Resurrection; some were immediate Successors to those ordained by the
Apostles; others of the highest reputation in the Church, for testifiers of
Catholic Tradition; all of them had, and still have such credit in the
Christian world, that their attestation has ever since been reverenced and
accepted in momentous matters of Religion, such as the religious observation of
the Lord's day, the number and integrity of the Canonical Books of holy
Scripture, the Baptism of Infants, etc. Episcopacy at least stands upon the
same grounds with these, if these upon the true measures of Piety and Religion
be not alterable, neither is it. The most learned of the Dissenters have been
forced to use the same proofs for these which we do for Episcopacy, when they
have not done so, they have been baffled in a good cause, as hereafter may be
exemplified. The Conclusion then is, to attempt a Reformation of Episcopacy by
its extermination is contrary to the sure and standing Rules of Christianity.

CHAP. III.
THIS is farther to be discussed in point of prudence, whether the change or
standing thereof will conduce more to the public interest, which may be
dispatched by these observations.

SECT. 1. They who to the diminution or abolition of Episcopacy, have or would
set up new models of Church Government, are either the Erastians, the
Presbyterians, the Independents or the Pontificians. The three former were
hatched since an. 1510. the last was long of hammering, but was never rightly
cast till Julius the Second molded it at Lateran, and of a cracked piece made
it whole. Now every of these will prefer Episcopacy, caeteris paribus, before
any of the other Platforms but their own espoused Darling, which they would
have all to accept, because complying with and favoring their wordly designs
and interests. But ask seriously any of the more observing and understanding
men, which of the Claimers they would rather incline to, provided they could
not possibly procure their own to bear the sway, they will fairly take to
Episcopacy.

Number. 1. The Erastians will by no means join with the Pontificians, because
they challenge and usurp a power to take cognizance in causes merely Civil, in
ordine ad spiritualia: Not with the Presbyterians, because they also claim the
same, sub formalitate Scandali, both of them maintain the power both of make
and confirm Ecclesiastical Laws as originally and radically in their supreme
Judicatures; the Civil Magistrate is only to execute them, which he must do
upon their Significavit's and Writs of Requisition at his peril, otherwise he
shall be clogged with their Sentences of Excommunication. Nor do they much
fancy the Independents, because they will not endure the Civil Magistrate to
interpose in Church matters, nor have the least stroke in externals of
Religion. As for the Bishops, though it be a grievance that they sometimes
meddle in matters of a mixed nature, yet because they know, that what they act
in these cases is by authority derived from the Civil Magistrate, according to
the known standing Laws, they esteem Episcopacy as the most safe and expedient
form; and so Bishops may stand for the present, till they can by rebellion
grasp again all Civil and Ecclesiastical power in their clutches.

Number. 2. Independents utterly dislike both Erastians and Pontificians, and
though they can associate with the Presbyterians at present, yet they hold no
good opinion of them. In a Book entitled, Saint John Baptist, they heavily
declaim against them, saying, They had established a Dagon in Christ's Throne,
had stinted the whole worship of God, etc. at last it came to this, they had
rather the French King, yea the Great Turk should rule over them. In a Book
called, The Arraignment of Persecution, they declared, If ever the
Presbyterians rule in chief, an higher persecuting spirit would be found in
them than they had felt from the Bishops: J. O. has excellently decyphered
these. Number. 3. The Presbyterians grin at them all. Beza is as angry at Erastus,
Socinus and Morellius, as the Pope; Mr. Henderson's tender Conscience started
at the thought of them. The Books are commonly to be had, wherein they often and
sadly complained, all that they could expect for their expenses of Blood and
Treasure (none of their own) was to be recompensed with greater grievances, and
more dangerous licentiousness (which is too true) than they ever mourned for
(which is very false, for most of them were colloguing compliers) under the
Government of King and Bishops. At last they cried out, Matters were come to
that pass, they had exchanged a bad Religion for none at all. See Excom. Excom.
p. 18. and inde. And Edwards his Gangrene.

Number. 4. The Papists of all men had the advantage, but the more sober
considering men among them, have expressed, That all their purchases of
Proselytes were no compensation for those miseries they had sustained, and
still feared from the Junto's, and that they were much more happy under the
former Government which secured their civil Liberties and Birthrights.

SECT. 2. But let it be for once presumed, that each of those Models had
somewhat good, yet withal recollect that the Constitution of this Church is of
so excellent a mixture with the choicest ingredients, that it will effect those
great ends so much pretended by them more strongly and obligingly, if it may
attain its just value and respect. For,

Number. 1. The Erastians are to be commended for their pretended care and
endeavors that the power of the Civil Magistrate be not infringed by any
Ecclesiastical Usurpation. So far good, if they were not possessed, or rather
pretend only to be, with fears and jealousies, that this Church approved some
principle to the diminution of the Civil Power, which what it is none can with
any color of reason conjecture, unless this be it, that whilst she fully
renders to Caesar the things that are Caesar's; she is still cautious to
reserve to God the things that are God's. Erastus the first Founder of that
Order had no prejudice against any thing determined in this Church upon that
score, if we respect either the motives which induced him to quarrel the
Allobrogian Model, or the Arguments he framed against it.

The Motives were,
1. He had observed that Calvin had so cunningly contrived it, that he and his
assisting Ministers could upon every occasion overtop the Statesmen. The
artifice lay herein, he took for a blind only six Ministers, but twelve
Syndicks, yet so that the Ministers were to continue for life, but the
Statesmen to be annually chosen, whereby he conceived these changling Officers
would be so wary as not to cross the standing Moderatours, which so happened,
as he himself signified in his Epistle to Bulling. Semper fuimus in is it a
promiscua colluvie superiores, We had always the better in that rifraff Junto.

2. He knew those chosen Officers had neither age, or experience, nor judgment,
nor manners (a full description of the late Lay Elders) to enable them to
sustain so great an employment with credit and honor.

3. He was provoked, that a Malecontent English fugitive had liberty to discuss
this Thesis, viz. That in every well-ordered Church this Government was to be
retained, in which the Ministers with the concurrence of the Elderships should
have the power of excommunicating all offenders, even Princes themselves:
Hereupon in a just indignation he expressed his abhorrence of this bold
seditious Proposition, yet with great indiscretion he causelessly vented his
wrath against Excommunication as it was a Church Discipline.

His Arguments improved by his Followers are these,
He supposed Excommunication did totally cut off the excommunicated from the
internal and invisible Communion of the Church; whereupon his Followers argued.
If the power of Excommunication be in the Church Officers, then it lies in
their power to save or damn men. But his supposition is false, and the
inference of his Followers is wild, as one (and the most learned) of them has
observed; for, he says, finis hujusmodi disciplinae, etc. The end of this
discipline (not final Sentence) was (is so still) that the censured being
deprived of the spiritual privileges of the Church, they might be humbled to
salvation. This is the whole truth and nothing but the truth, for its only a
bar from the external visible Society of Believers, not to exclude men from
heaven, but to incline them to put themselves in a capacity to be received
again into the peace of the Church, for the enjoyment of those great privileges
of holy commerce, which all men religiously affected earnestly desire and
value. A method of Discipline which Christ and his Apostles thought proper to
reduce and reclaim sinners. It is medicinal in Saint Augustine's expression,
To. 9. Sermon. de Poeniten. med. (if that Tract be his) ordained and applied for
edification, not destruction; if for destruction, it is for that of the Flesh,
that the Spirit might be saved, 1 Cor. 5. 15. or its a Chastisement, the
censured are thereby chastised of the Lord that they should not be condemned
with the world, 1 Cor. 11. 32. which Chastisement is not sweet or joyous for
the present, but grievous, yet yields the peaceable fruits of righteousness
to them that are exercised thereby, Heb. 12. 11.

2. Excommunication (say they) is a censure inferring a civil Penalty,
therefore if the Church makes use of it, she enlarges her Phylacteries by an
encroachment on the civil Power.

But where do those wrathful Objectours find this? or how can they prove it?

It was always reckoned in the Catalogue of spiritual gifts, practiced by the
Church for spiritual ends and uses, and exercised upon the members of the
Church, qua tales, in that capacity only; if, upon contempt hereof, a civil
Penalty was incurred, this proceeded not from the quality and nature of the
censure, but from the authority of the civil Magistrate, who so far respected
the Church, that he made provisions against the contempt of her Discipline.
That which the Church aims at, is either to reduce the offender, or to warn
others, or to discharge her duty in discountenancing and disowning dangerous
prevailing Heresies, Schisms and Scandals; all which are of spiritual
concernment and cognizance.

3. The Bishops claim this power by Divine Right, and why not? Forsooth, this
is contrary to the Oath of Supremacy, and sets up two Supremes in one Kingdom.

This is an high Charge: I am persuaded if the great Turk was acquainted with
this noble Argument, he would in a rage destroy all the poor Christian Bishops
in his Empire, or else he would scorn and deride it, as it justly deserves.
For the Argument runs thus, Ministers by a Divine Right challenge a power to
baptize Proselytes, communicate Christians, and do other offices belonging to
their Functions, Therefore they set up two Supremes in one Kingdom: or thus,
The Scripture declares, the Holy Ghost made them Overseers to feed the Church
of God (sure they may pretend to Divine Right who derive their title from the
Holy Ghost) Therefore the Scripture contradicts that Supremacy which it
establishes. But in sober sadness! did none of the first Christian Emperors,
or after Kings understand their Religion and Prerogative? did they ever declare
the Imperial and Episcopal power were incompatible? were they all so blind they
could not epsy this so obvious an inconsistency? or did any of our own great
Councils before that of 40. ever make such a determination? As for our own
Kingdom, we may without disparagement to their great wisedoms, compare many of
our Kings with the ablest of any or all of them; King Henry the Eighth was a
wise Prince, one that would not bate an Ace of his Sovereignty, yet he never
scrupled at the Divine Right of Episcopacy. Q. Elizabeth was as jealous of her
Prerogative, and as zealous for it, as the highest and most masculine Spirit,
yet she reverenced and maintained the Order. The greatest for Learning and
Judgment the Father and the Son were as Prelatical as the Prelatists. What King
James his opinion was of Episcopacy is before related, what it was concerning
his Supremacy, which he cogently asserted, he thus expressed, Premonition, p.
108. It consists not in making Articles of Faith, but in commanding obedience
be given to the word of God, in reforming Religion according to his prescribed
will, in assisting the spiritual Power (this is to be noted) with the temporal
Sword, in procuring due obedience to the Church (mark this too) in judging and
cutting off all frivolous Questions and Schisms, as Constantine did; and
finally in making a decorum to be observed in all things, and establishing
Order in all indifferent things. King Charles the First of blessed memory has
above and beyond all others resolved the case, in his answer to Henderson's
Papers, in his Reply to the Answer of the Isle of Wight Divines, Rel. Car. fol.
691. and in his final Answer, fol. 709. Sir Henry Spelman in his large History
of Titles, p. 157. thus stated it. God has committed the Tabernacle to Levi,
as well as the Kingdom to Judah, and though Judah has power over Levi, as
touching the outward Government, even of the Temple it self, yet Judah meddled
not with the Oracle and the holy Ministry, but received the will of God from
the mouth of the Priest. This is evident; God, for the promoting of Piety and
Justice among men, has ordained two distinct Powers, the Regal and the
Sacerdotal, which, in the times of the Patriarchs, were formally united, and
inseparably followed the first born of the male kind in every Family. This he
seemed to alter in the persons of Moses and Aaron, investing Moses the younger
Brother with the Regality, Aaron the elder in the Priesthood, both these
received their Commissions from God, Number. 16. Every power is the Ordinance of
God, but the Regal as Supreme, the Sacerdotal as Subordinate, which
subordination is not essential or causal, but moral, by virtue of God's
Constitution, and accidental for Order's sake. Certainly God, who gives all
power, can order a subordination of powers derived from him, the one to be
superior, the other inferior; and God was pleased to dispose the distribution
of those under the Mosaical dispensation, that as the Priests were not to usurp
the Regal, (for Abimelech was Servant to Saul, 1 Samuel 22. 12. and David was
Lord to Nathan, 1 Reg. 1. 24.) so neither were the Kings to execute the
Sacerdotal Function, but were bound to consult their Priests and Prophets, as
Joshua was Eleazer, Number. 27. 21. by God's appointment, and David, did Abiathar,
1 Samuel 23. 6. We are sure Saul, Jeroboam, Vziah were severely checked for
exercising such Acts as formerly belonged to the Priests, not that they were
debarred from regulating and providing for the due discharge of the Priestly
Offices: for that is a part of their duty, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. and Arist. l. 1.
Ethic. c. 13. was herein Orthodox, (...), but they are to permit the Priests
the exercises of their Functions, and in matters of Religion to require the Law
at their mouths, Mal. 2. 7. which all Christian Kings have always granted. Mr.
Hobbs owneth, that after the Ascension of our Lord, the power Ecclesiastical
was in Apostles, after them in such as they had ordained, and so delivered
downward to others ordained by them, and the great Erastian name has yielded
them a power to decide cases of Conscience, and to declare what is lawful,
what not; This was respectively done, but he fell far short of the mark; for
certainly to baptize Proselytes is a larger portion of power than bare
interpreting or teaching the Law, even a power to admit Members into the
Christian Society, and in all reason, they who have power to admit, have power
occasionally to exclude, hence that Gentleman was forced to confess, they had
power to bind and loose, which in Scripture signifies to forbid and decree,
which is more than any Casuist or Preacher as such pretends to, and is rather
proper to a Legislative or Judicial Power, which was sometimes exercised by the
Church, as when the Apostles upon a complaint, where no less men than S. Paul
and Barnabas were Advocates for the Plaintiffs, passed an obligatory Decree,
Act. 15. 28. and 16. 4. That Precept or Permission, ( Tell the Church) at least
implies the Church had then power to take cognizance of trespasses, and to say
the civil Magistrate is that Church is ridiculous: for then the sense would be,
Tell the trespass to Constantine three hundred years after it was committed,
for till then there was no certainly known Christian Emperor, and Christians
were not by the Discipline of the Church to seek for remedy at heathen
Tribunals in the first instance. Now as there was a subordination of these
Powers, so there was a distinction; the one was the power of the Sword,
committed to the civil Magistrate, to reward well-doers, and to punish
evildoers, of all kinds, Romans 13. 4. an Heretic, a Schismatic, an Idolater,
or Blasphemer, as well as a Thief, a Murderer, or a Traitor; and this has its
immediate effect upon the outward man, body and goods, with reference to the
concerns of this life, Ezr. 7. 26. the other is the power of the Keys, to
labor in word and Doctrine, to exhort and rebuke with all authority, to rule
well in spiritual concerns, to bind and to loose, 1 Timothy 1. 17. Tit. 1. 5.
Matt. 16. 19. the proper operation whereof is upon the Soul with reference to
the world to come. There is a difference, says the above cited Joh. Frig.
Refor. Pol. between Dominion and Jurisdiction; neither the Apostles, nor chief
Bishops exercised Dominion, but their Offices, having Jurisdiction, p. 16. as
in France (says he, p. 17.) the King has the civil Dominion, the Parliaments
the Jurisdiction, so in England the Queen has the Dominion, but the Bishops
the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; hence Arist. l. 10. Ethic. c. 9. n. 10.
resolves, Legislatours are differenced from Practitioners of Faculties, (...),
etc. The Professors are to Act, Legislatours to prescribe rules for acting.
The King's power is the supreme, that of Priests subordinate, which difference
proceeds not from the natural excellency of the one power above the other, but
from the all-wise disposition of God, who is the chief power empowring, as he
is said to be, natura naturans. The Bishops with their subordinate Ministers
are the Executours of Christ's last Will and Testament, the King is the
Supervisor, and the Judge too, to grant them Letters of Administration. Bishops
and Priests are the Ministers of Religion, Kings are the Rulers of it and them.

The substance of the whole is, the true Sons of the Church of England are the
sole Assertors of the King's Supremacy, not only in expressions and
complement, but in fact and real operation, not upon reasons of State, or
dictates of Prudence, but the rule of Conscience, which none of the Dissenters
therefrom will allow. Not the Erastians, for they play at fast and loose with
the King's Supremacy, and by distinctions and limitations fix it certainly no
where but make it as variable as their fortunes. One of the most esteemed
Partisans made this interpretation thereof, The King is the supreme Governor,
but not the supreme Power. Gallant Law Sophistry, as if it were possible he
could govern in chief, who had not a power suitable thereto: The Independents
plead an exemption from it: The Presbyterians utterly deny it: Such a Supremacy
as the Kings claimed, and the two Houses of Parliament (Erastian-wise) craved
(indeed at first they did but beg it, which after they plundered) I disclaim
(said Henderson second Paper number. 7.) The true Nonconformist makes it the main
work of his Book to charge it with Antichristianism. The Pontificians perfectly
abhor it; The Prelatists are the only defenders of it. The Pontificians make
Kings their Churches Ministers, and Presbyterians make them their Kirk
Ministers, not the Ministers of God; The Erastians and Independents are agreed
they are originally the People's Ministers not God's. The Prelatists assent
with the Law of Christ, and the Laws of the Kingdom, the King is God's
Minister, Romans 13. The Presbyterians and Independents resolve, the Kingdom is
in and under the Church, and then the Government of that must be conformed to
that of this. If then the Presbyterians be rampant, the civil Government must
be Aristocratical. If the Independents be the masters of Misrule, it must be
Democratical; but if it happen the Erastians be the Sultans, then the Game is
King and no King; at the best he is but their Trustee, he must stand on his
good behavior, and pass his accounts to the Patriots for the contracting good
People. If the Pope be the great Cham, the civil Government must truckle.

SECT. 3. To bring the matter nearer home, there was a time when the blades of
Fortune in 40 thought it prudent to declare they had no intentions for any
alterations; It was when the Earl of Essex his Army had scented and followed
the Scent very hotly, and when the King had objected the designs amongst them,
they formed a Declaration to renounce all such purposes, Aug. 9. 42. as before
they had protested against it, as a slander, and for once such an one as the
Father of lies had invented, Remonst. Dec. 41. This was smartly urged against
them by E. M. a long imprisoned Malignant, an. 1647. p. 3. of his Address, I
cannot (said he) submit to any new Government, either in Church or Kingdom,
because all our late Parliaments, and the Long Parliament most of all, have
still professed great severity, and made strict inquisition against all men,
that should intend, practice or endeavor any alteration of Religion, or
innovation in Doctrine or Worship as a capital offense. But for all their
solemn protestations to the contrary, the Root and Branch design went on, and
when it was first set on foot, Petitions were presented to prevent and stifle
it. The total of Subscribers in only seven Counties, and those none of the
greatest, amounted to 482 Lords and Knights, 1740 Esquires and Gentlemen, 44559
Freeholders, and 631 Ministers; number enough to show how generally well
affected the people of best rank and quality were for this Government; but
their reasons are rather to be weighed, which were these, by drawing them
methodically.

1. They desire they may left in that state the Apostles settled and left in
the Church, in that the three Ages of Martyrs were governed by, in that the
thirteen Ages since have always gloried in, proving themselves by their
succession of Bishops, members of the Catholic Church. A Government as
certainly Apostolical as the observation of the Lord's day, or distinction of
Books Canonical from Apocryphal, or that such Books were written by such
Evangelists, etc. This they thus farther prosecuted, either Christ left his
Church without a lasting Government, which we fear to say, lest it might seem
to accuse the wisdom of the father, and the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ in
not providing for his Family, which we believe he did, from Saint Luke's
Testimony, Luke 12. 42. and if he lest no Rulers, he left no Pastor, Ruler and
Pastor in Scripture being all one in person, office and expression. And if he
did not leave such as we desire, viz. Bishops, the Church (which we fear also
to suppose) has been Apostate from her Lord for 1500 years, she having no
other but these for Rulers for that whole space of time: Or else Christ did
leave a lasting Government, if so, then every motion and attempt of alteration
is Antichristian.

2. Most of the reformed Churches have Bishops, all that have any Protestant
Princes with Sovereignty, have them, the rest which have them not, highly
approve and value the Order, and heartily affect and wish it.

3. The Removal of Bishops will be a great Scandal.

(1.) To the weak, who if they be really such, and withal well-meaning,
suspect all innovations as some design upon their Consciences to ensnare them,
which makes them to suspect and dislike our whole Religion, as we have found by
sad experience; yea the grievous Scandal of our Religion as unstable, has
caused many to revolt from it.

(2.) To the strongest, who are not to be offended for this reason, because
they are not apt to be scandalized with umbrages and impertinences but real
inconveniences and mischiefs.

4. The unspeakable advantages given to our Enemies of Rome, by this change,
which in the event proved so.

5. The sad effects and consequences which we foresee and in part feel.

(1.) Which we foresee; We desire (said they) the continuance of this
Government, for that strange fears possess our hearts, that Schisms, Factions
and Seditions will overwhelm us, order, peace and unity will be far removed
from us, reformation and suppression of wickedness and vice, as is pretended,
will be totally cashiered, and extinguished, nor will ever take place or effect
among us. For we suspect and believe the sudden mutation of a Government, so
long settled, and so well known, cannot with any proportionable utility
recompense the disturbances and disorders which it may work by novelty,
therefore we cannot without trembling and perplexity of mind entertain a
thought of a change, and of innovation in a matter of so high concernment. For
if the design go on, we shall be reduced to such a desperate condition, that we
shall not know how to settle our selves, or form our obedience in such
distractions, and sometimes repugnancies of commands, as will unavoidably ensue.

(2.) What they then felt in part, since this Government is traduced and
despised, the Houses of God are profaned, the Ministers of Christ contemned,
the Liturgy depraved, that absolute model the Lord's Prayer vilified, the
Sacraments in some places unduly administered, in others profanely neglected,
Marriages illegally solemnized, Burials uncharitably performed, and the very
fundamentals of our Religion by the publication of a new Creed, teaching the
abrogation of the moral Law, (All the Religion we can hope for must be a
movable Creed, repealable by privileges, and to be made suitable to the designs
of any prevailing Faction) whereby God is provoked, his sacred Majesty
dishonored, the Consciences of the people disquieted, the Ministry
disheartened, and the Enemies of the Church emboldned in their enterprises.

6. We cannot hearken to such a change, because for many years we have found
the comfort and benefit of Episcopacy, which as it has been eminently
serviceable to this Kingdom, so it is most compliable with the civil Government
(into the Fabric whereof it is incorporate) that we must conclude it as the
most pious, so the most safe and prudent. Wherefore to call it a Vassalage and
intolerable burden, and thereupon to endeavor its removal, relisheth not of
piety, prudence, justice or charity. This we are the rather induced to present,
both because our Fathers have told us of the great convenience and moderation
of this Government, and we have felt the comfortable experience thereof.
Certain it is this Kingdom is much indebted to the Bishops for their piety,
wisdom, zeal and sufferings, which we trust shall never be forgotten. Thus far
they.

It may not be amiss to subjoyn the later opinion of a great name with the
Erastians, who once indeed had declared before, he was no such fool as to be a
Puritan, yet it is well known how, etc. but at last was forced to express his
great esteem of Catholic Order. The words are reported, Fair Warning, Part. 2.
p. 4. and thus are set out, It is a wonderful thing, that, etc. after that
passage, he gives his opinion, I should much fear that our most excellent
Religion, so miserably confounded by its distracted followers, would one day
give place to the two grand mischiefs of the world Popery and Profaneness,
against which there are no other remedies besides the merciful assistence of
heaven, than sound Doctrine settled, severe Discipline established, a decent
and holy Worship secured, and a grand establishment enjoined, which may fence
in truth and virtue, and keep out error and sin, whereby the Orthodox good
part of the Nation may be known and encouraged, as the Heterodox may be
discovered and awed.

SECT. 4. The little good which can be expected from Presbyterianism and
Independency is, that the Professors of the one Sect pretend great zeal
against Ignorance and Sin, and the other is aggrieved at promiscuous
Communions, though both of them, by their barkings and bawlings against this
Church, and the Discipline and Government thereof, have and do still obstruct
the methods which she has provided as remedies against those maladies. Now
that those Offices which she has determined for those ends, are proper and
very instrumental, through the assistence of the Divine grace, which
accompanies and inanimates them to devoutly affected Christians, most effectual
thereto, they will be necessitated to acknowledge, by observing the Order
prescribed, which lies thus.

Every Infant is to be solemnly matriculated into the Church by holy Baptism,
these baptized in a competent time are to be catechized in the principles of
Christian Religion, and then to be confirmed by the Bishop, and are required to
give attention to the reading and preaching of the word of God. Being thus
prepared, they are admittable to the great mystery of the holy Eucharist, and
for neglect of these means the offenders are liable to the censures of the
Church. That these methods are Scriptural, and Apostolical most of the
Dissenters acknowledge; some of them indeed scruple at Confirmation, but Calvin
conceives it to be originally Apostolical, with whom more than a whole Jury of
reformed Divines have given in their Verdict. Mr. Baxter thinks it would
quiet the wrangle about the formality of a Church Covenant and Membership; Mr.
Brinsley of Yarmouth was of opinion it would remove all the fears and
jealousies of vain Disputers: Calvin is positive this office was performed by
the Bishop from the beginning, and Mr. Dallee commends that of S. Hier.
Episcopus, etc. in Dial. inter Orth. and Lucef.

In this I blame the Presbyterians and Independents, because at present they
hang together by the tails, but for all the fair copies of their Countenances,
if their wished and labored for turn come, their faces will look several ways.
If the Presbyterians get the start, and keep their ground for a while, they
will soon proclaim the Independents to be Babylonians; If the Independents once
more out-wit the Presbyterians, and turn them out of power and trust, then the
Independents will face about, and tell them roundly they are Egyptians.

SECT. 5. As for the Papists, the best they can brag on is their unity, of
which they rant highly, that they, and they only have found out the true way
to it: this is a mere bravado to which a wise and learned person made
heretofore this return ( viz.) Let me see the Jesuits and Seculars reconciled
in England, a Dominican and Jesuit in Doctrinal Papistry, French and Italians
in state Papistry, then I shall allow them a little to vapor: their oral and
conclave Traditionists are hard at it in their confutations of each other,
their great heads of Unity Pope Sixtus and Clemens fell very foul one with
another: they cannot agree about the Supremacy of a Pope and a Council, nor
which of their four or five Churches is the infallible one: the Popes and
Councils have declared several ways upon the points, which obviates their
common shift, viz. Their clashings and bickerings are but in scholastic
opinions and niceties; for then the definitions of Popes and Councils are no
matters of Faith. But here again they quarrel; for some assert a Doctrine is
heretical by its repugnancy to what is revealed by Christ: others affirm a
Doctrine is heretical because the Church has declared so: its the former sort
thus confutes. If the Doctrine be heretical from the Churches declaration, then
the Church has power to make Articles of Faith: about which also there is a
great bustle among them; for some of them peremptorily deny the Church has any
power to make Articles of Faith: but most of the Canonists, and all the Popes
Exchequer men affirm it; so schismatically are they divided about their Church,
the Head thereof, with the terms and objects of their pretended Unity: when
these are smartly objected to them their only salvo is* Their Rule would be a
means to hold them in unity if it were followed. Very good! for the plain
English of this is, their Rule about which they so smartly wrangle, and
concerning which they could never yet agree, will or may be a means of unity
when they are agreed about it. In opposition whereto we assert the Rule which
we propose is not flexible like theirs, but infallible, viz. the sure word of
God duly applied; for the application whereof we take in the consentient
judgment of the universal Church in matters of Faith; and in points of practice
the constant usage thereof: these we stand to, because, if they be not the true
means of unity, the true Church of God, which always relied on these, and no
other, had never any. If to this some Romanists give assent, as some of them
do, they are so far English Episcopal Protestants. From all which premised
there is great reason and good warranty to conclude, that under the Government
of King and Bishops the Civil Power is most safely fixed; mixed Communion,
Ignorance and Sin are most effectually provided against; Unity and Obedience
storngly guarded; therefore whatsoever good or desirable can be expected from
Erastianism, Presbyterianism, Independency, or Popery, is really experimented
in Episcopacy; and therefore this in true polity ought to be retained and
supported: the other modes are not to be admitted or entertained; not the
Erastians, for they play at fast and loose with Kings and the Church; they
respect no Government present, to which their submission is compliance, not
obedience. Not the Presbyterians, for they encroach upon and vilify Kingly
authority; if they find a King, they will if they dare shackle him, or in our
Northern expression houghband him. Not the Independents, for with them Kings
are the Peoples Creatures and Trustees, neither will they permit him with their
good wills to intermeddle in Church Affairs. Not the Pontificians, for reasons
given by the learned Doctor Stillingfleet, and that honorable Person who
seconded him. It is therefore the clear interest of the Crown, if it would have
a Church National to govern by, it ought to be Protestant Episcopal, as a late
ingenious Writer has observed, lest if it be held of the Pope, Kirk, or People
in Capite, it totter and fall. That Problem which Dr. Prideaux Ep. Ded. ad
fasc. Contro. An suprematus Papalis sit potius Antichristianus quam
Presbyterianus aut Enthusiasticus? may hence easily be resolved if we be not
too palpably partial, we must declare them all, or none at all to be Tyrannical
or Antichristian. The best Argument ever yet produced to prove the Pope to be
Antichrist is his bold challenge over all Kings and Monarchs, to depose them
and dispose of their Crowns and Dignities; which if it be good, it will hold as
strongly against all other Sectaries, for they are as truly the Limbs of
Antichrist who preach and press Rebellion against their lawful Sovereign, and
those commissionated by him, upon a Puritan Vote, or Republican Resolution, as
they who prove and prosecute it upon the Pope's Placet or Fiat: that cannot be
the mystery of Godliness and Saintship in a Presbyterian or Independent, which
is presumed to be the mystery of Iniquity in the Pope; and if the Doctrine of
Rebellion be the mark of the Beast in a Pontifician, it cannot be a sign of
Election in a Smectymnuan or Owenist: for if the Pope by the plenitude of his
power can discharge Subjects from the Oath and bonds of Allegiance, then the
Sectaries by what names or titles soever divided or subdivided can free
themselves upon easier terms: for one will absolve himself by a dormant
dispensation of the spirit; another excuse himself by the pretense of a new
light; a third will plead Providence; a fourth Conscience, and the Blades of
Fortune will stand upon their privileges.

The result of this tedious Chapter is, God had always a Church, this Church
had always a Government, this was always detemined by God, who in the first
Ages of the world settled this power on the firstborn, who were both Kings and
Priests; after he separated these Offices, Moses to hold the Kingly power,
Aaron the Priestly; yet he so ordered, that the Priestly power should be
subordinate to the Regal: he foretold the like order should be established in
the Christian Church, that Nations should flow into it, Isa. 2. 2. and the
Kings of those Nations should be nursing Fathers to it, Isa. 49. 23. that
together with them should be spiritual Fathers, Bishops as Prefects therein,
Isa. 60. 17. for Clement according to that Copy which the Apostle uses reads
that Comma thus ( viz.) I will make thy Bishops peace, so do the Seventy, who
in nineteen other places render the Original (...) by (...), Bishop; so Pagnine
from R. Abraham, and Buxtorf, what we translate Office, Psalm. 109. 8. they
read Prefecture, which S. Peter, Acts 1. 2. calls Bishopric: what was thus
prophesied God in the fullness of time determined by his all-wise providence
verified, when the Church was first governed by our Lord Jesus Christ, who had
under him Commission-officers, his Apostles, and under them the Seventy
Disciples. After his Ascension, and descent of the Holy Ghost, the Apostles
ruled in chief, having Attendants and Assistants to them, whom they after
substituted, as the necessities of the Church required, for Bishops, with
Deacons and Priests under their Jurisdiction. Thus the Church stood and was
governed for 300 years, till the nursing Fathers appeared; then and ever since
Kings and Bishops have presided in it, Kings having the Dominion, Bishops the
Jurisdiction in the Catholic Church. This was one great end of the
Reformation, to restore our Kings and Bishops to their universally acknowledged
Rights due to them by Divine Law; this of all other Governments is the most
Christian, rational and practicable, because most suiting with the main end of
Government, which is that we may live quiet and peaceable lives, without any
Faction or Schism, in all godliness and honesty; and this therefore and no
other is to be retained in the Church, both upon the true measures of piety and
prudence.

CHAP. IV.
THE next thing canvassed in this Church, is the constituted Worship of God by
Liturgy with Ceremonies and Holy Days.

SECT. 1. If it can be evinced, that prescribed Forms were used in the Three
first Centuries, it will follow in the judgment of all unprejudiced persons
they are still to be practiced and imposed.

Number. 1. Our Lord and Savior prescribed a Form to his Disciples, Matt. 6. 9.
(...), etc. not only for the Matter but very Form; for this (...), etc. is the
same with that, Numb. 6. 23. according to the Septuagint, which did not respect
only the Substance but the Words as they were dictated. S. Luke makes it
clear, When ye pray, say. Verba and recitationem certam praescribit, says
Melanch. he gave them an Express, says Diod. long before them S. Cypr. de
Orat. Dom. Christ consulting the salvation of his people delivered them, Etiam
orandi Formam; and before him Tert. de Or. c. 1, 9. Novam, etc. he ordered a
new Form of Prayer; and before them both in Trajan's Reign, the Christians
ordinarily used it, as our Greg. observed from Lucian. The Context will confirm
the interpretation, for it is generally received, the Jewish Teachers did
compose Forms for their Disciples. S. John Baptist did, whereupon Christ's
Disciples moved him also for a Form, Luke 11. 1. that thereby they might be
owned for such. In compliance whereto our Savior granted their Petition, yet
with that caution to decline novelty, that he took much of it from the Jewish
Euchologue, as not only our Greg. has noted, but Drusius also and Capellus:
plain it is from the manner of its composure, it was not delivered as a
Directory, but as a Liturgy, not only as a Rule to form our Prayers by, but a
form to pray in: good reasons also there are to persuade us, notwithstanding
the silence of the Scripture, that the Disciples constantly so used it; for it
was a Symbol of their Discipleship, not unto them as common Jews, who only
used the Church Ritual, but as Christ's retainers, whose privilege and honor
it was to have a Form of his setting; they under this relation moved him for a
Form, in order to its observation, and to discriminate them from other Jews or
Disciples of other Masters.

Number. 2. Our Savior himself practiced composed Forms, Matt. 26. 30. which Came.
assures us was the solemn customary Hymn which concluded the Supper; and it is
the more probable, because the Disciples joined with Christ in it, which they
could not have done, unless they had been well acquainted with it. Again he
used the same prayer thrice, Matt. 26. 44. so upon his complaint upon the Cross
he used the words of David, Psalm. 22. 1. and when he gave up the Ghost, Luke
23. 46. he took a Form from, Psalm. 31. 7.

Number. 3. We have the Presidents of S. Peter and S. John attending the ordinary
service, Acts 3. 1. which the circumstances of time and place do evince; for if
they neglected the daily Service, or used any other, they would have given an
offense to the Jews, whose conversion they endeavored; this is confirmed from
that observation of learned men, that the first Christians accommodated all
their Offices to the Jewish Ritual, and revived the moral Service of God
practiced in the Jewish Church, which was always by a determinate Form, says
Capel. from Maim. Syn. Crit. in Loc. and appears from Luke 1. 10. compared with
Rev. 8. 4. for at the time of Incense they had three Forms called, Emeth,
Gnaboah and Shemshalom, because they began with these words; Lightf. Desc. of
the Temple Service: Mr. Seldom in his Notes on Eut. p. 41. from Maim. relates,
The Jews were permitted to have their voluntary prayers, yet not on the Sabbath
and Feast days, nor with the solemn appointed Sacrifices, because prescribed
Prayers were then to be observed, but only at the Freewill Offerings, and then
too with these restrictions, they should not be extemporary, but prepared
Prayers, nor were they permitted to the whole Congregation which was tied up to
the daily Offices. Those places of Saint Paul, Ephesians. 3. 19. Col. 3. 16. are a
plain reference to the Jewish practice, for there he uses those three Greek
words by which the Septuagint renders the three Hebrew Mismorim, Tehillath or
Rabbinice (as Buxt.) Tehillim and Shirim: Diod. interprets this Text by
reference to Psalm. 55. 17. as others to Dan. 6. 10.

Number. 4. Primitive practice is deduced,

1. From Acts 13. 2. where the Church is said to be solemnly at her Liturgy,
ministering, not to the people by Alms or other acts of Charity, but to God in
the acts of his Worship, in public Prayers and other parts of the Evangelical
Ministry, says Diod. This is agreeable to that Text, Acts 2. 42. which in Mr.
Calvin's judgment delineates the true state of the Church, treating of public
Prayers. And to that, Acts 4. 24. when the hundred and twenty Converts prayed
unanimously and uniformly, there were no dissenters amongst them, nor mutes,
all joined and all in one Form, and this a set Form as it is set down in the
Text.

2. From 1 Cor. 11. 5. every man and woman, etc. This at first sight is
obvious, all of both Sexes prayed and prophesied; and from the Context this was
done in the public Assemblies when the Church met, v. 20. and this according
to an Apostolical Tradition, which S. Paul charged them to keep, v. 2. (But
what then is this praying and prophesying?)

1. This praying here is not by an extemporary faculty or volubility of
language, it may be questioned whether that was then in use, for if when S.
Paul, Romans 12. Gal. 5. Ephesians. 4. 1 Cor. 12. enumerated the gifts of the Spirit he
gave a full Catalogue thereof, then this pretended gift is begged, because no
such is mentioned in that Company; that of praying by the Spirit, 1 Cor. 14.
15. was praying in an unknown Tongue, v. 14. which required an interpreter;
however this be, those gifts were not common to all Believers, neither was any
of them communicated to select persons for popularity and ostentation, but for
profit and edification; yea, their proper purpose was to prevent that
licentiousness that was taken from the pretense thereof, and even to restrain
arbitrary prayers, and to confine the gifted to such suggestions as the holy
Spirit dictated to them; this is evident, the Apostle censures some of the
pretenders for clashing one with another, 1 Cor. 14. 21. it was never heard
that the Spirit was given to any to pray upon their own heads, or according to
their own lusts, interests and passions; but supposing there were such a gift,
yet it was not to be used at every meeting; for if an Interpreter were wanting
at any such meeting, then all they had to do was either to resort to the
Common Prayers or to break up and be gone: neither lastly was this gift given
promiscuously to all of all Sexes, it being pretended as a peculiar to the
Minister, or some inspired person endowed therewith, therefore praying here
must be praying in the Church, v. 20. 22. by the Churches prayers according to
the order and custom thereof, 1 Cor. 14. 40. and then the meaning is, Every
man or woman meeting at the Church or observing the customary constituted
devotions ought to be thus habited and thus to demean themselves.

2. By Prophesying here we are not to understand prediction of future events,
nor the gift of interpreting what was spoken by the gift of Tongues, 1 Cor. 14.
v. 2, 3. nor for speaking to men for edification, 1 Cor. 12. 29. all are not
Prophets; nor is it to be taken passively, as some imagine, for hearing a
Prophecy, for then every one that hears a Prophecy is a Prophet; and by the
same reason, every one that hears a Sermon is a Preacher; and a reason ought to
be rendered why praying should not be interpreted passively as well as
prophesying, but the notion here is the same with that of, 1 Samuel 10. 5. 1 Chronicles. 25. 1. Luke 1. 67. for singing Psalms and Hymns, so the sense is
perspicuous ( viz.) Let every man and woman singing and praising God in the
Church, appear in such habits as are suitable to their Sex. This should not
seem odd to them who allow all to sing, but silence the whole Congregation in
the act of Prayer, because in such singing the Psalms which are used contain in
them prayers, supplications, intercessions and thanksgivings; but others are
verily persuaded that all both men and women have joint interest in the public
Service of God with the officiating Ministers, who as they are for order's sake
to direct and lead the Congregation, so all assembled have their parts to act.
A bare corporal presence is mockery and dalliance, an Eye or Ear service will
never be accepted as the reasonable service of God. Thus it has been from the
beginning (which is our Savior's way of arguing, Matt. 19. 8.) ever since men
called upon the name of the Lord; for thus it was practiced in the Patriarchal
ages, as our Greg. has exemplified, p. 120, 121. Under the Law examples are
numerous, Ex. 15. 1. 1 Chronicles. 15. 36. and 29. 20. 2 Chronicles. 6. 29. the manner is
described, Ez. 3. 10, 11. and the practice proved, Psalm. 34. 3. and 107. 8, 15,
21, 31. Mr. Seldom observes, the Eighteen composed Prayers by Ezra began with
that, Psalm. 51. 15. O Lord open thou our Lips, to which the People answered,
And our mouths shall show forth thy praise, the very Form retained in S. James
his Liturgy, which is very much for its credit, and in ours soon after the
beginning. S. Paul urges it as a Gospel duty, Romans 15. 6. to glorify God, not
with distracted or divided minds, but, with one mind, not that of the Minister
only, but of all as one in consort, for that form v. 11. (viz.) Praise ye the
Lord, was the Peoples Hallelujah: our Savior with the Disciples sung the great
one, on which Musculus observes, Ipse ita praelocutus est ut verba illius
fuerunt excepta and vicissim reddita; just as the people with us, repeat the
Confession, Lord's Prayer, etc. S. Paul reports the unlearned had his Amen to
give in at the Eucharist, but probably he did more in the other Offices, if we
believe Just. Mart. Apol. 2. sub fin. (...), etc. where he distinguishes
between the joint Prayers of Priest and People, and those peculiar and proper
to the Minister, his part lay in those Offices which solely depended on the
power of the Keys, as Absolution, Consecration of the Elements and Benediction;
the rest which had no such relation were common both to Minister and People,
who were to accompany him (as it is expressed in the introduction to our
Liturgy) with an humble voice, Cum disciplina and modestis precibus, as Saint
Cypr. Or. Dom. and as Ter. de Or. c. 13. Sonos etiam vocis subjectos, etc. both
of them commending a modest submiss rehearsal of the Prayers with the Minister
who speaks them out audibly, and both of them condemning the obstreperous bold
vociferations of rude men, who observed no decorum, whereof it seems such there
were at that time. Yet for once let it be supposed, the People only expressed
Amen at the Minister's prayer, this could not be rationally done to an
extempore effusion; because they could not do it with understanding, this they
could not because they were not acquainted with the Schediast's sense, for
whilst the understanding is in labor rightly to apprehend what he means, no
rational judgment can be passed till after some pause and deliberation upon
what is delivered, and whilst its thus employed, the Schediast in his post
haste is so far gone, that either he cannot attend to what he next delivers,
or he is at a loss of what he has delivered, and then all that he can do is
either to fall to his study or take all upon an implicit Faith; which if he do,
he must say Amen to contradictions, absurdities and wickedness. This is one
foul piece of Popery, to put all devotion on the Priest, for when 1 Cor. 14. is
urged against the Papists for their prayers in an unknown Tongue, the best
answer that is given by their Controvertists and Commentatours is, Populus est
particeps omnium precum quas pro omnibus fundit Sacerdos; for that the Priest
speaks not to Men but to God, and the ministerial Office would be dangerously
invaded, if the people be permitted to utter any thing more than a bare Amen.

SECT. 2. The Testimonies of the Second Century will be revered by all sober
men, as that of Enaristus, who ordered that Marriage should be solemnized with
the prayers of the Church; that of Clemens, Ep. 1. ad Cor. We ought to do all
things according to order, at set hours to frequent and solemnize the oblation
and Liturgy, answerable to S. Paul's (...), that of Just. Mart. as before, We
all arise to common prayer: Ignat. in Ep. ad Magn. Telesphorus, an. 139.
ordained that at public prayers, the people should sing that Hymn, viz. Holy,
Holy, Holy, Lord, etc. Soter. an. 164. that when the Priest said, The Lord be
with you, the People should answer, And with thy Spirit: Scaliger de Emend.
Tem. l. 7. tells us of an ancient Liturgy he had lying by him of Ignatius his
composing, as he is understood by a learned man.

SECT. 3. For the Third Century Tertul. is express, as is before noted; so is
S. Cypr. who profeffeth, Publica nobis, etc. We have public Common Prayer, and
that the people may be devout at it, the Priest prepares their minds with this
Preface, Sursum corda, Lift up your hearts, whereto they answer, We lift them
up to the Lord, Origin. l. 6. cont. Cells. reports the Christians used
constituted prescribed prayers, one Form whereof he mentions in terms; Hom. 11.
in Jer. we frequently say in our prayers; O Almighty God, give us a part with
the Prophets, etc. and we have a remarkable story of his great affection for
them, which lies thus, apud Eus. l. 6. c. 3. Leonides his Father being beheaded
by the Emperor Severus, and his Estate confiscated, Origin, not being then
full eighteen years old, he with his Mother and six other Brethren were left to
the wide world. It pleased God a noble Lady entertained and supplied him, who
also had retained one Marcus, an Antiochian, whom she respected for his famed
faculty in extempore praying, in which she was delighted; whereupon at her
house frequent meetings were had, to which not only the Heretics (the
Non-conformists) but many of our own Conformists resorted, yet for all the
favors Origin received from her, he would never be persuaded to be present at
their Conventicles, because from his Childhood (it seems his Parents were
religious true Sons of the Church) he had observed (...), the Order of the
Church, and perfectly hated all Doctrines of errors. Hippolytus writ his Orat.
de Consum. Mundi, about an. 220. wherein he says, Ad Antichristi tempora, etc.
in the last times of Antichrist, the holy Houses shall be like Cottages, (...),
Liturgy shall be extinguished, etc. This was fully put in execution by our late
Bandities upon the pretense of the feared (though most knavishly) and suspected
introduction of Tyranny and Popery.

SECT. 4. We produce good reasons, as well as good rules and great authorities,
for set Forms.

1. An arbitrary form by a new set of words may perhaps affect and work
strangely upon the sensitive Soul, as the frantic feats of the Turkish
Dervises do on those miserable deluded people; phrases and variety of them with
cadencies, affected tones and gestures, wry mouths and twinkling eyes, with
much sweat and noise, may raise the humors and passions into disorder, but
they can never prevail with a rational considering man to gain his esteem,
unless it be to pity them or smile at them. That which they esteem as a gift is
rather an art by the dilatation of the animal spirits, which are much pleased
and raised by a delight in novelty and variety, and often puts the Soul into
strange heats and fancies.

2. To borrow three from Mr. Calvin, Ep. 87.

1. A determinate Form from which Ministers are not to vary in their Offices,
is useful as an help to the weakness of some; he might have said of the many,
yea the most, if not all.

2. It is a Testimony of the Churches consent and unity; he might have added of
her conformity with the Catholic Church.

3. It is a way to stop the desultorious levity of those who are for new
things; Mr. Baxter will help him here, who in his Disp. of Lit. Prop. 10. in
his great experience, acknowledges, the constant disuse of set Forms is apt to
breed a giddiness in Religion, and it may make men Hypocrites, who shall delude
themselves with fancies, that they delight in God, when it is but in those
novelties and varieties of expression. Indeed extempore prayers are strong
delusions in several respects, For,

1. The most prudent and cunning sort of the pretenders to this faculty use
study and premeditation, which they conceive necessary to pray seasonably, yet
here lies the cheat, they would have their herd to take their composed Forms as
issues of their sudden conceptions. A great man of the Faction freely imparted
his mind herein to a Friend, saying, He had so many Forms lying by him, most of
which being committed to memory, by the interchangeable use of them, he was
thought by the people always to pray without premeditation, Engl. Reprover, p.
153. This is just si vuli populus decipi decipiatur, a Puritan pia fraus.

2. The Zealots of the Sect honor an honest unpremeditated prayer with the
title of Spiritual, by way of propriety, in opposition to set Forms for
ordinary use, pretending the Spirit immediately suggests the expressions. Thus
Ambrose in his experiences published with License from Herle once Prolocutor of
their Assembly, Angier, Johnson and Wait, Provincials in the Class in
Lancashire upon a private Fast observed, Jan. 6. 1642. held it forth, The Lord
gave some that exercised that day the very spirit and power of prayer, to the
ravishment of the hearers; surely it was the Spirit spoke in them, which they
resolved from Zach. 12. 10. Romans 8. 26. This is a Jesuitical Cheat, as it is
reported by Maffeus, elevante spiritu, etc. that the Spirit would raise
Ignatius at his prayers four cubits from the earth.

3. The great Sticklers for the good old Cause so highly extol extempore
conceptions, that they own them as the best evidences of their Party and Piety;
first idolizing that which in some is mere natural, in others an artificial
habit of Enthusiasm, as Casaubon has evidenced, c. 4. next, idolizing the
persons pretending to it, who have been very monsters of men; such as
Achitophel who (as the Rabbis relate) prayed every day thrice, and every time
had a conceived Oration; such as Basilides the great Duke of Muscovy, and
Oliver, two most bloody Villains and Tyrants; such as the blasphemous Hacket
here in England, and the vile Wretch were in Scotland; the horrid execrable
Regicides, and the whole litter of our late Mammon Rebels and Renegadoes.

SECT. 5. It is confessed by the most knowing men of the Party, that imposed
stated Forms were in common practice in the Fourth Century, which is an
Argument they were so from the beginning. For the Fathers of that Age, being
persons eminent for piety and sincerity in the Christian profession, would not
innovate, and being also men of excellent accomplishments would easily have
observed what was most proper for the discharge of their Function. Had they
believed that lousy Fancy, that the modification of public Worship by
personal abilities was the formal act of the ministerial Office, as the cutting
of Cloth into such a shape by his own skill is the formal ministration of a
Tailor, as an Anonymus, p. 79. of his Survey, mechanically held forth; they
doubtless would have made use of their great personal abilities in their
public administrations, which confessedly they did not, and it is certain they
would not do so, because they conceived themselves obliged to retain the
ancient Forms in veneration to those pious persons who composed and enjoined
them for public use. The Third Council at Carthage, c. 3. resolved,
Quascunque, etc. Whatsoever prayers any shall transcribe for themselves, let
them be taken out of a Copy before in use. S. Basil. de Sp. Sanct. c. 27.
refers to the solemn words of prayer observed before his time in the
benediction at the Eucharist. Saint Chrysostom. Hom. 2. in 2. ad Cor. exemplifies a
Form which had long before been constituted in the Church. In Ireland S.
Patrick brought a Liturgy which he received from Germanus and Lupus, originally
taken from S. Mark. Archbishop Usher, in his Discourse of the Religion
professed by the ancient Irish, affirms, he had seen it set down in an
ancient Fragment well nigh nine hundred years since, remaining now in the
Library of Sir Robert Cotton. That every exception against those Liturgies of
Saint James, etc. that they were supposititious, is an argument that such there
had been; for if they were corrupted, something was pure; if somewhat was
supposititious in them, somewhat also was genuine.

One trifling objection against our Liturgy, which serves to amuse the Vulgar,
is not to be neglected. It is this, The first Reformers industriously contrived
the Common Prayer Book, to endear the Papists to its use.

This in the judgment of wise men is to commend them, Zanch. in Phil. 4. 8.
thought the gratification of bad men in those things wherein we do not offend
God, to be a duty. Amyral. de Secess. ab Eccl. Romans p. 225. highly approves
this course, atque hic commemorare, etc. we are here to consider with what
wisdom and moderation the French and Genevian Churches contrived their public
Forms of Prayer. They are so far from handling any controversial matters
therein, that the Pontificians themselves scruple not to use them; and, which
is scarce to be believed, but that the matter of fact is notorious, they have
picked out of them certain Prayers, which they have inserted into their Manuals
for the use of the people in their native Language. The objectors might have
remembered, that Book took with the Romanists for full ten years of Q.
Elizabeth's Reign; probably had longer, but that their dear Friends the
Puritans, had disturbed the peace of the Church, which gave the Pope an
opportunity to dispatch his Emissaries, and ever since both Parties have
bandied against it.

The Consectaries of the premises are, stated Liturgy from Scripture, with the
practice of the primitive Christians, and continued in the Catholic Church, is
the best service of God; and our Liturgy being perfectly conformed thereto, is
to be retained. It was then no vanity or presumption in Archbishop Cranmer to
engage against all opposers thereof, if he was permitted to take Peter Martyr
with three or four more for his assistants, he would prove there was nothing
therein contained, but what was agreeable with the holy Scriptures, and
primitive Antiquity. Bishop Jewel had great reason to assert, Accessimus, etc.
We came as near as possibly we could to the Order used in the Apostles times,
Apol. par. 5. c. 15. divis. 8. and more fully, par. 6. c. 16. divis. 1. We came
as near as possible we could to the Church of the Apostles, and of the old
Catholic Bishops and Fathers, and have directed according to their customs and
ordinances, not only our Doctrine, but also the Sacraments and form of Common
Prayer; so false and absurd is that fancy, that our Liturgy is formed out of
the Roman Missal, that so far as it is Popish is nothing else but a bombast of
corrupt additionals patched to it.

CHAP. V.
THE next Charge against the Reformation is, that Ceremonies are retained and
enjoined.

SECT. 1. That circumstances may be determined the Assemblers have resolved,
Pref. to the Direc. p. 7. viz. They endeavored to hold forth such things as
were of Divine Institution, and to set forth other things according to the
rules of Christian prudence, agreeable to the general rules of God's word: and
some of these other things are Ceremonies; for a determination of the posture
of the Body in Divine Service is one which they pass, when they order the
people to sit at the Table; and in the Office of Marriage, they will and
require the Man to take the Woman by the right hand, etc. which they account a
Ceremony, or else their immediately subsequent clause is nonsense, viz. Then
without any farther Ceremony, etc. The Platform drawer, c. 10, 11. 8. is
peremptory, Nefas est, etc. It is wickedness to oppose the judgment of Rulers,
sine sufficienti and ponderosa causa; to explain which he declares, then it is
a sufficient and weighty cause, when at least there is violenta praesumptio a
violent presumption in the judgment of truly wise men, that the Superiors have
not swerved from the truth. But the Catechism maker, an old Trader in
Subtilties, goes more cunningly to work: This is his artifice, p. 61, 62.
Whatsoever is of circumstance in the manner of performance of religious
Worship, not capable of especial determination, as emerging or arising only
occasionally upon the doing of what is appointed, at this or that time, in this
or that place, or the like, is left to moral prudence. Now he immediately
subjoyns, but the addition of Ceremonies, not necessarily belonging neither to
the Institutions of Christ, nor unto those circumstances whose disposal falls
under the rules of moral prudence, neither does nor can add any thing to the
due order of Gospel Worship. This last Clause is but the opinion of a few
mushrome Sectaries, which is overruled by the judgment of the Catholic Church
and all wise men. It is remarkable, when the Aberdeen Doctors proved from the
Confessions of the Reformed Churches and judgment of some learned men, that
more than bare circumstances of actions were left to the determination of the
Church, and plainly told them, their stirring about Ceremonies was a scandal to
other Reformed Churches, Demand. 13. The Three Apostles of the Covenant,
Henderson, Dickson and Cant, fairly slipped by this in their first return, but
being once more pressed, they frankly confessed the charge, saying, We deny not
but Divines both ancient and modern, are against us concerning the lawfulness
of the things controverted, p. 22. all absolutely either allowing or judging
them tolerable, p. 28. For we scarce know any without his Majesty's Dominions
that peremptorily condemn them as unlawful: and at last were driven to this
feeble slurr to uphold all their innovations and rebellious actions, viz. They
had seen the day of the Lord's power in the Land. But if it be possible to be
an Oedipus to this Sphinx, we are to watch the motions and refuges of this Fox.

1. What does he mean by his occasional emergents, either his circumstances be
they, if so, then he must reconcile himself to his Brethren, who allow them to
be natural or inseparable accidents and adjuncts, not occasionally, but
constantly attending all external actions; or else his occasional emergents,
are some, pro hic and nunc, necessaries, that is, when occasion is offered, for
religious Worship, such circumstances and the like are necessarily to be
adhibited: for the last clause, viz. But the superaddition, etc. being an
exception to the foregoing it must signify this or nothing, viz. That
Ceremonies are not necessarily belonging, but circumstances do necessarily
belong, etc. For,

2. He seems to distinguish these not only in expression, but putting them in
a different letter. Let this be granted that they are distinguishable, yet the
distinction is only modal; for when a circumstance is actually applied to any
Act, then it falls under the notion of a Ceremony, that which is a circumstance
in the general abstracted consideration, becomes a Ceremony by the particular
usage and application. Time, place, and the like, that is, habit and gesture,
are circumstances, but this time or place, this or that habit and gesture, by
the special determination of the indefinite adjuncts to observation are
Ceremonies. But herein the Doctor kept a-loof from the contest, for the matter
in debate is, first, Whether religious Worship ought to be performed with
solemnity and reverence? And if so, then Whether Ceremonies be not proper for
its Solemnity?

3. What the things and matters are which he coucheth under his [and the like]
Was he afraid of an etc. which his Partisans had so shrewdly clubbed? yet his
[and the like] is as like an etc. as one Egg can be to another. If habit and
gesture fall under his [and the like] he must wear the Surplice and kneel when
he is ordered, which because they agree not with his chiverell Conscience, he
puts us off with an obscure insignificant [and the like.] But if he be
reserved, Brother Rutherforth coughs out, reckons habit and gesture with and
among his six physical circumstances; which if they be, then according to his
rule, they fall under the rules of moral prudence.

4. How comes it to pass that his circumstances are not capable of special
determination? Certainly God could (if in his infinite wisdom he had thought
fit) have prescribed the entire manner, (as once he did) as well as the duty;
therefore time, place and the like, are capable of special determination, with
the occasional emergents, viz. The monthly Wednesday Fast, and the annual
Thanksgiving on the third of September: and he could have ordered who should
have carried on the work of the days, J. O. for one, and Smect. for the other
end, and made them a Directory to order them how to preach and pray; he could
have appointed the habit and gesture as well as place, S. Paul's as well as
Margaret's Westminster; if then the circumstances of time and place be, so the
like form, habit and gestures are left to moral prudence.

5. What is his moral prudence? Here we are in the dark, till the illuminato do
in good earnest declare, whether his prudence be a peculiar of some Set of
gifted men, or the whole Set of secret Ones, or of some few Demagogues, who
with their seditious Orators, drive on their particular interests by
gratifying the lusts of their charmed herds, and have rare picklocks for their
Purses and Consciences. Or whether it be the public and the Legal Governors
of the Church, or the private prudence of every individual Christian; if the
former, then what is pleaded, is obtained; if the latter, then why may not the
public judgment interpose in those things, on which private discretion and
Conscience may resolve? Doubtless particular persons, or such as are
arbitrarily associated at the most, have only a private capacity, and all wise
men and good have heretofore been of this persuasion; that public persons are
most proper to be entrusted with the management of public concerns, both
because God has committed it to them* 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2, 3. and also because what
a Christian may safely do upon the dictates of his Conscience, he may
warrantably do when enjoined by public authority. This they practice in a
plain matter of fact, An Oath is generally confessed by them to be a part of
religious worship; But public authority has prescribed its form of
administration, and appointed significant Ceremonies at the taking thereof.
Here I demand whether an Oath thus formed and circumstantiated can be lawfully
taken or no? If not, how comes it to pass that these men, in any instance
wherein their temporal interests are concerned, are free to it? If they can,
and do, why may not the same authority determine the circumstantials of the
Second and Fourth Commandment as well as of the Third? Are they not equally
Precepts of Divine Worship? And why may not the same require our conformity to
their Constitutions in the adjuncts of religious Worship, as well as command
and enforce submission to their Acts for the modifying, limiting and enlarging
the duties of the Second Table? Is not holy Text as much a rule of perfection
for the Offices of Justice and Charity, as for religious Duties? Is not Christ
the Lawgiver to both? And can there be a fairer acknowledgment of the plenitude
of his power, than that by Commission he has settled and delegated his
Officers here on earth to make rules for the honest and honorary performance of
what he has indispensably commanded? What therefore they by their Legantine
power duly executed do order, is ordered by him. Quod quis per alium, etc. he
that hears you, hears me.

SECT. 2. Ceremonies thus stated are in some degree necessary (as we usually
call ornamentals in an House necessaries) because such is the exigence of all
external actions, that without them they cannot be solemnly performed, which in
all religious affairs, as well as civil transactions, ought to be respected.
All Societies have their ceremonial Observations as well as fundamental
Constitutions, to which they have so great respect, that they suspect these to
be sore shaken, when the other are removed; and the Catholic Church has ever
thought Ceremonies so subservient to the decent, regular and reverend
performance of Christian Institutions, that without them the Service could not
receive nor retain its due value and esteem. In the Christian Community, Unity
and Uniformity are commanded duties, and all Christians have hitherto believed
Ceremonies are the best fences and securities for them, and such as add much
luster and honor to exercises of Religion. How great a part of the judicial
Law was Ceremonial? not only by types and figures of good things to come,
which as carnal Ordinances were to expire when the fullness of time came, but
appendants and attendants of those good duties then enjoined, which are not
abrogated by Christ. That Text, Matt. 5. 17. respects not one division of the
Law, but every part, so that the whole remains in force to receive its
perfection by the Gospel. The moral Law, though nulled in its presumed ability
to justification, which the grace of Jesus Christ supplieth, yet lives as a
rule of obedience. The judicial stands still in its full strength in matters of
common equity, though as to those Laws which peculiarly respected the Jewish
State its rigor is abated, to supply which God has given to supreme Powers
authority to enact such Decrees as are conducible to the great ends of
Government. The Ceremonial, as it consisted of weak and beggarly rudiments is
determined, yet it holds as a directory to the Church for signification; For
one great end thereof was to teach us to serve God regularly and reverently;
Amesius, Med. Theol. l. 2. c. 15. n. 16. confesses, Institutions merely
Ceremonial do yet contain in them a general equity, and do yet teach us that
certain fitting days (therefore fitting Rites by parity of reason) be assigned
for God's public Worship, Substantia Legis Ceremonialis est perpetua, Zanch.
de Relig. Observe. c. 15. Aphor. 4. J. Frig. p. 9. of his Ref. Pol. thus
expresses it in reference to the whole; There is no abrogation, well there may
be some derogation; which he has borrowed from the Canonists and Casuists, who
thus distinguish, Derogatur Legi cum pars detrahitur; abrogatur cum prorsus
tollitur, Barth. Fum. Tit. Abrog. and he thus explains it; A derogation does
but expound an Edict, as we see the Gospel derogateth from the Law by taking
away the Letter, and requiring it be taken after the Spirit, now the spirit of
the Law is the equity thereof, but the letter is the rigor of the words. We
have a Saying, the reason of the Law is its soul; and every sense affixed
contrary to the reason of its enacting is unreasonable. Now as in several
Statutes of Repeal, some useless or prejudicial things are nulled, but what
conduces to good ends is by cautious proviso's strengthened; so the Mosaical
Law in those things which were burdensome and inconvenient, is quite out of
all, but those that are no way derogatory to the Discipline of Christ and his
easy yoke, and which are very agreeable with the Constitution of Christian
Society, and community have their full virtue. It was the observation of
Melancthon, that the fourth Commandment was Morale praeceptum de Ceremoniali,
which (if I understand him aright) the ultimost reason of the Law is moral, but
what is specially commanded is Ceremonial, and if so, then plainly it is moral,
that some things should be Ceremonial: And because Ceremonies have been by all
almost adjudged serviceable to the common interchangeable good of Religion,
therefore they are not to be esteemed trivial or superfluous; for nothing is so
which is a concurring good mean to a good end, or has a social good end in
good resolutions.

SECT. 3. If the quarrel be at their significancy, certainly the more
significant they are, the more expedient also they are, and the Church has
good authority to expedients, for what is both lawful and laudable is in that
degree necessary; and if S. Paul thought it incumbent on every single
Christian, to provide things honest in the sight of all men, Phil. 4. 8. then
much more is the Church bound to take care in that respect for her self and her
members. Now these honest things which are to be provided are such as in the
approbation of all wise men, whether good or bad, are grave, venerable,
attractive and obliging, and such are our Ceremonies; which are experimented to
be wholesome preservatives of the golden mean betwixt nakedness and vanity,
veneration and superstition, gaudiness and rudeness, and therefore of the kind
of those honest things; But S. Paul is yet more particular, seeming to put
significant Ceremonies, sub Praecepto, 1 Timothy 2. 8. I will therefore (I appoint
it by Apostolical authority, says Diod.) that men lift up holy hands, by this
Ceremony (says he) to express the devotion of the heart; Pisc. seconds him,
the lifting up the hands (says he) is a sign of the elevation of the heart,
with this proviso, not that this gesture is so necessary, that we are
indispensably tied to it; For we find the Publican used it not, but smote upon
his Breast, yet therein he was a true Conformist, who observed an uncommanded
significant rite according to the then received custom, if Dr. Lightfoot's
warranty be good, that in Christ's time they prayed with their hands laid on
their breasts, the right hand being placed on the left, [Prostration was no
commanded Rite, yet approved, 2 Chronicles. 7. 3.] All these had their proper
significations, that of lifting up the hands, an expression both of our faith
and confidence in God, and of innocence and sincerity in our selves, those of
smiting the breast and prostration, notes of humility and self-denial, all of
them, of reverence and submission of mind, and respectively practiced first by
the Jews and after by the ancient Christians, Grot. in loc. S. Paul observed
what he taught, Ephesians. 3. 14. I bow my knees, not metaphorically, but physically,
to testify (as Diod. and Pisc.) his humility in prayer. The Non-conformists
themselves can, when the Fit takes them, uncover their heads, (which is no
natural but topical usage) at their prayers, singing and communicating, which
they either refer to some present sensible object, and then they are as
idolatrous as they fancy the Papists to be, or else they use it as an
expression of some moral duty, which is to observe a significant Ceremony: All
who have approved Ceremonies (and all have done so but this petty peddling
Tribe) have the rather approved them for their significancy, and many who have
liked these, have snuffed at the Romish for their dullness.

SECT. 4. There being no fault in Ceremonies, nor their Significancy, there can
be none in their Imposition, both because what is lawful and laudable may, and
pro hic and nunc, ought to be imposed; and also if Superiors have authority it
lies in this kind of things, because the observation of these depends on their
authority; what is certainly divine, whether Superiors enjoin it or not, we
are to do for God's sake; what is humane, when required by Superiors, we are
to perform for their sakes, who have received such authority from God, what
they exact in duties standing by divine Law natural, or positive, is only
ministerial, what in others is judicial. But if significant Ceremonies be due
expedients in the public worship of God, then for order and uniformity
therein, it is necessary they be settled in a fixed determinate state, because
if this be not observed, the ends for which they are expedient are not
attainable. For as they will not reach the ends of decency and edification,
unless they be significant, and by their significancy expedient, so will they
not procure unity and uniformity unless they be determined, and by virtue of
this determination unanimously and uniformly observed. If then it be requisite
there be a stated order, this must be drawn either by God or Man. It is
acknowledged by all hands, that matters of this nature are left by God to
humane prudence, the order then must be from Man. But if from Man, then either
from an agreement of the People, which is not, for such lives not long, and so
we must begin again; and as the process will be in infinitum, so it is hard to
find that ever any such agreement has been made; if there have, then I demand
whether this agreement be obligatory or not? if not, the agreement is a busy
nothing, the end pretended is no way secured; if it be, then it has the nature
of an imposition to that multitude so agreed, and each particular member
thereof, and also the matter whatsoever it be in its kind, is resolved by that
consenting imposition necessary for its use, because confessedly obliging by
virtue of that conclusive agreement. Or else from some whom God has entrusted
and committed a power to order these things, which is the most natural and
Scriptural way: and so if these impose there, there arises an obligation to
observe what is imposed, because there are express commands for obedience to
them in the word of God, so that a scrupulosity arising from a mixed persuasion
or doubting of the lawfulness of the matters imposed will not acquit the
Conscience, because he that disobeyeth is damned as well as he that doubts.
It is no unwarrantable groundless supposition, that if man had continued in the
state of innocence, even then a settled Government would have been provided,
because that after men were multiplied upon earth they would have drawn into
Socities; but it is utterly unconceivable how the way of living in a Society
could be effected without a ruling power to order it. Rivet. in Exodus 20. p.
157. brings this home to the special matter; Ritus externi, etc. External rites
proper and belonging to Ecclesiastical Polity, and for certain circumstances in
the worship of God, were no way unsuitable to that state. For which he assigns
this reason, p. 152. In statu illo, etc. In that state men should have entered
into Society, and being entered, Ecclesiastical Polity should have its place and
use even in divine Worship. For, though in that state every day would have been
as an holyday, and there was nothing could have diverted man from the
contemplation and worship of God, yet as, even then man, as a living Creature,
might apportion some time for the procurement of necessaries for humane life,
so as a sociable Creature he would submit to order in his public religious
conversation. This will hold the stronglier, if that Hypothesis hold, that God
by a positive Law commanded the observation of the Sabbath to man before he
lapsed; and concluded it is that Adam, being the first Parent of mankind, did
exercise this ruling power over his descendants, and the successive Fathers of
Families, after they were multiplied, did so by the Law of Primogeniture; so
that superiority and inferiority, and therefore subjection, stands by the Law
of nature, otherwise the fifth Commandment is no part thereof.

SECT. 5. What was the reason of our first Reformers retaining Ceremonies, is
expressed in the Preface to the Common Prayer Book, in the Proclamation
published and prefixed to it, in the Editions thereof in King James his time,
which the Lord Bacon highly approved; and fully cleared by our excellent Jewel,
saying, Part. 2. c. 17* divis. 1. We keep still and do esteem Ceremonies, for
that we had a desire all things in the holy Congregation (as S. Paul commanded)
be done with comeliness and order. Vide Synops. in Josh. 22, 25, ad 30. and on
Dan. 6. 10.

SECT. 6. Now if our Separatists be not pleased to receive satisfaction from
the premises, nor from the Writings of many excellent men, both of this Church
and other reformed Protestant Churches; let them consult their dearly beloved
Amesius, provided they take him waking, not dreaming, when he is in his
practical method, not when he is in his polemical heats, unless when he is so
warmly charged by his adversary, that he is driven to give way, who if he do
not determine the case in favor to the Conformists, I must confess I do not
rightly understand him.

His first hint is in his Bell. enerv. To. 2. l. 4. c. 3. n. 9. viz. All
obedience presupposes a Precept, and it is due obedience in reference to God
if it be any way commanded by him, as in the proposal of things determined for
order, decency and edification. For then observantia superioribus est debita,
etc. obedience paid to lawful Superiors in many things not determined by
God, nor specially commanded (N. B.) by him to be observed by all, is
acceptable to God, quatenus pendet, etc. as it is a duty of the Fifth
Commandment.

The next is in l. 3. de consc. c. 18. q. 1. n. 4. Actiones, etc. Actions which
are neither commanded nor forbidden by God, are not matters of obedience or
disobedience, (considered abstractedly, as will soon appear from him) but are
in their intrinsecal nature indifferent. Now all we affirm in this case is,
that those actions which in their latitude and nature are indifferent, are
thereby free to be determined for practice, and being once so determined by
Superiors, it is not indifferent for private persons to cross or thwart their
determinations, to do or not to do those indifferents, because the
determination to practice so far abates the indifferency of that middle
indifferent thing, (which yet after the determination remains such in its
kind.) If herein he does not concur with us, I mistake, for he adds; The common
nature of the thing is indifferent to good or evil, as it is duly or unduly
circumstantiated. Now, say I, hence it follows, that the practice, according to
conformity or nonconformity, in the determination of that indifferent thing, is
respectively either good or bad; good by their tendency to good, that is, if
they promote the good of order, and unity, etc. evil if we do not; he goes on,
p. 191. such gestures are required in prayer, which are expressive of singular
humility, as uncovering the head, kneeling, etc. adding, p. 124. at solemn
prayer it is fit, by the elevation of the hands and eyes, to declare our faith
and hope in our heavenly Father, and by gestures and signs to express the
inward motions; whereupon he determins, these indifferents may not simply,
absolutely and for perpetuity be commanded, yet as they tend to good they
ought, and ought to be commanded by those, who, authoritate pollent, are in
chief authority. Therefore in his opinion, things indifferent in their nature,
are good from their application and settlement in good order, and in reference
to good ends; which (he farther says) needs not to be always actual and
explicit, a virtual is sufficient, and is as much as is generally required,
which obviates that cavil of Pyrgopal. in his answer to Dr. Durel.

His third comes yet more home, Med. Theol. l. 2. c. 14. n. 23. where he grants
other circumstances (as J. O. ordered) with an [and the like] but with this
difference, J. O. terms them natural, which he sticks not to call the common
adjuncts of religious and civil acts, but by others (whom he censures not) are
called religious Rites, or Ecclesiastical Ceremonies; the neglect and contempt
whereof is in some measure a kind of violation of the holiness of Religion, and
cannot be separated from it, but in some manner we derogate from the majesty
and dignity thereof. Then he gives his full judgment of them, n. 24. These are
not particularly commanded in Scripture, nay, its below the majesty thereof to
prescribe them, but they are left to moral prudence, n. 27. These Constitutions
thus determined, are truly said by the best Divines to be partly divine, and
partly humane; partly divine, because in their highest and primary respect they
depend on the will of God, commanding them in general; n. 24. partly humane,
because as to their particular observation they depend on humane prudence; yet
so, that if there be no error in their Constitution they are to be esteemed
and accepted, quasisimpliciter, and as if they were simply and absolutely
divine.

To recapitulate what he has deter-mined in the point.

There are things indifferent in their common nature and kind, these
indifferents, when by special determination through their tendency to good they
are applied thereto, are good; Ecclesiastical Rites and Ceremonies when thus
duly circumstantiated are in the account of those indifferents: these
Ceremonies should be significant, expressive of reverence and humility, of our
faith and hope in God; these significant expressions ought to be constituted,
these Constitutions are to be ordered by humane prudence, this humane prudence
is that of those who precide in chief, these so ordered are religiously to be
observed, and to neglect or contemn them, is to derogate from the majesty of
religious Worship, and to violate its holiness; and lastly, the observation of
them is acceptable to God (say Mr. Cawdry to the contrary what he can) by
virtue of the Fifth Commandment: and so Amesius his Evidence is summed up.

SECT. 7. Those three innocent (as they are justly called) Ceremonies retained
and observed in our Church, she prescribes for by long continued Custom. For,

1. The Priests should have a distinctive Habit, is so generally ruled, that it
has prevailed always in all places, where any Religion has been professed. In
the Patriarchal Ages, the Priests had such Garments whereof Isaac is an
instance, Genesis 27. 15. vide Sis. Poli Syn. in loc. under the Law it is
notorious; Calvin proves it from Zach. 13. 4. whereupon he approves it; in
Matt. 23. 5. it is evident Christ had such a Garment, and Eus. l. 3. c. 25.
relates S. John the Evangelist wore the Priest's Weed; our Greg. notes, p. 112.
that in the Alcoran the Apostles are called El Havariuna, the White men, Viri
Vestibus albis induti, as it is translated, because clothed in white Apparel;
It is probable they would imitate their Master, who did wear a long Linen Coat,
Rev. 1. 13. this was as Martin: Lex Tunica Sacerdotalis Linea, so Bull. such as
the Levitical Priests used, Lev. 6. 10. and Lev. 16. 4. which the Priests of
the Gospel when ordered, ought to do, says Marbach. Professor of Divin. in
Strasbourgh, which Gellasius in Geneva durst not deny, vid. Syn. in loc. and
Peter Mart. has evidenced the practice from good authority, This was not then
a Popish invention, nor is now with the Papists one of their massing or
consecrated Garments.

2. The Sign of the Cross, against which the Vir Doctissimus (Parker) in
Videlius has drawn a long Charge in Folio, is for all his clatter both ancient
and innocent: Mr. Perkins demon. Probl. p. 82. grants the permanent sign was
accustomed about an. 300. and the transient (which is that in use with us) was
for the first 300 years after Christ practiced in the common concerns of life,
as a significant Ceremony, just for those ends we use after Baptism, as is is
specified in the Rubric, and Can. 30. Tertullian often mentions the usage, so
does Saint Cyprian, as in Ser. de Laps. p. 217. Ed. Eras. frons cum signo, etc.
the signed forehead; and Tract. cont. Them. p. 149. qui renati and signo, etc.
who are baptized and signed. S. Hier. Prol. in Job. secundum 70. apologizeth
for himself thus, viz. What Aquila and the judaizing Heretics, Symachus and
Theodotian may undertake, that much more may I, who am a Christian, born of
Christian Parents, and vexillum crucis, etc. carrying on my forehead the banner
of the Cross. The custom then being ancient and innocent, because observed in
the best times, it ought to be retained, and for its better observation be
enjoined by authority, certainly not laid aside to gratify humorous people.

3. As for kneeling at the receiving of the holy Sacrament, though there be not
so clear a constat; yet this is plain, the Ancients used the same gesture they
did at prayer, which never was that of sitting, which neither in it self has,
nor in the esteem of the Ancients ever had any thing of reverence; Tert. de
Orat. c. 12. protests against it, and Amesius, c. 18. de Consc. p. 191. rejects
it, because not expressive of reverence, nor approved in Scripture. Now
kneeling was the ordinary custom, Eusebius. l. 8. c. 5, 8. standing was at
particular times and places, which they used as a significant Ceremony, yet
when they stood, they bowed the body after the manner of worshipping, which is
sufficiently proved by that received rule, Nemo manducat, etc. Let none
communicate but he who first adores; so that ordinarily they kneeled when they
received, and when they did not, they worshipped. The best reformed Churches
use kneeling, and the best learned of those who do not, acknowledge it a
gesture of humility and reverence, which, where it is constituted, ought to be
uniformly observed. The Genevians, in their Annot. on the harmony of
Confessions, are well content every particular Church should use her liberty in
such cases; particularly they make mention of kneeling at the Communion, and
use of all such Ceremonies as now are observed by the Lutherans, Copes, Organs,
etc. and had been used before by Papists, Annot. Sect. 14. Obs. 4. ad Confess.
Bohem. As an upshot to this, when an English fugitive Separatist, proposed his
Thesis, de Adiaphoris, at Geneva, he could not be permitted to discuss them.

The whole may be drawn up in this order.

Ceremonies are lawful things, some of this kind are expedient, these
expedients ought to be significant, these may and occasionally ought to be
imposed, these so imposed are to be observed, and those we practice caeteris
paribus are to be settled rather than any other, because thereby we honor our
first Reformers, we obey our lawful Superiors, we keep up our alliance with
other reformed Churches, sure with the chiefest and best; and which is more, we
hold a firm correspondence with the primitive and present Catholic Church.

CHAP. VI.
AS for the observation of Holidays, the Grandees of the Sectarians seemed once
willing to admit Festivals, provided they were not called Holidays; which was
nothing else in them but a silly sour singularity and morosity; for more
learned and much better men than they never scrupled at the name. Mr. Perkins,
Demonst. Problem. p. 232. n. 6. asserts this; Holy they are, not in and for
themselves, but for the holy duties then performed to God. Dr. Rivet in Ex. 20.
p. 167. declares, A relative holiness belongs to them, and they might very
properly be called Holidays, ratione finis, in respect to their ends and uses,
being separated for holy exercises. So they were constituted and observed in
the primitive Church. S. Chrysostom. Hom. in Ascen. has assured us, The Catholic
Church observed six recurring anniversary Solemnities in memory of Christ's
Nativity, Epiphany, Passion, Resurrection, Ascension and mission of the Holy
Ghost. The matter of fact is notorious. In the Reign of Dioclesian, an. 294.
and by the Greek Menology, on the twenty fifth of December, the Christians
assembled to commemorate the Birth of our Lord, whereof the Emperor having
received intelligence, commanded the doors of the Church to be shut, and fire
set to it, which soon consumed both them and it. Julian, in an hellish design,
joined with the Christians in their public Assembly on the sixth of January
called the Epiphany. The Festival (for it is called by Phil. (...)) and the Fast
of our Savior's Passion was solemnly celebrated, and that from long custom,
Eus. l. 2. c. 16. The dispute so early started about the time of the
observation of Easter puts that beyond dispute. Just. Mart. Resp. ad Orthod.
115. speaks of its being kept (...), from the Apostles time; Eusebius. (...), vid.
Eus. l. 5. c. 23, 24, 25. and S. Aug. Ep. 119, ex authoritate Scripturarum, and
universae Ecclesiae consensione. The Ancients called Ascension Tessaracostae,
Scal. de Emend. Temp. many are their Homilies on that day, Conc. Elib. c. 43.
treats of Whitsuntide, as an ancient Solemnity, censuring all those who neglect
it as Heretics. The matter of fact is backed with a good reason. For if the
primitive Christians were strict in the observation of the Birth-days (as they
were called, but indeed Death-days of the Martyrs) we cannot imagine they would
be forgetful fo the joyful days wherein the Lord, and the Lord of the
Martyrs, begun, continued and perfected the work of the Redemption of mankind:
But evident it is those days were religiously observed. S. Cypr. l. 3. Ep. 6.
expressed his great care and zeal those commemorations and solemn Offices
should not be slurred. Rivet. in Ex. 20. p. 154. says, Ratio postulat, etc.
Reason requires, that not only certain days, but sufficient be retained, even
as many as the right constitution, safety, good of the Church and the glory of
God requires. For we being exonerated from the Jewish yoke, may have more,
ought not have fewer days for the service of God than they had, but they had
more than one in seven, some whereof were of humane institution. This he
confirms, p. 163. Quod de die, etc. that which was expressly said of the
Seventh-day, by analogy and parity of reason, respects any day which the Church
has appointed, and in common use has observed for holy Meetings: whereupon
all Interpreters do conceive, not only the Lord's day, but all other lawfully
instituted Festivals are comprehended under the Fourth Commandment. But a good
word from Geneva may do more service, than all other authorities and reasons.
Hear a whole gang of Genevians at once, Every Church may use her liberty in
observing Ember-days, and Holidays consecrated to the godly memory of the
Saints. Annot. in Harm. Confess. Sect. 16. Obs. 1. ad Conf. Boh. and retain the
use of singing Christian Hymns and Songs upon the Holidays; Obs. 2. Zanch. in
Expl. c. 2. ad Col. so far approves them, that though he thinks there is no
absolute necessity for them, yet there is a profitable necessity in their due
observation; Bishop Dav. in his exposition of the same words, has furnished us
with three substantial reasons, who will, may consider them.

CHAP. VII.
THE last which is opposed, is the Doctrine of the Church, exemplified in the
Book of Articles. The Independent Sophi has expressed so great kindness for 36
of them, that by his Verdict, woe be to him that shall dispute them, no less
correction will satisfy his tender Conscience than exile; but away with the
other three, if they be not removed, no recipe of reformation or condescension
will work kindly with him. All this is but a Copy of his Countenance, when he
puts on his considering Cap somewhat else must march off and be disbanded.
Certainly for his dear sake, and the good service he expects from his Herd and
Comerades, the six Homilies against Rebellion must be cashiered, and cast off
to the dogs. Well! This is only one Doctour's opinion; A very good Friend of
his would have the nineteenth Article quite cut off, because therein (as he
sagely guesseth) the Church is defined directly as the Independents define it.
In good time! till these two be agreed about the definition of the Church,
there is little hopes of the much talked of Union; how this noble reflection
will go down with him, let him certify when the project of Union is effected;
but for his comfort, that he may take heart again, that suggestion of the noble
Peer was the product of his malice and ignorance. For the Church of England
reprobates Independency (which is, that every particular Congregation is an
independent Body, not subordinate to any superior Ecclesiastical Authority, as
Spanhem. Ep. ad Dav. Buch. p. 74. with Rivet and Poliander might have informed
him) as a singular schismatical Sect, purely Donatistical: yet if the Doctor
be offended that his beloved Friend thus girds at Independency, perhaps his
other folly, that the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Articles are dark, and not so
full as he desires, may regain his favor; Whether it does so or no is not
considerable, men of clearer eyes and better set think otherwise. For they have
resolved, that the Church of England had gone so far in these points, as could
with perspicuity, and safety be concluded from the Scripture. Mos. Amyr. de
Secess. ab Eccl. Romans p. 160. and inde. Bishop Daven. de pace inter Evang.
Proc. p. 20. and ad pacem Eccles. adhort. p. 146, 147. This is certain, they
were variously stated by Protestants both at home and abroad. What the judgment
of Melancth. Bulling. Eras. Sarcer. etc. was, is well known. What our Bishop
Hooper held is fairly discovered in his Epistle to the Reader prefixed to his
Treatise on the Ten Commandments: what Bishop Latimer, is found in his Sermon
on Phil. 3. and on Septuagesima, and in his Sermon on Acts 13. 48. This is
remarkable, many in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, returning home
from Geneva, broached Calvin's Doctrine here, one whereof wrote a smart Letter
to an ancient Divine, who had been exiled too, charging him for his opposition
to that Doctrine with Pelagianism, whereunto he, secundo Eliz. framed an
Answer, wherein he purged himself and others of his judgment from the
imputation, and by way of recrimination proved the Calvinists to be Pelagians.
But a dapper younker, and through paced Bigot, is not only angry at these
before excepted, but falls foul on the Sixth Article; what moved him at this, I
cannot conjecture, unless he bogled at the Apocrypha; but perhaps I may guess
what heated him against the One and Twentieth Article; forsooth, in his wise
judgment, the Kirk with its Provincials may meet, etc. without the King's leave
first obtained, and sit too contrary to his express command. I may also
possibly hit at his displeasure at the Thirty Fourth Article, because by it he
and his Drove must be concluded Schismatics. Great reason he had to keck at
the Thirty Sixth Article: For when he was presented to the Class of revolted
Ministers with their Lay Elders for Ordination, they were not provided at first
for a cast of their Office; for not knowing how to pick out a form of
Ordination from the Directory, they were at a loss till they received one from
Scotland, and then they gravely proceeded; to work they went on all hands
without any scruple, that they had stinted the Spirit in the use of that set
Form.

CHAP. VIII.
HAving considered the subject matters according to the rules of Religion,
somewhat remains to be added from the common measures of prudence to overruled
any motion tending to an alteration; which are to be taken from the resolutions
of wise Heathens and Christians, who have foreseen and discovered the danger
and mischiefs of such attempts, and then to make it appear, that those persons
for whose behalf, or their own instance, such a motion is made, are not
qualified for such a respect.

SECT. 1.
Number. 1. Considering Heathen have decried all innovations in religious matters,
especially Plut. in Camil. is positive, viz. Subjects are to be kept in
conformity to the Worship of their Country by a coercive power, (...), etc.
because men's humors and passions are so irregular and irrational, that
restraints must be set upon them, which he proved from common observation,
(...), etc. Men by the fierceness of their depraved dispositions, are now
hurried into superstition and sedition, and anon fall into profaneness and
irreligion. Maecenas in Dio, advised Augustus (...), etc. above all things do
thou thy self worship the Deity according to the Constitution of the Country,
and enforce others by punishing obstinate Recusants; and do thus not only for
God's sake, but in good policy for thine own and the Countries. For if the
refractary Fanatics and Changlings be not curbed, they will plot and move for
alterations in the Law, whereby (...), etc. Conventicles will be formed, in
which Conspiracies will ensue to the danger of Monarchy. Upon this counsel the
Emperor gave this following strict charge to the Senators, (...), etc.
Maintain the settled Laws vigorously, giving no way to change, assigning this
reason; for those things which continue in the same state, though perhaps worse
in themselves, are yet more profitable for the public. Lips. from Stob. tells,
that when a noble Peer taxed Cotys, King of Thrace, with tyranny, because he
commanded the penal Laws to be put in execution, sawcily saying, (...), etc.
This is madness not government; the King soberly and mildly replied, This my
madness keeps my Subjects in good order, viz. The Fanatics and Hypocrites in
their right wits, and the peaceable Loyal in their just rights. It was no bad
order, that whosoever should make a motion for a change, should present it with
an halter about his neck, unless he could make it appear to be just, reasonable
and practicable.

Number. 2. Christians are of the same mind. Lact. l. de Ira Dei, c. 12. says,
Quid erit in homine truculentius, etc. What can be more horrid in man than that
without fear of God, he can elude or defy the force of Laws? Eusebius. l. 8. de
Proep. Evan. c. 2. showing the happiness of the Jewish State under Moses and
Joshua, attributed this to their concord, and to their excellent temper of
mind, in that they abhorred all innovations, esteeming it the chiefest point of
prudence, not to enterprise any thing which might infringe or abate the tenor
of the Law. The Presbyters and Deacons of Rome writing to S. Cypr. l. 2. Ep. 7.
are very positive, Quid magis, etc. What can be more necessary either in times
of peace or persecution than to exercise due severity, according to Divine
order? S. Augustine fully, Tract. 11. in Joh. Admirantur Donatistae, etc. The
Donatists wonder that Christian Princes should bestir themselves against the
detestable dividers of the Church; but to abate their wonderment he subjoyns
this reason, Si vero, etc. If they did not labor to suppress them, how could
they give an account to God of their power which they had received from him?
because it is the duty of Christian Kings that they in their times preserve
their Mother the Church in peace. That smart saying of his, Ep. 73. Possid. is
not to be forgotten, Magis quid agas, etc. Think rather what course you are to
take with those who will not obey Laws, and how to handle them, than to trouble
your self to make it appear that their disobedience to Laws is sinful. This
also shows that the Christian Emperors did make severe Laws against the
Schismatics of those times; so did Constantine and his Sons, Aug. Ep. 166. Ed.
Bas. To. 2. so did Valentian, Gratian, Theodosius, Arcadius, but Justinian took
the safest course, for, the Heretics being great traders, he came even with
them, none should trade, (...), etc. but the Orthodox, the rest had six months
given them to consider whether they would conform or no. Evident it is that as
the Emperors handled them, sometimes more severely, sometimes more remissly,
(as the exigence of their affairs, and state of the Empire would permit,) the
Church and State did accordingly enjoy their peace and quiet, or else were
pestered with intestine broils and mischiefs. The Governors of the Church were
not behind hand to do their part; for the Laodicean Council forbids them
admission into the Church, c. 6. prohibits any Orthodox man to give his Sons or
Daughters in marriage unto them, c. 31. yea not to pray with them, c. 33. and
though it be true S. Aug. and Optat. called the Donatists Brethren, yet at last
they would not; that was, after that they had rejected or laid aside the use of
the Lord's Prayer, as many of our Fanatics have done. But above all, Solomon
prohibits the removal of what had been long settled by paternal power, Prove.
22. 28. which the Ephesine Fathers with many other Ancients, have applied to
Church Customs and Constitutions. Hereupon all wise men have dreaded the
dissolution and abolition (which is the Puritans work of Reformation) of what
has been firmly established by good authority, finding the provoking and
irritating of humors by medicines in order to a cure, have often proved mortal;
and have often resolved, a tolerable sore is much better than an hazardous
application for a remedy. The Lawyers have a saying, Better a mischief than an
inconvenience, which can signify only this, that a remedy by admitting only
an inconvenience has often proved more mischievous in the event, than the
mischief they endeavored to avoid; because every notable change of State is
apt to produce a world of unavoidable mischiefs, it being morally impossible
upon the exchange of a mischief for an inconvenience to prevent a new set of
mischiefs, which are not ordinarily found till they be felt. It is notorious,
that even preposterous and unseasonable pressures of present remedies against
either some present conceited mischiefs, or fansied inconveniences has choked
the heart of all the main and principal concerns which ought first to have been
respected, and frustrated all those great ends whose advancement has been
pretended; and whilst the greatest care of our Patriot Reformers should have
been neither to tempt God, nor to weary and harden his Vicegerent, they have
most impudently, imprudently and wickedly provoked both by their rebellious
actings, and preposterous courses. Heu! probatum est, witness, (not to go
farther back) our late Exclusioners and No-money-men.

Number. 3. Admitting a change be submitted to, this will not gain nor secure
those that are given to change; For upon every such change, they are ready ever
and anon to change their principles and practices. The Donatists, the great
Grandsires of our Sectaries, did so; at first they yelped, Quid Imperatori,
etc. What had the Emperor to do in Church affairs? but S. Augustine tells us,
with the change of the times they changed their note; for, taking their time,
they petitioned Julian the Apostate ( supplicantibus Rogatiano and Pontio,
says Opt.) for liberty of Conscience, which he readily granted them upon an
hellish design ( ut per sacrilegas dissensiones, as S. Aug.) that by their
sacrilegious dissensions he might destroy Christianity hip and thigh, root and
branch, if possible. Thus it fared with our Boutefeus, they sadly complained
and heavily declaimed against those Laws (and do yet) which our most Christian
Kings had enacted for the keeping their Subjects in obedience, with penalties
upon the seditious disturbers of the peace, and transgressors of Law upon the
same Donatistical principle; yet upon the lamentable change of the times they
procured from the Junto's Keepers, and Noll, cruel Edicts against the regular
Sons of the Church, which were executed (as Bishop Sanderson truly noted)
without justice or mercy, that they had reason to complain, as S. Augustine did
of the Donatists they were so mischievous, ut Barbarorum facta, etc. That the
actings of Barbarians were more mild than theirs, Aug. Ep. 122.

Number. 4. All the forementioned Petitioners did earnestly solicit for the
Religion established by Law, avouching a change thereof was unjust, most
impious and uncharitable. They had reason so to do; for that abovecited Text,
Prove. 22. 28. does at least insinuate, that it is contrary to all Religion,
equity and prudence upon every motion or singular humor of absurd and
unreasonable Malcontents or Phantasticks to discompose or unhinge what our
prudent and fatherly Governors have industriously set for the public peace
and tranquillity, and have been long received with the approbation and full
satisfaction of all good and peaceable Subjects. But there is another Text,
Prove. 24. 21, 22* which probably wrought on them to be so zealous for the
established Religion; My son, fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not
with them that are given to change, for their calamity shall rise suddenly, and
who knows the ruin of them both? A sad caveat this! destruction is awarded
not only on the changelings, but on the moderate medlers, who are agitatours,
mediators and apologizers for them; who though they will not justify them,
yet dare plead for them, speak a good word for them, and as much as they can
with safety to themselves palliate and smother their crimes. These though,
stylo novo, they be called, or miscalled the moderate, sober party, yet they
answer not the name. For they are either crafty designing evil men, or
well-meaning, but easilydeluded men; and generally are such who carry fair to
all, true to nothing but interest; fast friends to Mammon, and underminers of
the Government.

Number. 5. That severities are to be exercised on transgressors of Law, we may
warrant from Scripture. God settled the Eighth and Tenth Commandments, which he
improved by an explanatory Act, Deuteronomy. 19. 14. which after he revived by an
additional Act with a smart penalty and sanction, Deuteronomy. 27. 17. to heighten and
enforce the obligation. That this was God's intention, is evident from the
Ceremonies adhibited in the promulgation, which were not performed in common
but solemn form. For the Levite was enjoined to proclaim the Sanction with an
audible voice, the people were to give their assent and consent thereto by
pronouncing Amen. The Jewish Tradition is, that one moiety of the Tribes should
stand on Mount Gerazim, the other six Tribes on the descent of Mount Ebal, the
Levite should pronounce both the blessing and curse appendant to the Law, (
Josh. 8. 33.) first turning his face to Mount Gerazim he published the
blessing, viz. Blessed is he that removes not, etc. then wheeling about to
Mount Ebal he denounced the curse, viz. Cursed is he that removes his
neighbors Landmarks. Wretchedly mistaken then are our Fanatics in their
Case-divinity, who resolve it is sufficient for them, when resolved to affront
the Law, to submit to its penalty, as if the mulct were designed, not the duty,
and this the rather because they are provided with variety of shifts to get off
scotfree. For though in those Laws which are, pure poenales, merely penal, for
their violation this subterfuge may hold, because the will of the Lawgiver may
be either the performance of the duty, or undergoing the penalty as a competent
satisfaction; yet in those which are termed mixed penalties, partly moral (not
only civil) partly penal, the evasion will not relieve them, because the
intention of the Lawgiver is regular obedience, the penalty is only respected
as a more effectual means to induce and infer the prescribed duty, and to
prevent all neglects and contempts. The ground of enacting and exacting such
penalties is taken from common observation, Meliores sunt, quos amor, etc. Good
men love Government, and their Governors, whom they will readily obey; The Law
is not made for a righteous man, 1 Timothy 1. 9. but the many, the mobile must be
kept under the awe of Sanctions, and the lash of the Law, Arist. l. 10. Aeth.
c. 9. has long since observed, (...), etc. Men do not usually obey out of
respect [or conscience-sake] but for wrath, and fear; neither do they abstain
from evil for its baseness and badness, but for the punishmets attending
thereon. S. Aug. l. 2. cont. Pet. c. 83. has excellently declared the great
benefit of penalties annexed to Laws. Timor poenarum, etc. The fear of
punishment, if it does not remove the error, yet it will prevent its spreading
malignity; if it take not the cause away, yet it hinders most of its
mischievous effects.

SECT. 2. They for whom the motions of union, comprehension and toleration are
intended and promoted are not persons qualified for such respects. For,

Number. 1. Ever since any of their persuasions appeared in the world, which was
an. 1536. the same year that Jesuitism crawled abroad, they have been noted and
censured as a most turbulent, unpeaceable generation, of the same temper with
those of whom the Psalmist speaks, I labor for peace, but when I speak unto
them thereof, they make them ready for Battle. Upon their first rising,
Zwinglius discovered a strong malignant humor in them, insomuch that when
Oecolampadius had a desire to entertain them in Offices of trust, he cautioned
him not to own them, but for all that he went on in his project of
comprehension and union so far, that at last he found himself mistaken, and
confessed, he had undertaken a matter of more discommodity than profit. Gualter
reputed them such virulent Incendiaries, that in a Letter to Dr. Cox, Bishop of
Ely, dated Mar. 6. 1574. he passed this sharp censure on them, If they begin in
this sort, having not full possession of their Kingdom, what shall we think
they will do, if they obtain absolute authority? and in his Letter to Dr.
Sands, Bishop of London, he thus concludes, Quare video, etc. Wherefore I
conceive we ought to be very careful lest from the wounds of the Roman
Monster, not yet subdued, a multitude of mad-caps arise. Bullinger compared
them to the Roman Tribunes, a seditious Sect, possessed with an unsatiable
desire of rule and principality. What those judicious observing men had espied
in them, we of this Kingdom have felt and found to some purpose. In Edward the
Sixth's time, they with might and main obstructed the pious and moderate
endeavors of our first Reformers by their loud and lewd clamours, which gave
the Papists an occasion to reproach the Reformation as tumultuous; whereupon
the Government thought fit at once (if possible) to silence the virulent
calumnies of the one party, and satisfy the groundless scrupulosities of the
other, by framing another Edition of the Common Prayer Book with this
Protestation, There was no harm in the first. This the clamorous party were
offended at, and secretly repined at, yet because it was seconded with a severe
Sanction, they durst not publicly inveigh against it: so proved it is, if
Religion and reason will not prevail with them to a conviction, yet severity
will still them from murmuring and tumult. In Queen Mary's days many of them
were exiled, a condition which might have calmed their furious and raging
spirits, yet even then, they raised those scandalous troubles at Frankford,
which begot such heats and animosities as were never since wholly allayed. For
hereupon those squabbles and contests which soon after happened in Queen
Elizabeth's days were heightened. The peace of the Church was disturbed, and
the minds of the people distracted with the senseless brawlings of Whittingham,
Gilby and Goodman, who had the impudence to justify Wiat's rebellion,
asserting his cause was God's. Great were the insolences of White, Rowland and
Hawkins, when they appeared before Dr. Grindal then Bishop of London. Hereupon
the Pope thought it a seasonable opportunity to fish in these troubled waters;
and then followed the Rebellion in the North, and the Spanish Invasion, etc. In
all which her Majesty's distresses, the Puritans cunningly working upon her
necessities, still persisted in their turbulent outrages, vexing her righteous
Soul with seditious Petitions and virulent Pamphlets, such as the Admonition,
Diotrephes, Have ye any work for a Cooper, etc. These high provocations and
affronts to Majesty occasioned those expressions from Archbishop Whitgift (who,
in Dr. Fuller's judgment, was one of the worthiest Prelates that ever the
English Hierarchy did enjoy) viz. If the Puritans be not sharplier dealt
withal, than hitherto they have been, they would not only tear asunder this
Church with Schism and Faction, but in time overthrow the whole state of the
Kingdom, and work more harm than ever the Papists did: and again, If way be
given to their clamours and surmises, it would cause that confusion, which
hereafter the State would be sorry for. These also provoked the moderate and
famous Martyrologist John Fox thus to censure them, I wonder (said he) Quis tam
turbulentus genius, etc. what turbulent Spirit has possessed those factious
heads of the Puritans, they are cunning Impostours, canting Jugglers, subtle
contrivers of mischief, who will never give over till they have brought all
into bondage, etc. at last he comes off with these sad thoughts, If ever they
gather strength in this Kingdom, it troubles me to relate what sad commotions I
foresee, Full. Hist. l. 9. f. 106. What the one foretold, and the other foresaw,
we have seen and found: yea Queen Elizabeth her self, after a long trial of
moderate ways, said, Such are the restless Spirits of that factious people,
that no quiet was to be expected from them, till they were utterly suppressed.
Nevertheless the Government still thought by forbearance and mildness to have
prevailed with them for an answerable peaceable behavior, which proved by
their peevish obstinacy ineffectual. But a Plot being discovered against the
State under color of Reformation, an. 1591. in the Thirty Fifth of Queen
Elizabeth a sharp Act of Parliament was framed, which proved so advantageous to
her, that during her after Reign the Furies durst not be over-active. The Queen
dying, they grew big again with hopes and expectations of better success, which
proved like the untimely fruit of a woman. But being stirring Animals they by
their Emissaries into Scotland had the advantage of being the first who saluted
and complemented King James, moving him withal for a Reformation. The wise
King knew them too well to trust them, accounting them more false than any
Moss-troopers or Outlaws. What his answer was to their motion is uncertain, in
all probability it was a civil declinator, referring the case to farther
consideration. For, upon his coming into England, he was efforted with the
Millemanus Petition, which was convincingly confuted by both Universities, and
slighted by the King, yet so, that he promised them a conference at Hampton
Court, which proved as unlucky to them, as the Disputation Primo Elizab. had
been to the Papists. Meeting then with these disappointments they cooled in the
quest of their Reformation-work by Petitions and Motions, falling upon new
methods of mischief. These were by malicious close suggestions to infuse
groundless fears and jealousies into the minds of well-meaning men. To manage
which more advantageously for their desperate and destructive designs, they,
perceiving the people to be great lovers of an Imagenary Liberty, and of the
established Religion, played their Game under the color of advancing the
Liberty of the Subject (which they resolved to engross) and the preservation of
the Religion established by Law (which they intended to destroy) by degrees
thus cunningly working themselves into a State Faction. To make this more
popular they ceased not to alarm the Kingdom with the desperate ends the
Papists proposed to themselves. This strategeme they so closely followed and
craftily improved, that in the first Parliament of the most Christian King,
Charles the Martyr, and incomparable Prince in all religious and honorable
accomplishments, they industriously represented the growth of Popery, and the
dangerous Plots of the Papists and popishly affected, that the thoughts both of
King and People being taken up with these fears, they might without observation
increase into numbers and strength. The King well enough discerned this, though
at first he would not make it openly known, hoping the Gentlemen would calm,
but they grew madder; therefore at long run, in the Second Session of this
Third Parliament, he was necessitated to tell them roundly, That he looked on
this pretense, as a design to divert from all such businesses as he had
recommended to them, under color of taking care for this. But by pursuing
these arts they at length got the Militia of the Kingdom at their disposal,
being assisted thereto by the perjurious, treacherous practices of the
Schismatical and Atheistical Members of the great City, and seconded by an Army
of most perfidious, hypocritical Scots, with whom they agreed for brotherly
assistence upon most dishonorable terms. Now to find out their hypocrisy,
they, (being thus prepared) left the Papists unmolested, as an inconsiderable
party not worth looking after, farther than to drive on their devilish designs;
to which end, they remitted to some the penalties of the Law exacted for their
Recusancy. Pym, one of their great sticklers, took a bribe of thirty pounds of
one of them, as was averred against him, his Majesty's Declaration, Aug. 2.
1642. others of them they seduced from their Loyalty, entertaining them in
their Army, twenty or thirty being taken in one Troop or Company, his Majesty's
Declaration upon the Battle at Edgehill. (This the Villains in great hypocrisy
objected against the King) and promising to others, if they would assist them
against the King, they would repeal or relax all the penal Laws against
Recusancy. Nay, they publicly declared, October. 6. 1642. That if the Papists
would bring in any considerable Sum upon the Propositions (those, by which they
had drawn from the City and other Counties eleven millions; the Author of the
History of the two Junto's says more) they should be received; and its credibly
reported, they hired Owen Roe O-neal to raise the Siege at London Derry, when
beleagured by his Majesty's Forces, Hist. Ind. Part 2. p. 245. What dismal
effects those practices at last produced are generally known, yet this ought to
be remembered, That overtures upon overtures, condescentions upon
condescentions, concessions upon concessions were not only offered but
confirmed to them, which only emboldened and animated them to farther insolent
and unreasonable demands: They had always nineteen Propositions in readiness,
which they knew could not be granted in honor or conscience; if they had, they
had more in their Budgets, or else the old ones must have a new construction to
suit with the sense of the Bigots and Boutefeus, in good earnest, true
Protestant Gypsies and Gusmans; which will be fullier discovered in the next
consideration.

Number. 2. They are a partial hypocritical pack, a match for any Mufties or
Jesuits in their black Arts. Smectymnuus will be hard enough hand to hand with
Sanders, Campian, Parsons, Garnet and Oldcorn: The two Independent John's, J.
G. and J. O. will at any hour of the day venture a pass with Joh. Mariana, and
Eudaemon Johannes. To exemplify this note by instances. Once a crew of them
resolved, It was in the Princes power to reform or remove an ungodly Clergy,
their meaning was, to collogue a little, and to step into their preferments,
wherein when they failed, then the tide turned. Princes have nothing to do in
Ecclesiastical affairs, but to execute the Decrees of the Kirk, which gallant
Mr. Traverse thus held forth; They are to submit their Sceptres, etc. which by
his reference to Isa. 49. 23. is in plain English to say, They are to lick the
dust of the Presbyters feet, and kiss their toes. In an. 1605. a Club of them
protested, The Magistrate needs not respect Law, he may dispense with it, or
favorably interpret it (sure enough for their sakes) but if he practice it,
where they are not concerned, then the cry goes, he attempts an arbitrary
Government, their liberty, property, and Religion lies at hap hazard. Sometimes
the Law is a Bulwark to fence out Tyranny, on a sudden its an humane invention,
and God's people must order their lives according to God's word, and do the
work of their heavenly Father. Now they have so great reverence for Oaths, they
are not free to take them, anon they will glibly down with them, and again
vomit them, and Apologize for the violation of them; no Oaths can bind the
Conscience against the Reformation, England's Reprover, p. 158. and the Oaths
we have taken must not be examined according to the interpretations of men; so
Marshal, foreman of Smect. and Brother Downing. O false Lads! who can play at
fast and loose with their Consciences, which are so very tender, that they can
bend and bow to every opportunity of advantage. If they have no interest to
serve, or can maintain, and keep it without conformity, they must not conform
for a world; but if the loss of Offices of trust or profit, or hopes of gain to
themselves or advantage to the Cause fall into their view, they can submit and
perform what is required in the 25th. Car. II. Time was when the thirteenth to
the Romans was only safe counsel, or a politickly contrived Ordinance, when
King was the King in his Courts, not in his person, and the damnation
threatened, was lying in Prison, or suffering on a Gibbet; The case is soon
altered with the times, and then upon every revolution Saint Paul spoke no
longer like a Statesman, but as a Casuist, not in point of prudence, but
Conscience, first to the Patriots, then to the Keepers, then to Noll, in all
which changes, damnation was changed from loss or bondage into wrath to come
and eternal vengeance. For a long time their talk was of Providence, and their
successes; first their cause was God's cause, which he would prosper for their
sakes (his People, his fecret Ones) and for his promises, whereof they had a
large stock in the Old Testament, and the Revelations; (this had a strong smack
of profaneness) then God prospered their cause, therefore it was God's cause,
(a pure Mohammedan conclusion;) now that its at a loss, the note is, (and mark
it, I beseech you) God in the ways of his Providence toward us walks in the
dark, the good people must unite till the day appears, and the good hour comes;
in the mean time, let us make our appeals to God, as the Newcastle
Conventicling Doctor Gilpin held forth, an. 1671. and be very careful that
our zeal to God be not interrupted by our duty to the King; but above all, be
free to support your painful precious Preachers, that we want not tongues and
hands for the old cause. They constantly condemn that in others, which is their
common practice. Monopolies were once a grievance, yet the Drivers were very
liberal in their Grants of such to their officious tools, King's Declaration,
Aug. 12. 1642. and in his Declaration concerning the Treaty at Oxford. They
made an hideous hubbub that subscription to some Articles of peace was required
of those that pretended a desire to take upon them the ministerial Function,
yet they themselves were rigid exactours in the like case. They scorn all the
Canons and Constitutions of the Church, as the Precepts of men, but every one
at his peril must submit to the orders of their Synods. They fiercely inveigh
against Impositions; Oh! they are apt to whet humane nature (very humble
patient men they the mean time) to wild and forbidden courses; (This looks not
only like a charge against the Government, but a threatening too) yet these
murmurers against lawful authority interdicted the Common Prayer Book by
penalties from five pounds to ten, etc. and obtruded the Directory by a penalty
from five pounds to fifty: and that Imposition of July, 25. 1684. was at once
both Antiehristianly traitorous and tyrannical. They tartly tax the Romanists
(justly enough as to the matter of the charge) for clipping and cutting the
Tongues of their Writers, yet most unjustly, because hypocritically as to
themselves, who use the same craft. That most perspicuous passage of Calvin in
his Epistle to Cardinal Sadolet, wherein he declares, They deserve to be
anathematized who reject Episcopacy, where it may be retained (which is really
to pronounce an Anathema on all our English Sectaries) is quite purged out in
the two latter Editions of Beza and Gellasius. This was discovered by the Right
Reverend and learned Author of that Treatise called, The Serpent Salve, p.
220. What was to be found in the Argentorate Edition of Bucer, is left out in
the Geneva, as Grotius enforms us. The Author of the Friendly Debate, par. 2.
p. 404. has detected the like fraud in corrupting Dr. Sibbs's Treatise called,
The Souls Conflict. The words of John Careless, in reference to the
Common Prayer Book, at his examination by Dr. Martin were exemplified in the
first Edition of Acts and Monuments, fol. 1531. which in the second Edition, by
the Legerdemain of the then. Puritans, were not to be found: so in the Edition
which I had and carefully searched, I could not find what Dr. Hammond, (View of
the Directory, p. 17.) relates of John Hullier to the same purpose, which makes
me suspect some Sectarian Hocus in that also. That they corrupted the last
Books of Mr. Hooker's Ecclesiastical Policy, may probably be concluded from
what we find reported in the Book called, The Life of Hugh Peter's: and lastly,
that when the Book of the Thirty Nine Articles was printed, they procured the
Twentieth, [ viz. That the Church has power, etc.] to be left out. If it were
certainly known what their design was in the Tickets which were dispatched into
the several Counties, before Saint Bartholomew, 1662. their hypocrisy would be
so laid open that no Apology could be made. Thus much I know, it was to assure
their inferior sort of Ministers, that with their good leave, they might
comply and conform, and if they prevailed in the design they were then carrying
on, notwithstanding their present compliance, they would favorably entertain,
and as it should happen, prefer them.

Number. 3. They are a singular Sect, divided from the whole visible Church, and
every particular regularly formed Church throughout the whole Christian world.
This we are sure, if they lived in any such Church, and acted there in
opposition to their established Forms and Rites, they would be concluded
unsufferable Schismatics, and be more sharply handled than here they are or
have been. They are true Ishmaelites, Ishmael was a wild man, his hand was
against every man, and every man's hand was against him, Genesis 16. 12. They
conclude all the Christian world besides their Brethren in iniquity to be
Antichristian, and all Christian Chruches condemn them as Schismatics. They
dissent from this Christian Church whereof they are or ought to be Members, and
in that respect they dissent from the Catholic Church primitive and
successive; But this, say some, is hard measure, they are our Brethren, and our
Protestant Brethren. In good time! that now at last (upon a mischievous design
which is easily understood and might be soon manifested) Malignants from 40 to
60 should be taken in into the number of the Brethren; sure we are, they
received harder measure from these their false Brethren, than Jacob did from
his Brother Edom, Obad. 10, etc. They are in the Scripture notion strange
Brethren, who can find in their hearts to plunder, and murder their now lately
adopted Brethren. But how comes these (dear Brethren with a mischief) to be
dubbed Protestants? Are they so called because they dissent from all Protestant
Churches? Protestant signifies with them another thing than a reformed
Catholic, which every Protestant is, or else he is no true Protestant. Three
acceptations of the word [Protestant] are now in fashion; for first,
Protestants are a Set of pretenders in opposition to, and exclusion of all
others who profess Christianity, if this be their notion they are pure
Donatists, and the exclusioners have as much Antichristian pride and
uncharitableness, as the Pope, or his most bigoted Papalins; it is an assumed
name, (...), as the Greeks name it, who justly esteem every such a badge of
division and apostasy. Lact. (a Latin too) thought so, Christiani esse
desierunt, etc. They cease to be Christians, who, forsaking the name of Christ,
usurp to themselves humane and alien denominations. Or, secondly, Protestants
are but Antipapists, all who renounce the Communion of the Church of Rome, and
oppose the Pope's Sovereignty, without any more to do, commence Protestants; in
short, they are no Papists, therefore they are Protestants, or which is far
more absurd, they are enemies, sworn and foresworn enemies to Episcopacy and
Monarchy, and they then are true Protestants. The Demagogues, and Sectaries do
frequently thus sense it, which is indeed to reproach it, and make it odious to
all who love peace and truth. For then all Doctor Stillingfleet's Gnats, which
are now metamorphosed into Vipers, then all Doctor Burgesses putredinous
Vermin of bold and frantic Sectaries (so he honored them Ser. before Comm.
Nov. 5. 1641. who erewhile were his Bandogs, which he let loose and hounded on
the King and Bishops) must be honored with this title. Then Socinians,
Anabaptists, Familists, Antinomians, Swinckfeldians; yea, all Mr. Baxter's
Jugglers, the Hiders, whom he subdivides into Vanists, Paracelsians,
Weigelians, Behminists, etc. with his Seekers, whom he again subdivides into
six more vile ranks, must be dignified with this (not to be despised, as not to
be too much extolled) title. Or, lastly, Protestants were those learned and
pious men, who endeavored the retrieval of the Primitive, Catholic and
Apostolic Faith and Usages from the innovations and corruptions which had
overspread and polluted the Church. What they did was to reduce the Church into
its primitive state in the simplicity and purity of Faith, and redress abuses
in practice, reserving still a power in each particular Church to determine for
it self, what God has left undetermined for unity, order and edification, with
the closest consonancy to the rules and observations of the ancient Catholic
Doctors and Fathers. If this (which indeed is the true notion of the
Appellative) be intended, the Dissenters are to all intents and purposes for
ever barred from any claim to it, unless they mend their manners, which is
scarce to be hoped. For as a learned man observed, They know they are in the
wrong as well as we can tell them, but all the world will not make them confess
and amend. As the case now stands, they cannot challenge any right either to
the name; or to the thing. Not to the name; for neither they, nor any of their
Sect were in Germany, an. 1529. when the Disciples were first called
Protestants, upon a protestation and appeal from the Decree of Spira unto
Coesar, and a General Council. Nor to the thing; For neither they, nor any
commissioned by them, did ever subscribe to the Augustan Confession, neither
will they now be concluded by it, nor will they submit to the harmony of
Confessions industriously drawn, as the proper Test of Protestancy, to
distinguish true Protestants from false pretenders to the name. It is therefore
mere mockery to affirm them Protestants, who protest against true Protestancy,
and the resolutions of all formed Protestant Churches. But if they must be
called so, it must be by an odd Figure, the same by which a schismatical,
traitorous Conventicle patched up of Clergymen, Statesmen, Swordmen and
Lawyers was once called an Assembly of Divines. Their agreement (if any such
there be) in the same common principles of Faith, (which are arbitrary as to
them,) will not gain them the denomination of Protestant, nor beget the
relation of Protestant Brethren. For then the Pope and his adherents must be
Protestants, and our Protestant Brethren to boot; and with great reason,
because they earnestly contend for the first Principles of the Oracles of God,
and Doctrines of Christ, which several of the Fanatics either oppose or
scruple. Dr. Stillingfleet will not blame the Papists for believing too little,
but too much, which these heretical Blades are faulty in too, as well as they.
The Pope, or Church of Rome, by a presumed infallibility of judgment from a
Divine endowment assumes a power to declare (which in practice is to mint and
coin) Articles of Faith; so the Sectaries hold forth their singular opinions,
and Enthusiastical dotages, as demonstrations of Spirit: More plainly thus; The
Roman Chairman with his Conclave or a Council, takes upon them to define false
or disputed opinions, as matters of Faith, which thereupon they enter into
their Creed, to be believed as absolutely necessary to salvation; The Sectarian
Chairmen with their Benchers and Associates pass Problems in their Systemes and
Synods for Divine Revelations and Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, which
they exemplify in their Catechisms, and Confessions of Faith, as the Oracles
of God. Now they are as infamous profane prevaricators of Divine Law, who
preach up their private fancies, and sentiments, for infallible Soul-saving
Doctrines, as those who equalize their particular Traditions with the
infallible word of God. The learned and judicious Bishop Davenant thought so,
Adhort. ad Pacem. Eccles. c. 1. p. 43. I (says he) think it is all one to
obtrude our controverted points on the Consciences of men in the same degree of
necessity with the most perspicuous Doctrines of the Gospel, as to confound
unwritten Traditions with the written word of God. Mr. Newcomen, a sprig of
Smect. is herein positive, Their holding (speaking of those who withdrew
Communion from the Presbyterians, and gathered themselves into separate
Congregations) one Head, and one Faith does not excuse them of downright
Schism, so long as they hold not one Body and one Baptism, Sermon. at Paul's
Cross, Febr. 18. 1646. The total sum is; The Religion established by Law in
this Church from which they separate, is either the true Protestant Religion,
or not; if not, then none of the Transmarine Reformed Churches, understand the
Protestant Religion. For all of them do own this as such, and every of them
will prefer this before any other but their own, which most men are apt to
overvalue. If it is, then the Abettors of a Protestant Religion and Interest
different from, and opposite to it, do confound and destroy the Protestant
Religion and interest, and the Dissenters from it are not to be reputed
Protestants, but a singular schismatical Sect.

SECT. 3. Having proceeded thus far, that there ought not be a Reformation of
the present Establishment, whether we respect the matters upon which this
Innovation-work must depend, or the persons for whose behoof it is proposed and
designed; on a sudden up stants a new Set of men misnomened, the moderate or
sober party, who lately in the Kirk's censure were detestable Neuters. These,
though no fast Friends to the cause, yet are wellwishers to it, as appears by
the pleas they put up in its behalf, the chiefest whereof is, (the rest are
pitiful Umbrages) There is no way left to prevent Popish Idolatry (which they
too truly affirm to come on apace by our divisions) than by condescension to,
and compliance with the Dissenters; But this smoaky shadow is soon dissolved
and blown away.

1. In point of prudence; It is a madness to shift shoulders, or in our Nothern
Proverb, to leap out of the Drying Pan into the Fire. Dum stulti, etc. or in a
storm at Sea to bear up from a Rock and run desperately upon a Sand, where the
Ship will be as certainly stranded and wrecked with the loss of the Mariners
and Passengers. It can be no part of prudence to precipitate our selves into
those wasting destructive confusions, and tragical desolations and miseries out
of which by the all-wise providence of our good God we have so lately escaped,
to prevent a remote possible danger, and to part with our religious and civil
Liberties, to gratify a generation of Vipers and Hypocrites who will never be
gained by any condescensions, nor can be agreed with, unless they have their
insolent as well as trifling demands to an infinite process granted. This is
all one as to put my Coat a daying (in another of our Northern Saws) when I
know, he who seeks it will stand to no award, unless I give it him.

2. In Case Divinity, we may not do evil, that good may come thereby, a good
intention will not hallow a bad action; neither to decline one evil of sin, may
we hurry into another. No Casuist ever resolved, it was lawful to commute one.
wickedness for another. It cannot be Religion to prevent an imminent suspected
danger, by contracting and incurring the certain guilt of Schism and Sacrilege,
both which are as opposite to Christian piety, especially when maintained with
pertinacy. This is known, the ancient Christians equalized Schism with
Idolatry, which was then of highest figure; and certain it is, that Korah's
Schism, or perhaps Mutiny only, was more dreadfully avenged than the grossest
Idolatry; even Schismatics themselves will confess it an heinous crime but to
countenance or abett a Schism. And if Mr. Calvin's judgment may be taken, S.
Paul, Romans 2. adjudged Sacrilege to be a sin of the same kind with Idolatry.
Now to separate from that Church, which, in the judgment of the most eminent
Protestants, is the best Reformed Catholic Church, is Schism; and to refuse to
give God that external adoration, which under the Gospel belongs to him, is
Sacrilege; in both which respects the Dissenters being criminal, they are found
guilty by public judgment both of Schism and Sacrilege.

SECT. 4. The design of the premises is not to exasperate them, that is more
than needs, their rage and malice is at full Sea, they are already so madded,
they will follow their course, (if not stopped by an high hand,) with or
without any external provocations; but to discover their aims at present, which
is to make us forget their former actings, and to hope well of them for the
future, and over and above to evidence they are justly compared to the worst of
Papists, the Jesuits. For,

Number. 1. Their avowed principles and actings are originally Jesuitical, such as
their dispensing with Oaths lawfully taken, their industrious suppression of
Kingly authority, their Doctrine of propagating by some of them, and by others
of defending, Religion by the sword against lawful authority. They have taken
upon themselves as so many Popes to command or prohibit matters of Doctrine and
Discipline, merely, ex imperio voluntatis, by an arbitrary power. They have
sworn and vowed to maintain an ambulatory cause, never to be convinced of an
error, or to confess that ever they were in the wrong, and their Herd and
Partisans have associated and engaged to believe all the Declarations, to
observe all the cracked Ordinances, to preserve all the claimed Rights, and
usurped Privileges of the Caballers, and to stand by and assist these their
Representatives and worthy Patriots with their lives and fortunes, right or
wrong, in a blind obedience, all which are as bad, and some of them worse than
any Jesuitical Vows.

Number. 2. Such pernicious methods as they have sometimes openly pursued, and at
all times are closely pursuing, makes a ready way for Popery; first visibly, by
dividing and distracting the Church, and obstructing and frustrating all
methods of Union; and secondly, more covertly, it being utterly unaccountable
for the Church to yield, especially considering that nothing will satisfy
them, unless they be acknowledged the godly conscientious Party, whereby they
keep up their reputation with the Rabble, who upon that supposition will be
ready to join with them in any of their confounding designs, and all their
former detestable actings be pronounced just and warrantable, and their
traitorous War against the King be declared lawful; but supposing that in
these or some of these they should be gratified, yet that will not serve the
turn, unless Schism be settled by Law, which if once it be, the Papists will
gain this advantage, our Religion is unstable, feverish and (in Mr. Baxter's
expression) vertiginous. This is obvious, our Church and Religion will not be
so defensible against the Papists, as it is by preserving and supporting its
present Settlement.

Number. 3. It is evident the present Dissenters walk in the same track the former
Rebels had trodden out, which they are unwilling to have recounted to them,
because they have still a desire to follow it. Those made sharp reflections on
the Government, multiplying the errors (which were mostly feigned) and
misfortunes thereof, to amuse and distract the populacy, and alienate their
affections from it; so do these. Those told us the Sectaries were innocent
harmless Creatures; so do these. Those boasted of their numbers and interest;
these much more and higher. In brief, what those pleaded for themselves and
their unaccountable actings, these do with virulent and pernicious
improvements. Now may these drive on their designs in the same way they always
first set out to harden the people against their lawful Superiors, and shall
not the true Sons of the Church endeavor to undeceive them, and endear them to
love, honor and obey the King, and all respectively that are in authority
under him? If we may not discourse of their former actings, why was the King's
Book published, and appointed to be kept in all Churches? or why do we observe
annually the 30th. of January? Is it only to tell stories of the barbarous
villainies that day committed? and not rather to incline and effectually move us
to repent of those wicked principles and practices preparatory to them? If the
Sectarian Rebels may talk of the Papists and their Plots, notwithstanding the
Act of Oblivion and Indemnity, why not the affectionate Royal use the same
freedom against the Puritans? The endeavors of both Papists and Puritans when
invisible and under ground are equally dangerous, when visible and acted above
board equally mischievous. Never was there a Rebellion contrived with greater
hypocrisy, begun upon less provocations ( ubi minus motivum majus peccatum)
nor managed with more savage barbarities, than that of the late Schismatical
Sectaries and Republican Atheists; even that most execrable Popish Rebellion in
Ireland seems not to exceed it, scarce to equal it. The differences of both are
laid down by a very knowing excellent person, in his Tract (formerly mentioned)
entitled, Serpent Salve, p. 193. and inde. Indeed the Kirk Traitors professed
they were grieved they were compared with Papists in point of allegiance and
fidelity, and that therein they suffered an hard construction from all the
Reformed Churches ( ergo, the Reformed Churches thought them Rebels) Petit. of
Commis. of the Kirk of Scotland presented to his Majesty at Oxon, by Mr. Alex.
Henderson, Jan. 4. 1643. his Majesty's answer thereto is most remarkable,
particularly what he declared in reference to the Irish, viz. We profess our
dislike of their Religion, but though we think them worse Christians, because
they are Rebels, yet we think them not worse Rebels, because they are Papists;
A Protestant Rebel in the same degree has far more to answer, as having more
light, and it being more expressly against the Religion he professes, whereof
heretofore it has been a Maxim (though now it be taken for Apocryphal
Doctrine) not to take up Arms against their Prince upon any pretense
whatsoever. The Statesmen of the Faction, and the Presbyterian Pol's declared
as traitorously as the Jesuits did. No man could better evidence this than his
late Sacred Majesty, who has fully done it in his Proclamation against levying
of Forces, Jun. 8. 1642. and in his Declaration, Aug. 12. 1642. How the
Presbyterian Ministers held it forth may be seen in the Book called Evangelium
Armatum; and in another entitled, Dissenters Sayings; To whose Collections I
shall add, viz. a Book called Scripture and Reason, published by diverse
Divines, and ordered by the Committee to be printed, Apr. 14. 1643. Jus Populi,
1644. p. 1. Soldiers Catech. passim. Polit. Catech. Licensed by Mr. White, May
20. 1643. L. S. in his Book called Natures Dowry, c. 10. in the title. Mr.
Dury's Considerations with Caryl's Imprim. 1649. Mr. Price, one of their
quondam Brethren, says, As the Constitutions of public affairs vary among us,
so do the Constitutions of these men's Sermons ( viz. Presb.) alter and change,
etc. Pulpit Incendiary, p. 7. and in his Clero Classicum, p. 17, 18. Can you
presume we are so dull, as not to observe your partial and crafty handling of
the word of God? do not your practices settle and establish Atheism, Irreligion
and Profaneness, etc. and p. 53. You told the people that the King was a man
of blood, and took hold of all whisperings and hear-says of his wickedness to
make him odious to the people; and p. 40. You took the Covenant, and having
taken it, you turned and winded it, making it look East and West, North and
South, as your interest wrought, etc. and from p. 32. to 35. he proves the
horrid Regicide to be an act agreeable enough to their declared judgments,
quoting several passages out of Presbyterian Authors. Mr. Philips (in his
Veritas inconcussa) assures us, when the business of the Treaty (that of 1647,
as I suppose) came into discourse, the Assembly of Divines quickly resolved
(all of them but four) to be against it. See for this also Considerations
touching the present Factions in the King's Dominions, p. 6. Add to all these
the Edenbourgh Remonstrance, Mar. 1. 1648. the Declaration of the General
Assembly in Scotland, Jan. 10. 1648. Dr. Owen's Fast Sermon, Jan. 31. 1648. p.
5, 15. Brooks, Cockraine, etc. But the Newcastle Woolfall.
Presbyterian (who was after his death honored with a Monument, with high
Elogies in Hebrew, Greek and Latin) was more than Jesuitical in his Doctrines,
which were these,

1. All Government is derived from the People.

2. The Governors appointed by them, in case of maladministration, are to be
questioned by them.

3. If the preservation of the King's person be incompatible with the
preservation of our selves, and our Religion, then the deposition was no breach
of Covenant.

4. In the Oath of Allegiance a condition is implied, viz. to be true to the
King so long and so far as he is true to his trust, otherwise the obligation
cease.

5. In the deposition of the King his Posterity cease as to that right.

6. We justify not the persons proceeding against the King, but we justify
the fact: so that upon the point, Presbyterians might proceed against the King,
but not Papists (so old Goodman) nor the Independents, nor other Sectaries, but
only the Presbyterians by this man's opinion; which justifies Mr. Price's
censure in his answer to the London Ministers Letter to the general Council of
War, Jan. 8. 1648. that they thought the taking away the King's Life [in that
manner] (for that is their phrase) was unjustifiable, but it might be done
warrantably enough in another manner; and it justifies what Noll said of them,
Presbyterians are not so much troubled at the King's death, as that they had
not the chief hand and stroke in it. Lastly, before these troubles broke out, a
secular Priest, Watson, quodl. secund. Art. 1. to that question, Whether the
Jesuits or Puritans were more dangerous, passes this censure, That the Jesuits
are more dangerous, not that their intent against the Church and State is more
malicious than that of the Puritans, but because their manner of proceeding is
more covert, substantial and orderly in it self, their grounds more firm, etc.
as having many singular fine Wits among them; whereas the Puritans have none
but grossum Caputs, so that if matters come to handling between Jesuits and
them, they are sure to be ridden like fools: but had he lived from 41, till 80.
he would have found they were as great Artists in the mysteries of iniquity as
his Brethren the Jesuits or himself. For they have a more Serpentine and
subtle way in training up their Proselytes and Novices, upon these three
accounts:

1. They initiate them with Fastings, solemn Vows and Promises, Sermons and
Sacraments, though thereby they prostitute all the Ordinances of God, to
enchant and bind them fast in the Confederacy.

2. They then instruct them in the most refined mysteries of equivocating and
mental reservation; Ferguson, Dr. Owen's Champion, and Lob, Mr. Baxter's
Second, shall vie Loyalty with any Jesuit, and practice Treason as cleverly,
and out-doe them too in a Plot. Jews, the usurper of a Loyal Minister's Living
at Totnam-high-Cross, by a Farce, educated his Scholars (for he was a
Schoolmaster to Gentlemen's Sons, as well as Preacher to the People) in the art
of King-killing, by setting up an High-Court of Justice, arraigning, condemning
and cutting off the head of a Shock-water-Dog. Mr. Long's Comp. Hist. of Plots,
p. 186. so that after our Church and State-menders are molded into a Faction,
the Jesuits may go to School to them to receive full instructions in the art
they had learned them: yet here is a trick the Jesuits never taught them, which
is, to be so foolhardy as to threaten the Government, which both of late, and
heretofore they have done; Cartwright's Prayer was, Give us grace as one man to
set our selves against the Bishops. Penry, in his Supplication, threatened the
very Parliament with bloodshed if they did not reform. Vdal, in great
confidence, said, Presbytery shall prevail, and come in that way, and by that
means, as shall make all their hearts to ache that shall withstand it; all this
last clause is extant in the Records of the Star Chamber: The Confessions and
Subscriptions of Coppinger and Arthington are found in Dr. Cosins his Book
entitled, Conspiracy for a pretended Reformation. From all which premises it
abundantly appears, they are a traitorous, turbulent, hypocritical and singular
Sect, and therefore no true Christians, no true Protestants.

3. They teach their followers never to confess when examined by lawful
authority, or if they do, yet so auckwardly and ambiguously that nothing can be
fairly concluded; which they industriously do to obstruct justice, and so
baffle the Law that it cannot have its due course against the vilest and
rankest Mutineers. This in one old instance (new ones abound) from Full. Hist.
l. 9. p. 209. That Mr. Stone freely declared, (contrary, it seems, to the
judgment of the main body of the Faction) that silence unlawful which justly
causes suspicion of evil, as of Treason and Sedition, (See more in Bishop
Bancroft's Survey) which how frequently of late has been practiced, is too
notorious.

SECT. 5. Seeing then the Puritan principles are as dangerous as the
Jesuitical, and their practices, when prosperous, as destructive; no reason can
be assigned by the received rules of common prudence, why Puritans should enjoy
the privileges of comprehension, etc. and the Papists debarred. For common
prudence will determine all under the same guilt should be liable to the same
sentence of condemnation. What the reasons of State may be to grant a
toleration or privilege to one party and not to the other is not to be disputed
or sawcily examined by inferiors, or if the Government please to relax or
repeal the Laws to both. This is plain, the higher power may with as good
reason dispense with the execution of the Law, as inferior, whether Charter or
Commission Officers, may wave and in a manner outlaw them in favor of a
party, though thereby they run the hazard of perjury and perfidiousness. All
wise men (as a great wise man has observed) desire to live under such a
Government, where the Prince with a good conscience may remit the rigor of the
Laws; as for those that are otherwise minded, I wish them no other punishment
but this, that the penal Laws may be strictly executed upon them, till they
reform their judgment. If therefore the arguments which are alleged for the
standing of the Laws against Papists be good, as I am persuaded they are, then
the same reasons will much more evince the Laws against Puritans should still
be upheld, which will the better appear, if those arguments be produced and
applied. They are these,

1. The question is, whether Treason be not Treason because a man thinks
himself bound in Conscience to commit it? It is resolved in the affirmative.

This turns the Puritans pretense of Conscience in the like cases quite out of
doors, for no man's Conscience can alter the nature of things, that that which
is evil should become good, because his Conscience, that is, his corrupted
judgment, tells him it is so; or that which is good to become evil, by a
persuasion of Conscience, that is, because he is so instructed or conceited.
Now the Jesuits are as strait laced in their Consciences as the Puritans are,
thinking themselves as fast bound by the Popes Decrees and their own Vows, as
the Puritans do from their Swearings and Leaguings, or from the Votes and
Resolutions of their Demagogues.

2. Whether Magistrates have not reason to make severe Laws, when dangerous and
destructive principles to Government are embraced as part of Religion? It is
affirmed.

Here the case is the same again, both parties aver the lawfulness of resisting
the civil Magistrate under color of Religion, both hold the same treasonable
principles in substance and terms, differing only in the power to warrant
them. The Jesuits deriving it from the Pope, the Puritans from the
determinations of their Kirk Assemblies, or their Patriots; and this we know,
this Kingdom would never endure to be so far enslaved to the Pope as it was to
that traitorous Crew: Intestine broils, confusions and usurpations are more
destructive than the challenges and filchings of a Foreigner; and our late
glorious King said, It was more honorable for a King to be invaded and almost
destroyed by a foreign enemy, than to be despised at home. Bibl. Reg. p. 286.

3. Civil Magistrates have in them a natural inherent right and power to
preserve the Government, and punish those who disturb it, or would overthrow
it, and therefore an authority to judge of those actions which are dangerous to
it. This has been determined by the Civil Magistrate, that the actions of both
have been and are dangerous to the Government, and over and above, that the
actions of the Puritans tend to the dishonor of God, to the prejudice and
ruin of the safety and peace both of Church and Kingdom; witness the preambles
to the first and second Acts of Uniformity, and many more.

4. Where there is a suspicion of a number of persons not easily discerned, the
Laws may make use of certain Marks to discover them, although it happens that
those (as praying and preaching) be actions of Religion, which are not
therefore made the cause of their sufferings, but those principles and actions
which were the first occasions and motives of making those Laws; for the
performing Offices of Religion or of their function is not the motive of the
Law, or the reason of the penalty, but merely the means to discover their
persons, not as the thing which makes them guilty, but as the way of finding
out the guilty.

Then the Puritans meeting and conventicling in despite of Law is a way to
notify their guilt, and when they suffer for the performance of that which
they call their Calling, though as to many of them never called thereto either
by God or man, from and under him, they suffer not for their praying and
preaching, but for their principles, which they have maintained, and will not
yet retract, and the actions which they practiced, and still would justify;
neither is their praying and preaching the cause of their sufferings, but are
only the means to discover the persons of those who are of such dangerous
principles, and inclined to act according to them.

5. In a jealous time, when many treasons have been acted, and more are feared,
by bad principles, the Government may justly proceed upon the trial of the
principles to the conviction of the persons who own them, without plain
evidence of the particular guilt of the outward actions of Treasons. For he
that owns the principles of Treason wants only an opportunity to act them, and
therefore in great dangers the not renouncing those principles may justly
expose them to the Sentence of the Law.

By this the Puritans are concluded as well as the Jesuits; for as these still
adhere to the Papal Sentence, so they to their former Resolutions, who have
acted as many sorts of Treasons as the wit of Lawyers could discover. Master
Baxter, one of the Fanatic Chieftains, cannot yet see he was mistaken in the
main Cause, nor dare venture to repent of it; yet dare say, he would not
forbear the doing of the same thing, if it were to do again, Holy
Commonwealth, p. 489. so says their Foreman* so say they all; yet Amesius, l.
4. de Consc. c. 15. tells us plainly, They who will not confess and recant
public wickednesses are still impenitent, which if they be, they are in a
forwardness to react them when they dare. But it is said, They are at present
harmless innocent Creatures; so the Donatists, when they could not do
mischief, (just as Thieves are honest when manacled) boasted to their great
humanity toward the Orthodox; so did Petilian, to whom S. Aug. l. 2. adversus
Pet. c. 83. did thus reply, Isto modo, etc. A Kite is a Dove when he cannot
seize of a Dove, Vbi enim, etc. For when, I pray you, did you spare us, when
you were able? and when Rogatian (a great Stickler for Toleration) made the
like bragg, S. Aug. Ep. 48. ad Vincen. answers, Nulla bestia, etc. There is no
beast reputed tame because it has neither teeth nor talons to do hurt
withal; you say you will not mischief us, I rather think you cannot; for how
will you not do what possibly you can, seeing you cease not to be doing and
plotting when you can do nothing at all?

6. In quiet times, the Law being in force keeps persons of dangerous
principles more in awe, (though it be not rigorously executed) who will be very
cautious of broaching and maintaining their principles, and consequently have
not so bad effect as when they have liberty to vent them.

The Fanatics are herein more bold and insolent who presume (though they have
no liberty granted) to assert their schismatical Fancies and enthusiastical
Dotages, witness Rich. Baxter's and J. O's Writings, with many more, that we
cannot affirm the times are quiet and peaceable. For peace is not only exposed
to external force and outrages, which is the common acception, but to the not
having the same mind in love and accord, which is the Scripture sense; and it
is a sweet concord of many Souls knit together in what is honest or good, or
subservient thereto: while there remains bitter envyings, animosities and
driving on of contrary interests by clandestine contrivances, the deadly feud
continues: when men treat and carry fair in common civilities one with another,
when they huckster and barter by the intercourse of commerce or trade, yet
their heads and hearts are at an irreconcilable distance; this cannot in a
Christian be called quietness, it is rather secure injustice or uncharitable
dissimulation.

7. There can be no sufficient ground given for the total repeal of Laws first
made upon good grounds, where there is not sufficient security given that all
those for whom these were intended have renounced those principles which were
the first occasion of making them; because the reason thereof still continues,
while no good security is given, or if any be tendered, it is delusory until
the greatest satisfaction be given as to their sincerity, which can hardly be
supposed, if their Oaths and protestations cannot be safely trusted.

This is home to the Papists, but justly applicable to the Puritans, who are so
far from giving good security, that they give counter-security, in the worst
sense, obstinately persisting in their schismatical Separation from the Church
whereof they are Members, and in their defiance to the Laws of the Kingdom. For
either they utterly refuse a submission to the first declaration, whereby they
declare, they will give no security, or else collogue with it, taking it
propter lucrum cessans, or damnum emergens, which is clearly to give no full
satisfaction as to their Sincerity, because this they do not in obedience to
authority, but to drive on an interest. These therefore are not safely to be
trusted; and as they juggle with this, so with the Second, either refusing to
engage not to destroy the King and his Government, or Jesuitizing upon all the
Clauses thereof, as may appear fully from these following remarks.

The first period is, It is not lawful upon any pretense to take up Arms
against the King, etc.

The Reservation is, as the case now stands, for that he will not part with the
Militia, or as long as the King is in a condition to defend himself, and
protect his Subjects, which they will by all means endeavor to render
impossible for him to do, if not, we have no obligation to be subject; For we
have been taught, and are persuaded, that subjection and protection are
relatives; and therefore where protection is not afforded, nor can be expected,
subjection is no duty.

The second is, I do abhor that traitorous Position of taking up Arms by his
Authority against his Person.

The secret evasion to this is, yea, till we receive a farther light, or
providence otherwise determine, or the Patriots vote to the contrary. Godly Mr.
Jenkins rightly stated the case, the Newcastle Presbyterian stinted us a time,
for so long as he is the Peoples Trustee, which he is not, if he fail in his
trust, whereof the good People are the Judges, and if he be deposed, we need
neither to respect his Person nor his Authority.

The third is, I will conform to the Liturgy, etc.

The reservation is, though we are not free, yet for once we can and will
conform, because we shall thereby secure our Places and Offices, and keep our
Employments and Trusts, and be in a condition to befriend the Clanns who have
canvassed hard for us, and better enabled us to drive on an interest and manage
a Plot.

The fourth is, I do hold there lies no obligation upon me or any other person
from the Oath commonly, etc.

The evasion is, very right, if we make use of any eternal force or violent
resistance; but for all that, we may meet, draw Disciples after us, form
Parties, inveigle Confederates, hold correspondence and receive intelligence
from the Whiggs; but this is farther to be observed (which mark we beseech you)
though we will not attempt any alteration of Government upon the score of the
Covenant, yet there is an obligation so to do from other principles, Nature's
Dowry, etc. with many impertinent Maxims, and mangled Precedents; but
especially from that connatural and grateful thing which we call Self, such as
Selfpreservation, Self-interest, Self-conceit, and twenty Selfs more, which we
must not part with for a world, as we are instructed by precious men from good
Book-cases.

The last is, The same was an unlawful Oath, and imposed upon, etc.

Here many of them stick, but they will plunge through, such experienced
Masters are they in the craft of shuffling, they will make or find an hole to
creep out at, when closely beset. Some dare pretend an unlawful Oath is still
obligatory, others plead the Oath was lawful as the times went, the then
present Laws were on their side. But that blunt blade spoke the sense of the
Guzmans, who said, Oaths whether they were taken or not have no effect; For
(says he) if the matter be antecedently lawful, it remains so after the Oath,
and then whether it be taken or not, the obligation is no more nor less than it
was before the taking, which is to say in plain English, If we renounce the
Solemn League and Covenant, yet the matter being antecedently lawful, they are
obliged notwithstanding the abrenunciation constantly to adhere thereto; others
of them again have a faculty to conjure up a set of distinctions, to evade the
force of any Oath, as Pryn, Marshall, Downing, who tell you, either
interpretations must be put upon them, or they will not bind against the work
of Reformation, the end of the Covevant must be pursued, swear what we will to
the contrary. Hollingworth of Manchester stood close for the Covenant, but he
disputed as hotly against the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance as Mattheus
Tortus, alias Bellarmin ever did. The Anonymus true Nonconformist, will allow
the Oath of Allegiance to be taken, provided it be interpreted by the Covenant,
which may not be crossed; but he bids open defiance to the Oath of Supremacy as
an Antichristian badge. King James found by experience, along while ago, no
Oaths will bind them; we have greater reasons to believe his experience, having
had far more trials of their falseness and insincerity than ever he had; even
the Covenant it self will not hold them if it be their interest and advantage
to break it, because it is the Resolution of their own Casuists, That an Oath
obliges not in the sense of the imposer but the taker; but, which is much more
monstrous, some of them assert, That the swearer is neither bound to the
meaning of him who exacts the Oath, nor to his own meaning who takes it, but to
the reality of the thing sworn, as it shall be hereafter at any time explained
by a competent Judge. All their Declarations, Remonstrances and Appeals to
heaven and the world are but mockeries contradicted by practice.

8. Some love to pretend that a small alteration in established Laws would
satisfy them, to try, if by these arts they could bring the wisdom of a
Nation to yield to them in that, and when they have obtained it, a thousand
objections would be raised that never before were mentioned.

This is a right Puritan prank, experimented in the late times of confusions,
and in our present circumstances; several matters have been started which at
first they never so much as dreamed on, certainly never spoke of them. So much
has been already yielded as would not only satisfy but endear any modest
meek persons under their circumstances, but we are never a whit the nearer that
mark which was aimed at in those condescensions. Nay yield what you can with
honor and conscience they will presently make odd constructions of the grant.
Some fancy it a work of God in favor of them toward another turn, and then
they will fall in with the first opportunity; others say, God will not suffer
their Reformation-work to fail, for they have a stock of prophecies and
promises to assure them of success; others conclude the granters would not be
so favorable unto them, unless they were sensible of their own weakness, and
therefore let us fall on and prosecute the good old Cause, and in a little time
all will be our own. But suppose such moderate projects be put to trial, in the
issue they will be found unpracticable. They are pretty pleasant fancies and
speculations to the politic contrivers, very strange amusing things to the
vulgar, and fine matters of discourse to the busy inquisitive; but when they
come in good earnest to be transacted, the matter is so perplexed and
intricate, so many quaeres are proposed, so many difficulties to be resolved,
so many interests to be served, that they spend time to bring forth a Mouse,
and after much expense of, etc. the pitiful projectours break up, are
dissolved, and quite dashed out of countenance; all the satisfaction they can
give themselves, and all the excuses they can make to others, comes barely to
this, They had a good meaning, there was honesty at the bottom; but men value
their interests and reputation at so high a rate, (as one moderate Sage
observes) they will not buy the truth (that is the naked truth indeed) and
peace with the loss and damage of these.

9. It is not wisdom nor safe to give toleration to Wolves among Sheep, till
they abate their monstrous uncharitableness, renounce their Oaths, and give
security of their good behavior in not seducing others.

This the Leaders of the Puritan Faction will never do, they are bound by
their principles to engross Godliness and Saintship to their party, and by
their interests never to renounce their Oaths, nor give over their crafts of
seduction.

10. If new Laws be made more accommodate to our present State, yet all care
ought to be taken and caution used that our Church be not left without security
by Law against so violent and dangerous a party. For we have little reason to
believe that they who bid defiance to our present Laws, and make sport with
Proclamations, will be persuaded by gentler means to obey others.

Both the adverse parties are violent and dangerous, and in the other
particulars equally criminal.

11. No true Son of the Church will envy the quiet and security of innocent and
peaceable men, when there is assurance that by favor received they will not
grow more unquiet, but we cannot take too great care to prevent the restless
designs of those who aim at nothing more than the undermining and blowing up of
our established Church.

This the Puritans have done, razing down the foundations thereof, even to the
ground, and all those who refuse to subscribe, and give satisfaction as to
their sincerity, are laboring with might and main to demolish it again. And
not it only, but even to destroy Monarchy, and extirpate not only the
Priestly but the Kingly Office; For so long as the nineteen Propositions, the
Votes of Non-addresses and the Association appear against them, this can be no
Calumny. Nay, their aims go higher, than to the blowing up of our established
Church, even to the overthrow of all Religion. For to my apprehension there is
as great a difference between the Popish and Puritanical designs, as between
the persecution of Dioclesian and Julian; the former killed the Priests and
Christian Professors, but the latter plotted and endeavored the destruction
of the Priesthood and Christianity it self.

Seeing therefore what Archbishop Whitgift foretold, Mr. Fox foresaw, Queen
Elizabeth declared, and King James has observed of this Sect, is fully made
out in every period of time since they prodigiously appeared, it were good to
follow King Charles the First his Counsel, Never to trust them.

Postscript.
IT is known the foregoing Discourse was prepared seven years ago; if any
inquisitive person would be satisfied, why it was not exposed to the public
then, and why now; let him know, it would have been judged unseasonable then,
when most men's heads and hearts were full of thoughts about the Popish Plot,
which doubtless had wickedness enough in the design, and inward reserves. Some
would have said it was uncharitable, because it swells with hard words (as they
are commonly phrased) which would have been as hardly censured by those, who
favor, or endeavor to palliate the unrighteous dealings of those, who have
hardened their hearts against all convictions and reprooss. It will be hard for
these men to prove, that it is sin to call a Traitor a Traitor, a Schismatic
a Schismatic, a Hypocrite a Hypocrite, though it be impossible to prove all
that are so called to be such indeed. S. Paul has told us there were Traitors
in his days, 2 Timothy 3. 6. whose folly should be manifest to all men, v. 9. and
that after they would wax worse and worse, v. 13. Now if this great Apostle
thought such should be detected to their ignominy, a good reason should be
assigned, why our Dissenters and Republicans with their herd of Politico's (who
have been Traitors to all intents and purposes, if ever there have been any
such in any age or quarter of the world) should not be branded with that title
they have demerited. The same holy Apostle termed those of the Concision Dogs,
Phil. 3. 2. because they rent the Church in pieces by their Separation, and may
not we bestow the same figure on the Schismatics of this Church, who cease not
to snarl and bark, and, when they dare, bite and devour the men worthy that is
with them in this distinguishing note, the King and Bishops with all truly
loyal Subjects? What S. Aug. l. 3. adv. Pet. c. 83. said of their great
Grandsires the Donatists, we can say of them, When did they spare, being able
to hurt us? and to the Rogationists, Ep. 48. You will do possibly what you can
for our ruin, seeing you cease not to be doing when you can do nothing at all.
But I humbly conceive fairer pleas and pretenses may be made for the
Separatists of the Circumcision, than can be contrived for the present
Dissenters; and I believe those Scribes and Pharisees, whom S. John Baptist
called a generation of Vipers, were not a brood of so venomous Creatures, as
the generality of these be. Our Lord and Savior bids his Disciples beware of
false Prophets, as of ravening Wolves; but these will never be known so as to
be marked and avoided, as S. Paul exhorts, unless some marks be set upon them;
now who should do this, but they who are charged to discover the Wolves, and
as Watchmen and Shepherds to give notice of their approach, especially when
they appear in their assumed counterfeit harmless habit? Indeed great zeal is
pretended to keep out the Roman Wolf, and some over-wise projectours seem to
think the surest way to effect this, is to let in other grievous Wolves; make
an Union, join in an Association and in a defensive and offensive League with
them, who have once driven this Church into a Wilderness; when all Israel were
scattered upon the hills as Sheep that had no Shepherd. But others much more
wise, and truly moderate than they, did believe that would make a ready way for
the Conclave Wolf to catch his prey, whereof if he missed, we should, under
pretense of stopping one gap, set open an hundred gates to misery and
confusion, by bringing in a vast number of damnable Heresies, and an
unaccountable Schism. It may be remembered, that not long since, as the vogue
went, there was a design to unite the Roman and Reformed Churches, which though
it was much more honorable and piously Christian, than this so lately upon the
stocks, and as it is to be reasonably supposed still endeavored by
double-minded and unstable men, who are given to change, and by absurd and
unreasonable men, who count gain godliness; yet this way was by the troublers
of Israel, cried down as a politic fetch and contrivance for the reduction of
Popery; notwithstanding their great Bell-weather Mr. Baxter had declared, that,
that desire of reconciliation with Rome, was with such additions, as might bear
a tolerable sense, and for his part, he was persuaded, the Papists were as much
afraid of King Charles (well fare him for this) and the Grotian design, as of
any thing that of a long time had been hatched against them: But whatsoever may
be said either against, or for that, the late balderdash project must not take.
For we are resolved to stand in defense of our Divine Monarchy, nor will not be
contented with a titular Isle of Wight King, who may bear the name, but God
knows who should go away with the authority. Neither can we part with our
Apostolical, Catholic Episcopacy to take a day, (it will not be of much longer
standing) of truce with those who have forfeited their Faith with God, the King
and the Church; nor will we be pleased with an ambulatory, or menstruous Creed,
nor with an arbitrary monstrous superintendency voted, and unvoted, and revoted
backward and forward, according to the sense and interests of the Chairman and
his crew in S. Stephen's Chapel; Neither will we be satisfied or own a civil or
common Law hotch-potch Church, according to the device of the Counter-plot (as
the three Inventors gave it a Name, one whereof is an outlawed Traitor, the
second a Church Trepanner, the third a giddy Changeling.) For I demand, Was the
Church of England, when Popish, a true constituted Church according to its
first settlement by Christ and his Apostles, and subsequent example of the
Primitive Church, because it was so established by Law, or not? If it were, we
have done the Papists business, they need not prove us, we have proclaimed our
selves Schismatics, in separating from a true constituted Church by Christ's
and the Apostles order, antecedently such before any humane Sanction; if not,
then a legal settlement may be Antichristian, which in that very respect stands
in great need of a Reformation. For as to attempt a Reformation of that which
is founded on Divine Authority, and stands by Divine Law, is a contradiction to
the indispensable and irrevocable will of the Founder, so to reform what has
been introduced by mere humane authority, without any warranty either general
or special from a grant of our Lawgiver, is a pious Christian duty, provided
that in the management thereof nothing be done repugnant to any other Divine
Law, and our duty. But let what can be suggested for the promotion of this new
project, it will be baffled by the two notorious Ringleaders of the Faction.
For if Mr. Baxter's only true way of concord will not pass, he and his
Comrades will be as clamorous and stirring, if they dare, as ever. J. O. is
positive, All lawful things are not to be done for the Churches peace, which
quite undoes it.

Confessed it must be that several of the Partisans conceive a full union
cannot be expected, yet to comprehend, and condescend to those, who will
occasionally and partially conform, may go far toward a peace. In good time!
can this be a way to true Christian peace, when Mr. Baxter has given us fair
warning not to trust them, plainly telling us, Apol. for Nonconf. p. 90. they
are only Instruments to undermine us, and will turn against us, as soon as
they have opportunity. Neither will their coming to Church, as they delusorily
and hypocritically call it, clear them from the guilt of Schism, because this
Church being both founded and settled upon Divine Right in all its
Superstructures, there arises an obligation constantly and thoroughly to
communicate with it, and observe its Rules and Orders, which not to do, is
sinful Separation, and to abett or countenance those who do not, is to
partake of their sin. For it is not love, devotion or duty which draws them,
but cunning, interest and fear which drives them to this outward auckward
conformity. The best any can make of it, its an act of compliance, cannot be an
act of Christian allegiance and obedience to lawful Superiors, which is a
work of Faith incorporate with the other good works of Faith, issuing from the
supernatural power of God's Word, Spirit and Grace. Certain it is, that the men
for whom this favor is moved, do publicly and honestly declare (which is next
to a moral impossibility that they ever will) that Kingly power is originally
and immediately from God, that Prelatical Episcopacy is a Divine Apostolical
Institution, that some circumstances and adjuncts in the external ministeries
of Divine Worship not expressly prescribed by God may and ought to be adhibited
therein for decency, order and edification, they are not to be trusted; and if
frequent experiences will not make us so wise as to neglect them, and all such
motions for them, we are fit to be begged and once more undone.

We are yet again efforted with a troop of tantum nons, who are still bleating
for connivence, forbearance and moderation; which in effect is to solicit the
Laws be outlawed, though herein they would give better evidence of their
moderation and modesty, if they left that solely to the resolution of the
Government. Take these we must as we find them, and we shall find them vary as
the wind does, they can blow hot and cold with one breath, that trimming
Proverb is their Rule, There is no living at Rome, and fighting with the Pope,
and let the Government sink or swim, they will keep themselves out of
harms-way. If possible, to make sure of this world, they will have friends of
all parties; for which end, they can at present swallow the Oath of Allegiance,
take the Test, and upon another occasion vomit a fulsome Remonstrance, Address,
or Association; but by all means they will make infallible provisions for
heaven, in order whereto, if they be in health, they are for the Church, and if
in safe policy they may, for a Conventicle too; yea from the Church to a
Conventicle, and back again; if sick, they will not refuse the Offices of the
Church, but will admit them de been esse; yet for their transire and viaticum,
they must have a voluntary conceived prayer by a moderate Sneak, who can play
fast and loose with the Church Offices, and to make sure work, the Sacrament
must be re-administred by one of the same batch, or a zealous Holder-forth. In
my judgment these of all other Sects are the most dangerous, because the more
close and reserved, we cannot say they are either flesh or fish, nor discover
whether they be Hawk or Buzzard, they are animalia imperfecte mixta; but this
we know, much mischief has happened by this false disguised, and miscalled
moderation; to evidence which, it will be requisite to exemplify this in some
(all are too numerous and would be too bulky) instances, and to give in the
opinion of two, who in their times were reputed moderate learned men, and
excellent preachers.

1. It has been mischievous to the Church; The Samosatenian Heresy was
brought in under a mistaken charitable pretense to reconcile the Jewish and
Christian Religion. The Heresy of the Monothelites was set up on a design to
moderate the Heresy of Eutyches; The Eusebians propagated the Arian Heresy by
their moderate endeavors to compose the difference betwixt them and the
Catholics. Some Novatian Bishops, to satisfy the scruple of a convert Jew,
thought fit to leave it (though the matter of it was an approved practice) as a
thing indifferent, which soon raised a Schism, and this Schism in a short time
begot another. Theoph. Alex. favored the Originists in hope to recover some at
least from that Sect, but S. Hier. told him roundly, his moderation therein was
very offensive to holy men, because thereby he emboldned and strengthened the
(already) over insolent and peevish Faction. What Greg. Naz. got, or rather
lost by his easiness of temper is too large to relate, and so it is of many
more. These are sufficient to show, that whosoever they be that follow such
moderate courses, are in the number of those, who heal the hurt of the daughter
of God's people slightly, Jer. 8. 11. whose words will eat as does a canker, 2 Timothy 2. 17. which if it be not speedily remedied will infect the whole body,
and prove mortal; they are like those who sow pillows to all arm-holes, Ezekiel.
13. 18. but most like those, Ez. 34. 18. who eat up the good pasture (yet cry
out sadly of hunger and persecution) and tread down the residue, who drink of
the deep waters, and foul the residue with their feet.

2. It has reached to civil Dominions too; Not to seek for foreign, we have
had too sad experiences of it at home. It was moderation which set all the
villainous Factions of the Kingdom a-gog, by the advantages which the
State-menders (who certainly never intended those miserable desolations which
ensued) gave them; this appears, in that when some had raised the evil Spirit,
it was not in their power to lay it, as it happened to Titus his Soldiers at the
sacking of Jerusalem, all his authority could not put a stop to their fury.
Indeed endeavors were used to stop that issue of blood which had fatally
weakened and consumed the vitals of the Kingdom then weltering in her gore, by
some, who generally were very worthy men, yet proved Physicians of no value:
what occasioned, or rather caused this miscarriage and sad consequence, will be
best manifested by what his late Sacred Majesty in his Declaration concerning
the Treaty of Oxford observed of them. They had light enough, but wanted heat,
they at once disliked and countenanced the bloody Rebels, their tameness made
them considerable, and their too much discretion would undo them; which soon
happened, so that they who hated them became Lords over them, they were a prey to
those of whom the most Reverend Primate Usher was wont to say, They had Guts
enough but no Bowels; and we may truly apply that of Solomon, The tender
mercies [marg. bowels] of the wicked are cruel, Prove. 12. 10. but if their
cruelty had been exercised only upon them who had affronted them, the
condition of the Kingdom had not been so lamentable; but it extended from Dan
to Beersheba, every supplanting and succeeding Faction taking their turn to
pull down and destroy whatever was sacred, venerable or honest, that our case
was perfectly the same with those in Petron. Arb. Omnes nobiscum aut corvi qui
lacerant, aut cadavera quae lacerantur. Now that the moderate set these
instruments on foot, might easily be demonstrated; Dr. Bates, Elench. Mot. p.
2. has given us the names of several of them, with a general description of
their tempers, humors and qualities.

3. In our present case, moderation tends to the dissolution and subversion of
the Government. The Dissenters are tools and instruments of which the Papists
make great use, and these moderate are the Abettours, Patrons and Protectours
of the Dissenters; all that can be expected from the moderate in relation to
the Government, is in any exigence to leave it in the lurch, if we hope to find
from them any real concerns, or faithful endeavors, to prevent any
Conspiracies or Assaults upon it, we are (before we be aware) got to a fools
Paradise, we shall again be at Ferguson's title, No Popery, no Tyranny, or at
College's Motto, No Popery, no Slavery, which in the sense of the Junto's is no
King, no Bishops, or at best, a precarious King and Bishops; to second which
wicked policy most of the stirring Addressers will once more with their lives
and fortunes engage to make good all the protestations of their traitorous
Patriots. It is probable, from Holoway and others, though the moderate were not
thoroughly acquainted with the very particulars of the late execrable
Conspiracy, yet, they knew by clandestine correspondence, and the figure of
affairs, some devilish design was a-spawning, which they kept close to
themselves, and would have stifled it from others, to play their own part
according to the success or disappointment of it. The Papists could not be so
dangerous as they are supposed and too justly feared, if the Dissenters were
quelled, because they then would be utterly disappointed of the many advantages
they gain by their Schismatical, and rebellious principles and practices; The
Dissenters can never be rampant, unless they be emboldned and assisted by the
moderate, who by their covetousness, connivence, cowardice or hypocrisy, keep
their heads above water that they sink not; and their hearts and hands that
they neither faint nor flag. This is notorious, for one bigoted Papist there
are an hundred overgrown zealot Schismatics, both which labor on all hands
to level the Crown and the Church, but for an hundred Schismatics there are a
thousand moderate Mammonists, who will never endeavor to support them unless
upon force and with reluctance, which when they do, they do it persunctorily,
perfidiously and scarce to half part. This is our hope against these evil men;
he that keeps Israel neither slumbers nor sleeps, who has delivered from so
great a death, as they have vainly imagined, and does deliver, in whom we trust
that he will yet deliver us. Amen.

4. As this humor has been mischievous to the public, so to private persons
amongst us, who were no way engaged but by prayers and tears for the
established Government. The very excellent Bishop Davenant told Doctor Ward,
when he saw what his and other men's moderation was like to produce, he was
ashamed to live: he with others had often interceded with the Government for
moderation toward the Faction, but now (1641) he saw such immoderate courses
taken by them, that the most irreligious things were done under pretense of
Religion, Memoires, p. 281. The same Author tells us, Bishop Potter
complained, he had lived to see himself despised by them he had countenanced;
he had interceded so long for liberty of Conscience with the King, till he saw
neither the King nor himself could enjoy their own, that he feared the pretenee
of Religion would overthrow the reality, and the divisions of that Age would
breed Atheism in the next. I could nominate Bishop Morton, etc. all reverend,
learned and holy men. The King observed, that they who counseled him by a
politic moderate Maxim to sign the Bill for beheading the Earl of Strafford,
were so far from receiving the rewards of such ingratiatings with the people,
that no men have been more harassed and curshed than they; he only, etc.
(...), c. 2. This I believe, if it were thoroughly examined, would be found a
certain truth, that all of the nobility (one only excepted) who suffered death
for the King and the Church by the Sentence of their Courts of Injustice, were
such as at first took trimming measures, leaving us a while to play at
Blind-mans-buffet, till we came to cutting of throats. I am sure there was a
Book not long after entitled, Lex Talionis, which made shrewd discoveries.

Secondly again, I shall give you the opinions of the two Divines before
hinted, the first is Dr. Preston, who thus delivered himself in a Sermon on
Numb. 25. 10, 11. Not only the great sins of the profane, but the coldness of
them that are otherwise good, causes the Lord to remove the Candlestick, the
old complaint may be now taken up, The fire which before was hot, is now only
light, and p. 291. If we profess the cause of God, why go we coldly about it?
if it be not the cause of God, why do we not desert it? yea but discretion and
moderation must be used! It Is true, but does one grace cross another? Prudence
does not abate our love, but guides it in its labor, as for moderation it
stands in avoiding the rock, in declining the extremes, but moderation in a
good course is not moderation but coldness and lukewarmness. The second is Mr.
Bolton in his Genesis direct. for comfortable walking with God, p. 50. who thus
declares, Many unsanctifie themselves by making moderation a Saint, and undo
their Souls by adoring discretion as an Idol. Moderation and discretion truly
so called and rightly defined, are ornaments to the most zealous Christians,
but being tempered with coldness, and edged against the fervency of the Spirit,
become the very desperate cutthroats of the power of godliness, a pestilent
consumption of the spirits, heart and life of true zeal. It will be confessed,
they thus wrote in reference to the Papists, who (as they conjectured) were too
much favored; But if the Diffenters be as dangerous to the Government, and as
pernicious to the Souls of those who are taken in their nets, (which plain
matter of fact demonstrates) then these censures are as applicable to them. For
every Schism and rebellion carries in its bosom the transgression of all God's
Commandments, if our Book of Homilies, III. Rebellion (which Julian the
Apostate thinks the next best Book to the holy Bible) inform us aright, and if
he, or any other designing makebate can say worse of the Papists, let them do
it. There is another Author, who, it seems, by the often reprinting of his
Book, was once in great credit; it is Mr. Shepherd, who, in his Sincere
Convert, prin. an. 50. Ed. 5ta. p. 159. speaks home to the case, his words are,
Of the nine easy ways which men take to heaven, but lead to hell, the eight is
that of moderation, or sober descretion, which is nothing else, but
lukewarmness of the Soul, when a man contrives and cuts out such a way to
heaven as to please all and displease none, if they be rich especially, or in
power. In p. 165. he falls heavily upon fawning Ministers, who in their Sermons
do mostly shoot a few pot-guns against some grosser sins, but will not tell
them roundly of their Herodias, etc. and p. 207. says, Thus they cheat the
people by their general dawbing Doctrines, who conclude themselves to be honest
religious men, because their Minister has given them a beggarly pasport for
heaven, and so they go out of this world, and die like Lambs, being woefully
cheated. Mr. Calvin did not like any should be more moderate than Christ our
great Exemplar and Lawgiver, who used severity upon those who upheld an old
custom profanely and for their avarice, at two several times, Matt. 21. 12.
Joh. 2. 13. which execution S. Hier. looks upon as an evidence of his
miraculous power, in that none made any resistance; and Musc. notes, none
before did ever attempt it, though the Law and custom was overruled, Matt.
11. 13. In sum the Lay prudential moderate in times of distraction and action
will for the most part (all but the Caballers) stand still, as lookers on, till
they spy the time most for their purpose, then if the Faction get uppermost,
they will strike in, go along with it, and to loose no time will take the
advantage of the first turn, in their common language and practice. The Clergy
will now and then speak of Conformity, making use of such arguments as would
make an honest, well-meaning Soul more averse; for scarce a word comes from
them of obeying for Consciencesake, mostly to submit for the Laws sake, or
Peace sake, which is to say, its good policy at present to conform. Again, they
will for shame of the world say something for Loyalty, upon the Fifth of
November, the Thirtieth of January or the Nine and Twentieth of May (very
rarely at other times, be the occasions never so urgent) and vent some general
loose expressions, as all parties consent in, and will serve for the purpose of
a Republic or a Monarchy, for an Usurper or their natural Liege Lord, and then
slur over the most pernicious principles of Rebellion, and by no means will
declare of what denomination they are who assert those principles, and pursue
the practices consequential to them; when they speak most home, yet to come off
fairly with the populace, they have two tricks to please and to cheat them, the
first is an Application or Use, to make an Harangue against Drunkenness,
Adultery, Swearing, Sabbath-breaking, and other universally condemned
debaucheries; we know their full aim in this, (as they would have it taken)
malicious, hypocritical slander, the rather because they do not say any thing
at all against lying, slandering, pride, malice, covetousness and hypocrisy;
which as they are the more reigning, so the more dangerous to the Government,
and more deadly in their nature, propter eorum latentiam (as Aquinas) for their
close sculking within the Soul, that it seldom or never is sensible of them; no
sooner have these devilish deadly sins taken possession, but the possessed
begin to settle on their lees, and ever after sit in the seat of the scornful;
for then the Conscience is concerned, and the pretense and privilege of
Conscience hardens them against all admonitions and reproofs, Matt. 21. 31, 32.
The other trick is to close all with an Exhortation, to Union, Charity and
Forbearance, wherein if they have a good meaning, it is a pure impertinency; if
a bad meaning, it is a piece of hypocrisy, and a scurvy reflection on the
Government: both Lay and Clergy will occasionally talk at a considerable rate
for Loyalty and Conformity ad amoliendum periculum, the danger of the Law, and
suspicion of their insincerity; but on all other occasions where no danger of
Law, as in the Election of Representatives, Impannelling of Juries, hooking in
a rich Widow for one of the Tribe, or procuring a confiding cologuing Priest to
be admitted upon a Vacancy into a Church, they then are tooth and nail for
Dissenters, or some moderate Dissemblers.

It may be foreseen with half an eye, some will say, all this needed not to be
so tediously and unseasonably superadded; to this it is soon replied, when the
Traitors in Scotland had made a large progress in their rebellious courses,
some took the liberty to talk freely of the danger this Kingdom was in, the
rather because the English Sectaries and Republicans held correspondence with
them, as since it has been evidently proved. Now how was this monition taken
and interpreted? Some said they could not believe the English did contribute to
those stirs (so Rebellion was smothered) and it was irrational to believe they
would; as for the Scots, they did stir, but it was because they in their
conceits were oppressed, and under fears and jealousies (by their own guilt if
they were so) should be more oppressed; others from which much better (if it
had been within) might have been expected, ssighted the relation, and censured
the relatours to be short-sighted men, wiser men than they knew better things.
But I shall here demand, Whether those wise men did apprehend any danger from
these stirs, or no? If they really did, they were very indifferent men, the
trimming humor was predominant in them, they had friends on both sides, and
would not be concerned in either; If they did not, then they were the
short-sighted men. I will not say, whose eyes the God of this world had
blinded, but they were in our Northern expression, moon-blind, or blindfolded:
should a man tell these wise men now, the stirs are not yet laid or ended, he
would be censured; but let them think or say their worst, there is some reason
to persuade, that in all probability the Conspiracy is not yet dead, they are
in hopes it will revive, for if any discourse thereof, they may observe the
wise sober men use such shruggs, and make such shruggs, and make such faces,
their very countenance and motions betray them, but over and above we know,
it is not Conscience but design which keeps these men from a full submission to
the Government and obedience to the Laws; they are men of interest, have
working brains, and would never stick to give the Government all satisfaction,
if they did not hope to effectuate their designs at long run. This the wise
sober men will not deny, that they who are dull, heavy and averse in the
execution of Law, when the King and Law is for them, will never be forward and
active to promote the public peace, interest and tranquillity, when the case
is hazardous, and King and Law like to be oppressed.

But it will be demanded, how will you come off in this bold adventure of
exposing these men of renown (such as Corah's Accomplices) whom wise and good do
caress and complement? If they do so I cannot help it, but for my own part, I
think they ought to be exposed, for these reasons,

1. That all Israel may hear and fear, and do so no more.

2. The most probable way to keep out Popery, is to keep down Puritanism. The
right reverend Bishop Hall observed, None gained by the seditious divisions and
practices in this Realm but Hell and Rome, the Devil and the Pope; and if these
men be countenanced and permitted to follow their old ways, we may expect the
same fate; they that court them, or but dally and play at bo-peep with them, do
not only encourage but tempt them to persist in their perverseness and
obstinacy, which is as great a kindness and service as the Pontifician
Politicoes can desire or can be done for them. Contzen's Politics, l. 2. cited
in Fair Warning, part. 2. c. 2. Sect. 1. As much advantage is to be made by the
Protestants disagreements as of the Papists concord, to extirpate Protestants,
p. 33. This was the Popish old Plot by Campanella in his Book De Monarchia
Hispan. to destroy our Monarchy, and was followed by Cardinal Richlieu in his
advice which he gave a little before his death to the French King; and for the
abolishing of Episcopacy, Io Paean's were sung at Rome, and Father Sibthorp
upon the first discovery of that resolution in his Letter to Father Medcalf,
said, Now they are pulling down that Wall which at once adorned and defended
their way. Mr. Baxter was of the same destructive opinion; for as he did agree
with Father White in pulling down the Bulwark of Monarchy; so with Father
Sibthorp to pull down the Wall of Episcopacy: only with this difference, that
Father Sibthorp would endeavor to pull it down because it both adorned and
defended the Church; but Mr. Baxter was for demolishing the Wall, because (in
his account) it was a Wall of Separation; and thereupon resolved to do the
best he could, while he lived, to pull it down, and to make it the most earnest
action of his life to prevent the re-building of it, Mr. Baxt. 3d. Defense,
Part 2d. p. 84. Now it will be confessed, that if Rome got any thing the Devil
gained too.

3. The Devil, the first Schismatic and Rebel, will still endeavor to make as
many as he can by his serpentine wiles to be as bad and miserable as himself,
neither will he suffer those whom he has once taken Captive at his pleasure to
loiter in his service, but keep them at hard duty; neither are there any more
captivated by him, than those who serve him in a Rebellion, wherein they fight
his Battles under God's Colors; for this is like the sin of Witchcraft, once a
Witch, always a Witch, once a Rebel, always a Rebel. I have read it as a Maxim
in Law, Semel malus semper malus in eodem genere mali; and we have reason to
believe our old and late Rebels will never relent. For,

4. They cannot endure to hear any thing spoken of Rebellion, they sit uneasy
when that Theme is prosecuted home; all their aims are, not to appear what they
are, and to appear what they are not, their business in the world is to carry
fair, (in their own cant) and therefore it is no hard measure to pay them what
they have deserved; if wise and learned good men have forbore to reflect on
them, they are either such who have not seen, or felt their studied arts of
barbarous cruelties and impieties, and they may give loosers and sufferers
leave to speak; or such, who are swayed with a transport of good nature, and
excess of a mistaken preposterous charity; but by their good leave to gratify
a few roving Privateers to the prejudice and detriment of the public is no
office of charity, nor act of prudence. King James has told us, Good deeds
will never gain them; we are sure ever since they have been fruitless: It Is
very unlikely then good words, which are but wind, will ever do it; and if
neither good words nor good deeds will still them, an experiment of hard words
and deeds may do the feat, at least stop them in their carier. To fob them up
with soft words, is a way, as to flatter them, so, to keep up their credit and
reputation with the multitude and common sort of people, which as it is to do
half their work for them, so to render the Government odious and suspected.
Doubtless when they tell us they are his Majesty's most faithful, loyal and
obedient Subjects, and then upon the first opportunity break out into open
Rebellion, we may truly call them Traitors and Hypocrites, which are as hard
words as can be used, and if they may not be used, they were invented to no
purpose. But to salve the matter, some have found out a moderate way of
compounding it, by joining an hard and soft word together, calling them
dissenting Brethren. For as the former is a very ungrateful, unsociable and
offensive word, synonymous to Recusant, Separatist and Schismatic; the other
is a sweet, pleasant and comfortable appellative. Now I cannot yet understand
why the same may not be attributed to Romanists, unless partiality or
popularity prevail too much. For the relation is founded either on Nature,
Profession or Office, which are the common ways of appropriating that title,
but they are our Brethren by Nature, as Men, by Profession, as Christians, (Dr.
Burnet confesses them to be so) and sure I am they are Ministers of the Gospel
by designation and Function, so that a reason should be rendered why Father
Garnet, Creswell, Oldcorn, Whitebread and Gawen may not be dubbed Brethren as
well as Smectymnuus, Brother Baxter, Owen, Lob, or Ferguson. If Idolatry
destroy the Fraternity on one side of the House, Sacrilege will on the other;
if positive Superstition break off the Brotherhood on the one hand, negative
will on the other; if the Colliers Creed make us ashamed of the relation, the
no Creed, or no Determinate, will give us occasion to grieve and mourn: if an
implicit Faith in the Church, or a blind obedience to the Pope, make us like
to Horse and Mule which have no understanding, then it will so happen, if we
resign our reason to the resolutions of a pack of Demagogues; unless we at last
be contented the Pope's Chair be removed to the Speaker's at Westminster, with
a Nemine Contradicente. But to shut up all, it is an hard case when men will
censure others in that wherein they themselves are faulty. For these mellow
soft Souls, when they are pinched or twitted, make use of words as hard in
sense, though not so harsh in sound, and can for a Friend's sake smother,
stifle and excuse their hard deeds; as if we were fallen back into Jeoffrey
Chaucer's days, when words were sins, but deeds were not. However, if any think
I have been too rude or bitter against those whom I believe upon good grounds
to be dough-baked Ephraamites, King-haters, Church-Mountebanks, Interlopers,
Barratours, a most prodigiously ungrateful profligate Sect, let them, I say,
who think so, prove it by good authority and reason, I will confess and amend,
which is all the Reformation I yet know is needful to them who live, and are
resolved (by God's grace) to die, in the Communion of this most Christian,
Apostolical Catholic Church.

James 1. 10. A double minded man is unstable in all his ways. Ecclus. 2. 12.
Woe be to fearful hearts, and faint hands, and the sinner that goes two ways.
THE END.
ERRATA.
PAge 27 ult. after Sylvanus add a full point, and dele etc. p. 34. 10. for
Bidell r. Videli. p. 35. 1. after martyred add was. ib. 21. r. Era. p. 40. 27.
r. Heming. 41. 18. after day dele full point. 42. 2. r. Caranz. ib. l. 15.
after find add in. p. 46. 9. r. in moderate S. Aug. 60. 26. r. Tithes. 77. 3.
for blame r. clann. 78. 21. for its r. which. 84. 7. del. for. 96. 23. r.
Evaristus. 101. 18. del. an honest. 102. penul. r. Weir. 116. antepen. r.
judaicall. 119. 3. for, all r. date. 124. 16. add, to whom. 131. 26. r.
preside. 133. 5. r. Martin. in his Lexicon. 139. 10. r. their Lord. 145. 12. r.
at their own, etc. ib. l. 18. dele especially. 150. 26. for by admitting r. for
removing an incon. etc. 182. 11. r. misnomered. 189. 5. r. Royalists. 205. 6.
for exposed r. opposed.


