Sheldon Mayor.
Curia specialis tent' die Lunae, 31 die Januarii, 1675. Annoque Regni Regis
CAROLI Secundi, Angliae, etc. xxviii.



THis COURT does desire Mr. Sharp to Print his Sermon Preached yesterday
morning before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen at Bow-Church, with what he had
further prepared to deliver at that time.

Wagstaffe.

Imprimatur,

Geo. Hooper, Rev. Do. Archiep. Cant. a Sac. Domest.

Feb. 7. 1675/6.

A SERMON Preached before the RIGHT HONORABLE

THE Lord Mayor, AND ALDERMEN of LONDON, AT BOW-CHURCH.

By JOHN SHARP, Chaplain to the Right Honorable Heneage Lord Finch, Lord High
Chancellor of ENGLAND.

LONDON: Printed by Andrew Clark, for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishops Head in
St. Paul's Churchyard, 1676.

1 TIMOTHY iv. 8. Godliness is profitable unto all things, having a promise of the
life that now is, and of that which is to come.
THese words are the enforcement of an exhortation which St. Paul had made to
Timothy in the Verse before going, which was that he should Avoid profane and
Oldwives Fables; meaning those Impious and superstitious Doctrines, and the
carnal and unchristian Observances that were grounded upon them (some of which
he had mentioned in the beginning of this Chapter) which some at that time did
endeavor to introduce into Christianity: and instead of applying his mind to
these, that he should rather Exercise himself unto true Godliness.

This was the Exhortation. The Arguments wherewith he enforces it are Two:
First, The Unprofitableness of these Carnal and Superstitious Doctrines and
Practices. Bodily exercise (says he) profits little. Secondly, The real
usefulness of solid Virtue and Godliness to all the Purposes of life* Godliness
is profitable to all things, having a promise of this Life as well as of that
which is to come.

I shall not here meddle at all with the former part of the Apostles
Exhortation or the Argument that has relation to it; but shall apply my self
wholly to the latter, craving leave most plainly and affectionately to press
upon you the Exercise of Godliness upon those Grounds and Considerations on
which the Apostle here recommendeth it.

Indeed to a man that considers well, it will appear the most unaccountable
thing in the world, that among all those several Exercises that Mankind busy
themselves about, this of Godliness should be in so great a measure neglected,
that men should be so diligent, so industrious, so unwearied, some in getting
Estates, others in Purveying for Pleasures, others in learning Arts and Trades;
All in something or other relating to this sensible World; and so few should
study to acquaint themselves with God, and the Concernments of their souls, to
learn the Arts of Virtue and Religious Conversation.

Certain it is, this Piece of Skill is not more above our reach than many of
those other things we so industriously pursue; nay, I am apt to think it is
more within our power than most of them. For in our other Labors we cannot
always promise to our selves certain success. A thousand things may intervene
which we know not of, that may defeat all our plots and designs though never so
carefully laid; but no man ever seriously undertook the Business of Religion
but he accomplished it.

Nay further, As we can with greater certainty, so can we with less pains and
difficulty promise to our selves success in this affair, than we can hope to
compass most of our worldly designs which so much take up our thoughts. I doubt
not in the least but that less labor, less trouble, less solicitude will serve
to make a man a good Christian, than to get an Estate, or to attain a competent
skill in Humane Arts and Sciences.

And then for other Motives to oblige us to the study of Religion, we have
incomparably more and greater than we can have for the pursuit of any other
thing. It is certainly the greatest Concernment we have in the world. It is the
very thing God sent us into the world about. It is the very thing that his Son
came down from Heaven to instruct us in. It is the very thing by which we shall
be concluded everlastingly happy, or everlastingly miserable after this life is
ended.

These things well considered, we may justly (I say) stand amazed, that men
should be so prodigiously supine and negligent in an Affair of this nature and
importance, as we see they generally are.

If there can any account be given of this matter, I suppose it must be some
such as this, That the things of this World, upon which we bestow our Care, our
Time, our Courtship, are present to us. We see them every day before our eyes;
we taste, we feel the sweetness of them; we are sensible that their enjoyment
is absolutely necessary to our present well-being: But as for spiritual matters
they lie under a great disadvantage. They appear to us as at a great distance.
We do not apprehend any present need we have of them: Nor do we fancy any
sweetness or relish in them. Nay, on the contrary, we form the most frightful
and dismal Images of them that can be. We look upon them not only as flat, and
unsavory; but as things which if we trouble our heads too much about will
certainly ruin all our designs in this World. We think Religion good for
nothing but to spoil good Company; to make us melancholy and mopish; to
distract us in our Business and Employments; and to put so many Restraints upon
us that we can neither with that freedom nor success pursue our Temporal
Concernments, which we think necessary to our happiness in this World.

But let us suppose things to be thus with Religion as we have fancied, yet
cannot this be any reasonable Excuse for our carelessness about it. What though
there were no visible Benefit by a religious life in this world? What though
the rewards of our pains about it were only in reversion? Yet since a time will
come when it will be our greatest Interest to have been heartily Religious, is
it not a madness now to neglect it? What though Religion be a course of life
difficult and unpleasant; a way strewed with Briers and Thorns; a way which if
we follow, we are certainly lost, as to our hopes of any thing here? Yet since
a Time will certainly come when we shall wish, that we had been good
Christians, though we had lost our right eyes and our right hands upon the
condition; when we shall wish that we had purchased Virtue though at the rate
of the loss of the whole World: For Gods sake why should we not be of the same
mind now? Who but Fools and Children but will look upon that which shall
certainly and unavoidably be, with the same regard as if it was now present?

But indeed, this is not the Case of Religion; This Business of Piety is not so
formidable as we often represent it. It is no such Enemy to our Temporal
designs. It is a very innocent thing, and will do us no harm; though we look no
further than this present World. It will hinder none of our delights or
pleasures, but will allow us to gratify every Appetite that God and Nature
has put into us. And if any man doubt this, let him name that Natural desire,
which the Christian Religion does forbid or any way hinder the innocent
satisfaction of: I am confident he shall be able to name none. Since this is
the Case then, how much more Childish than Children shall we appear if we make
so little reckoning of it? How inexcusably Foolish shall we be, if we will not
be at some pains to possess our selves of that which will be no manner of
Hinderance to us in our affairs in this World, and will infallibly make us
everlastingly happy in that which is to come?

But further; What if it be certain, that a Life of strict virtue is not only
no Hinderance to our Temporal designs, but a great furtherance of them? What if
it can be Proved, that besides the influence it has on our Happiness in the
next Life, it is also the best thing in the World to serve our turns in this?
And that nothing can so much contribute to the bringing about our Worldly Aims;
no such ready way to attain to what our very Flesh and Blood most desires, most
delights in, as to be sincerely Pious. What imaginable pretense can we then
have for our contempt of God and Virtue? If this can be made to appear, sure
all our Objections will be fully answered; all our scruples satisfied; all our
prejudices against Religion wholly removed; and every one that is not abandoned
of his Fortune and his Senses, as well as his Reason, must think himself
concerned to become a Votary to it; since he can have no Temptation or Motive
to Vice which will not more powerfully draw him to Virtue; and all the ends
that the one can pretend to serve, will much more effectually be served by the
other; and he escapes an Eternity of Misery, and gets everlasting Life into the
Bargain.

I think it therefore worth the while to spend the time now allotted me in
making good this Point, and discovering something at least of that universal
Profitableness of Godliness to the purposes of Human Life, that St. Paul in my
Text assures us of.

But because the Studies of men are so infinitely various, and the Ends of Life
to be served so many, that it will be impossible to speak particularly of them;
it will be needful to pitch upon some general Heads, such as, if they do not
comprehend all, may yet take in most of those things, to which the Labors and
Endeavors of men are directed, and in the acquisition of which they have
compassed their Designs; and to show the serviceableness of Religion above all
other means for the attaining of them. And I think, I cannot pitch better than
upon those three noted Idols of the World, Wealth and Honor and Pleasure;
these being the Goods which have always been accounted to divide Mankind among
them; and into the service of some one or all of which All that set up for a
happy life in this world do list themselves, how different and disagreeing
soever they be from one another as to their particular Employments and ways of
Living. I shall therefore make it appear, that Godliness and Religion is a very
great furtherance to the acquisition of all these; and that no man can take a
more ready way either to improve his Fortune, or to purchase a Name and
Reputation among men, or to live comfortably and pleasantly in this world, than
heartily to serve God, and to live in the practice of every Virtue.

And in the First place, I begin with the Conduciveness of Religion and
Godliness to improve our outward Fortunes; the Advantages of it for the getting
or increasing an Estate: For this is the thing to which our Thoughts are
commonly first directed, as looking upon it as the Foundation of a happy Life
in this world.

But here I desire not to be mistaken: I would not be thought to deal with you
as one of our ordinary Empiricks, that promises many brave feats in his Bill,
which are indeed beyond the power of his Art: I do not pretend that Wealth and
Opulency is necessarily entailed upon Religion; so that whoever is good shall
presently be enabled to make Purchases, and to leave Lands and Livings to his
Children. Riches are one of those things that are not so perfectly in our
power, that all men may hope for an equal share of them. The having more or
less depends oftentimes not so much upon our selves, as upon that condition and
quality in which we were born, the way and course of Life into which our
Friends put us; and a hundred accidental circumstances to which we our selves
contribute nothing. But this I say; supposing the virtuous man in equal
circumstances with others; supposing him to stand upon the same level, and to
enjoy the same fortuitous hits and external concurrences that they do, and he
shall by many odds have the advantage of them for thriving and improving in the
world in any condition of life whatsoever.

So that, so far as the getting of Riches depends upon Humane endeavors; so
far as it is an Art, and falls under Precepts and Directions: no man alive can
propose a better expedient in order thereto than a serious practice of Religion.

To make this good, let it be considered, that as to the means that do in a
more direct and immediate manner influence upon the getting or improving an
Estate (I speak of General means, such as are of use in all conditions of life;
for to meddle with the Mysteries of any Particular Art or Trade, is not my
purpose, as indeed it is beyond my skill:) as to such means as these, I say,
none can prescribe more effectual than these four.

1. Prudence, in administering our Affairs. 2. Diligence, in that Vocation
wherein God has placed us. 3. Thrift and good Husbandry. 4. Keeping a good
Correspondence with those in whose power it is to hinder or promote our
Affairs.
If now it do appear that Godliness does highly improve a man in all these four
respects; if it can be showed that all these Fruits naturally grow and thrive
better in a Religious Soil then any other, it will evidently follow; that
supposing these abovenamed means do indeed contribute to the making of a
Fortune, (and if they do not, no man knows what does; and we strangely abuse
our Friends and our Children, when upon that account we recommend them to them)
it follows, I say, that a life of Godliness is a mighty advantage to a man for
the purposes I am speaking of.

And first of all, it will be easy to show that Godliness does above all
things tend to make a man wise and prudent, skilful and dexterous in the
management of his Affairs of what nature soever: for it does very much clear
and improve a man's understanding, not only by a certain natural efficacy it
has (as I shall show hereafter) to purify the Blood and Spirits, upon which
the perfection of our Intellectual Operations does exceedingly much depend; but
also by dispelling those adventitious clouds that arise in the discerning
faculty from the noisome Fumes of Lust and Passion.

All Vice in the very nature of it, depraves and distorts a man's judgment,
fills our minds with prejudices, and false Apprehensions of things; and, no man
that is under the dominion of it, can possibly have such a free use of his
Reason as otherwise he might; for he will commonly see things, not as they are
in themselves, but in those disguises and false colors which his Passion puts
upon them: Upon which account he cannot avoid but he will be often imposed
upon, and commit a thousand errors in the management of his Affairs, which the
virtuous man, whose Reason is pure and untinctur'd, is secured from. It cannot
be imagined that either he should foresee events so clearly, or spy
opportunities so sagaciously, or weigh things so impartially, or deliberate so
calmly, or transact so cautiously, as the man that is free from those manifold
prepossessions which his mind is fraught with.

We see this every day verified in men of all Ranks and Conditions, of all
Callings and Employments. What a multitude of inconveniences, as to matter of
dealing between man and man, does an intemperate Appetite betray men to? How
silly and foolish is the most shrewd man, when Wine has gotten into his head?
There is none so simple in his company, but supposing him to be sober, and to
have designs upon him, he shall be able to overreach him. What a world of
Advantages does the Angry man give to him he deals with, by the hastiness and
impatience of his spirit? How often does a man do that in the fury and
expectancies of a Lust, for which when his Ardors are over, he is ready to bite
his nails for very vexation?

It is thus more or less with all kind of Vices, they craze a man's head, and
cast a mist before his eyes, and make him often lose himself in those very ways
wherein he pretends to be most skilful: So that it cannot be denied, that
virtue is of a singular use in all matters wherein we have occasion to make use
of our Reason, and does secure us from a multitude of indiscretions, which
without it we should unavoidably commit.

But secondly, Godliness is also an excellent means to secure a man's diligence
in the discharge of his Calling and Employment, which is also a matter of very
great consequence in order to our thriving in the world: for it is the diligent
hand that makes rich, and the man that is diligent in his business, that shall
stand before Kings; as Solomon tells us.

Now the Obligations that Religion lays upon us to be careful in this point,
are far stronger then what can arise from any other respect or consideration
soever; for it obliges us to mind our Business, not only for our own but for
Gods sake: it charge the matter upon our Consciences, and represents it to us
as a part of that service we owe to our Creator; and upon the due performance
of which, no less then the everlasting welfare of our souls does depend: for it
assures us, that he that will call us to account for every idle Word, will much
more do so for the idle expense of our Time, and the abuse or not improvement
of those Talents that he has entrusted us with. So that though we had no
worldly inducement to make us diligent in our Callings, though we were sure we
should suffer no prejudice in our Temporal Affairs by Idleness, and the neglect
of our Business, (the fear of which yet is the only principle that puts worldly
men upon action) nevertheless we were infinitely concerned not to be slack or
negligent in this matter, in regard it is a point that will be so severely
exacted of us in the other world.

I know but one Objection that can be made against this discourse, and it is
this, that what engagements soever Religion lays upon us to the careful
spending of our time, yet its own Exercises, Prayer and Reading, and
Meditation, take up so great a portion of it, which might be spent in the works
of our ordinary Employment, that in effect it rather hinders our attendance on
our Business than promotes it. But to this it is easily answered, that there is
no man so engaged in the world, but may if he please, make both his Business
and his Devotions consist together without prejudicing of either.

They have very false Apprehensions of Religion, that think it obliges us to be
always upon our knees, or always poring upon some good Book: no, we do as truly
serve God, and perform acts of Religion, when we labor honestly in our
Vocation, as when we go to Church, or say our Prayers.

It is true indeed, we ought to have our hearts in Heaven as much as is
possible, and to that end we ought to pray continually; but what hinders but we
may do this in the midst of our Business? There is no employment does so
entirely engross a man's mind, but he may find leisure if he please, many times
a day, to entertain good thoughts, to quicken and reinforce his purposes, to
cast up a short Prayer or a wish to God Almighty. And this I dare say for your
encouragement, that such a devout frame of heart, such frequent and sudden
dartings of your souls to God, while you are at your Business, will be so far
from hindering or distracting you in it, that they will make you go about it
with much more vigor and alacrity.

But further, I would ask any man that makes the foresaid Objection, supposing
Religion ten times more expensive of our time then really it is, yet whether
Vice and Sin be not much more so, then it would be. What a multitude of idle
avocations from, and interruptions in our Business does that daily occasion
unto men? what a number of impertinent Discourses, unprofitable Visits,
needless points of Gallantry, long diversions by Drink, and Play, and Company;
not to mention a great many other Debauches, does it frequently engage men in?
and yet these we count no hindrances to our Business; these we complain not
of; but to spend a quarter of that time in some devout Exercise, this is
intolerable, it wastes too much of our time, our occasions will not permit it.
Such partial and unjust estimators of things are we. But I proceed.

In the third place then, as for Frugality and good Husbandry, which is another
necessary requisite for the getting of Wealth. Religion is unquestionably the
best mistress of it in the world; for it retrencheth all the exorbitances and
wantonnesses of our Desires, which are the things that pick the money out of
our purses, and teaches us to live after the measures of Nature, which every
body knows are little, and cheap. It perfectly cuts off all those idle expenses
with which the Estates of other men stand almost continually charged. The
Modesty of it clothes us at a small rate; and its Temperance spreads for us,
though a neat, yet a frugal Table. The attendance it requires on our Business
will not allow us to embezel our money in Drinking or Gaming: nor will that
Purity which is inseparable from it ever let us know what the vast and sinking
expenses of lewdness and uncleanness are. In a word, it is Vice only that is
the chargeable thing; it is only Shame and Repentance that men buy at such
costly rates. Godliness is saving, and full of good Husbandry; nor has it any
known or unknown ways of spending, except it be those of Charity, which indeed,
in proper speaking, are not so much expense, as Usury; for money so laid out,
does always even in this life return to us with Advantage.

The fourth and last means I mentioned of Thriving in the world, was the
keeping a good Correspondence with all those in whose power it is to hinder or
promote our Affairs. This every body knows to be a prime point in Policy; and
indeed it is of a large extent, and of continual use. No man can be supposed so
independent on others, but that as he is some way beholden to them for all that
he has, so he stands in need of their help and concurrence for all that he
hopes for. Men do not make their fortunes of themselves, nor grow rich by
having Treasures dropped in their Laps, but they do it by the benefit of Humane
Society, by the mutual assistances and good offices that one man performs for
another. So that whoever intends to thrive in the world, it above all things
imports him so to carry himself toward all that he has any commerce with, so
far to secure their favor and good will that they may be obliged not to deny
him any of those assistances, which the exigency of his Affairs calls for at
their hands. But now how this should be done any otherwise than by being truly
Just and Honest, by abstaining from Violence and Injury, by being True to our
Trusts, and Faithful in performing our Contracts; and in a word, by doing all
those good Offices to others which we expect they should do unto us, which as
our Savior tells us is the sum of Religion, is a very hard thing to conceive.

The usefulness or rather the necessity of such a Behavior as this, in order
to the gaining the good Opinion of others, and so serving our own ends by them,
is so universally acknowledged, that even those that make no real Conscience of
these things, are yet nevertheless in all their dealings forced to pretend to
them. Open and Barefaced Knavery rarely serves a man's turn in this world, but
it is under the mask of Virtue and Honesty that it usually performs those Feats
it does; which is no less than a Demonstration of the conduciveness of those
things to promote our Temporal Interests: for if the mere Pretense to them be a
great advantage to us for this purpose, it cannot be imagined but that the
Reality of them will be a greater. Certainly the Power of Godliness will be
able to do more than the Form alone, and that if it was upon no other account
than this, that no man that is but a mere Pretender to Honesty can long hope to
keep his credit among men. It is impossible to act a Part for any long time;
let him carry it never so cunningly, his Vizor will some time or other be
thrown off, and he will appear in his true colors; and to what a world of
mischiefs and inconveniences he will then be exposed, every one that knows how
hated, how detested, how abandoned by every one, a Knave and a Villain is, may
easily determine. I hope I need say no more to convince you that Religion is
the best Policy, and that the more hearty and conscientious any man is in the
practice of it, the more likely he is to Thrive and Improve in the world.

So that I may now proceed to the second general point to be spoken to, which
is the Profitableness of Religion for the attaining a good Name and Reputation.
How very much it conduces to this purpose will appear from these two
considerations.

First, it lays the surest Grounds and Foundations for a good Name and
Reputation.

Secondly, Men are generally so just to it, that it rarely misses of a good
Name and Reputation. The first is an argument from Reason, the second from
Experience.

First of all Godliness lays the truest Foundations for a fair Reputation in
the world. There are but two things that can give a man a title to the good
Opinion and Respects of men; the inward Worth and Dignity of his Person, and
his Usefulness and Serviceableness to others. The first of these challenges
men's Esteem, the other their Love. Now both these Qualities Religion and Virtue
do eminently possess us of.

For first, the Religious man is certainly the most Worthy and Excellent
Person; for he of all others lives most up to the great End for which he was
designed, which is the natural measure of the Goodness and Worth of Things.

What ever external Advantages a man may have, yet if he be not endowed with
virtuous Qualities, he is far from having any True Worth or Excellence, and
consequently cannot be a fit object of our Praise and Esteem; because he wants
that which should make him Perfect and Good in his Kind. For it is not a comely
Personage, or a long Race of Famous Ancestors, or a large Revenue, or a
multitude of Servants, or many swelling Titles, or any other thing without a
man that speaks him a Complete Man, or makes him to be what he should be; but
the right use of his Reason, the employing his Liberty and Choice to the best
purposes, the Exercising his Powers and Faculties about the fittest Objects,
and in the most due measures. These are the Things that make him Excellent. Now
none can be said to do this but only he that is Virtuous.

Secondly, Religion also is that which makes a man most Useful and Profitable
to others; for it effectually secures his performance of all those Duties
whereby both the security and welfare of the Public, and also the Good and
Advantage of particular Persons is most attained.

It makes men Lovers of their Country, Loyal to their Prince, Obedient to Laws;
it is the surest Bond and Preservative of Society in the world; it obliges us
to live peaceably, and to submit our selves to our Rulers, not only for wrath,
but also for Conscience sake: It renders us modest and governable in
Prosperity, and resolute and courageous to suffer bravely in a good cause in
the worst of times: It teaches us to endeavor as much as in us lies to
promote the good of every particular Member of the Community, to be inflexibly
upright, to do hurt to none, but good offices to all, to be charitable to the
Bodies and Souls of men, to do all manner of kindnesses that lie within our
power: it takes off the sowrness and moroseness of our Spirits, and makes us
Affable and Courteous, Gentle and Obliging, and willing to embrace with open
Arms and an hearty Love, all sorts and conditions of men.

In every Relation wherein we can stand to one another, it influenceth upon us
in order to the making us more useful; it makes Parents kind, and Indulgent,
and careful of the Education of their Children, and Children Loving and
Obedient to their Parents: it makes Servants diligent to please their Masters,
and to do their work in singleness of heart, not with eye-service as
men-pleasers, but as unto God; and it makes Masters gentle and forbearing, and
careful to make provision for their Family, as those that know they have a
Master in Heaven, that is no respecter of persons. In a word, there is no
condition or capacity, in which Religion will not be signally an instrument of
making us more serviceable to others, and of doing more good in the world. And
if such be the spirit and temper of it, how is it possible but it must needs
acquire a great deal of Respect and Love from all sorts of men? If Obligingness
and doing good in ones Generation do not endear a man to those that know him,
do not entitle him to their Love and Affections, what thing in the world is
there that is likely to do it?

But secondly, True and unaffected Goodness seldom misses of a good Reputation
in the world. How unjust to Virtue soever men are in other respects, yet in
this they generally give it its due; where ever it appears it generally meets
with Esteem and Approbation; nay it has the good word of many that otherwise
are not over-fond of Religion. Though they have not the grace to be Good
themselves, yet they rarely have the confidence not to commend Goodness in
others.

Add to this, that no man ever raised to himself a Good name in the world, but
it was upon the score of his Virtues, either Real or Pretended. Vice has
sometimes got Riches, and advanced it self into Preferments, but it never was
accounted Honorable in any Nation.

It must be acknowledged indeed that it may and does sometimes happen, that
Vicious men may be had in Esteem; but then it is to be considered, that it is
not for their Vices that they are esteemed, but for some good Quality or other
they are eminent in. And there is no doubt, if those men were without those
Vices, their Reputation would be so far from being thereby diminished, that it
would become much more Considerable.

It must also be acknowledged on the other hand, that even Virtuous and Good
men may sometimes fail of that Esteem and Respect that their Virtue seems to
merit, nay, in that degree as to be slighted and despised, and to have many
Odious Terms and Nicknames put upon them: But when we consider the cases in
which this happens, it will appear to be of no force at all for the disproving
what has been now delivered. For first, it ought to be considered what kind of
Persons those are that treat Virtue and Virtuous men thus Contemptuously, we
shall always find them to be the Worst and the Vilest of mankind; such who have
debauched the natural principles of their minds, have lost all the notions and
distinctions of Good and Evil, are fallen below the Dignity of Humane Nature,
and have nothing to bear up themselves with, but Boldness and Confidence,
Drollery and Scurrility, and turning into Ridicule every thing that is grave
and serious: But it is with these as it is with the Monsters and Extravagances
of Nature, they are but very Few. Few in comparison of the rest of mankind, who
have wiser and truer sentiments of things. But if they were more numerous, no
man of understanding would value what such men said of him. It looks like a
Crime to be commended by such Persons, and may justly occasion a man to reflect
upon his own actions, and to cry out to himself as He did of old, What have I
done that these men speak well of me?

But secondly, it cannot be denied but that some persons who are otherwise
Virtuous and Religious, may be guilty of such Indiscretions as thereby to give
others occasion to slight and despise them. But then it is to be considered,
that this is not to be charged upon Virtue and Religion, but is the Particular
Fault of the Persons. Every one that is Religious is not Prudent; the meanness
of a man's Understanding, or his Rash and Intemperate Zeal, or the moroseness of
his Temper, or his too great Scrupulosity* about little things, may sometimes
make his Behavior Uncouth and Fantastic, and betray him to do many actions
which he may think his Religion obliges him to, that other People will be apt
to fancy Silly and Ridiculous. But this does not at all reflect upon Religion;
nor does it follow, that because the Imprudence of this or the other Particular
man, exposes him to the Mirth and the Pleasantness of others, that therefore
all Religious Persons must fall under the same Fate. Most certainly Religion,
wherever it is governed by Knowledge and sound Principles, wherever it is
managed with Prudence and Discretion, is a thing so Noble, so Amiable, that it
attracts Love, and commands Respect from all that are acquainted with it,
unless they be such profligately wicked Persons as I just now spoke of.

There is one Objection made from the Scripture against this and the former
Point I have been speaking to, which I desire to remove, before I proceed to
the third General Head of my Discourse. It is this: That the Scripture is so
far from representing Godliness as a means to Improve our Fortunes, or attain a
Reputation in the world, that it seems directly to affirm the contrary; for it
assures us, that All those that will live godly in Christ must suffer
Persecution. That the Disciples of Christ shall be Hated of All men for His
Names sake. That the World shall revile and persecute them, and speak all
manner of Evil of them; and that through many Tribulations we must enter into
the Kingdom of God.

But to this it is easily answered, that these and other such like Passages of
Scripture do not speak the General and Common Fate that attends Godliness in
all times and places of the world, according to the Ordinary course of Gods
Providence; but only refer to that particular Time, when Christianity was to be
planted in the world; then, indeed, Persecution and Disgrace, loss of Goods,
and even of Life it self, was to be the common portion of those that professed
it: nor could it otherwise be expected; for, when a new Religion is to be set
up, and such a Religion as is perfectly destructive of all those others that
have been by long custom received, and are by Laws established in the world, It
cannot be imagined but that it will meet with a great deal of Contradiction and
Opposition from all sorts of persons. But this was a peculiar and extraordinary
case, and could but last for a certain time; now that Christianity has
obtained in the world, and is adopted into the Laws of Kingdoms, as God be
thanked it is among us at this day: so far need we be from fearing that the
practice of it will draw upon us any Persecution, or such other Inconveniences
as are mentioned in the forecited places, that there is no doubt but that we
may Rationally expect from it all those External Benefits and Advantages, which
as we have seen it is in its own nature apt to produce, and which God has
indeed made over to it by Promise, in several Passages of the Scripture,
especially of the Old Testament.

For that I may mention this by the By, I do not conceive that those Promises
of Long Life, Good Days, and all manner of worldly Prosperity, with which the
Practice of Godliness is so frequently enforced in the Old Testament, were so
appropriated to the Jewish Religion, as to be antiquated or disannulled by the
Introduction of the Christian; but rather that they are still in force to all
the Purposes they were then: For that the coming of Christ into the world did
add many great Blessings and Privileges to the People of God, which before
they had not, we are certain of: but that it took away from them any that
before they had, this we no where read, nor indeed is it probable.

But I hasten to the third and last General Head I am to speak to, which is the
Excellent Ministeries of Religion above all other things, to the Pleasures of
Humane Life: which point, if it be clearly made out, I do not see what can be
further wanting to recommend it unto us, as the most effectual Instrument for
the serving all our turns in this World. Now that Godliness does indeed make
the most excellent Provisions for all sorts of Pleasures, will appear by these
four Considerations.

First, That it eminently ministers to Health, which is a necessary Foundation
for all Pleasures. Secondly, It does much increase the Relish and Sweetness of
all our other Pleasures. Thirdly, It secures us from all those Inquietudes and
Disturbances which are apt to embitter our Pleasures, and make our Lives
uncomfortable. Fourthly, It adds to Humane Life a world of Pleasures of its
own, which those that are not possessed of it, are utterly unacquainted with.
First of all, Godliness does very much conduce to Health, which is so
necessary to our enjoyment of any sensible Good, that without it, neither
Riches, nor Honors, nor any thing that we esteem most gratifying to our Senses
will signify any thing at all to us. Now that a Sound and Healthful
Constitution does exceedingly much depend upon a discreet government and
moderation of our Appetites and Passions, upon a sober and temperate use of all
Gods Creatures, which is an essential Part of True Religion, is a thing so
evident, that I need make no words about it. What are most of our Diseases and
Infirmities that make us miserable and unpittied while we live, and cut us off
in the midst of our days, and transmit Weakness and Rottenness to our
Posterity, but the effects of our Excesses and Debauches, our Wantonness and
Luxury? Certainly, if we would observe those Measures in our Diet and in our
Labors, in our Passions and in our Pleasures which Religion has bound us up
to, we might to such a degree Preserve our Bodies, as to render the greatest
Part of Physic perfectly superfluous. But these things are too well known to
need to be insisted on. I therefore pass on to the next thing.

Secondly, A Life of Religion does very much increase the relish and sweetness
of all our sensible Enjoyments. So far is it from abridging us of any of our
earthly delights (as its enemies slanderously represent it) that it abundantly
heightens them. It does not only indulge to us the free Use of all those good
Creatures of God which he has made for the Support and Comfort of Mankind,
while they are in these Earthly Bodies; but also makes them more exquisitely
gratifying and delightful than without it they could possibly be. And this it
does in part by the means of that never sufficiently commended Temperance and
Moderation I before spoke of: for hereby it comes to pass that our Senses,
which are the Instruments of our Pleasures are always preserved in that due
Purity and Quickness, that is absolutely necessary for the right performing of
their Offices, and the rendering our Perceptions of any thing grateful and
agreeable. Whereas the Sensual and Voluptuous man defeats his own designs, and
whilst he thinks to enjoy a greater share of Pleasures than other men, really
enjoys a less. For his Dissoluteness and giving up the reins to his Appetites
only serves to dull and stupifie them. Nor does he reap any other Benefit from
his continual hankering after Bodily Pleasures, but that his Sensations of them
are hereby made altogether Flat and Unaffecting. Neither is his Meat half so
favoury, nor his Recreations so diverting, nor his Sleep so sweet, nor the
Company he keeps so agreeable as Theirs are, that by following the measures of
Nature and Reason, come to them with truer and more unforced Appetites.

But besides this, there is a certain Lightsomness and Cheerfulness of mind,
which is in a manner peculiar to the truly Religious Soul, that above all
things sets off our Pleasures, and makes all the Actions and Perceptions of
Humane Life Sweet and Delightful. True Piety is the best Cure of Melancholy in
the world; nothing comparable to it for dispelling that Lumpishness and
Inactivity, that renders the Soul of a Man incapable of enjoying either it self
or any thing else. It fills the Soul with perpetual Light and Vigor, infuseth
a strange kind of Alacrity and Gayety of Humor into us. And this it does not
only by removing those things that Hinder our Mirth, and make us languish in
the midst of our Festivities, (such as are the Pangs of an Evil Conscience, and
the storms of unmortified Passions, of which I shall speak in the following
particular) but even by a more Physical Efficiency. It has really a mighty
Power to Correct and Exalt a man's Natural Temper. Those Ardent Breathings and
Workings wherewith the Pious Soul is continually carried out after God and
Virtue, are to the Body like so much Fresh Air and Wholesome Exercise, they Fan
the Blood, and keep it from Settling; they Clarify the Spirits, and purge them
from those grosser Feculencies which would otherwise Cloud our Understandings,
and make us dull and listless. And to these effects of Religion does Solomon
seem to Allude, when he tells us, that Wisdom makes a man's face to shine,
Eccles. 8. 1.

Where he seems to intimate, that that Purity and Exaltation into which the
Blood and Spirits of a man are wrought by the Exercise of Virtue and Devotion
does diffuse it self even to his Outward Visage, making the Countenance clear,
and serene, and filling the Eyes with an unusual kind of Splendour and Vivacity.
But whether this be a true Comment on his words or no, certain it is, that
Piety disposes a man to Mirth and Lightness of Heart above all things in the
world: and how admirable a Relish this does give to all our other Pleasures and
Enjoyments there is none but can easily discern.

Thirdly, Let it be further considered, that Godliness is a most Effectual
Antidote against all those Inquietudes, and Evil Accidents, that do either
wholly destroy, or very much embitter the Pleasures of this Life.

For whilst it teaches us to place all our Happiness in God Almighty and our
selves only, whilst we have learned to bring all our Affections and Passions,
our Desires and Aversions, our Hopes and Fears, under the command of our
Reason, and endeavor not so much to suit Things to our Wills, as our Wills to
Things; being Indifferent to all Events that can happen, save only that we
always judge those Best which God in his Providence sends us. Being I say, thus
disposed (as certainly Religion if it be suffered to have its perfect work upon
us will thus dispose us,) what is it that shall be able to disturb or interrupt
our Pleasures, or create any Trouble or Vexation to us? Our Present Enjoyments
will not be Embittered with the fear of losing them, or lessened by our
Impatient Longing after Greater. Our Brains will not be upon the Rack for
Compassing things that are perhaps Impossible, nor our Bodies under the Scourge
of Rage and Anger for every Disappointment. We shall not look pale with Envy
that our Neighbors have that which we have not, nor Pine away with Grief if we
should happen to lose that which we have.

But the Vicious man is exposed to all these Miseries, and a thousand more; He
carries that within him, which will perpetually fret and torment him, for he is
a Slave to his Passions; and the least of them, when it is let loose upon him,
is the Worst of Tyrants. He is like the Troubled Sea, restless and ever
working, rifled and discomposed with every thing. He is not capable of being
rendered so much as Tolerably Happy by the best Condition this world affords:
For having such a world of Impetuous Desires and Appetites which must all be
satisfied, or else he is miserable; and there being such an infinite number of
Circumstances that must concur to the giving them that Satisfaction: And all
these depending upon Things without him, which are perfectly out of his Power,
it cannot be avoided but he will continually find matter to disquiet him, and
render his condition troublesome and uneasy: a thousand unforeseen Accidents
will ever be crossing his Designs. Nor will there be wanting some little Thing
or other, almost hourly to put him out of Humor.

And if this be the Case of the Vicious man, in the Best Circumstances of this
world (where the Causes of Vexation are in a manner undiscernable) in what a
miserable Condition must he needs be, under those more Real Afflictions unto
which Humane Life is obnoxious, what is there that shall be able to support his
Spirit under the Tediousness of a Lingering Sickness, or the Anguish of an
Acute Pain? What is become of all his Mirth and Jollity, if there should happen
a Turn in His Fortune, if he should fall into Disgrace, or his Friends forsake
him, or the Means of maintaining his Pleasures fail him, and the miserable man
become Poor and Despised? Not to mention a great many more Evils, which will
make him incapable of any Consolation, eat into the Heart of his best
Enjoyments, and become Gall and Wormwood to his choicest Delicacies.

And has he not now, think you, made admirable Provisions for his Pleasures?
Has he not done himself a wonderful Piece of Service, by freeing himself from
the Drudgery, as he calls it, of Virtue and Religion? Alas, Poor Man! this is
the only Thing that would now have secured him from all these sad Accidents and
Displeasures. The Good Man sits above the Reach of Fortune, and in spite of all
the Vicissitudes and Uncertainties of this Lower World, with which other men
are continually Alarmed, enjoys a Constant and Undisturbed Peace. Those Evils
that may be Avoided, (and really a great many which afflict mortal men, are
such) he by his Prudent Conduct and Government of himself wholly prevents. And
those that are Unavoidable, he takes by such a Handle, that they have no power
to do him any Harm: For he is indeed possessed of that which the Alchymists in
vain seek for: Such a Sovereign Art he has, that he can turn the Basest Metals
into Gold, make such an use of the worst Accidents that can befall him, that
they shall not be accounted his Miseries, but his Enjoyments. So that however
the varieties of his Condition may occasion a change in his Pleasures, yet can
they never cause any Loss or Destruction of them.

And this security he enjoys, not as some of the Stoics of old pretended to
do, by an Imaginary Insensibility, or by changing the names of Things, calling
that no Evil which Really is one: but by an absolute Resignation of himself to
the will of God, and an Hearty acquiescing in his wise Providence. He is
certain there is a God that governs the world, and that nothing happens to him,
but by his Order and Appointment. And he is certain also that this God has a
Real kindness for him, and would not dispense any Event unto him, but what is
really for his Good and Advantage. And these thoughts so support his Spirit,
that he not only bears patiently, but thanks God for what ever happens to him.
And instead of Fretting and Complaining that things succeed otherwise then he
expected, he Resolves with himself that that Condition, whatever it be, in
which he actually is, is indeed best for him; and that which he himself, were
he to be the Carver of his Fortunes, supposing him but truly to understand his
own Concernments, would choose for himself above all others.

But further, besides this security from Outward Disturbances which our virtue
obtains for us, there is another Evil which it also delivers us from, with
which the wicked man is almost perpetually haunted, and which seldom suffers
him to enjoy any sincere, unmingled Pleasure. That which I mean is the Pangs of
an Evil Conscience, the Fears, the Restlesness, the Confusion, the Amazements
that arise in his soul from the sense of his Crimes, and the just Apprehensions
of the shame and vengeance that does await them, possibly in this Life, but
most certainly in the Life to come.

How Happy, how Prosperous soever the Sinner be as to his other Affairs, yet
these Furies he shall be sure to be plagued with: no pompousness of Condition,
no costly Entertainments, no noise of Company will be able to drive them away.
Every man that is wicked cannot but know that he is so, and that very Knowledge
is a Principle of perpetual Anguish and Disquietude. Be his Crimes never so
secret, yet he cannot be confident they will always continue so: and the very
Apprehension of this makes him feel all the Shame and Amazement of a present
Discovery. But put the case he has had the good luck to sin so closely, or in
such a nature that he need fear nothing from Men; yet he knows there is an
Offended God to whom he has a sad and a fearful Reckoning to make: a God too
Just to be Bribed, too Mighty to be Overawed, too Wise to be Imposed upon. And
is not the man, think you, under such Reflections as these likely to live a
very Comfortable life? Ah, none knows the Bitterness of them but himself that
feels them. To the Judgment of others he perhaps appears a very happy man, he
has the world at his beck, all things seem to conspire to make him a great
Example of Prosperity, we admire, we applaud his Condition. But ah, we know not
how sad a heart he often carries under this fair Outside: we know not with
what sudden Damps his spirit is often struck, even in the height of his
Revellings. We know not how unquiet, how broken his sleeps are, how often he
starts and looks pale; when the Wife that lies by his side understands not what
the matter is with him.

He does indeed endeavor all he can to stifle his Cares, and to stop the mouth
of his Conscience. He thinks to divert it with Business, or to flatter it with
little Sophistries, or to drown it with rivers of Wine, or to calm it with soft
and gentle Airs. And he is indeed sometimes so successful in these Arts as for
a while to lay it asleep. But alas this is no lasting peace, the least thing
awakens it, even the sound of a Passing Bell, or a clap of Thunder; nay, a
Frightful Dream, or a Melancholy Story has the power to do it, and then the
poor man returns to his Torment.

And now judge you, whether the Honest and Virtuous Man that is free from all
these Agonies, that is at Peace with God, and at Peace with his own Conscience,
that apprehends nothing terrible from the one, nor feels any thing troublesome
from the other, but is safe from Himself and from all the world in his own
Innocence: Judge, I say, whether such a one has not laid to himself better and
surer Foundations for Pleasures and a happy Life, than the man that by
indulging his Lusts and Vices, only breeds up a Snake in his Bosom, which will
not cease to Sting and Gall him beyond what a Tongue is able to express, or a
witty Cruelty to Invent.

Fourthly and lastly, besides the benefits of Religion for removing the
hindrances of our Pleasures; it also adds to Humane Life a world of pleasures
of its own, which vicious men are utterly unacquainted with.

And these are of so excellent a kind, so delicious, so enravishing, that the
highest gratifications of sense are not comparable to them. Never till we come
to be heartily Religious do we understand what true Pleasure is. That which
arises from the grateful motions that are made in our outward senses, is but a
faint shadow, a mere dream of it. Then do we begin to enjoy true Pleasures
indeed when our Highest and Divinest Faculties, which were wholly laid asleep
while we lived the life of sense, begin to be awakened, and to exercise
themselves upon their proper objects, when we become acquainted with God, and
the Infinite Abyss of Good that is in him, when our hearts are made sensible of
the great Love and good will he bears us; and in that sense are powerfully
carried out in Joy, and Love, and desire after him: when we feel the Divine
Nature daily more and more displayed in our souls, showing forth it self in the
blessed Fruits of Charity and Peaceableness, and Meekness, and Humility, and
Purity, and Devotion, and all the other Graces of the Holy Spirit. It is not
possible but that such a Life as this must needs be a Fountain of inexpressible
joy to him that leads it, and fill the Soul with transcendently greater content
than any thing upon earth can possibly do: for this is the Life of God, this is
the Life of the Blessed Angels above, this is the Life that is most of all
agreeable to our own natures. While we live thus, things are with us as they
should be; our Souls are in their natural Posture, in that state they were
framed and designed to live in: whereas the Life of Sin is a state of Disorder
and Confusion; a perpetual violence and force upon our Natures. While we live
thus, we enjoy the Pleasures of men, whereas before when we were governed by
sense, we could pretend to no other satisfactions but what the Brutes have as
well as we. In this state of life we gratify our Highest and Noblest Powers,
the intellectual Appetites of our Souls; which as they are infinitely
capacious, so have they an infinite good to fill them: whereas in the sensual
Life, the meanest, the dullest, and the most contracted Faculties of our Souls
were only provided for.

But what need I carry you out into these Speculations, when your own sense and
experience will ascertain you in this matter above a thousand Arguments. Do but
seriously set your selves to serve God, if you have yet never done it, do but
once try what it is to live up to the Precepts of Reason, and Virtue, and
Religion; and I dare confidently pronounce that you will in one month find more
Joy, more Peace, more Content, to arise in your spirits, from the sense that
you have resisted the Temptations of Evil, and done what was your duty to do,
than in many years spent in Vanity and a Licentious course of living. I doubt
not in the least, but that after you have once seen and tasted how gracious the
Lord is, how good all his ways are, but you will proclaim to all the world,
that One day spent in his Courts is better than a thousand: Nay, you will be
ready to cry out with the Roman Orator (if it be lawful to quote the Testimony
of a Heathen, after that of the Divine Psalmist) that One day lived according
to the Precepts of Virtue is to be preferred before an Immortality of Sin.

You will then alter all your sentiments of things, and wonder that you should
have been so strangely abused by false representations of Virtue and Vice. You
will then see that Religion is quite another thing than it appeared to you
before you became acquainted with it. Instead of that grim, sour, unpleasant
Countenance in which you heretofore painted her to your self, you will then
discover nothing in her but what is infinitely Lovely and Charming. Those very
Actions of Religion which you now cannot think upon with Patience, they seem so
harsh and unpleasant, you will then find to be accompanied with a wonderful
Delight. You will not then complain of the narrowness of the Bounds, or the
scantiness of the Measures that it has confined your desires to; for you will
then find that you have hereby gained an entrance into a far greater and more
perfect Liberty. How ungentilely, how much against the grane of Nature soever
it now looks to forgive an Injury, or an Affront; you will then find it to be
as far more eafie, so far more sweet than to revenge one. You will no longer
think works of Charity burdensome or expensive; or that to do good Offices to
every one is an employment too mean for you; for you will then experience that
there is no sensuality like that of doing good, and that it is a greater
pleasure to do a kindness than to receive one. How will you chide your self for
having been so averse to Prayer and other devout Exercises, accounting them as
tiresome unfavoury things; when you begin to feel the delicious Relishes they
leave upon your spirit? You will then confess that no Conversation is half so
agreeable as that which we enjoy with God Almighty in Prayer; no Cordial so
reviving as heartily to pour out our souls unto him. And then to be affected
with his Mercies, to praise and give thanks to him for his Benefits, what is it
but a very Heaven upon Earth, an anticipation of the Joys of Eternity? Nay, you
will not be without your pleasures even in the very entrance of Religion, then
when you exercise acts of Repentance, when you mourn and afflict your self for
your sins, which seems the frightfullest thing in all Religion. For such is the
nature of that holy sorrow, that you would not for all the world be without it,
and you will find far greater Contentment and satisfaction in grieving for your
Offenses, then ever you did receive from the Committing them.

But, O the ineffable Pleasures that do continually spring up in the heart of a
good man, from the sense of Gods Love, and the hope of his Favor, and the fair
prospect he has of the Joy and Happiness of the other world! How pleasing, how
transporting will the thought of these things be to you! To think that you are
one of those happy souls that are of an Enemy become the Friend of God, that
your ways please him, and that you are not only Pardoned, but Accepted and
Beloved by him: to think that you a poor Creature who were of your self
nothing, and by your sins had made your self far worse than nothing, are yet by
the goodness of your Savior become so considerable a Being, as to be able to
give delight to the King of the world, and to cause joy in Heaven among the
Blessed Angels by your Repentance: to think that God charges his Providence
with you, takes care of all your Concerns, hears all your Prayers, provides all
things needful for you, and that he will in his good time take you up unto
himself, to live everlastingly in his Presence, to be partaker of his Glories,
to be ravished with his Love, to be acquainted with his Counsels, to know and
be known by Angels, Archangels, and Seraphims; to enjoy a Conversation with
Prophets, Apostles, and Martyrs, and all the Raised and Glorified Spirits of
Brave Men; and with all these to spend a happy and a rapturous Eternity, in
Adoring, in Loving, in Praising God for the Infiniteness of his Wisdom, and the
Miracles of his Mercy and Goodness to all his Creatures. Can there be any
Pleasure like this? Can any thing in the world put you into such an Ecstasie of
Joy as the very thought of these things? With what a mighty scorn and contempt
will you in the sense of them look down upon all the little Gauderies and
sickly Satisfactions that the men of this world keep such a stir about! How
empty and evanid, how flat and unsavory will the best Pleasures on Earth
appear to you in comparison of these Divine Contentments? You will perpetually
rejoice, you will sing Praises to your Savior, you will bless the day that
ever you became acquainted with him; you will confess him to be the only master
of Pleasure in the world, and that you never knew what it was to be an Epicure
indeed, till you became a Christian.

Thus have I gone through all those Heads which I at first proposed to insist
on. What now remains but that I resume the Apostles Exhortation with which I
begun this Discourse, that since as you have seen, Godliness is so exceedingly
profitable to all the purposes of this Life, as well as the other: since, as
you have seen, Length of days is in her right hand, and in her left hand riches
and honor; and all her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are
peace: you would all be persuaded seriously to Apply your selves to the
exercise of it. Which that you may do, God of his, etc.

FINIS.

