A SERMON Preached on the Day of the Public Fast, April the 11th. 1679. AT St.
Margarets Westminster; BEFORE THE Honorable House of Commons.

BY JOHN SHARP, Rector of St. Giles in the Fields, and Chaplain to the Right
Honorable Heneage Lord Finch, Lord High Chancellor of England.

Published by Order of the House.

LONDON: Printed by M. C. for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishops Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1679.

A SERMON ON
REVEL. ii. 5. -- I will come unto thee quickly and will remove thy Candlestick
out of his place, except thou repent.
WE are this day met together to humble ourselves for our sins before God, and
to implore his mercy to this Nation, in the Preserving our King, our Laws, our
Religion and our Lives, and in Blessing the present Public Counsels in order
thereunto.

And never was a work of this nature more seasonable or more necessary than at
this time, and to us of this Kingdom: For as our sins were never greater, never
cried louder to Heaven for Vengeance, so the Judgments they deserve did never
more visibly threaten us than they do at this Day. Insomuch that if our
circumstances be duly considered, we may have just reason to apprehend, that
our Savior in the way of his Providence does now speak to the People and
Church of England the same words, that he ordered St. John by the way of Letter
to speak to the Church of Ephesus. Remember from whence thou art fallen, and
repent, and do the first works, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will
remove thy Candlestick out of his place, except thou repent.

This Church of Ephesus, as also the other six Churches of Asia, to each of
which St. John by the command of our Savior does here address a several
Epistle, were at the time when these Letters were dictated very flourishing
Churches, favored as much with the especial presence and influence of Christ,
as ever any Churches were.

This appears from the Preface to this Epistle in the first Verse of this
Chapter, wherein Christ the Author of the Epistle is described, as holding the
seven Stars in his right hand, and walking in the midst of the seven Golden
Candlesticks.

The seven Stars are the Angels of the seven Churches as he himself Interprets
them, Cap. i. 20.
that is, according to the sense of all Antiquity, The Bishops the Presidents,
the Governors of those Churches. His holding them in his hand, is his
supporting and directing them for the good of the people. The seven Golden
Candlesticks in the midst of which he walked, Ibid.
are, as he himself likewise expounds them, the seven Churches themselves, as
being the places where those Stars, those Lights did shine. And his walking
among those Candlesticks is his presence in those Churches, Encouraging or
Reproving, Rewarding or Punishing the members of them as there was cause,
having the power in his hands, either to continue those Lights among them, or
to remove them to another place.

I insist on the Explication of this passage, because it lets us in to the
meaning of the phrase that we meet with in the Text of removing the Candlestick
out of its place, which from hence we plainly see to be the Un-Churching any
people, the withdrawing the Light of the Gospel from them.

Well, But this Church of Ephesus to which the Epistle I am now concerned in
was written, how much soever Christ had done for them, had it seems made but a
bad requital of his kindnesses. Cap. ii. 2, 3.
At first indeed they had walked very worthily, and are much commended by our
Savior, for their Zeal and Piety and Labor in Religion, but now they were
fallen to a great degree of negligence and remissness.

It is true they at this time continued Orthodox in their Doctrines and
Opinions, they did both know and profess the true Religion, and were Zealous
against false Doctrines, which also our Savior takes notice of and commends
them for, This, V, 6.
says he, thou have, That thou hate the deeds of the Nicolaitans which I
also hate, but yet notwithstanding, so offended was he with the Loss of their
first Love, the decay of Devotion and Charity among them, that he threatens
them solemnly in the Text, That if they did not repent, and do the first works,
he would remove their Candlestick out of its place, that is, as I said, he
would withdraw from them his presence and the Light of his Gospel.

This is a brief account of my Text as to the first design and litteral meaning
of it, that is, as it concerns the Church of Ephesus. I now desire leave to
make such Application of it to ourselves as may be subservient to the ends
designed in the Solemnity of this Day.

And we have warrant enough to make such an Application; for let us not flatter
ourselves, what is here Reproved, and what is here Threatened, has not such a
peculiar respect to the particular Church of Ephesus, but that it does equally
concern all Churches so far as they fall under the same Character. Which
whether we at this day day do or no, it is fit we should seriously examine
ourselves about.

Here are three things considerable in the Text. First, a great Sin, and Guilt,
supposed. Secondly, a great Judgment denounced for that Guilt, no less than the
Un-Churching of that people that had contracted it. Thirdly, the means
prescribed for the averting that Judgment, viz. Repentance.

My Application of the Text shall proceed upon the same Heads, that is,

I shall first desire leave to enquire, whether we of this Nation, at this day,
for our manifold sins and guilt, may not be judged to be in as bad or worse
circumstances than the Church of Ephesus in the Text, and consequently have not
just reason to fear the same Judgment that they are here threatened with.

Secondly, I shall consider the Judgment here threatened, how grievous a one it
is, and consequently how great an argument the consideration of it ought to be
to us all to Repent.

Thirdly, I shall speak something of this Repentance how it ought to be expressed,
if we would thereby prevent the Judgment.

I begin with the first of these points, which concerns our sin and our guilt,
to make some representation of the Spiritual Maladies and Diseases that this
Nation groans under, those public grievances by which the Holy Spirit of God
is provoked to withdraw himself from us, and to give us up to the Power and
Dominion of other Masters.

This I must confess, is a very melancholy and unpleasing Argument, but yet
very necessary to be insisted on, and that very freely too: especially upon
such an occasion as this; and most of all, when I speak to those whose
Concernment, and whose Care it is to inspect these Matters, and from whom we
hope for a Cure of our Distempers.

It is here taken notice of the Church of Ephesus to her commendation, that she
retained the truth of the Christian Doctrine in opposition to the Heresies of
those times, and this, God be thanked, may be spoke of us at this day, we are
not much degenerated from the purity of Christianity as to Doctrinals. Our
Church may vie with all the Churches in the world, for Orthodoxy and Conformity
to the Primitive Church in matters of Faith.

And, blessed be Gods Name, this Light is not put under a Bushel. There is
perhaps no Church since the Apostles time wherein the Divine-Truth has been
more publicly and more purely taught, or the Sacraments more rightly and duly
Administered than among us, and no Church wherein Knowledge has more abounded
among all the members of it than it does now in Ours.

But the thing that is charged upon the Church of Ephesus, is their corrnption
in Manners, and this is the point we are now concerned in, and which it is fit
the whole Nation should examine themselves upon, and deeply lay to heart.

Though we still keep up the form of Godliness, yet have we not in a great
measure lost the power thereof? Though the Principles which our Church Owneth
and Professes be excellently good; Yet do not many of us horribly contradict
them in our Practices? Is there not a visible decay of Christian Piety to be
observed among us, and a Deluge of Vice and Wickedness of all sorts
overspreading the face of the Land?

I speak not here of the faults of this or the other particular person, for we
know there was never any Age nor any Religion that was free from such, but I
speak of the National sins, the reigning Vices of the Times, the miscarriages
that are so prevailing and so common that a public guilt is contracted by
them, and the whole people may justly share in the punishment of them.

I must confess, to speak strictly, the Degrees and Proportions in which any
Age grows better or worse than those that went before it, are not easily to be
measured, unless we could live the space of several Ages, and out of our own
experience make observations and remarks upon them. All that we have to make
our estimate by, is the Histories and Records that are left us of the state of
former Ages with which we may compare our own; But yet this way is often very
fallacious, because it is the common humor and custom of men, even of those
that transmit the Memoires of their own Times to Posterity, still to complain
of their own Times most, and to prefer the former Ages before that in which
they live.

Upon this consideration I shall not be forward to draw a comparison between
the former times and ours in order to the showing how much greater our sins are
than of those that went before us, and consequently how much riper we are now
for Judgment.

Most certain it is, That God, as he has done to the Sea, so has he to every
Nation, set its bounds of wickedness beyond which they shall not pass; and when
their iniquities are at full he will not fail to repay vengeance into their
Bosom. The Canaanites, the Jews, and many other Nations I might name have been
said instances of this kind of proceeding.

But when a Nation is come to that Fatal Period none knows but God, and whether
we are not already very near it we cannot tell, but we ought infinitely to fear.

Too evident it is, that things are in a very bad posture among us, and our
sins are grown to that height, that it is a Miracle of the Divine patience and
long-suffering that we are not already consumed. Let us be more particular.

If the prevailing of Atheism in a Land, and the contempt of God and Religion:

If open Lewdness and Debauchery, and Immorality of all kinds:

If the turning Religion into a mere piece of Formality, and outward profession:

If Schisms and Divisions and Factions in a Church:

And lastly, if our general Unthankfulness for and Unprofitableness under the
means of Grace, and the many mercies and privileges that have been vouchsafed
us.

If any or all of these sins can provoke God to forsake a Nation and give it up
to ruin (and yet these sins are both in the Scripture, and by the ordinary
course of Gods providence especially marked out for such) then are we of this
Nation at this time in a very deplorable condition, and are to expect Judgment
without Mercy, unless it be prevented by a speedy Reformation.

For first of all, was there ever more Atheism and Irreligion in a Christian
Nation, at least in a Protestant Christian Nation; or more countenance given to
such Doctrines and Opinions as directly tend thereto than now among us!

There are not many perhaps that dare in express terms affirm That there is no
God, because they know it is not safe so to do: But many affirm it by
consequence, by asserting such Principles from whence it must necessarily be
concluded.

For what is the consequence of such Doctrines as these; That there is nothing
but Body in the world, and that the very Notion of a Spiritual Incorporeal
Being implies a contradiction; That there is nothing Just or Unjust, Virtuous
or Vicious in itself, but as it is made so by the Laws of the Kingdom. That all
things come to pass by a Fatal Necessity, and that no man is so free and Agent
as to be capable of Rewards and Punishments for his Actions: What is the result
of these Doctrines, but the necessary introducing of Atheism and the banishing
Religion from among men? It being upon these Principles, not only a needless
impetinent, but an absurd contradictious thing.

And yet are not these the avowed Principles of too many among us, and those
too that are the great pretenders to Reason and Philosophy?

But what has been the effect of such Philosophy? Why suitable enough to the
Notions of it. You may meet with those that make no scruple to scoff at God and
every thing that relates to the other world, and to turn into Ridicule every
thing that is Sacred. And he is accounted the Great Spirit that thinks freely,
and dares speak boldly what he thinks. And if a man will set up for a Wit he
cannot take a more effectual course to gain him that Reputation in many
Companies, than to be confident and peremptory in contradicting the common
Sentiments of men as to Religion, To be able to Burlesque the Scriptures
humorously, To be dexterous in employing Religious Phrases to Scurrilous
Purposes, and to Baffle and Droll out of countenance those that stand up for
the Reputation of Sacred things.

As the world goes, it is a piece of virtue to believe a God and Providence,
and future Rewards and Punishments, with the other Principles of Natural
Religion; They do very well that go thus far. But as for Instituted Reveald
Religion, for instance Christianity, How many are there that think themselves
no way concerned in it, but hold it in the same rank with Judaism and
Mahometanism? And if they profess that rather than either of these, it is only
because they were born and bred up in it; It is the Religion of the Country
where they live; but if either of the other should be set up in the place of
it, they would as willingly conform to that.

One would think that such men as these should not be found in a Country that
calls itself Christian, much less in a Christian Country that calls itself
Reformed; And yet such is the infelicity and the fault of ours, that men of
these Principles and Practices do abound among us. O Blessed God! Whither shall
we come at last if timely care be not taken of these things?

But Secondly, If to the Atheism and Infidelity that reigns among us we add the
open Profaneness and Debauchery that is every where to be observed in our
days, how much blacker will our guilt appear?

Where is that Ancient Seriousness and Reservedness and Modesty that heretofore
has been thought not only essential to the Spirit of a Christian, but Natural
to the Temper of an Englishman?

Alas! We seem to have changed not only our Religion but our Climate too. And
may for Dissoluteness and Luxury, for Pride and Vanity and Idleness compare
with the ancient Asiaticks, and do perhaps outstrip several of our present
neighbor Nations, though of a worse Religion.

But this is not all, so much are we degenerated from the ancient strictness of
Christianity, That those things that would not have been named among the first
Christians without horror and banishing out of their Society all those that did
them, are frequently practiced among us. And those Vices that even in the worse
times of Christianity the Actors were afraid or ashamed to own, are now made a
matter of Sport and Merriment, a Trick of Youth, a Humor, or a Frolic. What
was then a deed of darkness, is now too often done in the face of the Sun, and
the persons concerned in the wickedness are so far from blushing at their
guilt, that they relate their own actions as a pleasant entertainment for their
Company.

O the Riots and Drunkenness; the Frauds and Cousenage; the Filthy and Lewd
speeches; the Whoredoms and Adulteries; the Blasphemous Oaths and Imprecations
that are daily without any regret, any sense of shame, practiced among us.

We seem to have lost not only the virtue of Modesty but of Hypocrisy too (if
so bad a thing may be called by so good a name.) Those Vices and Lewdnesses
which heretofore sought corners and wore a Mask do now appear with a naked Face.

It is true, It is to be hoped, That the greatest part of us are not guilty of
such Crimes and Immoralities as we speak of: But this does not wholly excuse
us; For we are all faulty in this, That these kind of Vices are not
sufficiently branded and put out of countenance. They pass under easy, not to
say, Creditable names. And so little a sense have we of them that a man may
keep his Reputation among us though he be never so Vicious, supposing that his
Vices be of the Mode of the Country. This very thing without our personal guilt
makes the sin a National sin; and God will Visit these things upon us, except
we Repent.

But to make up the measure of our Iniquities, we can in the Third place live
after this dissolute rate, and yet at the same time many of us think ourselves
Religious: we increase the guilt of our Profaneness by joining Formality with
it.

If we would disclaim all Religion when we led such wretchedly careless and
sensual lives, it would in some respects be more tolerable: For then
Christianity would not suffer by us, It would get no Odium, no Ignominy in the
world, It would not be an occasion to men to turn Atheists:

But to live Un-Christian lives and yet to call ourselves Christians: Nay to
make our Religion a Sanctuary for our Vices, and to think that we may the more
freely Indulge ourselves in them because we are of the Right Religion; This is
intolerable, and extremely aggravates the iniquity of our practices. And yet
this is a fault that we of this Nation are notoriously guilty of.

We often make Religion to consist in Opinion and outward Profession. If we
have but once joined ourselves to that party of Christians which we think is
the Right and do Espouse all their Controversies and are Zealous in the
observance of their particular Forms and Rites, whereby they are distinguished
from the other Sects that are in being among us, we think we are true Saints,
let our Morals be what they will.

This is the Religion that is every where too much in Fashion. If for instance
I have Listed my self a Member of some Church of the Separation, (as there is
great variety of them) If I be but true to the Principles of my Church, and
vigorous in opposing those that are not of my Way; and constant in my
attendance upon the Brethren at their Assemblies: This Zeal of mine will excuse
a multitude of my other Failings: And though I now and then use indirect ways
of Dealing in my Calling; Though I be Uncharitable and Censorious; Though I
affront Authority and live in a constant Disobedience and Contempt of the Laws
of it, yet my fervor for that which I take to be the True Religion and the
Relation I stand in to the people of God will bear me out as to these matters.

On the other side, If I be a Member of the Church of England, I am too often
apt to think my self in a fair way to Heaven, if I be but Stout for the Church,
and Zealous against the Sectaries, and punctual in observing the Ceremonies of
the Liturgy, and now and then come to the Sacrament; Though it may be I have
nothing of the True Life and Spirit of Christianity in me, nothing of that
Sobriety and Meekness, and Charity, and inward Devotion that our Savior does
indispensably require of all his followers.

Nay so far from that it may be I think'tis no matter how I live, if I be but a
good Subject to the King and a true Son of the Church. Nay it is well if don't
go further, it is well if I don't make Vice and Debauchery an essential
Character of a man that is right in his Principles; it is well if I don't brand
seriousness of Conversation, and a care of ones words and actions with the name
of Fanaticism, and reproach every one as a Puritan, that will not Swear and
Drink and take those Un-Christian Liberties that I do.

You know there are such men as these frequently to be found in all the several
Sects and Ways of Religion among us. But O! What is become of Christianity all
the while.

This sure cannot be thy Religion, O Blessed Jesus! since it is so unlike both
thy Actions and thy Doctrines: Thou never placedst any virtue or praise in
Knowing but in Doing; In being of this or the other particular external Mode of
Religion: but in believing thy Gospel and following thy Example, in Mortifying
our Lusts, and leading a life of Peaceableness, and Obedience, and Humility,
and all manner of inward Holiness and Purity.

How our Brethren of the Separation will dispose of their Members that are of
this temper, I know not; But as to all those that pretend to be of our
Communion, and yet live scandalous lives, and think that their owning
themselves for the Sons of the Church will make Atonement for their
Immoralities, It is to be feared they have done us more hurt than ever they
will do us good. And unless they would Reform, it may perhaps be wished that we
were rid of them: Let them declare themselves Fanatics, Papists, Any thing,
rather than Members of the Church of England.

And though by their Recession and going over to the Enemies Camp we might
possibly be so weakened that we could not support ourselves, but must be forced
to fall under our Adversaries; Yet I do not know whether even then the Church
would not be the better for it. And, it would perhaps be more desirable to
live in a mean, low, afflicted condition without such Company, than to govern
the world with it.

But Fourthly, These are not all the Maladies which this distressed Church and
Nation labors under: There is another Wound that is as Wide and Bleeds as much
as any of the rest: And which, if timely care be not taken of it, may cause her
expiration as soon as any other.

I mean the Unnatural, Un-Christian Feuds and Divisions that are amongst us,
our Nations being rent and torn into so many Parties and Factions, and the
cruel and bitter Animosities with which each party does prosecute the other.
And all this, if men would consider, for Little things in comparison, things
certainly not worth all this heat, things that the Wisest and Best of the
several dissenting parties confess to be indifferent.

O! How do men by these foolish and unaccountable Divisions weaken the common
interest that all pretend at least to be concerned for? What advantages are
hereby given to the Adversaries?

It is likely indeed that as They first set on foot, so They still continue to
foment these differences. They laugh at this opportunity of making Proselytes
to their Religion; and a plentiful Harvest they have hereby Reaped to
themselves.

But where is our wisdom in the mean time? Have men no more understanding than
to be still hot and eager in their contentions about a shadow, when there is an
Enemy at the Gate, that is in a fair way to take from us the Substance*

Some indeed may be apt to dispute which side ought to comply, Whether the
Dissenters ought to come over to the Established Church, or the Church to them?
It is not now a time fully to debate the Merits of that Cause. But this may be
truly said, If men would be honest and sincere, and mix no passion or worldly
concernment with their Religion, the Point would soon be Decided on the
Churches side.

Every man that calls himself a Protestant would think himself obliged to obey
Lawful Authority in all things where he was convinced their commands were not
Unlawful. And if he could not with a safe Conscience come up to it in all
things, he would come up as far as he could. And as for those things that he
was not satisfied about, as he would not Condemn or Censure Those that were
persuaded, or practiced otherwise, so neither would he raise any disturbance in
the Church by joining himself to an opposite Party.

And on the other side Those that did Conform to the Church in all things would
not withdraw their Charity from their fellow Christians for not doing so much
as They. Though they differed from them in several Opinions, yet they would
join hands with them in all Christian Offices of Mutual Love and Charity, and
in a joint opposition of the Common Enemy.

But alas! Things are not thus with us. And I note it as a fault for which we
ought deeply to be affected this Day; And if men did duly weigh the sinfulness
and the danger that all Schisms and Separations of this kind do bring upon a
Nation, they would be thus affected.

If human conjectures about the Reasons and Causes of Divine Judgments may be
allowed, it will appear from History and Experience that there has been as much
War and bloodshed caused in the world; as many Nations desolated, as many
Churches Ruined, by the malignity and evil influence of this Sin of Schism as
any other.

And if ever God in judgment shall think fit to give over this flourishing
Church of ours as a prey to that mighty Hunter, that would erect an Universal
Spiritual Monarchy to himself upon the Ruins of all the particular Churches of
Christendom, we should have good Reason to believe that the unnecessary
Divisions and Quarrels among ourselves had a great hand in bringing on the
Judgment.

In all appearance we of this Nation might be Impregnable, as to our Religion,
if those Protestants amongst us, who have been so long separated from the
Communion of our National Church would once return into its bosom; that we
might all heartily join together in Loving and Assisting one another, and
Opposing the public Adversary.

But Fifthly and Lastly, If the state of our Church and Nation was not near so
bad as I have now represented it, Yet there is another thing still that all,
even the best of us, have reason to be sensible of and to mourn for; as that
which of it self is sufficient to bring destruction upon us. And that is our
Ingratitude to God for his many Mercies and Deliverances, and our
Unprofitableness under those means of Grace that he has been pleased so long to
afford us.

I cannot call this a particular sin, It is, if you will, an Aggravation of all
the rest, or all of them summed up together. However I give it a particular
consideration, because it is a thing that God has set a Mark upon, and has so
far declared his displeasure against it, that he has determined it a just cause
to Un-people or Un-Church a Nation.

Our Savior tells us that when a certain man had Planted a Fig Tree in his
Vineyard and came and sought Fruit thereon, and found none he said unto the
Dresser of his Vineyard, Luke xiii. 6.
Behold these three years I come seeking fruit on this Fig Tree and find none,
cut it down it, why does it cumber the ground?

Let us apply this Parable to ourselves, as certainly the Reason of it will
sufficiently prompt us. Was ever Fig Tree or Vineyard more curiously Planted,
more carefully Dressed, more richly Manured, more securely Fenced, from the
outrages of Beasts of Prey than our Fig Tree, our Vineyard, the Church of
England. For of a Church this Parable is necessarily to be understood.

Is there any one of the Protestant Churches in Europe that has been so
regularly Reformed; that in the first Constitution of it was Established upon
Principles so justifiable, so agreeable with the Laws of Nature and
Christianity and the Civil Rights of the Kingdom, as this Church of England was?

Is there any Protestant Church in Europe whose Articles of Faith; whose
Discipline; whose Manner and Rites of Worship are more correspondent to Ancient
Tradition and Catholic Doctrine and Practice?

Is there any Protestant Church in Europe wherein the Word of God has been
taught more sincerely and more to the edification of the people than among us?

Is there any Protestant Church that has more comfortably lived under their own
Vines and their own Fig Trees, has more freely enjoyed all the benefits and
privileges that either Religion or their Birthright could Entitle them to, than
we have done?

Is there any Protestant Church that has been preserved so miraculously, that
has received so many wonderful deliverances from Enemies of all sorts; Enemies
of the Hills and of the Valleys: and yet notwithstanding all; notwithstanding
the contrivances of false Brethren within ourselves, and the assaults of the
Public Adversaries abroad, does still not only continue in Being, but
Flourishes also, as God be thanked we do at this Day?

The care that God has taken of this Nation has been wonderful; his
Providence toward us are to be admired for the Rareness and the Graciousness
of them. ^mnd therefore justly may the Lord of the Vineyard after all this
Care, all these Providence, expect some good Fruit from us proportionable to
his Kindness to us. And long has he waited for it.

But what Fruits have we produced after all these great opportunities and this
great patience? Can we really say, that we now are Better than our Forefathers
of the Reformation, who perhaps had not more light, certainly had not that
experience of Gods Mercies and Deliverances that we have? I am afraid our
Hearts will give it Against us.

Can we say that we are not worse than they? That we have at least made as good
an use and improvement of the Talents that have been committed to us as they
did? It is to be feared we shall be cast upon this Point also.

Our own experience will tell us, if we have lived any considerable time in the
world, That even since our remembrance, Though God has more and more both
heaped his Favors and his Severities upon us, yet we have grown worse and
worse.

His Mercies have not Melted us; His Judgments have not Reclaimed us; He has
done all that is Possible both by Gentle and Severe Methods to bring us to a
sense of our Duty, but We like the Deaf Adder have stopped our Ears; and have
not hearkened to the voice of the Charmer, though he charmed never so wisely.

What therefore, these things considered, can we expect, but that God should
pass the same Sentence upon this Unthankful, this Irreclaimable People of
England, that the Lord of the Vineyard passed upon the Fig Tree in the Parable:
Cut it down, why does it cumber the ground?

Or, If you will take it in the words of the Prophet, what should hinder or
what can we expect, but that God should speak to us (that is, decree upon us)
what he did to his beloved people in the fifth of Isaiahs Prophecy, O
Inhabitants of Jerusalem and men of Judah, judge I pray you between me and my
Vineyard. What could I have done more to my Vineyard that I have not done in
it? Wherefore then when I looked that it should bring forth Grapes, brought it
forth Wild Grapes? And now go to, I will tell you what I will do with my
Vineyard, I will take away the hedge thereof and it shall be eaten up; and break
down the wall thereof and it shall be trodden down, and I will lay it wast, it
shall not be pruned or dug, but there shall come up briers and thorns.

This is the Judgment that is here threatened in the Text, which I now come in
the Second place more particularly to consider.

A grievous Judgment without doubt it is, and the greatest that can fall upon
any Nation; For so much as our Souls are of greater concernment to us than our
Bodies: So much are Spiritual Mercies to be preferred before Temporal: And so
much the greater misery is it for any people to be deprived of them than of the
other.

For that Nation that was once Gods own peculiar people to be abandoned by him,
and to be laid in common with the rest of the world that are under the Prince
of the power of the Air; For that Nation that once enjoyed the influences of
Gods presence, and the Light of the Truth, and the benefits of his Ordinances,
now to be stripped of all these; To be without God, without Light, without the
Ordinary means of saving their Souls; O what more deplorable condition can be
imagined!

And yet thus severe has God been with many Nations, thus when their sins have
cried loud, and the sinners have been impudent, and all Methods of amendment
have been ineffectual, God has in anger Removed their Candlestick from among
them.

The Church of Ephesus which Christ thus threatens in the Text, Nay all the
other six Churches of Asia to which the Epistles are sent, are sad instances of
this. Once most flourishing Churches they were, even the very Paradise of the
Lord, but now they lie wast and desolate, over run with Ignorance and Barbarity
and Mahometanism.

That Africa which is not now more fruitful of Monsters, than it was once of
excellently Wise and Learned men; That Africa which formerly afforded us our
Clemens, onr Origin, our Tertullian, our Cyprian, our Augustine, and many other
extraordinary Lights in the Church of God; That Famous Africa in whose soil
Christianity did thrive so prodigiously, and could boast of so many Flourishing
Churches, Alas, is now a Wilderness. The wild Boars have broken into the
Vineyard and eaten it up, and it brings forth nothing but briers and thorns: To
use the words of the Prophet.

And who knows but God may suddenly make this Church and Nation, This our
England, which Jeshurm-like is waxed fat and grown proud, and has kicked
against God, such another example of the Vengeance of this Kind.

It is true, in all appearance there is no danger of having our Candlestick
removed from us in the same sense or manner that those Churches I have
instanced in, had theirs. We have no apprehensions that either Mahometanism or
Paganism will come into these Kingdoms: At least not in our days.

It is another kind of removal of our Candlestick that we have reason to fear;
It is another Religion nigher at hand that is most likely to displace our
Candlestick.

You all know what Religion I mean, It is Popery that most threatens us. It is
that restless busy Religion that has made so much disturbance in Christendom;
that has always been and is still so active by all means just or unjust, by
fraud or force to insinuate it self into all places. It is this we ought to
have the most apprehensions of.

It is true those that are of this Religion do profess the Name of Christ, and
we do not deny them the Title of a Christian Church; But of all sorts of
Christianity this seems to be the worst, and next to the being of no Church, it
is the least desirable to be of This.

And for all the specious Titles of Visible and Perpetual and Catholic and
Infallible, which they would amuse us with; If we did seriously consider what a
kind of Religion we now enjoy, and what a kind of Religion will come in the
place of it, if ever they get their will of us, we should sadly reflect upon
the Change. And for all we continued a Christian Country, Yet we should lament
over ourselves that our Candlestick was removed out of its place.

I believe there are few here but sufficiently understand what a kind of
Religion this is, and what you are to expect from it: But yet I will beg leave
to give a brief account of some of the Articles of it. Not to instruct you, but
to give you occasion to consider how well it will suit with us of this Kingdom,
or indeed with Any that would be Christians after the way of Christ's
Institution.

It is a Religion, whose avowed Principles are to keep their people in
ignorance as much as they can. For with them Ignorance is the Mother of
Devotion. And if you do but blindly Believe as the Church Believes, and blindly
Obey what is imposed upon you, you are good Catholics.

It is a Religion, in which you will not be allowed to have any Prayers in
public that you can understand. When you come to Church, you may entertain
yourselves with saying over your Rosary (which is a solemn set of Prayers
containing Ten addresses to the Virgin Mary for One to our Lord) and other
Private Prayers, if you have them: But join in the Public Service with the
Minister you cannot, unless you understand Latin.

It is a Religion, into which as soon as you enter you must give up your
Bibles. For the people must not read the Scripture without especial License,
and not at all of that Translation you now have of it.

It is a Religion that Robs you of half the Sacrament: For you must never be
allowed to receive the Cup in the Lords Supper; Notwithstanding the Institution
of our Lord in express words: And notwithstanding the Practice of the Primitive
Church to the contrary.

It is a Religion, in which you are so far from being permitted to try all
things and to hold to that which is good, according to the Apostles Command;
That you must wholly submit your reason and understanding to the Dictates of an
Infallible Judge, even so far, (if one of their greatest Authors say true) to be
bound to believe Virtue to be Bad, Bellar. de Romans Pontif. lib. 4. cap. 5.
and Vice to be Good, if it shall please his Holiness to say so

Nay, It is a Religion in which you shall not be allowed to believe your very
Senses. For though four of your five Senses tell you that one of the
Consecrated Elements in the Sacrament is a piece of Bread, yet you are obliged
under pain of Damnation to believe that it is not so; But the very Body of
Christ that was Crucified at Jerusalem, and is now in Heaven; and which upon
this supposition must be Actually and Separately present in a thousand distant
places at once every day.

It is a Religion that will bring you back to the Old Paganish Idolatry: Or to
that which is as near it as can be. For as the Old Heathens had their inferior
Deities, their Demons and Hero's to be Mediators between God and them: So will
you have your several Saints and Patrons of the like nature, which you must
apply to for the recommending your Prayers to the Divine Majesty. And as they
had the Images of their Gods and Mediators to worship and fall down before; So
will you also for the same purpose have the Images of the blessed Trinity, and
the Virgin Mary and the rest of the Saints.

It is true, the Pagans were mightily reproved for these things, both in the
Scripture and by the Primitive Christians. And they made several Defenses and
Apologies for their Practices. And the very same does the Church of Rome now
make for her Invocation of Saints and Image Worship. But if the one were guilty
of Idolatry there is little doubt but the other are so also: For there is not
an hairs breadth difference between the Pleas and Apologies that each party
makes for it self.

Nay, It is a Religion that will engage you in a more Unnatural Idolatry than
ever the Pagans were guilty of. De Not. Deor. lib. 3.
Cicero that was a Heathen himself, and knew as much of that Religion as any
man living did; Yet affirms that there was none so mad in any of the Religions
of his time as to pretend to eat his God. But yet this you must do in that
Religion every time you Receive the Sacrament. And the Priest does it every day
when he says Mass. For he eats that which himself and you all must worship. And
you are taught to believe that what you worship in the Mass is God, that is,
the very Humanity of our Savior united personally to his Divinity.

It is true, In this Religion there are many advantages and conveniences
pretended, that you cannot really have in the Religion you now profess. But
look you to them, whether they will prove so in the event.

The easy ways they have to reconcile sinners to God, even after the most
Vicious life, by the means of the Sacrament of Penance, as it is commonly
Taught and Administered in that Church: Together with the liberty you may take
in the choice of such a Confessor as you think will be most favorable to your
Case. Add to this, The Virtue of Indulgences, and Masses for the Dead. As also
the efficacy of Pilgrimages, Relics and Holy Garments, etc. For the purging
of Sins.

All these things put together may perhaps rid you of a great many Uneasinesses
and Scruples and Pangs of Conscience, with which you might otherwise be
troubled; and which would not be so easily Cured in the Way that you are now
in. There is little doubt but upon the Commonly received Principles of that
Religion, you may go to Heaven upon much easier Terms than you can upon ours:
But yet for all that, in a business of such consequence as the Salvation of a
man's Soul is, It is good to make a serious enquiry whether of the two Ways is
the safer.

But there is one thing in this Religion which will not so easily go down with
Englishmen: And that is, That you cannot therein be any longer good Subjects to
your Prince, than his Holiness will give you leave.

If his Majesty should be a Heretic (as it is certain his present Majesty is in
their account) Nay, In other Cases besides that of Heresy; the Pope has power
to Depose him, and Absolve his Subjects from their Allegiance. And that not
only in the judgment of their most famous Casuists, and by the Established
Rules of their Canon Law, but by the Decree of an Infallible General Council.
And it has been a frequent Practice of the Pope to make use of his Power in
this way.

Nay, in this Kingdom of England he needs not stay for such pretenses. For his
Holiness (as appears upon Record) has declared, that this Kingdom is held in
Fee of the Papacy. And that whoever wears the Crown here is their Vassal, and
consequently may be turned out at pleasure.

What the effects of these Doctrines have been, we of this Kingdom have had
sufficient experience since the Reformation; Not to mention the troubles they
have given us in former times. The instances are so many and so very well
known, that I need not name them. But if they were all forgot, The Late shall I
say or the Present Popish Plot for the taking away the life of His Sacred
Majesty, and Subverting the Protestant Religion and the Established Government
of this Kingdom, now brought to light; This alone, though all the other
instances were worn out of memory, would sufficiently show us what we are to
expect from these Roman Principles, as to the security either of our Prince, or
our Liberties, or our Religion.

But blessed be Gods Name, that this Cursed Design has been hitherto Defeated,
and we are here to Praise him for it, and to Pray to him for a farther
Discovery of it.

And blessed be his Name, That he has given us this Remarkable evidence that
he has not yet abandoned us, notwithstanding our manifold provocations.
Certainly this extraordinary Providence of God toward us, is one of the most
Comfortable Arguments that we can draw to ourselves, That God has yet some
Pity for this Nation: If we will but pity ourselves.

And Lastly, blessed be Gods Name that this Mercy has already had this good
effect upon us, That we are awakened into a more lively sense of the manifold
Iniquity and Mischief and Danger of the Popish Religion and Party.

What is now further to be desired, but that the Issue of things among us may
be suitable to these beginnings?

God has once more given this Nation a great Opportunity for the Establishing
her Tottering Candlestick, and who knows whether ever the like will be offered
again?

It therefore infinitely concerns all of us, especially You to whom the
Managery of Public Affairs is committed, to improve this Present Opportunity
to the good purposes for which it was given; That so this great Mercy and
Providence of God be not lost upon us.

Offenses may come. And we may be disappointed. But as our Savior said, Woe be
to that Man by whom the Offense comes. Such a man will never be able to answer
it either to God, or his Country, or at last to his own Conscience.

O may God so inspire you with the Spirit of Wisdom and Counsel; with Temper
and Moderation; with a Spirit so disengaged from private Ends, and Interests;
So unbyassed by particular Faction; And so wholly intent upon the Public Good,
that you may be the blessed Instruments of Healing all the Distempers we groan
under; And of Deriving upon us those Blessings which we this Day Pray for.

That by your means Atheism and Contempt of Religion, as also Lewdness and
Debauchery of all kinds may be so discouraged that they shall not dare to
appear with an open Face.

That by your means a stop may be put to the Scandalous Schisms and Divisions
that are among us; That if it be possible we may serve God with one Heart and
with one Mind.

That by your means, not only the Person of His Sacred Majesty, and the Rights
of his Crown may be secured against all wicked attempts, whether of Papists or
Others: But also that upon his Head the Crown may be so Supported, and so
Flourish, that we may at least be in a condition not to fear the Malice or the
Power of any Foreign Enemy.

Lastly, that by your means as effectual Provision as possible may be made:
both for the keeping out that Foreign Religion, which, as we have seen, so
little serves the ends of Christianity, and so much disserves the Interest both
of King and People: And for the more firm Establishment of the Protestant
Religion of the Church of England: That so our present Candlestick may be
continued to our Posterity, and they as well as we may have reason to bless God
for You.

But in Order to the procuring those great blessings to the Kingdom: There is a
duty necessary to be performed by all of us in our private Capacities, which is
here specified in the Text, viz. Repentance. I will come unto thee quickly
(says our Savior) and will remove thy Candlestick out of its place, except
thou Repent. Which Repentance, How it ought to be performed by us, Is the Third
and Last thing I am to speak to.

But because I would not exceed the ordinary limits of a Sermon, I shall only
mention the Heads of those things which upon this Occasion are proper to be
insisted on.

If we would Repent sincerely of our sins, so as to do our parts toward the
prevention of those Judgments that hang over our heads, and the procuring those
Blessings we stand in need of: It will be necessary that every one of us do
deeply Humble and Afflict our Souls before God for our own Sins, the sins which
we have in person committed; Devoutly confessing them, and begging of God, That
when he makes inquisition for a National guilt, he would not remember them, nor
let the public suffer any thing upon our account.

It is also necessary that we be duly sensible of the Common Sins of others so
as to Repent of them also. Lamenting before God the Corruptions of the Times:
The Public Fashionable Vices of the Age. This was the Spirit of David who was
concerned for the faults of others as well as his own; Rivers of Tears (says
he) run down my Eyes because men keep not thy Law.

Nay, further, In order to a National Repentance, We are obliged to confess to
God the Sins of our Forefathers, and pray for the forgiveness of them also.
What my own former private sins are to me at present with respect to my
personal Capacity; the same are the sins of our Fathers to us all, considered
as a Nation or People. We are to Repent as well of the past as of the present
sins of the Land. This is the Rule that God himself has prescribed for a
Public Repentance. And for not putting that Rule in Practice, the people of
the Jews in our Saviors time severely suffered. Matthew. xxiii. 35.
For upon the Men of that Generation (as our Savior had threatened) was
Revenged all the Righteous blood shed in the Land from the blood of Abel to the
blood of Zachariah. Though yet none of that blood was shed by that Generation.
Great reason therefore have we at this day seriously to put up to God that
Petition which we so often repeat in our Litany, Remember not Lord our
Offenses, nor the Offenses of our Forefathers; but spare us good Lord, spare
thy people whom thou have Redeemed with thy most precious blood and be not
angry with us forever.

But to make this Repentance such as it ought to be, there is further required
a through Change in our Hearts and Minds; So that as we Confess and ask Pardon
for the Faults of our Lives, we should also amend them. Without this all our
Ceremonious Humiliation will signify nothing.

Nay, We must not only Reform Ourselves, but do what we can in our Spheres
toward the Reforming of Others. And every one of us might do a great deal, if
we would; though it was but in this one thing, In heartily discouraging
Scandalous and Open sins where ever we meet with them; So far as it may be done
without breach of Respect to our Superiors or Forfeiture of common Prudence. If
Vice had once an ill name in the world; Was once generally stigmatized with
Reproach and Ignominy, it would quickly lose its Empire, and thousands that are
now the slaves of it would become Proselytes to Virtue.

But further if we truly fear the Judgment I have been speaking of, and by our
Repentance would prevent it, Let us make this particular expression of that
Repentance, viz. Let us set a great Value upon the Religion we at present
enjoy. Let us in all our Actions show a great Zeal and Concernment for it, and
do what we can both toward the continuing and promoting it.

If Every one of us in his way would but express half that Zeal and Industry
and Diligence in the Cause of our Religion that we see our Adversaries do; We
should probably in a very little time see a quite different Face of Things: And
should not only put a stop to their present Successes, but gain so much ground
upon them as to cast them into despair of ever making a Conquest of this
Nation. But here is the misery, we are so Confident and Secure of the goodness
of our Cause, that we think it will support itself without any help of ours.
Let us in this Point learn Wisdom from our Enemies.

But especially let us practice heartily those Virtues which our Religion
peculiarly Teaches as Opposed to Popery. Let us be Meek, and Gentle, and
Long-Suffering, even to those that differ in Opinion from us. Let us hate all
Tricks and Devices and Equivocations, both in our Words and our Carriage. Let
us be Constantly and Inflexibly Loyal to our Prince, and let no consideration
in the world make us violate our Allegiance to him.

To all which, Let us in the last place add our earnest and constant Prayers to
God, That he would be pleased to take pity of us. To avert the Judgments we are
threatened with, and continue the Mercies we have hitherto enjoyed. That he
would protect our Religion and make it to flourish more and more. That he would
preserve our King, our Government, our Laws. And in order thereunto, That he
would Influence and Direct all the Public Councels, especially the great
Council of the Nation now Assembled in Parliament, That this Session of Theirs
may have a Happy and a Glorious Issue. Which God of his Mercy grant, etc.

FINIS.

