SEPARATION Convicted OF Profanation, Oppression, Persecution, Rebellion, Self
destruction, AND Antichristianism


Being a FURTHER EVIDENCE OF The Mischief of Separation, As asserted by the
most Learned and Pious Dr. EDW. STILLINGFLEET, DEAN of St. PAVLS.

By Jews Sharp, Rector of Moreton-Hampstead in Devon.

LONDON: Printed by J. C. and Freeman Collins; to be sold by the Booksellers of
London and Exeter. 1681.

TO The very Reverend, and Right Worshipful, Dr Edw. Stillingfleet DEAN of St.
PAVLS.
SIR,
NOnconformity unto, and Separation from the Church of England, having brought
forth bold and daring Advocates to offer to the world, and that with a repeated
diligence, Pleas for their Justification; 'twas high time for some dutiful Son
of so innocent and indulgent a Mother, to awake, arm, and march forth out of
his Tent, for her Defense and Vindication: And how seasonably and obligingly
you appeared, who are deservedly reputed the Antesignanus of the present Age,
for the Protestant Cause and Interest, I can with more thank-ful Resentments
acknowledge, than with due Elogies represent; for I can tell you, Sir, without
the least suspicion of flattery, That so good a Cause being managed by such an
expert Champion for the Truth, the Conforming Sons of the Church are greatly
confident, that you will rather need Spectators to congratulate your victorious
Successes, than any Seconds to help you with any Succors in your Contests.
Indeed you have so judiciously and learnedly stated the Case of sinful
Separation, and so directly and plainly applied it to the Authors and Fomenters
of it here in England, that you may with much truth, and no immodesty, say,
Veni, vidi, vici. But it is your Infelicity, that you have to do with such
Adversaries, who, like an angry and revengeful sort of Animals, which will show
their Teeth when they cannot bite, and bawl when they durst not fight, rather
than they will quietly and silently yield to the conquering force of your
Arguments, they will raise a great Noise, and write much against them too,
though to no purpose: and though you have done enough to shame them out of a
disputing and wrangling humor, yet you find they become impudent, and rail
and upbraid, yea, turn mere Buffoons, quibble and scoff it out; and when
nothing else will do, they will fly to their sure and old Refuge, their
Obstinacy, which they know to be so strong an Hold against the power of
Arguments, that the power of Miracles cannot demolish it. It Is true, they do
not, with the Romanists, in their Contests with you, challenge to themselves an
Infallibility; but yet they carry it as if they could not be deceived,
accounting a perfective Change no commendable Improvement, but a vicious
Weakness: and therefore that your friendly and compassionate Condescentions to
instruct and convince them, have so highly displeased and provoked them, is not
at all to be wondered at; for they take it to be an attempt to expose them,
because you hereby represent them as a sort of men who are not altogether of
the wisest, but such as have assented to Propositions, and engaged themselves
in answerable Practices, without taking due evidence and consideration. And for
such Pretenders to Knowledge as they are, who are, or would be, admired for
Gods most secret ones, to take up Opinions and agreeable Practices, and to
plead and suffer for them, and after they have made a strong and daring Party
for them too, then to recant and lay them down, is a Punishment too great to be
endured; an Argument of such weakness and vanity of Mind, and of such levity
and unresolvedness of Will, they durst not own, lest their Reputations and
dependant Interests then become as little, as they persuade themselves now they
are great. Besides, you have charged Schism on a Separation from the Church of
England, and you cannot make them understand what the Church of England is: and
I will warrant no body else shall, unless he propound a Proposition concerning
it, which will gratify their Affections, and accommodate their Interests;
which no wise, good, and honest man will ever do. The Titles given to some of
their Pamphlets are very goodly and specious: here you have, A Christian
Temper; there, The Peaceable Design; here, A Peace Offering; there, A Plea for
Peace; here, A true way to Concord; there, A Discourse of Evangelical Love,
Church-Peace and Unity: but they all join Issue in Declamations against the
mischief of Impositions, and conclude in Pleas for Nonconformity, and
Vindications of themselves from Schism; that is, they represent the Church of
England as a Tyrannical Imposer, a Society of men usurping and exercising
Church Power for Destruction and not for Edification; unto whom no body ought
to submit and obey, but every body must oppose and defy. So that we must undo
our selves, and betake us to a Stool of Penance, before we can be in a meet
capacity for a Christian communion with them in Love, Peace, and Unity. And to
give them their due, they are no Changelings in their common design; they are
all hard at it to pull down the Church of England, and to get themselves
uppermost; and if they happen to rid themselves of Impositions, I can get a
Commission to assure you in their Names, that they are more peaceable than to
stomach it, and bring themselves under them again. Let there be no Laws made,
and they will be very careful not to break them; Let it be lawful for every man
to do that which is right in his own eyes, and they will be a very innocent
sort of people, and never offend. This, Sir, you know, is the true construction
of what they call the Mischief of Impositions. Now although we know them so
well, that we need not the help of a Melius Inquirendum to discover that they
are one of the most unteachable as well as most ungovernable sort of people in
the world, against whom Authority is no longer safe than it is too strong for
them; yet I hope God has mercy in store for them, because he has so signally
called you forth (who so very well understand their Disease and Remedy) for
their Cure. And that the Work may prosper in your hands, and be thoroughly
effected, to Gods Glory, this Church's Peace, and your own Satisfaction and
Comfort, is the hearty and fervent Prayer of him that is,

Reverend Sir, Your most humble Servant, Jews Sharp.
Moreton-Hampstead, October. 22. 1680.
JOSH. 22.19. Notwithstanding, if the land of your possession be unclean, then
pass ye over unto the land of the possession of the Lord, wherein the Lords
Tabernacle dwells, and take possession among us: but rebel not against the
Lord, nor rebel against us, in building you an Altar beside the Altar of the
Lord our God.
THE word [Notwithstanding] is discretive, and plainly refers us to the Context
for the right understanding of the words read to you. Israel having completed
the Conquest of their Enemies, and being in a peaceable possession of the
Promised Land, chap. 21.43, 44, 45. Joshua, their Captain General, calls an
Assembly of the Reubenites, Gadites, and half Tribe of Manasseh, and having
commended them for their Obedience to God and to himself, and for their Love
and Fidelity to their Brethren, he commands them to get to their Tents, and to
return to the Land of their possession, which Moses gave them on the other side
of Jordan, v. 1, 2, 3, 4. And because it is not enough to begin well, and for a
season to hold on in a good course; therefore as at their first Assembling he
commended them for what they had already well done, so at their dismission he
charged them to persevere in well-doing: And so blesses, and withal orders
them, when they are returned home to their Brethren, that they make them
Sharers with them in the Spoils of their Enemies, v. 5, 8. that it might appear
that the common good was a greater Incentive to their courageous Encounters,
than a private gain; and that a present taste and experience of the beneficial
fruits of their Victory, might most effectually provoke their Brethren to join
with them in Praises and Thanksgivings for it.

Sect. 2. Now the Reubenites, Gadites, and half Tribe of Manasseh in their
return, being come unto the borders of Jordan, do not combine to erect
triumphant Monuments of their signal Victories over their Enemies, but how to
secure their religious interests in common with their friends, in the Worship
and Privileges of the Tabernacle. Though the Soil they possess be different
from that of the Land of Canaan, yet the Inhabitants of the one, as well as of
the other, shall acknowledge the Lord of the Soil to be the same. Though they
do not possess the same Land, yet they will enjoy the same God. And though
their Habitations be at a greater distance from the place and symbols of Gods
special presence than those of their Brethren, yet they will make a solemn
Protest, and record a sensible Evidence for them, that they are as nearly
related unto God, and have as good a claim to all the Rites and Memorials of
his gracious Name and Commerce, as they.

Sect. 3. For this purpose they built an Altar over against the Land of Canaan
in the borders of Jordan, v. 10, 11. not like that in the Tabernacle, for
Sacrifices, but for a Memorial to succeeding Generations, that they and their
Seed may resort with the rest of the Tribes to the Tabernacle, and partake with
them in all the services and privileges of it, v. 10. comp. with 24. a
practical demonstration, how highly they prized a Right to the fellowship of
their Brethren in the same Rites of Religion, which they endeavor to entail to
their Posterities, as well as secure to themselves.

Sect. 4. And what is the effect of this zeal for their God, and affection for
their Brethren? Truly, it was here, as too often in other cases, that which
was well meant was ill taken; for as soon as the other Tribes heard of this
Altar, they were so alarmed, that they presently call a Council of War,
supposing those who were very lately their Champions to be their Enemies, are
so enraged against them, that notwithstanding their late usefulness to them,
and near Relation with them, they seem to design them as a Sacrifice for their
Altar, v. 12. but before they will go to extremities with them, expose them to
their revenge who exposed themselves for their defense, they will expostulate
with them before they will do execution upon them: and therefore sent chosen
Messengers to them to reason the case with them, v. 13. And it is well they did
so; for though it was bad enough to judge before they tried them, yet 'twould
have been much worse to persecute and destroy them too.

Sect. 5. That they sent Messengers to them, was an Argument that they were not
implacable and inexorable: but the grievous offenses they were commissioned to
lay to their charge, was too strong an Evidence, that there was in their
Enterprise too much of a passionate Fury, and too little of a well-advised
Charity: for, from mere jealousy and suspicion, they attaint them with no
lower crime than Rebellion against God and themselves; that is, either an
Apostasy to the Worship of a false God, or a Separation from the Worshippers of
the true. They thought the erection of a new Altar implied the adoration of a
new God; and the consecration of a new Tabernacle or Temple, a separate
religious Commerce and Communion from that formerly they had been obliged unto
and exercised in; a guilt so tremendous, that it threatened destruction from God
to them.

Sect. 6. Now though this Charge be so very deep and heavy, that it looks
rather like an invidious Accusation, Challenge, and Defiance, than a charitable
Embassage for Amity, Peace, and Concord, and seems designed rather to
Exasperation than Accommodation; yet the words I have read to you, plainly
evince, that the Intent was charitable, pacifick, and healing. For the words
are an Expostulation, or a Reasoning with them, to work them to a consideration
of what they had done, and the consequences of it; that they might reclaim them
rather by the strength of Reason, than ruin them by the force of Arms. In them
we have three things considerable: 1. A Supposition, If the Land of your
inheritance be unclean. 2. A Concession, Then pass ye over into the possession
of the inheritance of the Lord, wherein the Lords Tabernacle dwells, and take
possession among us. 3. A Limitation of this, But rebel not against the Lord,
nor rebel against us, in building you an Altar beside the Altar of the Lord our
God. I shall discourse of each in order.


Sect. 7. Here is a Supposition, If the Land of your inheritance be unclean.
They may suppose, but not grant it; for their inheritance was undoubtedly part
of the promised and holy Land, as well as the Land of Canaan. And indeed the
Supposition is not grounded on any misperswasion the Reubenites, Gadites, and
half Tribe of Manasseh had concerning the Land, but on their own rash and
uncharitable jealousy and suspicion. It Is very likely, that because the Land
which the Reubenites, etc. were to possess, had not the Tabernacle and Altar in
it, the only place unto which all the Tribes were to resort for the exercise
of the public Ministeries and Rites of Religion, and there was no place like
it on the other side of Jordan, they inferred this conclusion, That the
Reubenites, etc. were prejudiced against their inheritance, because without the
visible signs of Gods special presence. From whence by the way, without any
digression, we may observe, That Gods Church and People then thought, That that
Land was unclean (that is, excluded from Gods special favor and protection)
which had no Places by public consent set apart and consecrated for the
exercise of religious Worship and Communion. For as the First Fruits under the
Law were to sanctify and procure a Blessing upon the whole Harvest; so Places
dedicated and peculiarly appropriated to the public Worship and Service of
God, are for a Blessing to the whole Country and Land where they are, Psalm.
84.3.

Sect. 8. But that which I design principally to commend to your consideration
from the Supposition, is this, That a People professing the Lord to be their
God, from a mistake and misperswasion of the nature of things, I mean from a
conceit that things are unholy and unclean which are not so, may separate
themselves from a public religious Commerce and Communion, and from the holy
things of God. This the whole Congregation of the Children of Israel supposed
the case of the Reubenites, etc. to be. And this is really the case of many
now; they are more led by Opinion than Truth, more under the power of
Imagination and affection, than Reason and Religion. What is it which builds
their Church, chooses their Teacher, prescribes their Discipline, measures
their Devotion, forms their Prayers, composeth their Gestures, and orders
all their significations of Reverence to God, but their Conceits and
Fantasies? Although it be not in the power of any man's judgment and
conscience to change the natural condition of things, to render things
essentially good, evil; or essentially evil, good; but every thing will retain
its proper nature and condition, be a good or evil of the same quality and
degree it naturally is, whatsoever men's Judgments and Persuasions of it are;
yet men's Judgments and Conseiences have such power and influence upon
themselves, that they may render a thing good and clean in its own nature, evil
and defiling in its use to themselves. This the Apostle plainly asserteth, That
there is nothing unclean of it self [that is, no kind of meats prohibited by
the Mosaical Law, to which it refers] but to him that esteems any thing
unclean, to him it is unclean, Romans 14.14. the reason of which you have in the
last clause of the last verse; for whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin; because
by the constitution of God and Nature, men's Wills and Actions are to be guided
and governed by their mental Persuasions and Consciences; so that if they
counteract them, they rebel against their immediate Overseer and Ruler.

Sect. 9. And such is the power and prevalency of men's Opinions and
Persuasions, that they build as strong a Resolution upon them when they are
erroneous and corrupt, as when they are right and sound: for Error is not
entertained as Error, but as Truth; and a man is as firmly bound by it in his
own persuasion, as if it were Truth, and is as much prejudiced against the
contrary Truth, as if it were a very bad Error. Hence the Devil has had his
Martyrs as well as God; for Mr. Smith in his Remarks of the Manners and
Religion of the Turks, gives us an instance in a Mohammedan that suffered death
rather than he would acknowledge, That there was a God: And Mahometans have
been as zealous for their Mahomet, as Christians for their Christ. Heretics
and Schismatics have been as zealous for their Fictions, as the Orthodox for
their Faith. The false Prophets under the Law would as confidently call their
Dreams and Imaginations, The Word of the Lord, as the true Prophets their
divine Visions and Revelations. Hence Zedekiah the false Prophet struck Micaiah
the true Prophet, saying to him, Which way went the Spirit of the Lord from me
to thee? 2 Chronicles. 18.23. Bloody Saul was as much concerned for the Reputation
of the Law, as St. Paul for that of the Gospel; I verily thought (said he) that
I ought to do many things against the Name of Christ, Act. 26.9. He did what he
did against Christ, from clear convictions of Judgment and Conscience; and he
testifies of the Jews, That they had a zeal of God, were hearty and
affectionate in their Piety and Devotion, though it were not according to
knowledge, Romans 10.2. and so to no advantage. And our Savior tells his
Disciples, That their Enemies would think they should do God good service to
kill them, John 16.2. And accordingly Tertullian tells us, That Maximinian, who
sometimes offered humane Sacrifices, accounted the blood of Christians the most
acceptable sort for the atonement of his angry Deities. So that men may be as
confident that they are in a right mind, when they wickedly separate from the
public Worship of God, and the Communion of his Church, as they are who
confidently persist in their faithful adherence to it.

Sect. 10. Secondly, Let us consider the Concession made upon this Supposition;
Then pass ye over into the Land of the possession of the Lord, wherein the
Lords Tabernacle dwells, and take possession among us. A Proposition full of
Love, Compassion, and Indulgence; and a convictive Evidence, that their hearts
were more inclined to Peace than War; and were rather disposed to receive
Satisfaction, than to inslict Punishment. And in truth, whatever the
Provocation be, Treating should go before Fighting; for War must always be used
as strong Physic in desperate Diseases, as the last Remedy; and can never be
just, but when it is necessary and unavoidable. Indeed the persons here
offended, were really the Offenders; and afterward being better informed,
justified the fact they now condemned, which was designed to prevent for ever
the very thing they so severely blamed at present: but they thought themselves
the wronged Party, and answerably acted the parts of men provoked by factious
and rebellious Brethren, declare the iniquity and mischievous malignity of the
Fact, and the tender resentments they have of it; and yet rather than they will
run the hazards and endure the calamities of an Intestine War, dash one against
another, and turn their Swords, as it were, against their own Bowels; they sue
for Peace, offer terms of Accommodation, give the Law into their Brethrens
hands, will lose something for a quiet life, buy a Peace rather than fight for
it, and so suffer a second wrong rather than revenge a former.

Sect. 11. I will briefly open the sense and scope of the words themselves, and
then offer an Observation or two to your considerations. Canaan is not here
called The Land of the possession of the Lord, oppositely and in a way of
discrimination from the Land of the Reubenites, etc. as if that were not so
too; but eminently, and in a way of peculiarity, from the Tabernacle of God
which was there, in which was the Shecinah, the special presence of God. And
therefore the Tabernacle was called the Tabernacle of Meeting; not because the
whole Congregation of Israel was to meet there, but because it was the place
where God did in a most special manner meet with his People, Exodus 29.42. Numb.
17.4. Exodus 32.3. showing by many special Evidences of Grace and Glory, that he
was there, to instruct, protect, and bless them, Lev. 1.1. and 9.23. and to
receive Homage and Worship from them, Psalm. 48.1, 2. From whence by Analogy,
and from the consideration of the nature and general reason of the thing, we
may infer, That God is in a most special manner present in those places which
are set apart for his service, and are appropriately his. Those places which by
a public designation are set apart only for the Offices of Religion and the
use of holy things, have God's Name set upon them; and God has such a peculiar
propriety in them, that he makes them the places of the special determination
of his gracious presence. I have sanctified the House which thou have built, 1
King. 9.3. that is, I have accepted what thou have dedicated; what thou have
designed for my Worship, I have designed for thy Blessing.

Sect. 12. We have the Memorials of God's Name, Symbols and Tokens to testify
God's Covenant with us now under the Gospel, as they had under the Law; and why
should not those places which are selected and employed to partake of them, be
graced with Gods special presence now as well as then? Place is as necessary
for the solemn and public Worship of God, as Time; and if some select portion
of Time be to be appropriated unto God, and more acceptable to him than other,
why should not select places be so too? It Is true, the Tabernacle and Temple
were places of Gods own immediate appointment, and had extraordinary
Privileges and peculiar Rites; but it is as true, that from the instinct of
Nature and common Reason, there were public places set apart and erected for
Gods public Worship, with Gods approbation, long before these places; and had
Gods special presence determined to them too, Genesis 28.16, 17, 18. Exodus 33.7.
and it is as true, that for the same reason the Jewish Synagogues, which were of
humane and prudential institution and appointment, were called by the Holy
Ghost, The Houses of God, Psalm. 74.8. and 83.10. Our Christian Temples and
Oratories are by him also called, The Churches of God, 1 Cor. 11.22. even
because dedicated and appropriated to his service: And it is plain from the
Apostles Argument drawn from the presence of Angels with Christians assembled
in them, v. 10. that God is specially present in them; the specialty of Gods
presence being generally specified by the presence of Angels, which are Gods
Houshold-Train and Retinue, Acts 7.5. comp. with Exodus 19.16. and 18. Dan.
7.10, Isai. 61.1.

Sect. 13. Has God said, That where two or three are gathered together in his
Name, there am I in the midst of them? Mat. 18.20. He has said too, That he
loves the gates of Sion more than all the dwellings of Jacob, Psalm. 87.2. for
there he commands his blessing, and life for evermore, Psalm. 133.3. and
therefore the Psalmist asserteth, That a day in Gods Courts [ i. e. spent in
partaking of Gods public Ordinances with the solemn Assemblies of his people
in his House] is better than a thousand, Psalm. 84.10. And elsewhere professes,
that this one thing he had desired of the Lord, as a most desirable favor, and
that would he seek after, that he might dwell in the house of the Lord for
ever, Psalm. 27.4. and when he was debarred from access to it, he was as a dry
and thirsty land where no water is, and therefore longed to see Gods power and
glory so as he had seen it in the sanctuary, Psalm. 63.1, 2. which implies,
that he had observed that God did there manifest greater impressions and
expressions of his power and goodness, than in any other place in the world.
And I know no reason any body has to believe that God is less propitious to
public religious Assemblies in his holy places now, than he was formerly. I am
sure his Ordinances are not less essicacious, nor he himself less gracious, nor
are holy places less capacious of Gods presence and blessing. So that if we
come hither and depart without special advantages to our Souls, it is because we
are wanting to our selves; we do not use holy Places, holy Ordinances, and holy
Assemblies, in that manner, and to those ends and purposes we should. And it is
to be scared, that meeting in secret Chambers, yea, Barns and Stables, and
suchlike places for ordinary and profane Employments, have been and are
preferred before our Church Assemblies, because very few have senses exercised
to discern betwixt things that differ, and know what it is to meet with God in
his ways of acceptance and benediction.

Sect. 14. The next thing here considerable in my Text, is, That they offer
them liberty to take a possession among themselves; that is, to share with them
in that Inheritance which fell to them by Lot when the Land was divided. It Is
very likely, that a considerable part of the Land being yet in the possession
of the Canaanites, that part of it which they at present enjoyed, was little
enough for themselves; to be sure, they had no great supersluities; and yet so
far do they prefer Religion before Interest, an inconvenient Maintenance before
a mischievous Separation, that they freely offer to dispossess themselves, and
to disinherit their Posterities, rather than their Brethren shall separate from
the Worship of God in Communion with them. From whence this Observation
naturally offers it self to us, That the Church and People of God had rather
depart from their Estates, than their Brethren should wilfully and causelessly
depart from a public Fellowship with them in the Worship and Service of Gods
House. They will rather communicate their worldly Goods to them, than be
deprived of Communion with them. They are the men of this world, who have their
portion in this life, who are more for Dives his good things, than for the good
Fellowship of Gods Church. The men of God, who are expectants of an Heavenly
Kingdom, value that most which has most of God in it, and therefore account
the Communion of Saints a more eligible enjoyment than large possessions. The
Evangelical Church having higher Obligations and stronger Motives to Love,
Unity, and Peace, than the Jewish had, ought to be proportionably the more
careful and zealous to preserve her Communion entire and inviolate; and
consequently, wilful and causeless Separation from her, is in a due estimate a
far greater Calamity to her, than any worldly adversity or distress whatsoever;
and she cannot be duly affected with the evil of it, unless she have greater
thoughts of heart for it, than for any worldly loss whatsoever. The Reasons of
it are these:

Sect. 15. First, Because they are more for God than for themselves; would
rather Gods Name should be hallowed, than their own turns served. If the Church
of God be despised (as most certainly it is, when her Members divide and
separate themselves from her) the Name of God is profaned: for the Church is
called by Gods Name, and marked for his; and therefore the one cannot be
despised, but the other must be profaned too: and is it not better that our
Estates should be lessened, than the celebrated Honor of God abated? The one
is a penal evil, an evil only contrary to their present well-being as men, and
in some cases eligible; but the other is a sinful evil, an evil contrary to the
Will, and in a sense, to the very Being it self of God, and in no case
eligible. And you shall find, when the Prophet laments the evil portion of the
Church, her sins and not her sufferings are the principal objects of his
Lamentations, because the worst evils upon her, and the procuring causes of all
the rest, Lam. 1.5, 8, 9. And David was more passionately affected and
afflicted for the wickedness of his very Enemies, than for his own Exile and
Reproaches, Psalm. 119.136. And why was it? Even because he laid Gods dishonours
to his heart more than his own wrongs.

Sect. 16. Secondly, Because they love their Brethren as themselves; and
therefore do not seek their own things as to forget the things of others, but
account other men's innocencies more valuable than their own conveniences, and
consequently more endeavor the eternal salvation of their Brethrens Souls,
than a temporal provision for their own Bodies. What is said of Adam's first
sin, may also be said of sinful Separation; it is virtually every sin, a
violation and breach of the whole Law. For it is a sin so formally and
destructively opposite to love, that if love be the fulfilling of the whole
Law, as the Apostle tells us it is, Romans 13.10. then Separation is an
evacuating of the whole Law. And St. James expressly asserts, that where Strife
and Division is, there is every evil work, Jam. 3.16. that is, such men are not
only at odds among themselves, but also with God and themselves,
counter-acting too often, to make and maintain a Party, their own Judgments and
Consciences: And is not Separation then a very likely way to Reformation? How
light soever some men make of Divisions and Separations, they are no other than
the Smoke of the bottomless Pit, the exudations and workings of that flesh
which is Enmity against God, Gal. 5.19. and the Authors of them are represented
by the Holy Ghost, notwithstanding their pretenses to the Spirit, as carnal, 1
Cor. 3.3, 4. such as have not the Spirit, Jude, v. 19. nor are Servants to
Christ, but Servitors to their own Bellies, Romans 16.18. Yea, such is the
Malignity of this sin, that Divines, both Ancient and Modern, assert it to be
the greatest wickedness. Mr. Edwards, an eminent Presbyterian, and a Member of
the Assembly of Divines, tells us in his Gangraena, second part, p. 197. That
Schism, of it self, even with sound Doctrine in every point, is a most grievous
wickedness, which exceeds all other wickedness. And Optatus, and St. Augustine
before him, have observed, That for this sin, God more severely punished Corah,
Dathan, and Abiram (though they fell into it from a pretense to Holiness and
great Humility, Numb. 16.3.) than he did Cain for his Murder, or the
Israelites for their Idolatry, Epist. 142. And Mr. Crofton, a man who preached,
and wrote, and suffered as much for the Presbyterian Cause as any man in
England, plainly asserts in the Presace to his Saints Care for
Church Communion, That groundless or causeless Separation from true Churches,
such as he acknowledges and contendeth the Parochial Churches in England to
be, and Self-constitution of new Churches, and Self-consecration of a new
Ministry, are fundamental Errors, and inconsistent with a state of Salvation.
And he has a very good warrant for so saying; for the Holy Ghost himself
taught him, That they which addict themselves to Divisions, shall not inherit
the Kingdom of God, Gal. 5.19, 20. Now if Schism be of such a dangerous and
damnable importance to the precious and immortal Souls of men, what price can
be given too great to prevent or redeem from it? Certainly, if we ought to lay
down our lives for our Brethrens safety, 1 John 3.16. we should not think the
expense of our Estates a cost too dear for it.

Sect. 17. Thirdly, Because there is a greater interest of their own, even
self-preservation, requires it. The danger of a Separation is not only to the
Separatists, but to the whole Society of Christians, from whom the Separation
is made. Eccles. 9.8. One sinner destroys much good, especially a
Schismatic; for Schism is to a Church, what Sedition is to a Kingdom; divides,
and so destroys it. A Kingdom divided cannot stand, but is brought to
desolation, Mat. 12.25. Other sins destroy the Church effectively and
consequentially, but Schism formally and directly: for Schism is to a Body
Ecclesiastical, what a Solution of continuity is to the Body Natural; does not
like an Ulcer corrupt a part, but cuts or rends one part from another; and when
a compounded body is dissolved, it is destroyed. Therefore when the Psalmist
aimed at the defeating of his Enemies Conspiracy against him, he prayed,
Destroy, O Lord, and divide their tongues, Psalm. 55.9. i. e. as the Languages
of the Babel builders were divided, which brought their Plots to an utter
confusion, Genesis 11.7. So that Division and Destruction go together. The Members
of Christ's Church are called Living stones built upon a spiritual house, 1 Pet.
2.5. Now you know, so long as Stones in a Wall are cemented and joined to one
another, the Wall stands firm, one Stone supports and holds fast another, they
mutually contribute preservation to each other, and to the whole Wall: but if
you sever one Stone from another, it is no longer a Wall, but a ruinous heap.
Churchuniting is Church-edifying; but Church-dividing is Church-destroying
work. And therefore Mr. Baxter very plainly and honestly tells the
Nonconforming Ministers, That if they set themselves in a dividing way,
secretly to rejoice at [the Conforming Ministers] disparagement, and to draw as
many from him as they can; they are but Destroyers of the Church of God: Call
your selves what you will, (says he to them) I will call you Destroyers, if
you are Dividers. Sacrilegious Desertion, page 91.

Sect. 18. It Is true, every Division in a Church, and Separation from it, does
not actually end in the destruction of it, but yet it is the proper and direct
tendency of every Division and Separation; and the Dividers and Separaters are
as really and completely guilty, as if they did actually accomplish it; the
ineffectualness of their design proceeding from a defect of natural Power, and
not of Will and moral Endeavor. And though every Division do not eventually
conclude in the destruction of a Church, yet it is a very heavy Oppression to
it, and a most grievous Persecution of it.

Sect. 19. It Is a very heavy Oppression to it. We are all Debtors to the Church
of God, Romans 1.14. and so far as we are Christians, owe to it our very selves,
Philem. v. 19. for it is the Mother of us all, Gal. 4.26. and does not only
give us being, but also ministers nourishment and increase to us, Col. 2.19.
Ephesians. 4.16. and therefore we cannot alienate our selves from its Communion and
Service, without doing great injustice and wrong to it. Separations from a
Church are very injurious to it, in five respects: 1. In respect of its Being
and Existence. 2. In respect of its Beauty and Loveliness. 3. In respect of its
Fame and Reputation. 4. In respect of its Stability and Strength. 5. In respect
of its Propagation and Enlargement.

Sect. 20. First, Separation is an Oppression to a Church, in respect of its
Being and Existence. The Church is as the Body, and we are as Members of the
Body; and is it not a great wrong to the Body, for the Members caufelesly to
rend themselves from it? If the Life be more than Meat, and the Body more than
Raiment, Luke 12.23. then it is a greater Oppression to destroy Life, or to
dismember the Body, than it is to take away outward Accommodations, which are
only for Food and Raiment. By Moses his Law, he was guilty of death that stole
a man, Exodus 21.16. and is his guilt less, that robs the Church of a Saint? Man
being by the very constitution of his nature, a sociable creature, we cannot
conceive him related to any Society, but we must conceive him bound to preserve
it, and to be a Guardian to it, to protect and preserve it in all those Laws
and Orders, Rights and Privileges which are necessary to its Being, Security,
and Welfare; and is not he an Oppressor which overthrows or weakens that
Society which he is bound to maintain and support?

Sect. 21. Secondly, Separation is an Oppression to a Church, in respect of its
Beauty and Loveliness. External Beauty and Loveliness is properly nothing else
but a resultancy from parts harmoniously and orderly united and disposed: so on
the contrary, Deformity is a resultancy from maimed or disordered parts. And
who is there which does not as much dread Deformity as Poverty? What would you
not give or lose, rather than become ugly and abominable? And what are
Divisions but a disordering of the parts of the same Body? And what is
Separation, but a pulling of one part from another? Dismember a Body, and you
must certainly deform it; pluck out an Eye, or cut off the Nose, or any other
visible part, and you will find that you have deformed it. The Church of God,
for the correspondency of her parts in Gods design and constitution of her, is
so beautiful, that she is altogether lovely; and is it not a great Oppression
to her, by Divisions and Separations to bring Deformity upon her, and make her
an Object of lamentation to her compassionate Friends, and of scorn to her
insulting Enemies?

Sect. 22. Thirdly, Separation is a great Oppression to a Church, in respect of
her Fame and Reputation. Detraction from Fame and Reputation, is as much and
more an Oppression, than a detraction from any Civil Right or Possession can
be. A good Name and Report is such a valuable Blessing, Phil. 4.8. Prove. 10.7.
that good men of all sorts, in all Ages, have preferred it before either
Pleasures, Eccles. 7.1. or Riches, Prove. 22.1. or Life it self, 1 Cor. 9.15.
And the violation of it has ever been ranked amongst the worst injuries
incident to humane Society and Commerce. A man, or a Society of men, without
Reputation, under contempt and scorn, is one of the meanest and most impotent
things in the world. Now Separation from a Church is an high defamation to it,
and most directly exposes it to contempt; for this represents it to the world
as a Society of Christians apostatized from Christ, declined from the ways of
God, gross prophaners of Gods Name and Ordinances, and consequently so divested
of all goodness, that they are not fit for Christian Communion, but ought to be
avoided and abandoned as Publicans and Heathens. This is the irresistible
insinuation and true interpretation of every Separation from a Church: for no
Separation, from a Church is justifiable, but for that reason which God gives
why his people should come out of Babylon, That they be not partakers of her
sins, and receive not of her plagues, Rev. 18.4. So that they which separate
from a Church, disgrace and brand it for a Society of corrupt and infamous
Christians, with whom God is not graciously present, and with whom good men
should have no fellowship: which is the most injurious dealing can be met
withal in the world, and cannot be resented without a great deal of smart and
indignation.

Sect. 23. Fourthly, Separation is a great Oppression to a Church, in respect
of her Stability and Strength. One end why Christ imbodied and formed his
Disciples into a Church-Society was, that from their conjunction and relation,
they might, like parts of the same body, contribute mutual help, strength, and
succor to each other. Two (says Solomon) are better than one, Eccles. 4.9. to
13. that is, Society with Love and Peace is better than Solitariness, because
it is useful to encourage Endeavors, to support under Burdens, to preserve
from Dangers, to rescue from Distresses, to further and cherish in the
discharge of Duties and Offices, and to sympathize and refresh under all Griefs
and Sorrows. As Christ for his protecting and quickening influences on the
Church, is compared to the Head, Col. 1.18. so every Christian for his
subordinate assistance and beneficialness to the whole Society, is compared to
a Member fitly and orderly joined to the Body, Ephesians. 4.15, 16. So that, As the
Eye cannot say to the Hand, I have no need of thee; nor the Head to the feet, I
have no need of you, 1. Cor. 12.21. so neither can any the most perfect
Christian say to the meanest, I have no need of thee: for they all embarque in
the same Bottom, and are engaged by the consignation of God to a common care
and concern for the whole, and one another. The Church is said to be as
terrible as an Army with banners, Cant. 6.1. that is, whilst like an Army she
continues in good Order, Peace, and Unity within it self; because in such a
case one Member is a succor and defense to another: And as every Soldier in
an Army keeping his Rank and Order, does partake of the benefit and advantage
of the conduct, courage, and prowess of the whole Army; so every Christian
abiding in that Calling wherein he is called with God, walking orderly in the
Church, does partake of the usefulness of all those Gifts and Graces which God
has bestowed upon the whole Church, 1 Cor. 3.22. Now we all find by
experience, that weak things united become strong, and strong things divided
become weak: whence Scyllurus taught his eighty Sons by giving them a sheaf of
Arrows, which together they could not break, but one taken from another they
could easily break, That Unity and compacted Strength was the Bond that
preserves all Societies entire and inviolate, but Division that which dissolves
and extirpates them. So that he which separateth himself from a Church, and
refuses to supply his proper place and order in it, he breaks down her strong
holds, and weakens her, and consequently oppresses her.

Sect. 24. Fifthly, Separation from a Church is a great oppression to it, in
respect of its Propagation and Enlargement. We are all obliged to pray, and
consequently to use our utmost endeavor, that the Kingdom of God may come,
Mat. 6.10. that is, that the government of God administered by Jesus Christ, may
more and more prevail, and be every where erected; or in the Apostles words,
that the Word of God (which is the Scepter of his Kingdom) may have free
passage and be glorified, 2 Thessalonians. 3.1. by opening men's eyes, and turning them
from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, Acts 26.18. and
adding them to the Church, Acts 2.47. This is one of the great Interests of the
Church; and whosoever sets himself to oppose it, is an Oppressor of it. You
account, that he which unlawfully obstructs another Trade and Commerce, and
hinders him from improving and increasing his stock, does as really oppress
him, as he that violently detains or takes his goods from him. And this is the
case of all Separatists; as they do unjustly with-hokl from the Church what of
right belongs to it, so they hinder it from enlarging it self, by begetting
Scandals, and laying Stumbling Blocks against its Communion and Fellowship.
It Is a thing both good and pleasant, for Brethren to dwell together in Unity,
Psalm. 133.1, 2, 3. excites Admiration in the Beholders, invites their
Affections, and encourages them to a Commerce and Communion. But can we
reasonably expect to gain the hearts of Jews, Pagans, Mahometans, Papists, and
Atheists to us, persuade them to embrace our Religion, and to join themselves
to our Communion, so long as we have such Variances, are at such Distances from
one another, and cannot agree upon terms of religious Communion among our
selves? Do not our Divisions and Separations seem to proclaim to all the world,
that we understand not the intent and meaning of those Institutions and Laws
which Jesus Christ has imposed upon us, and are uncertain what that Religion
is which we our selves profess, and commend to others as the best in the world?
One Sect preaches up that which another cries down; and the religious
Communion of one sort, is an abomination to another; and what one justifies,
another condemns: And did you ever know disagreeing Witnesses an effectual
Proof?

Sect. 25. Besides, will a considering man unite himself to that City which is
divided against it self? or choose that house for his place of habitation, whose
materials are falling asunder? and will not the Enemies of Christ think him an
unmeet person to gather under his dominion and rule all the Nations in the
world, who seems not able to govern those in Unity and Peace which are already
subject to him? It Is reported of Julian, that he thought the fomenting of
Divisions in the Church, the most effectual way to suppress Christianity, and
to advance Paganism: and he had reason to think so; for the world will never
believe that they are taught of God, who divide from one another, because the
Spirit of Truth is never contrary to it self; and the design of all true
Religion is to draw and bind men unto God and one another. And therefore you
shall find, that our Savior prays again and again, that his Disciples and
followers might be one, as he and his Father are one; and to this very end,
that the world might believe that God had sent him, Joh. 17.21, 23. which
implies, that their Unity would be of principal influence, to persuade the
world that he came into the world on Gods errand, to destroy the works of the
Devil, and to restore man to Gods image, favor, and fellowship.

Sect. 26. And you shall find, that when three thousand were converted at one
Sermon, and added to the Church, all the Christians were with one accord in one
place, and continued with one accord in the Temple, and were of one heart and
one soul, Acts 2.1, 41, 46. and 4.32, 33. and then by the rule of contraries,
they which cause divisions, cause offenses, Romans 16.17. and prejudice the minds
of men against the Church of God, as if it were a Synagogue of Satan, a Society
to be shunned and abhorred; which obstructs the propagation and enlargement of
it, and consequently is a mighty Oppression to it.

Sect. 27. As Separation is an heavy Oppression to, so it is a grievous
Persecution of the Church too. Persecution in the strictest and severest sense,
is the prosecution of a person with a peremptory design to ruin and destroy
him. And what is Separation less than the execution of a design to dissolve
and destroy that Community of Christians from which the Separation is made?
Persecutors think the persecuted so bad and hateful, that they are not fit for
the society of men: And Separatists think that Church from which they separate,
so corrupt and degenerous, that it is not fit for the society of Christians. And
as Persecutors would not have the persecuted to continue in being and existence
among men, so the Separatists would not have the Churches they separate from,
to continue in being and existence among Churches. They both act from the same
inodiating and envenomed principle, and the aim of each horribly mischievous.

Sect. 28. Yea, I take the Separatists to be the worst and most cruel sort of
Persecutors: for by how much the Rights and Privileges of Christians, as such,
are better and dearer to them than the Rights and Privileges of men, as such;
by so much the more of Rigor and Severity is there in the rejection of
Christians from their Rights and Privileges. Is it a very bad thing to suffer
confiscation of Goods, imprisonment, banishment, and death? it is much worse to
be rejected from the love and fellowship of God and his Church, the means of
Grace, and the hope of Glory. Whatever some inconsiderate folk may think, to be
dealt withal as intolerable in the Church, is much harder usage than to be
dealt withal as intolerable in the Commonwealth; for the outward, earthly, and
temporal condition of the Body, is only concerned in the one; but the inward,
spiritual, and eternal condition of the Soul, is concerned in the other. When
you unchurch a Society of Christians, you account them, in the expression of
the Holy Text, as Dogs, Rev. 22.15. the basest and uncleanest sort of
creatures, a company of men so far sunk under the power of the animal life, and
given over to the power and tyranny of the Devil, that they are alienated from
the life of God, enemies to all goodness, to be shunned as the Prophaners of
holy things, and the Pests of Christian Commerce. And if it be great cruelty
without cause to be judged worthy of Death, I am sure it is a greater without
cause to be judged worthy of Hell and Damnation.

Sect. 29. And, I think, it is very ordinary for the Separatists to carry on
their Separation by far worse methods, than for the most part other Persecutors
do their Persecutions; for other Persecutors accuse those they persecute of
some heinous and capital Crime, implead and try them by the known Laws of that
Community to which they do belong, produce Evidences of their Allegations
against them, and do not judge and execute them before trial and conviction.
But the Separatists from our Church, at least many of them, are so heady and
fierce against those Christian Societies from which they separate, that they
have no regard to such measures of proceedings, but assume and exercise a power
to reform, before they have, or indeed ever can, prove any thing to be amiss;
and go about to heal the Churches distempers by cutting her throat, and
stabbing her to the heart, without telling her that she is sick; herein doing
that to others, which they would, questionless, in no case have done to
themselves, nor perhaps to no particular person else in the world; as if
Justice, Charity, and common Honesty, were not concerned men's behaviors
toward whole Churches or Congregations of Christians, as well as toward
particular persons; and that were justifiable toward a National, Provincial,
or Parochial Community of men, which by the common sense of mankind has been
condemned for cruelty toward a single man. Certainly, to condemn and reject a
Society of Christians for the greatest Guilts, without trial and conviction, is
one of the greatest Outrages that humane Nature is capable of, and a thing, I
am confident, the most barbarous Nations abhor: And yet is not this the common
practice of Separatists? yea, when did they otherwise? What Congregation in
England did they ever endeavor to convict and reform, before they forsook it?
So that the Separatists have no more reason to glory in their Separation, than
they have to glory in the vilest Oppression and most cruel Persecution.

Sect. 30. And here is an Answer ready for them, who ask, Why we are so angry
with them that separate from us? Even because they heavily oppress and
grievously persecute us, without a cause. They break the staff of our Beauty,
and the bands of our Perfectness, that is, violate our Unity, and quench our
Charity, defame and expose us to Contempt, abhor us, and passionately pursue
our Ruin; and yet confidently ask, What aileth us? and why we complain? as if
they could not wrong or hurt us, unless contrary to the common Laws of the
Land, they would not suffer us to live quietly in our houses, and did beat and
slay us where ever they met us. And yet, some of us can remember when such
forbearances were accounted great favors from some very near akin to them. You
may as easily conceive, that a man may be torn into pieces without pain and
smart, groans and lamentations, as a Church-society of Christians divided and
broken asunder without grief and exasperation. When any of the Separatists, for
affronting lawful Authority, and trampling on the known Laws of the Land,
endure a confiscation of goods, imprisonment, or banishment, then your Ears
shall be filled with Sighs and Groans, with Exclamations and biting
Reflections, and all the world shall ring of it; and yet there is nothing in
these Sufferings but what has relation to a temporal concern. But when they
censure and reject us from the Kingdom of Christ, deal with us as intolerable,
profane, and ungodly wretches, proclaim to all the world, that we are
Apostates, and incorrigible evil doers, and as much as in them lies,
disfranchise us of all our spiritual Rights and Privileges, which ought to be
dearer to us than life it self; if we take on as hurt and injured, we are
peevish and choleric, and have as little Reason to conduct us, as they judge
we have of Religion. But this language of theirs becomes no man's mouth but such
an one as he was, who said, He had rather have a part in Paris than in
Paradise. They who are Christians indeed, prefer their God before their goods,
and are more for the Communion of Saints, than for great Possessions. And this
brings me to the last branch of my Text.

Sect. 31. Thirdly, The Limitation of the Concession: But rebel not against the
Lord, nor rebel against us, in building you an Altar beside the Altar of the
Lord our God. The exceptive particle [But] is very emphatical, and seems to
suggest, That no indulgence is to be showed to our separating Brethren, but
upon condition of their penitence, and return to our Communion. The Children of
Israel's condescension here, was founded on a presumption of the Reubenites
Reformation. If the Reubenites, etc. will yield and submit themselves to God
and his Church, then they will stoop to them, and gratify them; not else. So
here, if the Separatists continue impenitent and obstinate, set up Altar
against Altar, and Church against Church, we are under no Obligation to remit
any of our Rights, or to give away any thing we justly possess, to them, to
live in amity and peace with them. We need not be at any trouble or cost to
purchase patterns of stubbornness and disobedience, we shall have more than a
good many thrust upon us against our Wills. Church-peace is such a valuable
Blessing, that we should readily purchase it at any rate of disadvantage to our
Worldly Interests; and we should gratify them that have separated themselves
from us into opposite Parties to us, in any thing consistent with Truth,
Goodness, and Charity to our religious Church Communion: But if we cannot bring
these Offenders into the Church, without bringing in their Offenses too, we had
better give away what we have to keep them out, than to be at any cost or
trouble to make room to receive them in. If we cannot have some reasonable
security, that their joining with us will do us more good than hurt, let them
alone, Hos. 4.17. To stretch our selves by comprehensive acts, to take into the
bosom of the Church (as the Trojans did with the wooden horse) a company of men
armed with designs to undermine and betray her power, and to disgrace and
disturb her Order, will add to her calamities as well as to her numbers.
Though they leave off their Separations, yet if they retain their unpeaceable
and ungovernable spirits and principles, continue more apt to find faults in
others than to amend them in themselves, will check at every feather, raise
quarrels and divisions from their own mistakes and misperswasions, will not be
made conformable to Laws, but will have Laws made conformable to them, or will
live at large without the precincts of any Government at all, but what they
themselves call the government of Christ, and will have the Wall within which
we are enclosed broken and trodden down, Cant. 4.2. Isai. 5.2. i. e. have it
left indifferent how Congregations of Christians and their respective Worships
and Disciplines be modelled; our Congregations may be much the greater, but our
Offenses and Sorrows will be never the less; and I think 'twill be more for our
comfort and safety too, to go to Heaven, though without their company, in the
good old way.

Sect. 32. A Ceremony or two may not be much stood upon, (though we are not to
make matters of decency so cheap, as to alter them to please every unmannerly
Humourist) but Faith and Order, fixed Rules of Worship and Discipline, are an
interest too considerable to be neglected for any bodies sake. All is not Gold
that glisters, and yet we may buy Gold too dear. It Is possible the Separatists
may not be such a good company of Christians as they themselves report; but
suppose them to be much better than indeed they are, they which shall sell the
established Government of the Church, and its fixed modes of Worship, to regain
them to it, shall pay much too dear for it, have a very bad bargain of it, and
shall be sure to put all the gain in their eyes: For they are a People, for the
most part, of such volatile spirits, that if you have no binding Impositions to
fix them, you shall not be able to keep their company when you have it; and so
in the issue the means used to make their company most sure, will bring it to
the greatest uncertainty that can be. Take away all Order, and I am sure there
can be nothing but Confusion: Or if it be in every man's power to be the Master
of Order, it is great odds but the most will be the Masters of Misrule.

Sect. 33. It Is therefore certainly better to keep the Church-doors close shut,
than to set them wide open to those Separatists who would turn the doors out at
windows, I mean, invert the whole order of things, and render Religion in its
Ministrations, like some late itinerant Preachers of it, an ambulatory thing,
as various as the complexions of the Celebrators, and as changeable as the
Moon; which will infallibly harden its Enemies against it, and expose it to
their contempt and scorn. Has any Nation changed their Gods? Jer. 2.11. i. e.
all Nations account Innovations in matters of Religion a Reproach to them;
because men's lightness and inconstancy is an Argument that they have very weak
heads, or very bad hearts; either that they are greatly uncertain, or
exceedingly careless, whether they please God or not by what they do. And
truly, I take it to be as contrary to the revealed Will of God to abolish a
good custom, 1 Cor. 11.16. as to introduce a bad one: And it is very seldom,
that the benefit of an alteration does compensate the trouble of it. And we
cannot but observe, that men given to change, are seldom or never satisfied;
but the gratifying of them in one thing, encourages them to challenge it as
their due in others: Change is so sweet to them, that like the Horsleaches
daughters, they are still crying, Give, give. And I am sure we may be better
employed than to be meddling with those men who are given to change. In a word,
when men, who have withdrawn and separated themselves from us into distinct
Societies, are obstinate, and refuse to be reformed, we must be so far from
studying a compliance with them, that we must not give place to them by
subjection, no not for an hour, Gal. 2.5. but must mark and avoid them as the
enemies of Christ, Romans 15.16. and the words of Limitation in my Text are the
reason of it; for they that build an Altar beside the Altar of the Lord, rebel
against God and against us.

Sect. 34. The Altar is called in the Hebrew [Misbeach] a Sacrificatory, or a
place for the Sacrifices, Genesis 22.19. Lev. 1.11. And such a most holy place was
it, both in the Tabernacle and the Temple, that it sanctified what they offered
on it, Exodus 29.37. Mat. 23.19. Now Sacrifices were Rites of address to God,
and used as Mediums of Praise and Prayer, 1 Samuel 13.12. Ezra 6.10. Psalm.
116.13. And accordingly you shall find, that where Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob
built Altars, they called on the Name of the Lord, Genesis 12.7. comp. with 13.4.
Genesis 26.25. and 33.20. and 35.1. i. e. they praised God, and prayed to him: So
that an Altar was a place for solemn religious Worship. And then by building an
Altar beside the Altar of the Lord, must needs be designed, as the Children of
Israel thought, the erecting an holy place for solemn religious Worship,
contradistinct to that of the Lords own appointment, where the Reubenites,
Gadites, and half Tribe of Manasseh had conspired to meet in religious
Assemblies to worship God in a peculiar and separate way, under distinct
Officers and Orders from themselves, who were to inhabit the Land of Canaan.
And it is very plain, they uncharitably suspected an intent of some kind of
Idolatry, and so took it for a design of an aggravated Separation. It Is true,
they had no such bad design as was supposed; yet lot the fact be such as it
was supposed to be, and then it is granted on all hands, that by so doing they
rebelled against God and his Church.

Sect. 35. This building of an Altar beside the Altar of the Lord, has been
applied by all sorts of men to Schismatical Separations from the Christian
Church; that is, when any sort of Christians do voluntarily, and causelessly, or
rashly forsake those Christian Societies with which they once had, or ought to
have, Communion, and gather themselves into separate religious Societies, live
combined in a submission to distinct Laws of Government and Rules of Worship
from those formerly observed, or were obliged unto, renouncing, refusing, or
not owning public religious Communion with those from whom they separate; they
are said to erect Altar against Altar, to gather Churches out of Churches, and
to set up Churches against Churches.

Sect. 36. Now although this be but too ordinarily practiced among us here in
England. yet it is such a very bad thing, that many of those among us, who are
most notoriously guilty of it, vehemently disclaim and disown it. That there
are diverse Societies of Christians distinguished from one another by the
observation of separate ways of Church Government and Orders of Worship, is too
evident to be denied; but who are the faulty Separatists, is made by some,
matter of Question and Doubt. It Is but to put Cases, and the Question will be
answered; and the Doubt, if there be any, resolved. When the Reubenites, etc.
built an Altar, if they had withal actually forsaken the religious Communion of
the Children of Israel in the Tabernacle and held separate religious Meetings
at their New-erected Altar, and resolved not to be united by the same common
ties of Government and Orders of Worship with them; who had been the
Separatists? questionless, the Reubenites, Gadites, and half Tribe of Manasseh,
because they only would have departed from the Unity of the National Church,
to which they did belong as Members, and to whose Laws of Government, and
Orders of Worship they owed subjection and obedience. So here, they who have
departed from the Unity of the National Church of England, are the Separatists:
The National Church! that is a Scare crow; yea, less, a Chimaera dancing in a
vacuum: and so some men endeavor to bring the old Church of England to a new
nothing. They could swear (at least the chiefest of them) what the Church of
Scotland was, and Covenant to maintain her in her Doctrine, Worship,
Discipline, and Government, and to endeavor a Reformation according to her
Pattern: but, good men! they cannot understand for their hearts what this
Church of England should be. One would think that a National Church in England
might as easily be defined, as a National Church in Scotland. All the odds is,
the National Church of England is not now so likely to serve their turns, as
the National Church of Scotland, then so termed, was. Let us but pull down the
Bishops, and set up a General Assembly of Presbyters, and 'twill be as easy to
understand what the National Church of England is, as what the National Church
of Scotland was.

Sect. 37. Let us reason the case a little with these men. Why may not the
English Nation become a National Church, as well as the Jewish? What is there
wanting which the Jews had, that is essential to the constitution of a National
Church? May not that be as much from God, and have as great approbation, and as
many Blessings from him which is effected in an ordinary way, as that which is
effected in an extraordinary way? What they were by immediate, we are by
mediate divine Constitution. Were they converted from dead Idols to the living
God? so are we. Were they united in the profession of the same true faith? so
are we. Were they bound to the same rules and modes of Worship? so are we. What
is it which makes a Church, but Gods Call to a People, and their Answer to his
Call? Now you shall find, that this is to extend to whole Nations of the
Gentiles under the Gospel, as well as it did to the whole Nation of the Jews
under the Law; Isai. 55.5. Thou shall call a Nation which thou knew not, and
Nations which knew not thee shall run unto thee. Zech. 2.11. Many Nations shall
be joined unto the Lord in that day, and shall be my people. So Mich. 4.2. Many
Nations shall come and say, Let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, and he
will teach us his ways, and we will walk in his paths. And Psalm. 72.11, 12. All
King shall fall down before him, all Nations shall serve him: all Nations shall
call him blessed. And Christ tells the Jews, Mat. 21.43. That the kingdom of
God [that is, the Church-state] shall be taken from you, and given to a Nation
bringing forth the fruits thereof. And it is no more than what Moses foretold
them, Deuteronomy. 32.21. I will move them to jealousy with those that are not a
people: I will provoke them to anger by a foolish Nation. Which the Apostle
expressly applies to the rejection of the Jews, and calling of the Gentiles,
Romans 10.19. which plainly evinceth, that God would convert whole Nations, as
well as particular Congregations, out of them; and bring them to a
Church State, such for substance as the Jews enjoyed. And why may not an whole
Nation incorporate into one Body Ecclesiastic, as well as into one Body
Politic? There may be as universal agreement in divine matters as in civil,
and the Members of a National Church may be as useful to one another in that
relation, as the Members of a Civil State, and as governable in the one
capacity as in the other. So that they which forsake, and gather themselves
into distinct religious Societies from that Society of Christians here in
England, which are united by National Laws Political and Ecclesiastical, in the
profession of the same Faith, and observation of the same rules of Worship and
Discipline, are faulty Separatists, and set their Altar beside the Altar of the
Lord their God.

Sect. 38. To make this yet a little plainer to you, I shall apply it to a
Separation made from our Parochial Churches, which are of the same constitution
with the National, and differ only as parts from the whole. Though Parochial
or Congregational Churches are no more of immediate divine Institution than the
Jewish Congregation in their Synagogues were, but a mere prudential
distribution of the whole into parts, for the more convenient and orderly
Community in a public confession of Faith, and participation of public
Ordinances; and no Christian considered simply as a Member of the Church
Catholic, is any more bound to the Communion of one part of the Church than of
another, but ought indifferently, as he has opportunity, to join himself to
any one sound part of it as well as to another: yet our Parochial Churches
being homageneal or similar parts of the National as well as Catholic Church,
essentially considered, they who from Vicinity of Neighborhood and
Cohabitation, have or ought to have joined themselves to them as Christian
Assemblies fitly accommodated for public Worship, common Order and
Edification, and best subserving the duties of a Church-relation; if they
separate from our Assemblies, as acting in a way of Communion with the National
Church, and set up Assemblies of a different and disagreeing constitution, They
do not walk as God has called them, 1 Cor. 1.17. pitching every man by his own
standard, Numb. 2.2. according to order, 1 Cor. 14.40. Do not go forth by the
footsteps of Gods flock, nor feed where God makes his flock to rest at noon,
Cant. 1.7, 8. but set up an Altar beside the Altar of the Lord.

Sect. 39. Moreover, whatever the Original Constitution of our Parish-churches
was, or whatever their relation to the National Church is, or suppose there
were no National Church at all, yet it is evident that our Parish-churches
consist of visible Saints, such as profess Christianity, and have been baptized
into the Body of Christ; they are the pillars and ground of Truth, 1 Timothy 3.15.
that is, they do preach and proclaim Gods Will as revealed in the Gospel, which
is the Word of Truth; as those Pillars which have the Edicts of Princes affixed
to them, proclaim their Will and Pleasure: the true Sacraments, which are the
Symbols and Seals of Gods Covenant, which is the Bond of all Amity and Commerce
with God, are administered in them; they by mutual consent join themselves
together as Pastor and People, and assemble themselves together to partake of
the Ordinances of Christ; and therefore they are most certainly true Churches:
and they which live in an orderly Communion with them, keep the unity of the
Spirit in the bond of Peace, abide where they were called with God, keep their
ranks and places where right Reason and Religion has fixed them, and maintain
public Charity and Order; and consequently, they which have been once joined
to them (as all the Separatists in England have been, or ought to be; for such
an Existence as Parish-churches now have, they for the main had long before the
oldest Separatist in England was born) to separate from them, they carry it
like Mutineers in an Army, violate all the bonds of Love, Peace, and Order,
and by setting up distinct and separate Societies for Worship and Discpline
from them, rebel against God and against us.

Sect. 40. I. Such Separatists rebel against God. As there were some which
professed they knew God, but by Works denied him, Tit. 1.16. so some
Separatists pretend to a singular subjection to the Will of God in all things,
and you shall not lightly meet with any sort of men who will outwardly appear
more addicted to a Zeal for the setting up of the Kingdom of God and the
Scepter of his Christ, as they term it, and the throwing down all opposite
Interests, than they; but yet in their practices are all the while deeply
engaged in rebellion against him. Every sin being a transgression of Gods Law,
is virtually and by interpretation a making void of Gods Law; which is a
disclaiming his Sovereign Authority and Power over us, and consequently a
Rebellion against him: But as every breach of Law, amongst men, is not strictly
and properly denominated Rebellion against the Sovereign Powers; so neither is
every breach of Gods Law termed Rebellion against the Sovereign Power of God;
but those sorts only which by circumstances are so aggravated, that they seem
to be, after a sort, a formal renunciation of our subjection unto God, a plain
resistance made to the Will of God, and a setting up the Will of man above the
Will of God; and as it were a repealing of his Institutions, to establish our
own Imaginations and Inventions. Now this sin of wilful and causeless or rash
Separation, is a complicated sin, which partakes of the nature of those
provocations which are under the imputation of Rebellion, as I will discover to
you in a few remarkable instances.

Sect. 41. First, Separation in the Context, is called a Turning away from
following the Lord, v. 16. and 18. for when men causelessly separate themselves
from Gods Church, they go out, like Cain, from the presence of the Lord, Genesis
4.16. because it is a departure from love; and he that dwells not in love,
dwells not in God, nor God in him, 1 John 4.12. Which includes an abuse of
Grace, and a rebelling against Light, as Job speaks, chapter 24.13. a sin of
knowledge and ingratitude. I pray mind it, Church-forsakers are God-forsakers;
for what is the Church of God, but the house of God? 1 Pet. 4.17. And where
does God dwell, but in his house? 2 Cor. 6.16. And where does God meet and
bless a people, but where he records his Name? Exodus 20.24. And where does he
record his Name, but in Church Assemblies, where, by the celebration of his
Ordinances, preaching of his Word, Acts 5.15. performing of his Worship, Mal.
1.6. and exercising of his Discipline, he is known and acknowledged as a man by
his Name? And how can we obtain and maintain intercourse with God, but by
coming to him, and walking with him in his Temple, and in the midst of his
golden Candlesticks? 1 Cor. 3.16. Rev. 2.1. In a word, Gods Church is his
Spouse, Cant. 4.8, 9, 10, 11, 12. and they that cleave not to God with her, go
a whoring from God, Hos. 4.12. deal treacherously with God, and prostitute
themselves to the filthy lusts of their own hearts, and do in effect say to God
as they in the Parable, We will not have this man [that is, God] to reign over
us, Luke 19.4.

Sect. 42. Secondly, Separation is a gainsaying and resisting lawful Authority,
which is the Ordinance of God, Romans 13.1, 2. a sin of great pride and contempt.
The formality of the sin of Corah, Dathan and Abiram, was Schism, a sinful
Separation from the Church and Congregation of Israel; and it is exprefly
called, a gathering themselves together against Moses and against Aaron, Numb.
16.3. and 19. i. e. against the chief Magistrate and the chief Priest. They
avouched all the Congregation to be equally holy with them, one as good as
another; and therefore some were too good to be under others. And because Moses
and Aaron took too much upon them, and usurped a Supremacy over them, they
would be a Church of themselves, a Congregation of holy people contradistinct
to them. But though they pretended for a parity, and their words sound
altogether that way, yet Moses plainly discerned that their pleadings for an
equality proceeded from a spirit strongly working after a Superiority; and so
he tells them, v. 7, 8, 9. Ye take too much upon you, ye sons of Levi --
Seems it but a small thing to you, that the God of Israel has separated you
from the congregation of Israel, to bring you near to himself, to do the
service of the Tabernacle of the Lord, and to stand before the congregation to
minister to him -- and seek ye the Priesthood too? They thought the
High-priest's Garments would fit their shoulders as well as Aaron's. So that
their humble Remonstrances against a Superiority, was but an ambitious design
to exchange it, to pull down others and set up themselves. And we every where
see men like the Fir Tree in the Parable, who would be cut down as low as the
meanest shrub, rather than be over-top'd by the Cedar; are so proud, that they
cannot endure a Superior. I will not say, that all the Separatists do
ambitionate a Superiority; nor will I say, that like the Pharisee, they affect
a singularity, would not be like other men, Luke 8.11. lest they should be like
Saul hid in the stuff, men of no remark, who deserve to be head and shoulders
above their Brethren in reputation and honor, themselves being Judges: But I
shall be bold to say, they are so far from moving under the regular conduct of
Civil and Ecclesiastical Authority, as all good Christians ought to do, that
the most visible signs by which they are distinguished from other Christians,
are their bold desiances of both. And in truth, so far is the interest of the
one incorporated into the other, that like Isocrates his Twins, they live and
die together, and the enemies of the one are the enemies of the other.
Conformity and Loyalty, a steadfast and zealous Communion with the Church, and
an invincible and immovable Obedience to the King, like stones in an arch, do
mutually support and streng. then one another; but Nonconformity and
Malignity, Separation and Sedition, have such complicated influences and united
interests and designs, that the one being armed with Power, is rarely divided
from the other: and he must wink very hard, that does not every where see, that
when the Church loses a Member, the King also in heart and affection loses a
Subject; unpeaceable in the Church, and ungovernable in the State: for they
that are not held by the ties of Religion under subjection and obedience to
those that have the rule and oversight of them in the Lord, have a very natural
and easy step to despise Dominion, and to exalt themselves above all
obligations to the civil Powers. And it is no wonderful sight to see those who
from a presumption of secrecy have sneaked and creeped into an unlawful
Conventicle, from a presumption of victory and impunitie, boldly to defy and
resist Authority in open field.

Sect. 43. Thirdly, Separation proceeds from a preference of their own thoughts
and devices before Gods Institutions and Injunctions; which is called in the
holy Text, Rebellion, Isai. 65.2. and the making of the commandments of God of
none effect, Mat. 15.6. Mark 7.13. There is nothing more plain, and more easy
to be understood in all the Bible, than, That the body of Christ is one, and
that all Christians are baptized into this one body, 1 Cor. 12.12, 13. and
therefore, though many, are yet one body in Christ, and members one of another,
Romans 12.4, 5. so that, if one member suffer, all the members suffer with it, 1
Cor. 12.26. From which near relation and sympathy, they are obliged to the
dearest love, Romans 12.10. and are to live in the exercise of it, as the
evidence of their near relation to Christ, John 34.35. and the bond of
perfectness among themselves, Col. 3.14. And that this be not weakened or
interrupted, they are commanded not to forsake the assembling of themselves
together, Heb. 10.25. and to give no of fence to the Church of God, 1 Cor.
10.32. nor to any member of it, Romans 14.13. And if offenses come, as through
Satan's subtilty and the malignity of fleshly lusts they must needs do, Luke
17.1. ( though woe to them by whom they come, Mat. 18.7.) their Christian Faith,
which works by love, Gal. 5.6. must so moderate their passions, that they
must not easily be provoked, but bear all things that are tolerable; yea, must
cover a multitude of sins, and suffer long, 1 Cor. 13.5, 7. and ought to be so
far from rejoicing in iniquity, and having advantages of dislike and
separation, that they must account it their Glory to pass by offenses, Prove.
29.11. follow after peace, and the things that make for it, Heb. 12.14. Romans
14.10. and do as much as in them lies, do all that is possible to be done, to
live in peace, Romans 12.18. that is, no condition of a peaceable Communion is to
be refused, but such as is morally impossible, cannot be submitted unto without
sin. This is plainly the mind of God, That we must never forsake the Communion
of that Church unto which we are united, so long as we can keep our innocence
in it. Nothing but the sinfulness of a Communion can justify or warrant a
Separation. When we cannot continue in Communion without either the
acknowledgement of some error for a Truth, or the practice of some sin for a
Duty, we may separate; but for no other provocation. The requiring of doubtful
or suspected practices, as some speak, as the condition of Communion, can be no
warrantable ground of Separation; because Engagements to a Separation must be
equally certain as Engagements to a Communion. They are certainly very badly
advised and disposed, who prefer their doubts and scruples before their known
duty and the Churches honor and safety.

Sect. 44. And I must tell you too, there may be real corruptions in a Church,
and yet no ground for a Separation from it; because we may communicate with it
in Gods Ordinances, without partaking with it in its Corruptions: for that may
be tolerated which is not imposed; practiced by some, which is disowned by
others, and required from none. And in all lawful things, condescension and
yieldance is infinitely more commendable than selfwilledness, and stubborn
frowardness. If therefore a Brother, much more a Mother, will have you go a
mile with her, in a way of condescension and yieldance to such things as you
conceive inconvenient and burdensome, you must, to maintain peace and love, go
with her twain, Mat. 5.41. The Philosopher calls a good man, (...), a Cube or
Square; implying, that a good man is not like a Spherical Figure, which is able
to meet the plainest thing only in a point, but like a Cubical Figure, which
meets with plain things in whole broad-sides, and has a notable aptitude for
Unity and compliance. I am sure St. Paul was such an one, and he is worthy to
be a president to us all, Who became as a Gentile to the Gentiles, that he
might gain the Gentiles; and as a Jew to the Jews, that he might gain the Jews;
yea, though he were a free man, yet he made himself a servant to all, and was
made all things to all men, that he might gain some, 1 Cor. 9.19, 20, 21, 22.
And certainly, he was never baptized with the Spirit of Christ, who will not do
more for the unity and Peace of that Society to which he belongs, than to
please an ill-natured humor; and that will not smother his private judgment,
and relinquish his private liberties, and his more public conveniences too,
rather than by a peremptory publication of the one, and a stiff maintenance of
the other, disturb the quiet of Gods Church.

Sect. 45. Now it being generally acknowledged by most of the Separatists, That
the Church of England, at least, that our Parochial Churches are true Churches,
and that they may, without the dangerous hazard of their Salvation, communicate
with them in their religious Administrations; they cannot separate from them,
without exalting their own Imaginations above Gods Prescriptions, and
preferring the gratification of an Humor, before the pleasing of God; which is
a grand rebellion against him.

Sect. 46. Fourthly, Separation is an act of great stubbornness and contumacy:
it is a sin excused, justified, and pleaded for; which is the adding of
rebellion to sin, as Job speaks, c. 34.37. The very same circumstances which
rendered the sin of Saul in sparing Agag and the best of the spoil a Rebellion,
are fully applicable to the sin of wilful and causeless Separation, and with
some superior aggravations. Did Saul break the Commandment of God? so do they:
And far more hainously; for he transgressed only a single, positive,
temporary, dispensable Precept, but they an eternal and indispensable Law of
Love and Righteousness: Saul transgressed to preserve and save, but they to
ruin and destroy. Did Saul, notwithstanding his disobedience, pretend that he
had performed the Commandment of the Lord? so do they: They do it in obedience
to the Call of God, who will have them (as they say) come out from among us and
separate. Did Saul excuse and justify his sin from the pretense of a good end
and intention? so do they. The Church needs Reformation, and they have
covenanted to reform it, and they will bring religious Ministrations to greater
purity; so that they are in a faithful pursuit of The good Old Cause, are the
men called forth to bear witness to the Gospel-designe, and their Separation is
for the Honor of God, and the Edification of his Church; that is, they pull
down the Church to build it up, rend the Members of the Body asunder to join
them the more orderly together, wreck and quite mar the Ship to repair and mend
it, destroy to save. Did Saul at last confess his sin? so do not they, but
obstinately defend it, yea, glory in it as an attainment of an extraordinary
size; and, which is the foundation of it, ascribe it unto God as his own doing;
and are so far from assuming any shame or blame to themselves for it, as
sometimes a Drunkard, a Liar, a Swearer, and other debauched persons will do,
that they extol and magnify the worthiness of the action, and are confident
that it commends them unto God, and is one of the most rewardable acts of
Virtue they can do. This I take to be the very height of sin, and much worse
than Readiness Rebellion, Which was as the sin of witchcraft, and his stubbornness
as iniquity and idolatry, 2 Samuel 15.23.

Sect. 47. Would you not think it an abominable aggravation to the sin of a
Drunkard, a Thief, a Blasphemer, or any slagitious wretch, to hear him justify
and plead for it as an act of Religion, and a notable piece of service done for
God? and hear him censure others as defective in duty to God and themselves,
that will not applaud and imitate him? This is the Case of all Separatists; how
contrary soever they are to the Church and one another in their dividing and
separating principles and practices, motives, and ends. they impute them all to
God as the Author and Encourager of them. And what higher Affront and Reproach
can be done to God, who is the God of order, 1 Cor. 14.33. and the Lord of
peace, that gives peace always by all means, 2 Thessalonians. 3.16. than to avouch and
represent him the Author of Divisions and Confusions? There is a sin unto death
(says St. John 1. chapter 5.16.) I do not say, that thou should pray for it. I
shall not judge any man, but shall leave him to stand or fall to his own
Master, Romans 14.4. And indeed, what have we to do to judge those that are
without? 2 Cor. 5.12. But I cannot see how any body can expect that God should
pardon that sin which he defends and justifies, and will not confess and
reform, but how vile a sin and provocation soever it be, will call it good, and
father it upon God; and so blaspheme God, rather than condemn himself. Now
these particulars being duly weighed singly or together, it will appear that
wilful and causeless Separation, and erecting Churches against Churches, is as
peremptory an engagement, and as considerable a motion against the bent of Gods
Will, and the design he is managing and carrying on in the world to magnify
his Name, as any the boldest sinners can adventure on.

Sect. 48. II. Separatists rebel against the Church of God too. That part of
Gods Church which is continued here on Earth, is not unsitly termed Militant,
because it is always in a warfaring condition, is encompassed on all hands with
malicious and spiteful adversaries, and subject to the most invidious and
mischievous designs and oppositions. Hence she is compared to a Lilly among
Thorns, Cant. 2.2. because surrounded with enemies which are as vexatious and
hurtful to her, as galling and sharp pricking Thorns to the tender Lilly. Now
of all enemies, those of a man's own house, and those which have dearest
intimacie, are most concerned with us in civil and religious matters, are the
worst, the most dangerous and pernicious. Here lay the accent of David's
hazards and sorrows, That his own familiar friend in whom he trusted, which had
eat of his bread, did lift up his heel against him, Psalm. 41.9. For it was not
an enemy that reproached me (says he elsewhere, Psalm. 55.12, 13, 14.) then I
could have born it; neither was it he that hated me that did magnify himself
against me, then I would have hid my self from him: But it was thou, O man,
mine equal, my guide, and mine acquaintance. Tea, which was a further
aggravation of it, 'twas such an one as did not only take sweet counsel
together with him, but walked unto the House of God in company with him. Such a
sort of enemies as these are Schismatics to the Church; they were born and
bred in it, have been fed with her fat things full of marrow, and with her
wines on the lees well resined, Isai. 25.6. have been taken into her bosom and
made one with her, in profession and outward appearance have had common
interests, common loves and hatreds, and common hopes and fears with her, and
have spoken unto her and quickened her, saying, Come ye and let us go up unto
the mountain of the Lord, the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us
his ways, and we will walk in his paths, Isai. 2.1. And for some to arise among
our selves, speaking perverse things, to draw away Disciples after them, must
needs be a grievous hurt to us, Acts 20.30. because all their opposite designs
are managed with treachery. And doing all in the Name of Christ, they do as it
were turn our own weapons against our selves; I mean, use the sacred Scriptures
and Religion it self, on which the Churches Being and Unity is founded and
preserved, as Engines to divide and destroy us. For this reason, the Dividers
of, and Separaters from the Church have done more to weaken and destroy it,
than all its other Enemies; for Schismatics are to a Church like Mutineers to
an Army, which by dividing it against it self, do more certainly and easily
bring it to desolation, than the most violent impressions from the power of any
sort of enemy whatsoever can do. Who will regard that Authority and Communion
which is despised and rejected by those who pretend to be the greatest friends
to it?

Sect. 49. In a word, as he which rebelleth against the supreme Head of a
Kingdom, rebelleth against the Kingdom it self; so he that rebelleth against
Jesus Christ the supreme Head of the Church, rebelleth against the Church too.
Now sinful Separation is a peremptory rebellion against Christ; for it is a
dividing of him, 1 Cor. 1.3. and he that divides Christ, and makes him the Head
of a sinful Faction, does in effect depose him from his Headship over the
Church. Hence such Dividers are said to be carnal, and to walk as men, 1 Cor.
3.3. i. e. walk not as persons related to the Spiritual Kingdom of Christ, but
as men which have cancelled all the Obligations of Christianity: for they
cannot acknowledge Christ in his Supremacy, who do not keep the Unity of the
Church in the Bond of Peace.

Sect. 50. Thus I have with all faithfulness, without partiality or prejudice
to any Party, Sect, or Faction of men, represented to you the damnable Mischief
of Separation; and have said nothing which for the substance has not been said
by the most eminent Divines of the Presbyterian Judgment, with whom I have not
a little consulted in this case. And certainly, were the Scriptures
conscionably observed (as Mr. Baxter tells us in his Christian Concord, p.
119.) men would take Church-division to be a greater sin than Adultery and
Theft: for it is an eminent branch of Antichristianism, a sin by which men as
directly and effectually do the work of the Devil, and of the great Antichrist
his subordinate Instrument, as by any sin they do or can commit. For it is most
directly contrary to the design of God the Father in sending Christ into the
world, which was to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, Luke 1.17.
and to gather together in one, all things in Christ, Ephesians. 1.10. And as contrary
to the redeeming work of God the Son, which was to gather together in one the
children of God which are scattered abroad, John 11.52. And as contrary to the
sanctifying Operations of the Spirit, by which we are all baptized into one
body, 1 Cor. 12.12. And consequently as contrary to all those Ordinances and
means of Grace by which they all derive the effluxes of their Grace, Love, and
Goodness unto the Souls of men; which are all purposely designed to accomplish
the Churches unity. E. g. When we are baptized, we are all baptized into one
body, 1 Cor. 12.13. and what is the communion of the body and blood of Christ
for, but to mind us, that though we are many members, yet we are all but one
body? 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. And what are all the Officers of the Church and their
respective Ministrations for, but to bring us to the unity of the Faith -- and
to speak the truth in love, that we may grow up into him in all things, which
is the Head, even Christ; from whom the whole body fitly joined together, and
compacted by that which every joint supplieth -- the body increases to the
edification of it self in love, Ephesians. 4.13, 14, 15, 16. And Divisions and
Separations being so directly contrary and destructive to the design of
Christianity, how unreasonable a thing is it, for the Dividers of, and
Separators from our Church, in which nothing (as some among themselves
acknowledge) is to be done and approved of which is unlawful, to assume to
themselves the denomination of the Godly Party? Whereas we can justly appeal,
and call Heaven and Earth to record, that for so doing, they are Rebels against
God and against us. I shall conclude my Discourse with a serious and earnest
Admonition and Charge to you, to remember with great thoughtfulness of heart,
That the Church of Christ, which is the Body of Christ, was, is, and ever will
be One; and that when you were initiated into a profession of Christianity, you
were baptized into this one body, 1 Cor. 12.12, 13. So that here a departure
from Unity is a Nullity: He that is of a New, and not of the Old Church, is of
no Church. And this is the reason why the Sentence of Excommunication rightly
executed is so terrible, because it cuts off from Christ's Body; which Sentence
every Schismatic very desperately executes upon himself; and that too in the
most effectual and tremendous manner that can be: for the Governors of the
Church may, through some mistake or prejudice, sentence such as ought not to be
sentenced; and then the Sentence is reversed, and made void by a superior
Tribunal. But whosoever wilfully separates from the Christian Church, or any
sound part of it, for a reason common to the whole, most certainly separates
himself from Christ too, who is the Savior only of his Body, Ephesians. 5.23. The
Church is compared to the Ark, because out of it there is no Salvation: and he
that wilfully leaps out of it, is rather more than less desperately guilty of
Self-destruction, than he that is deservedly and judicially cast out, It Is a
most fearful Curse for a Church to pronounce against an Obstinate Sinner, The
Devil take him! and yet this Curse every man very resolutely executes upon
himself, when he wilfully forsakes Gods Church: for he does in effect say, I
will forsake God, and the Devil take me! A thing so full of terror and
astonishment, I even tremble to speak and you to hear; and from which, Good
Lord deliver us, for thy Christ's and our Jesus his sake. Amen.

FINIS.

