(...): OR Divine Comforts, Antidoting Inward Perplexities OF MIND. IN A
DISCOURSE UPON PSAI. xciv. Ver. 19.

By T. Sharp M. A. late Minister of the Gospel at Leeds.

With some short Remarks upon the Author.

(...) -- (...),

Marc. Antonin. l. 4.. 49. LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and
Three Crowns in Cheapside; And John Whitworth Bookseller in Leeds, 1700.

THE PREFACE, Rendering an Account of this Publication.
COmfort is a thing so pleasing, so amiable, so tempting, that it invites every
ones Embraces, and often is liable to the Confident and Impudent Arrests and
Rapes of Presumptious and Wanton Hearts, which in a Licentious Age, do not
entertain so much Solicitude to be Good as Quiet. Degenerate Nature is loath to
divest it self of its evil Dispositions, as those Satisfactions which are
agreeable to its predominate Qualities and Constitution, because this imports
no less than its own Dissolution and Ruin, (as far as Corrupt) and in this Gulf
the Generality Perish, it being, like the Dead Sea, smooth though muddy. But
when a daring Light boldly rushes into the Conscience, and as our Redeemer once
in Jerusalem, overturns the Tables, and with Whips and Scorpions drives out the
old Buyers and Sellers, the Corruptions that converted the Temple of God, Man's
Heart, into a Den of Thieves and Murderers, and thus imbitters all his
delicious Lusts, disgraces and destroys his false and delusory Carnal Joys,
(which must certainly be done either on Earth or in Hell) then does he feel a
necessity laid upon him to enquire after another Balsom, to heal his broken
Heart and Hopes, than that which grows in his own Garden, and for a secure
Relief, is constrained to make toward Heaven.

Yet his pursuits admit of great varieties according to the Vigor and Power of
that Light which arraigns him, and the Conduct of those different Guides he
relies upon, one of the first Effects of these Convictions, being
Self-diffidence. Some therefore into whose Souls the Dart is not struck home
and deep enough, yet feel some Pain and Smart, and are diseased with and
impatient of it, must and will have Ease, making that their principal Care and
End, without any due Endeavors to proceed in a regular Method to gain it:
Therefore Ignorance and Appetite being their Leaders, they in this dark Night
soon get to Bed, and dream themselves into a pretty Paradise. These possess
Peace without its Harbinger, true Penitence; and therefore must be more sadly
dispossessed of it, than they sweetly enjoy it, Impostorous Pleasures never
being Permanent. Others with more Art but as little Strength, make toward the
same Port by another Wind, frighted into something like Repentance and Faith,
and other Parts of Religion, by the Terrors of the Almighty, as knowing these
the only Line and Course to bring them to the Haven of Rest: Yet will not lay
on Sail enough, nor exactly direct upon the right Point, but having a slothful
Heart and Hand, and a sinister Aim, they Anchor upon the Quicksands of their
own fleeting, fading Formalities and Mockshews of Religiousness, as a
sufficient Ground and Bottom to stay and settle their Peace upon, yet at length
under fair Hopes, and in a Serene Calm, sink and are swallowed up of
Everlasting Woes.

The Design of this Discourse is to prevail with these, and all, by the noble
Magnetism of a thing so desirable-and delightful as true and solid Consolation
to engage in real Goodness, which is the only way thereto, it being as
impossible for Wickedness and sound content of Mind to cohabit, as for Light
and Darkness; before this therefore would I lay the greatest Discouragements,
as there is just reason, whilst I attempt to promote the other, which is mainly
in my Eye throughout.

A small Canton of this Tract was, upon promise to be Transcribed, at the
request of a Person grievously afflicted with horrid Injections (I call them
rather than Spontaneous Cogitations) relating to God and Providence; which
whilst in Hand, my Family was diminished by the Death of a Lovely Child, this
enlarged my Meditations. Concurrent with these was a Report, that if I
continued in an obstinate refusal (as I long had done) to appear in Print, some
Sermons taken from me in Shorthand would unknown to me crowd into the World,
wherein perhaps we both might suffer. To prevent this I undertook to stop a Gap
with this little Piece, and commit it to the public Censure and Conscience:
Only two parcels of it were delivered to an Auditory, in the rest I took the
liberty of a Writer rather than a Preacher. If any thing here seem above the
Capacity of the Vulgar, yet the greatest part is not. I endeavored to suit
those for whose sake 'twas Published so, that it might not altogether nauseate
the Learned and Ingenious of my Hearers and Readers by an insipid flatness of
Style, or emptiness of Matter, nor soar aloft out of the reach of the Unlearned
and Plain. I would speak Things, Id agendum ut non verbis serviamus, sed
sensibus, Senec. Ep. 9.
not mere Words and Wind, and with solidity of Sense Profit, rather than please
with variety of Phrases: If I miss of my aim it is not the fault of my Subject
but Intellect, which in the greatest depths of matter, I always find extreme
shallow of Apprehension, skinning over things rather than diving into them. And
this is that piece of pride that has hitherto upheld my Aversation to the
Press, in a fear to betray my Weakness. But then again I am too proud willingly
to be deemed and doomed for a Fool in that of Seneca, Epist. 9.
Nisi sapient sua non placent. Omnis stultitia laborat fastidio sui; Vain Man
would be wise, and now am I tempted to another, and no diminutive act of
Arrogance, viz. In lawful endeavors for Public Good to act resolutely and
contemn the World. A bad Proficient I acknowledge my self in this Philosophy or
love of Wisdom, yet would aspire after thus much of it, To submit my Follies to
the Correction of the Wise, but to let the Captious know that I read in
Arrianus, lib. 4. cap. 5.
(...).

Some short REMARKS upon the Author.
MR. Thomas Sharp was Born in Little Horton, near Bradford, in Yorkshire, of
Religious Parents, who seeing his Promptness and Industry for attaining Humane
Learning, and hopefulness for Religion, dedicated him to God in the Work of the
Ministry, though he was their eldest Son, and likely to enjoy a considerable
Estate: Having made good Proficiency in Country Schools, he was sent up to
Cambridge about the Year 1649. or 1650. admitted in Clare-Hall under the
tuition of the famous Mr. David Clarkson, his Mother's Brother, who when he
left the University, committed him to the care of Mr. John Tillotson that great
Man, afterward Archbishop of Canterbury; where he was very Studious and
became an excellent Scholar, having a capacious Soul, of admirable Natural
Parts, which being cultivated by External Advantages, and his own more than
ordinary Industry, he became an universal Scholar, comprehending the whole
Encyclopaedia of all profitable Literature, a solid Logician, a good Linguist,
a fluent Rhetorician, a profound Philosopher, and very skilful in the
Mathematics.

Being thus well accomplished for Learning and Parts, after he had taken his
Degrees in the University, the first Essay he made upon the Public Stage was
about Peterborough, where staying but a little season, he came into his Native
Country about the Year 1660. and his Uncle Mr. William Clarkson, who was Parson
of Add-hill dying, he was presented to that Parsonage by Esquire; Arthington of
Arthington the Patron, he accepted of it, but enjoyed it but a little space,
for Dr. Hich, Parson of Guiseley, challenged it as his by right, upon King
Charles the Seconds Return, having been excluded by the Act against Pluralities
made by the Parliament; Mr. Sharp was capable of it, having been Ordained by a
Bishop, yet he saw there was no contending with so great a Man, especially in
that juncture, he was willing to resign, although Mr. Arthington would have
tried his Title to present by Law, but he declined it, (for at that time he saw
a Cloud approaching with covered us all) and so retired to his Father's House,
where he was of singular use, living privately, and following his Studies very
close, attending upon Public Ordinances in the Parish Church at Bradford,
where that worthy Person Mr. Abraham Brooksbank was Vicar till he removed to
Reading. But when the Licenses (granted by King Charles 2. in 72.) came forth,
he took the opportunity to exercise his Ministry in his own House, being
crowded with great numbers that flocked to hear him. About that time he married
Mrs. Bagnall's Daughter, by whom he had one Daughter, but both dyed. After a
season he married Mr. Sales Daughter, (an excellent N. C. Minister) by whom he
had several Children, but none are now living, but one Son and one Daughter.

He had a call to Preach at Morley, where he was very industrious and highly
esteemed. But the Inhabitants of that populous Town of Leeds (having built a
large Chapel) upon Mr. Richard Streattons remove to London, gave him a call
which he embraced, living at his own House at Horton, riding mostly on Lords
day Morning to Leeds, and back again at Evening (in Summer time at least) which
was above a dozen Miles, and Preaching twice, which at length he found too hard
for him, therefore he bought a House in Leeds, repaired it, built to it, and
kept House there and at Horton also, where his necessary affairs required his
frequent attendance.

He was in Labors more abundant and spared not his own Body or Estate, that he
might do good to Souls, and edify the Church of God: He was very self-denying,
and stood not upon Worldly Incomes, whether they were more or less he was very
well content, so that he gave strict charge to those who collected that small
Pittance he accepted of in consideration of his Labors, not to urge any, but
only receive the voluntary Contributions of those who were as well able as
willing: He was exceeding Temperate; mortified to all Earthly Enjoyments; of
great Aequanimity, Sociable to all, yet prized above all others, such as feared
God, these were his chosen Companions: He invited Ministers and Christian
Friends frequently to days of Fasting and Prayer in his own House, and went
upon a call abroad upon those Occasions: He was indeed very excellent in
Prayer, and had a peculiar way of pleading with God, by serious sensible
Expostulations with great Ardency and Affection, which made it appear to
Intelligent Christians, that he was much with God in Prayer, and very familiar
with him, few had those rare Gifts, or exercised Grace at that rate; and no
doubt God dealt familiarly with his Soul; he lived near God, and now is with
his God: His Prayers were usually long but not tedious, being flowered with
variety of sweet Expressions, and Pathetical Expostulations; and I doubt not
but the Lord graciously accepted his Person, and vouchsafed many gracious
Answers to his ardent Prayers, as might appear in several Instances, which I
forbear to mention.

He was a fluent Preacher, a Master of Words, not so much abounding in
Rhetorical Flourishes, as in Pithy and Profitable Sentences, very taking with
his Auditors, that fit under his Ministry with great delight: His Sermons were
Elaborate and Accurate, all he did was exceeding Polite and Scholar-like; his
Method was peculiar to himself, and sometimes Cryptical, but always suitable to
the matter, and proper to the end designed, not to please the Fancy, but to
inform the Judgment, convince the Conscience, work upon the Will and
Affections, and change the Heart and Life. He has often said he should never
have been so cautious, and so careful of his Words, had not his Father been so
critical and found so many faults with him, which he studied to rectify, this
did him good, though he found it hard to stoop to, but as he was sensible of
his Paternal Authority, and his own Filial Duty; so he was convinced of his
Fathers judicious Exceptions and the tendency thereof to his own Benefit.

He was very Sound and Orthodox, and trod much in the old Path, though he was
well acquainted with the Controversies of the Times, and very able to oppugn
Error, and defend the Truth; yet he was of a peaceable Spirit, making the best
Constructions of doubtful Phrases, and inclined rather to compose Differences,
Civil and Sacred, than to espouse a Party; he was of a Catholic Spirit, and
spoke well of what was good in Persons that differed from him; he was very
unwilling to engage in any Controversy, only some knowing his Acuteness and
Genius desired his help in three Cases, first against the Papists upon occasion
of a young Man turning that way, and sending a Letter to his Relations, which
he answered very Learnedly and to great Satisfaction. 2dly. Two Papers he writ
in Reply to two Conformists, who grievously and rigidly censured their
peaceable Brethren, the one in Print, the other in Writing; both which he
Answered and Confuted; both well deserved Publishing, but the Times would not
then bear it, and now they may seem out of season, but are still preserved as
choice Manuscripts in the Hands of Friends: As is also (3dly.) an Answer to
some Queries, supposed to be Dr. Owens, Whether Persons who have engaged unto
Reformation, and another way of Divine Worship, according to the Word of God,
etc. may lawfully go unto and attend on the use of the Common Prayer in Divine
Worship, etc.?

He had a lofty Poetical Strain, wherein he sometimes (for a diversion)
employed himself upon special Occasions, as upon the Death of that Worthy Grave
Divine Mr. Elkanah Wales, and upon the Burning of London in 1666. which being
showed to Dr. Robert Wild, he seemed surpised, and ingenuously acknowledged,
that Man should be his Master, he would yield the Laurel to the North Country
Poet. An imperfect Copy of his Verses for and against Sleep (made in his
younger Years, when at the University) were Printed under the Name of the
Famous Cleveland; several other of his Poems, deservedly valuable, remain in
the Custody of some Friends.

He had a copious Library, and abundance of the chociest Books, of which he
made good use, having a notable facility in turning over Authors, and picking
the Quintessence out of them.

He would never be persuaded to put any thing to the Press, though often
solicited to Print something, but replied there were Books enough Printed: But
a Gentlewoman in the Neighborhood being in great trouble of Conscience, often
came to visit him; whilst he discoursed with her, she seemed to be much
satisfied, and her Spirit appeased, but when she was gone from him she was as
much cast down and disconsolate as ever; whereupon she earnestly desired him to
write down some Pertinent Meditations, that she might have recourse to, when
she was absent from him; which he did, and gives some account of in his Epistle
to the Reader, perfixed before this ensuing Treatise, yet could not be
persuaded to let it see the Light while he lived, yet showed some willingness
it should be Printed after his decease, having before writ it out by his own
Hand in readiness for the Press, and designed for Public Good; which upon the
Importunity and Encouragement of several Friends is now accomplished by his
surviving Widow, that all the Voluminous Labors of such a wise Master Builder
might not be lost, since most of his Writings for his own use were in
Shorthand, and not fully Legible or Intelligible by any, there being many
unknown Characters of his own inventing interspersed.

But to come to the last Scene of this worthy Man's Life: He had endured the
acute pains of the Pleurisy four several times, yet through the Blessing of
God as often recovered out of it, though upon frequent occasions complaining of
a pain in his side, yet by Temperance and the use of Means, he was wonderfully
shored up in the midst of his Travels, Studies, and Preachings.

August the 4th. 1693. he rid from his own House at Horton to Leeds, being as
well as ordinarily, in competent Health, Preached that day, being Friday, the
Preparation Sermon for the Lord's Supper: Lord'sday August the 6th. he Preached
twice. Administered the Lord's Supper, was wonderfully enlarged both in
Expressions and warm Affections, so that some were ready to think he was in
Heaven already, and admired the Grace of God in him.

Wednesday, August 9th. was the Monthly Public Fast, he was long at Work,
spent himself exceedingly: On Thursday Night he begun of his old Distemper the
Pleurisy, which now made the fifth vigorous Assault; he was by the Physicians
advice Blooded twice, but his Distemper prevailed, and turned rather to a
Fever, yet still the violent Pain in his side continued, but he was very
sensible and patient under it: August 24th. he desired the assistance of a
Friend in drawing his Will, which he Subscribed the 26th. after that he made a
most Pathetical affecting Exhortation to several Christian Friends then
present, who observed that the Graces of Faith and Humility, which had been
eminent throughout the whole course of his Life did grow and increase to the
very last; he was nothing in his own Eyes, had the most selfdebasing
Expressions imaginable; Poor Creature, sinful Worm, vile Wretch, that had
intruded into the high calling of the Ministry, and had no Gifts, no Graces, no
Abilities, to discharge such a Trust. He even loathed himself for it, and if
the Great God should spurn him out of his Presence he could not but justify
him: Oh! woe is me that I have sinned, I even tremble to appear before the
dreadful Tribunal of God, who will come with flaming Fire to take vengeance on
them that know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Remember what I preached to you from that Text; I have endeavored to discharge
a good Conscience, though with a multitude of Imperfections, and have not
shunned to declare unto you the whole Counsel of God, and I bless God for the
sweet Communion I have had with you in his Ordinances, and humbly beseech him
to supply the breach that is shortly to be made, and to send you a Man of
Judgment, fitted with his Spirit, that may better discharge his Duty than I
have done, who deserve to be made a Spectacle of Misery to Angels and Men; But
blessed be God for hopes of Salvation through the Blessed Mediator Jesus
Christ. Oh the infinite Riches of free Grace! And here he fell into an holy
ecstasy of Joy, but the Expressions cannot be retrieved, those who were present
being too deeply Affected to take the Particulars in Writing or Memory. Several
Instructions likewise he gave to his Relations. The Night after he grew very
weak and his Vital Spirits decayed more and more, till the next Morning about
Seven of the Clock, having taken a solemn leave of his dear Wife and Children,
and with great Faith and Cheerfulness recommended his Soul into the Hands of
his dear Redeemer, he encountered the Pangs of Death August the 27th. 1693.
being Lord's Day, and entered upon his Everlasting Rest, being aged Sixty Years.

On Tuesday August the 29th. he was Buried, many sad and sorrowful Hearts, both
of Ministers and Christian Friends attending the Funeral. His Corpse was
solemnly Interred in the Chancel of the New Church in Leeds, nigh the Remains
of good Mr. Wales, as himself had desired.

September the 6th. 1693. upon the Peoples request, two of his Brethren
Preached Funeral Sermons at his Meeting Place on Mill-Hill, to a mighty
concourse of People, the one treating upon Acts 20.38. Sorrowing most of all
for the Words which he spoke that they should see his Face no more. The other
treated upon that Text, 1 Kings 13.30. And he laid his Carkase in his own
Grave, and they mourned over him, saying, alas my Brother!

Thus dyed this holy Man of God, that has left few behind him of the same
Spirit, a Dutiful Child to his godly Parents, a Loving Husband to his lovely
Wife, an Indulgent Father to his hopeful Children, a Faithful Friend to all
that feared God, a Conscientious, Laborious Minister, and Tenderhearted
Watchman over the Souls of his Flock. A Person of great worth in all Men's
account but his own; indeed it was strange to see a Man of such eminent Parts,
and rare, and raised Accomplishments, to have so mean an esteem of himself; he
thought himself below others, though he was higher by Head and Shoulders than
most of his Brethren: He was clothed with Humility, this was the upper
Garment, put upon all his other Graces, and was his bravest Ornament, which
rendered him Conspicuous in the Eyes of all that knew him: Though much more
might be said of him, yet let his own Works Praise him in the Gates, and let us
all make sure of our State, and make have after him to that Land of Light, that
New Jerusalem.

It cannot be expected that a Complete Draught of this worthy Man's Life should
be drawn by any Pencil but his own. May these hints of so rare a Pattern of
Piety, have influence upon his surviving Relations and Hearers, to transform
them into the same Image, that this Legacy of so Rational a Discourse, may have
a persuasive Power to attract Souls to a Capacity for Divine Consolations; and
such a real Example have a compulsive Power to draw many to follow this Hero
and others into Eternal Mansions; if both do not effect these Ends, the
Spectator and Reader have more to Answer for.

ERRATA.
PAge 2. line 24. read near Series, l. 32. r a Prolepsis. p. 3. l. 1. r. our
collapsed. p. 4. l. 14. blot out in. p. 5. l. 28. r. (interline.) p. 6. l. 24.
r. my Troublers. p. 8. l. 33. r. Trmenters. p. 21. l. 11. r. the Pharisees. p.
38. l. 17. r. this Notion. p. 40. l. 15. r. together with it. p. 63. l. 10. r.
another. l. 32. r. mediately. p. 73. l. 21. r. born, and live, and act. p. 8^.
l. 10. f. ^ar, r. care. p. 83. l. 29. r. the Minisery. p. 87. l. 26. r.
intension. p. 1^^. l. 34. r. good life. p. 123. l. 3. r. und^vercibly. p. 124.
l. 6. the Parenthesis ends with ^e^. p. 125. l. 30. r. Image. p. 136. l. 30. r.
a more ready. p. 142. l. 16. r of God. p. 143. l. 13. blot out the second and.
l. 21. f. the, r. this. p. 144. l. 13. r. express. p. 158. l. 25. r. his. p.
160 l. 1. r. own. p. 162. l. 26. r. unsupp^rtable. p. 165. l. 2. r. and
P^tency. l. 33. r. own. p. 186. l. 3. r. whatever. p. 198. l. 21. r. enjoyed.
p. 205. l. 21. blot out u^. p. 208. l 33. r. mere. p. 214 l. 33. r. le. p 215.
l. 24. r. Though. l. 32. r. sum. p. 2^7. l. 16. r. he^ghtned or transferred.
p. 237. l. 9. r. these. p. 240. l. 5. r. combines. p. 242. l. 22. r. in Wisdom.
p. 245. l. 2. r. and in all l. 25. blot out in. p. 248. l. 7. r. true Comforts.
p. 250. l. 14. r. 9. p. 258. l. 28 r. might hence derive. p. 260. l. 26. r. in
nocency. l. 35^36. ^. make a comma before from and after which. p 280 l. 36.
insert an Interpreter, and r. show me. p. 285. l. 13. blot out 30. p. 303^ l.
20. blot out 4. p. 307. l 17. r. store. l. 31. r. that Pers^^. p. 31^. l. 23.
r. (...). l. 36. blot out that. p. 361. l. 4. r. they.

THE Nature, Origin, Subject Matter, Character, Method, and Means of COMFORT.
CHAP. I. The Introduction, with the Explication of the Words, and their Sense
Critical and Moral.
PSALM. XCIV. 19. In the Multitude of my Thoughts within me, thy Comforts
delight my Soul.


LORD, I am Hell, but thou art Heaven, Bp Hooper.
was the pathetick Exclamation of the Spirit of Martyrdom in a devout Soul.
Here you have a prospect of both. Tormenting Thoughts are the veriest Fiends,
nothing can make us miserable without them; nor in the enjoyment of the sweet
Delectation of those divine desirable Joys, which are most suitable and proper
to rational Nature, and the appetite of an immortal Spirit. The former are our
natural Inheritance, these the free Donations of infinite Goodness, or the
unmerited communications of Fidelity and Righteousness. 1 Job. 1.9.
By our Apostasy from God, we rendered our selves insufficient to attain that
Felicity, which our innocent Estate did entitle us unto, and possess no
sufficiency to any thing but the making our selves the most wretched of the
whole Creation, and are relievable by nothing but the All Sufficiency of
Heaven. The inanimate Creatures may indeed be dispossessed of their Heaven, viz.
their Center and Rest; but the Evil thereof they can neither fear nor feel.
Vegetables may live in a Hell through the burning Fever of a Summer's drought,
but cannot smart and be in pain. Sensitive Natures may be farther divested of
their Happiness, be driven out of their Paradise in Gilead and Bashan, and be
yet more miserable under the Servitude of that torturing Devil, the Lust of
degenerate man; but a final period is put to all their Infelicities by that,
which (if infinite Grace prevent not) will be only the beginning of our
remediless Woe; at the worst they can but die, and it is without the sting of a
cruciating Fear, that a Life without end, after Death will introduce a Series
of never-ending Plagues. But Immortality, the highest Prerogative of humane
Nature, is through Sin become its most dismal cause of horror, and in being
better than the rest of the inferior Creation, we through our own default are
only rendered capable of being worse, both in another, and even in this present
life, as far as our dreadful Expectations become prolepsis or pre-occupation of
those Sufferings, which are no less durable than intolerable. Neither can we be
eased by the hopes, that the least part or degree hereof is avoidable through
the efficacy of our homebred endowments, or any thing we can scrape out of the
rubbish of collapsed Natures, since by experience we find, that our greatest
preventive care is not able totally to exclude and keep down those
prepossessing horrible anticipations; nor the Furniture we are enriched with,
of power to support and ease our minds under (much less to antidote) those real
Plagues, which actually infest, and sink us toward a State much more
insupportable, our hope and help must needs therefore perish from within, our
relief is wholly from without; yet not from Earth, but Heaven. There Is no
Malady so perplexing, so dangerous, but there is a sufficient and suitable
Remedy in God.

In Bedlam I have seen a Man under the Severity of that most rigid and most
uncomfortable Confinement, so not only unconcerned but triumphant, as to bear
up himself in the Port and Majesty of a King, and in his imaginary height and
glory, with a disdainful stateliness, converse with those little shreds of
Mortality who were blessed, as he thought, in the Honor of his Empire and
Government; and sometimes with a stately humbleness invite them to glory in his
Condescensions; with such a creative power is Fancy endowed, that it can
produce almost any thing out of nothing, dwindle substantial Woes into Shadows,
convert a Hell into an Elysium. Of such Madmen the World is full: We (as the
Prisoners of Justice) carry our Chains about with us, and they sit and sink
into our Flesh, yea, our very bones; yet, as if we possessed an unconfinable
liberty, we jovially dance about, and solace our selves with this lamentable
dream, till our real Miseries confute our false Imaginations. For a Man's state
may be miserable, yet the Man so rationally, stoically, or brutishly mad, as
not to be miserable: That is, since nothing can make a Man unhappy but by the
mediation of something within him, his Fancy, his Folly, his Fears, his
Feeling, his Reasonable Powers; hence that which a Man either is above the
sense of, or has no sense of, is to him as if it were not, though never so
real in it self: Therefore the Venom and Sting of Infelicity is our Sense, and
the Gall and Bitterness of our Sense lies in our Thoughts, the workings of our
Minds. A Man that lies asleep bound hand and foot upon the top of a Precipice,
with his Head, and a great part of his Body hanging over a bottomless Gulf, is
in a case most wretched in it self, the least hitch tumbles him down into
remediless Ruin; yet in the condition he is in, viz. Sleeping, he is aware of
no danger, to him all is well and secure, he has no apprehensions except of
Ease, Safety, and Rest. But awake him that he look about, see feel, and think
of his Peril and Helplessness, then will he be all Agony and Horror, ready to
swoon and die through the direful Apprehensions of his (as to himself)
irremediable Death. This is our Case, we are naturally asleep in Security and
Iniquity; upon the brinks of Hell, bound hand and foot in the Chains of our
Sins, and an Adversary, Satan, at hand, to push us headlong into the Abyss of
Misery. Beside, the Omnipotent Vengeance of Heaven awaits us ready to arraign,
condemn, and execute us, to which we even dare it every moment. But being
asleep (nay, dead, Ephesians. 2.1.) we feel nothing; reckless and careless, in a
Bedlam Dream, we conceit that we swim upon a smooth and Halcyon Sea of sensual
Joys, as if 'twere a Voyage to Paradise, 'till God awake us by the Calls and
Convictions of his Word and Spirit; but then, Oh, the inexpressible Troubles,
Terrors and Astonishment that arrest us! because our amazing Jeopardy, whereof
we had no apprehensions before, is now entertained into our Thoughts, and works
so much the more violently there, by how much we find our selves the more
helpless, and therefore hopeless. Thus, whatever perplexes us, does it by way
of Thoughts, as it invests our Mind and Consideration, it tortures us. 'Till it
thus get within us, and engage our considering Faculties, it does not
ordinarily commit a Rape upon our Irascible, or Interrupt the Sweet and Peace
of a secure and quiet Composure and Rest. But when this Tempest, this Hurricane
of Thoughts beats upon us, we cannot tell which way to turn, how to bear up
against it. It confounds our Reason, discomposes our Affections, terrifies our
Consciences, tears down all our Confidences, reduces us to an absolute Nonplus.
Our Thoughts trouble us (as Dan. 4.19.) even to astonishment, and so much the
more, by how many the more they are. Multitudes of Thoughts beget multitudes of
Cares and Fears, and Griefs and Cumbers, and Disquiets and Despondencies; and
of these so many the more, by how much the more intimate and deep within, and
by how much the more they are our own, not of a divine Injection, but a corrupt
Mind's Fabrication.

In the multitude of my thoughts within in me, in intimo meo [intestin] in my
Heart [Septuagint and Vulgar Lat.] expressing the general sense of the Original
Word, by the noblest part within, to which the Scripture sometimes attributes
Thoughts, as Gen 6.5, etc. Both in conjunction amount to [my inmost Heart or
Soul] If they be Thoughts, not merely the workings of my sensitive Powers
inward or outward, my Follies or Fancies; but the mature and genuine offspring
of my Mind. If they be not a few stragglers whereof I can say, apparent rarae
nantes in gurgite vaslo, that they swim only here and there thinly in the vast
Ocean of my Understanding, but cover the face of my Soul in Multitudes. If they
be only my Thoughts, such as spring in my own Garden, having no Author but my
self, no Original but in and from my self, whatever their object be, whether
that which I feel in my own Breast, or that which is an effect of the same cause
in others, which has such a dismal aspect upon me, even Sin. And if they be
penetrating Thoughts, that sink and soak into the bottom, and become most
intimate within me, not lying shallow upon the furface of my Soul; In such
multitudes of my thoughts within me, I cannot find the least glimmering of
Comfort at home, nothing but Terror and Despair; constrained am I therefore to
look abroad, and no where can I enjoy any thing reviving, Refer to the 1.
Direction.
but in thee. O Lord, the Comforts which refresh me must be thine, or none. And
since nothing can pass into my Soul, but at the door of Thoughts, even these
thy Comforts cannot affect me, but as Troubles do, they must enter into my
Thoughts too, be apprehended by my Mind, ere they can relieve my Heart. The
same Engine that introduced my Misery, must usher in my Mercy. I must be cured
through the same Weapon that wounded me. Thoughts, the first born of my Soul,
must bear my Comforts that heal me; the healing is not from any virtue in the
Weapon, but thy Comforts, the Salve upon it. My Soul by its Thoughts viewing
thy Comforts and transmitting them to my Affections is in a transport of
delight and joy.

The Word rendered Thoughts is but twice found in Scripture. Interpreters judge
from the affinity of it with other Words of the same sound and almost the same
Letters, that it carries an allusion to the Boughs of a Tree. Such Thoughts
then are here to be understood, which in like manner proceeding from the Mind
of Man spread every way, and divide into smaller Branches, and the smallest
Twigs, so entangling themselves together as upon every motion to wound each
other, and the Tree they spring from. Therefore the Seventy render the Word by
(...), which signifies the Pangs of of a Woman in Travail. In the fullness of
the pangs of my Heart, etc. Others render it Perplexities, entangled Thoughts,
etc.

Neither does the English fully express the sense of the other Word translated
Delight, which primarily signifies to look upon. The Mood it is here used in
imports a looking upon with Pleasure, Content, Love, Complacency, even as
Lovers look upon one another, ('it is Dr. Hammonds's Paraphrase) with a sweet and
amiable Regard, with loving and lovely glances of Favor and good will. The
Original does not intimate so much the Act as the Power and Possibility of
delighting; not that the Psalmist did actually lay hold upon, embrace, and
apply to himself, but only that those Comforts of God did rather manifest a
forwardness, and favorable readiness, to lay hold upon him; they were not
already apprehended by him, but offered themselves to him, lay plain and fair
before him, inviting him by their benign and amiable looks, by their goodness,
and sweetness, and suitableness to close with, and espouse them. Even then when
we are so overwhelmed with Perplexities, and Troubles that we do not, or will
not, or cannot, or dare not appropriate divine Comforts to our selves; they
notwithstanding are prepared for us, and by their lovely looks, and endearing
amiableness woo us to entertain them.

The sense therefore of the Verse is,

In the throng and crowd of a numberless fullness, (that I may include the
Greek) of my troublesome, perplexing, disquieting, paining, Thoughts, in my
inmost Soul, thy Comforts have a favorable aspect upon me.

This, though a singular, yet considering that the Scripture is a Catholic
Rule of universal concernment, and describes Cases, rather than Persons; and
often in this Book of Psalms speaks of the whole Church, under the notion of a
single Person, as Psalm. 45. Daughter, etc. I shall therefore convert into a
general Proposition though in terms a little differing.

That God in the tenderest affection, has prepared for and offers to his Church
in General, and all its true Members in Particular, the sweetest Comforts, in
their sorest Perplexities. Whilst our Hearts are brim full of trouble his Heart
is full of compassion to us; and ready to administer the most suitable and
satisfactory Consolations, when our Thoughts hurry us into Confusion. There is
that in God's Nature and Word, tendering it self to our acceptance and
embracement, which may abundantly solace us in the severest Calamities. Though
the World have never so malign an aspect upon us, yet we have very favorable
Heavens, which by their benign Influences will revive us, when there is a
combination of all below to blast us. Every good Soul, when under the betterest
pressures, through its own ungovernable cogitations, which are of all torments
the nearest, and most unavoidable, may find not only the supports of
everlasting Arms, but the communications of infinite Love, Goodness, and Peace,
with concurrent united Energy and Virtue relieving it under all its saddest
despondencies, and by making the joy of the Lord its strength, contributing to
lighten its Burden and sweeten its Sorrows. You and I, if our Hearts be right
with God, may in our deepest Agonies, sing with the Psalmist, In the multitude,
etc.

CHAP. II. The Subject of Comfort displayed under the Psalmist's Character.
BUT that we may not miss the tune and harmonize with Satan, by cheating our
selves into endless discomfort, under a mistaking application of comfort,
instead of making melody to the Lord in Hearts, replenished with Celestial
Joys, let us endeavor a clear and distinct apprehension of three things.

1. Whether we be such Persons as the Psalmist. 2. Whether the constitution of
our Thoughts, and 3. The complexion of our Comforts be alike.
To administer some assistance to your Meditations in all these I undertake 3.
things, 1. To give the Character of the Psalmist, and by consequence of the
Person who may find such relief from the Comforts of God in the midst of all
inward Perturbations. 2. To describe the nature and quality of those Thoughts,
the multitude whereof did so discompose him, and may us, that no redress can be
found on this side Heaven. 3. To particularize those Comforts which are of such
a reviving quality, deriving them from their proper Source and Fountain.


1. The Character and Circumstances of the Person is necessary to be premised,
that we may not build without Foundation. It Is certain that the sweet of
comfort is a temptation to every Man to claim and apply it, yet no less
certain, that it is not the right and portion of every Man, (of what temper of
Soul soever) who will be bold to commit this Sacrilege. God reserves these
Pearls for his Cabinet, he does not cast them regardlessly before Dogs and
Swine.

But now the Personal Character of the Penman of this Psalm, I cannot give
except I could certainly find who it was. The Rabbis have a Rule (I will not
avouch its truth) that when a Psalm (as this) has no Title, he is to be
accounted the Composer who is named last, in some Title of the preceding: This
would refer us to Moses, Ps. 90. but Ps. 92. (by several circumstances) points
at a later Author; therefore puts in an exception to the Rule. For not to
insist upon the Title in the Greek which ascribes it to David; nor the mention
of Musical Instruments ver. 3. which were little used in the Wilderness, or
until David's time; the exalting the Horn, and anointing with fresh Oil, ver.
10. seem to intimate something of Regality, in hopes at least, and his Eye
seeing his desire upon his Enemies, ver. 11. all which are Phrases used in
other Psalms, whose compiler is known; besides the naming of the House of God,
and his Courts, ver. 13. and Ps. 93.5. seem to respect a later Age. And the
Genius of this whole 94. Ps. especially ver. 5, 6, 15, 16, 20, 21. cast it
lower than the time of Moses. It was the composure of a Person so considerable,
as to be the object of a King's Enmity, and that King an Israelite, as may
appear by comparing ver. 10. and 20. He that chastizeth the Heathen shall he
not correct? whom? surely some contradistinct People, and which can that be if
not Israel? wherein there was a Throne, ver. 20. which persecuted the Psalmist,
ver. 21, 22. no obscure evidence that the Person was David; the time, his
Affliction under Saul, and there is nothing in the Psalm but may easily be
reconciled to this opinion, were it material to spend time about it. It Is
undoubtedly sure from Divine Testimony, Heb. 4.7. that the next Psalm. 95. is
David's, and the Septuagint entitles him to this also, therefore I shall, upon
occasion, take it for granted that he was the Author.

But that which is of more concern to us, is the Moral Character of the
Psalmist, which as in a Glass is represented to us in, and we may gather from
the scope of the Psalm, and the sense of the 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15, 17, 18,
21, 22. verses.

1. He was a Man that lived under a due and deep sense of God, as the whole
Psalm, but especially ver. 8, 9, 10, 11. demonstrate; where he undertakes to
convince the secure, careless, presumptuous wicked ones of Israel, 1. That
there is a God, of a boundless Understanding, as knowing intimately and
perfectly, 1. The very thoughts of the Heart, ver. 10, 11. He that teaches Man
Knowledge, shall he not know? The Lord knows the Thoughts of Man, that they
are Vanity. 2. The Words of the Tongue, ver. 9. He that planted the Ear shall
not he hear? Words are an Object of hearing. 3. The Works of the Hands, ver. 9.
He that formed the Eye, shall not he see? Deeds are a proper Object of seeing.
2. That this God is of strict and severe Justice, ver. 1, 2, 23. Vengeance
belongs to him as Judge of the Earth; and ver. 10. He that chastizeth the
Heathen, shall not he correct? Whom? you his own by Calling and Profession, if
you be not also his in Conscience and Conversation. Nay, says he, it is a
Blessed thing to be corrected, if together therewith the Lord superadd
Instruction, ver. 12. The Issue will be good though the Passion be grievous;
which yet to Gods Servants will be short, for all it is eternal to the Wicked,
ver. 13. 3. That this God is of unchangeable Love to his own, and will evidence
it in their Deliverance and Advancement, and also by his Presence with them,
and care of them and kindness to them, so as never to relinquish and reject
them, ver. 13, 14, 17, 18, 19, 21.


Now he that undertakes to instruct others in such Doctrines, either maintains
in his own Soul a commanding sense thereof, or he is a Hypocrite, which to
imagine concerning a divinely inspired Penman of Holy Writ, is not only
uncharitable but impious.

If then we entertain no reverent, and awful Apprehensions of the Divine
Majesty, or if our Conceptions of God do not make an indelible Impression upon
our hearts, to overruled them into a religious Care, that our Actions may be a
clear representation to others of our inward Sentiments, concerning the Glory
and Excellency of God: If we pretend God and Heaven, and yet like Fiends or
Swine, live in a Sink or Hell of Ungodliness, Unrighteousness, Insobriety, it is
self-deluding, damnable Presumption, to intermeddle with, and appropriate to
our selves any divine Consolations out of the Covenant and Promises. This Holy
Man presents these adorable Perfections of God to the Minds and Consideration
of these wicked ones, on purpose to restrain their hands, and bridle their very
inward Imaginations of Evil against his Inheritance, that a venerable Opinion
of his Omniscience and Justice might not remain merely as a barren Speculation
in their Understandings, but overcome their Wills and Affections, and govern
their external Actions, as no doubt they did his own; and if they do not ours,
if the awful Excellencies of God do not affect us, what have we to do to
refresh our selves with the comfortable? God will not be divided, cannot. If
his infinite Majesty do not get the Victory over our Irascibles, our
Concupiscibles must not, cannot be satiated with his fathomless Mercy. He will
come in Lightning and Thunder, ere he distill upon us in a gentle shower of Love
and Peace. He that will not retain a powerful Sense of God's Greatness, neither
shall, nor indeed will entertain a reviving sense of his Goodness. If Thoughts
of God will not work one way, they will not another. That Man's Comforts are
none of God's, which are not ushered in by the Fear of God; neither has he any
Right to receive Good from any thing of God, who is not wrought and formed into
Goodness by All of him; God will be all or nothing; command down our
Corruptions by the dread of his Power, or he will not command up our Content by
the display of his Kindness; if he cannot bend us, he will break us. The sense
of his Glory must make us better, or the sense of his Bounty must not make our
burden lighter. In sum, Greatness must awe us, or Goodness shall not ease us;
no sense of God can do us good that is not universal. No Promises comfort,
independently upon the Precepts. We steal our Peace, if Grace give it not. And
holy Sensations of the plenitude of all heart and life-ruling Excellencies in
God, are the very first Principles and beginnings of Grace. If a Man can think
of God, and yet love his Lusts, his entry upon the Inheritance of Peace is a
bold and impudent Usurpation. Ps. 50.18. Unto the Wicked, God says, what have
thou to do to declare my Statutes, or that thou should take my Covenant in
thy mouth, seeing thou hate Instruction; and castest my Words behind thee,
etc. The Origin of this, both Presumption and Disobedience, is declared, ver.
21. Thou thoughtest that I was altogether such a one as thy self: Low,
creeping, ineffectual Thoughts of God, which will permit Men to be unlike God,
will also suffer them to delude themselves into real Woe, by invading his
Comforts without the Warrant of his Commands. He that has a Right to solace
himself in God, or any thing of his, must in his proportion be like God. It Is
in virtue of his infinite Perfection, that he is infinitely pleased with
himself; if we possess nothing of the one, both as a foreign Good, and
domestic personal Qualification, what have we to do with the other? If the
Perfections of God be not our objective chief Happiness without us; if they be
not a transforming Principle and Life within us, as far as communicable, they
cannot be our Formal chief Good and Happiness: If they be not our Right and
Nature, they cannot be our Pleasure. There can be no Satisfaction whilst there
is Dissimilitude, Dissension, Opposition of Natures. What Comfort can Enemies
have one in another? A harmony of Dispositions must introduce Complacency;
where this is not, there is no Content. All that solaces, must be suitable.
Pleasure and Delight arise from the agreeableness of Objects and Appetites.
What pleases not, comforts not. God himself, who is an everlasting Fullness and
Fountain of the sweetest and richest Satisfactions, cannot be a comfort to that
Soul, which is not pleased with him; and then nothing in the World can; it
being impossible that finite should outdo infinite. But how can that Man be
pleased with God, that does not apprehend his singularly delectable
Excellencies, or apprehending them, does not by consideration work a due
respect to them into his inmost Soul, so as out of Conscience, with a liberal
and ingenuous Affection, to approve of, and choose, and acquiesce in God, as his
All-sufficient Portion, his sole and supreme Felicity? Really if we think that
we can be, and enjoy better any where else than in God, or if that be the
import of our Actions, we neither can nor will possess a Heaven of Consolation
in God. For that only is our ultimate Comfort, which is our best, and if we do
but make God a means to a further end, he cannot be our rest. Here then must we
fix our Tabernacles for a final repose and content; therefore must keep alive,
and lively in our Minds and Hearts the Thoughts of God. He that can live a day
without some pleasing Reflections upon immense Wisdom, Power, Holiness,
Justice, Goodness, Faithfulness, All Sufficiency, etc. may be a Devil tomorrow,
as he is a Beast to day; but Title has he none whilst thus brutish, to refresh
himself with the Comforts of Heaven, since he owns not the Wellspring of them.
Oh, let us set the Lord always before our eyes, and keep him in view as the
Omniscient Supervisor of our hearts and ways, having always an eye within us,
piercing into the most secret recesses of our Souls. Let only a Balaam say in
the future, I shall behold him, but not near; do thou, O my Soul, awe thy self
into seriousness, and Integrity of Conscience, by present Consideration, that
this all-comprehending, unconfinable Nature, is necessarily more nigh to, and
intimately present with thee, than any thing in the World, thine own Body, nay,
thy very Thoughts, and most inward Motions not excepted. Thou understandest
that he is the highest Perfection, and plenitude of Essence, Existence,
Substance, Glory; that more of God is every where, than of any thing; that
there is not so much Soul in a body, Light in the Sun, Matter in the Universe,
as there is of God in each; that they are not, as he is. They are but
derivative Beings of a thin, lank Constitution, in comparison of that amplitude
and fullness of Being in God, who is every thing in the utmost Perfection, that
he can possible be, from Eternity to Eternity unalterable, and every where the
same boundless Perfection, that he is any where. And will thou dare to be, or
speak, or do any thing unbecoming so august, so awful, so glorious a Presence.
Shall the eye of a Worm, Job 25.6. give Law to thy Tongue and Hands, and shall
not the Sovereign Majesty of Heaven and Earth have an Empire in thy Conscience?
Oh, do not dare to be other now, than at Judgment thou will wish thou had
been: For thy Judge is no less present, although thou be less sensible. Enforce
upon thy self, nay, rather with a spontaneous and generous Freedom of Spirit,
out of choice entertain, and take complacency in such Considerations always, as
may better thee, because not to be better for them is to be worse; ineffectual
Thoughts of God being like to be effectual for thy confusion. If the Rays of
Divine Glory that shine into thy reasoning Powers, have no influence upon thy
Appetite and Actions; if notwithstanding them, thou can be as vain, frothy,
carnal, secure, rocky, unsavory, unbelieving, formal, hypocritical, worldly,
lustful, lazy, disobedient, as if thou did still sit in darkness and the
shadow of Death; if thy apprehensions of the super-intendency of Heaven do not
overawe thy unruly untoward Will, into compliance with that Will which is
supreme and universal Goodness, do not quicken thee to Penitence and Holiness;
to an entire and upright observance of the whole Condition of the Covenant of
Grace, with a persevering resolution and endeavor, thou will certainly find,
Oh my Soul, that this Light will be mighty to aggravate thy Sin, and Punishment
everlastingly. Oh, for a heart so to work toward God, under its Sensations of
the Unfathomableness of his Understanding, Universalness of his Presence,
Particularity of his Observance, Amplitude of his Goodness, Beauty of his
Holiness, Severity and Impartiality of his Justice, Extensiveness of his Power;
in fine, Greatness and Incomprehensibleness of his Majesty and Glory, as to be
altogether unsatisfiable, till it can center it self upon him, (...).
as its only Happiness in an absolute Renunciation of every thing, that stands
in competition with him, and be willing out of love to him readily to embrace
his Laws, submit to the Government of his Son Jesus Christ, and the Conduct of
his Spirit of Truth and Grace; which if these Thoughts of God will not prevail
upon thee to do, nothing can, since there is infinitely less of Argument in
every finite thing, nay, in all together, than there is in the Infiniteness of
God. Will thou hence then be persuaded, Oh, my Soul, to acknowledge that God in
all thy ways, whom thus thou know in some degree, though but very imperfect?
Will thou fear and reverence his Greatness, love and delight in his Goodness,
conform to his Holiness, stand in awe of his Justice, in all things subjugate
and submit thy self to his Sovereign Authority and Will as the best and wisest?
Thine own interest as well as the reason of the thing, and the command of thy
Maker requires thy speedy and through resolution. If thou will not bid an
everlasting adieu to all the Comforts of Heaven, thou must thus humbly seek
after them, which if thou do really, it is no presumption to claim them as thine
Eternal Inheritance and Portion. This appertains to the First Commandment, we
shall derive another part of the Psalmist's Character from the Second.

CHAP. III. A Second Character of the Subject of Comfort, Prayer.
2. THe Sacred Penman here was a Man of Prayer, the whole Psalm is a solemn
Address to God; and it is not like the fumbling of one unaccustomed thus to
converse with the Divine Majesty; the Genius of it gives abundant evidence that
it has been a familiar and frequent practice with such gravity of Expression,
with such liberty of Spirit, with such a holy Parrhesy and Confidence, with
such variety of Arguments, with such endearments of affection does he plead
with God, as one that long had lived upon the trade, and was a good Proficient
in this heavenly art of Wrestling with God. And indeed it is generally under
this Duty, that the Lord administers the solace and satisfaction of his Love to
revive a drooping Heart. Whoever is unacquainted with Prayer, is utterly an
alien from Divine Peace. Those that live most with God in this exercise,
receive most from God, enjoy most in him, to sweeten their Spirits, under all
their Sorrows; his Promise engaging him to be found in a way of Peace and
Contentation, of all those that diligently seek him. Beside that his own Glory
engages him to answer the Petitions of Peace which are put up in the Name, and
put into the Hands of his only Begotten, to be presented to his Majesty,
perfumed with the Incense of his Mediation, Joh. 14.13. Whatever ye shall ask
in my Name that will I do. Wherefore? is it because you ask, or for the merit
of your Devotions, or the strength of your Faith, or the fervency of of your
Spirits, or the forcibleness of your Arguments, or the urgency of your
Importunities, etc.? No, but I will do it that the Father may be glorified in
the Son. Oh gracious Redeemer! Oh precious Promise! Oh blessed Hope! How strong
and rich are thy Consolations? especially considering the relation which this
Promise stands in to another immediately succeeding it, viz. that of a
Comforter, the Holy Spirit, which our blessed Mediator prevailed with his
Father to bestow, that he might give us an Experiment of the prevatence of
Prayer, ver. 16. I will (...) the Father, and he shall give you another
Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever. As if he had said, my personal
Prayer you shall to your satisfaction find effectual, but this further
assurance will I give you, that the Prayers you put up in my Name, shall be no
less efficacious than those I my self present in mine own Person; for upon my
request you shall be endowed with the same Spirit that breaths out mine, and my
Merit is not confined to my Person, the virtue thereof will be extended to your
pleadings in my Name, through the cooperation of that Holy One, who shall be
your aid, and with unutterable groans cointercede for you. Indeed this Heavenly
Dove comes only in at the Window of Prayer; but we must put forth our hand to
take it, and heartily, humbly, believingly to beg it, is as little as we can
do; if we sluggishly put our hand into our Bosom, and refuse this labor, we
together with it reject the Olive Branch of Peace: But who in his wits would
not beg with all manner of Prayer, Public, Private, Secret, Mental, Vocal,
with a Form, without, when he may be assured if he ask to receive, that his Joy
may be full, Joh. 16.24. This 94th Psalm and the rest, most of them seem in
their composure to be designed by the Penmen for Privacy, though God had a
further design in them, viz. to make them Public, and part of the Canon of
Scripture, for the guidance of his Church in all Ages; and assuredly, he is a
stranger to heavenly Comforts, who is a stranger to secret Converses and
Communion with God. It Is true, God by bringing these secret breathings of holy
Souls after himself, in these Psalms to a more public use, and making their
private Forms of Prayer as it were the common Liturgy of his Church in all
Generations, may seem graciously to intend the honor of his public Worship by
the Church, since he has picked out that for Catholic advantage, which in
reality was a Treasure in all their private Devotions, pretermitting the rest.
For that more were composed by them, I no more doubt than that other Books were
made by Solomon, besides those preserved in the Holy Writings. And that Forms
of Humane Composure, as well as Divine Inspiration, were made use of by holy
Souls, without impeach of any crime therein; particularly without the guilt of
Idolatry, (the senseless sottish charge of some against a Form) is demonstrable
from the New Testament, where Christ's Disciples beseech him to teach them to
pray as the Pharisees and John taught theirs. They taught them Forms and so did
he; theirs Humane, his Divine. But if this were so foul a crime, so odious to
God, would he (who is so severe against Pharisees upon other occasions, even in
relation to their Prayers) give it the honor of an approving Imitation, and
not rather chastize it with the Scorpions of a bitter rigorous reproof, and
check his Disciples desire to be Idolaters, or symbolize with them? I could
demonstrate irrefragably, that this whimzy would absolutely turn all Vocal
Prayer whatever out of the Church, if it were as true as it is abominably
false; but this is no place for it.

The choice which God made for the Church of these more refined suspirations of
pure and heavenly Souls, that in a zealous ardour of divine and raised
affection, lifted up themselves toward his holy Habitation, in these Forms of
his own dictating and directing by his holy Spirit, and his applying them to
public use, are a testimony that he accounts the honor of more to be more
honor, and his reserving the best for the Church, when others are lost,
declares, that he expects the best from it. His own is to him always most
acceptable, and administering hereof to his Church, to offer before him, he
evidences that he would have its Offerings to be always acceptable, and in this
provision he gives the Public a preference to any thing personal, which also
he further advances by making these public Ministrations the ordinary means to
beget spiritual Life, and therefore Peace. But then nevertheless, the benefit
of that which we enjoy in Public, depends upon what we are in Private; and the
main business of Church Offices and Ordinances, is to make us inwardly and
secretly sound and solid Christians For God no more regards outward public
Semblances, without Sincerity, than a whited Sepulcher; his general end is to
make us upright Nathanaels, Israelites indeed in whom there is no guile, not
gilded Hypocrites; and no better are we, whatever our visible Sacrifices may
be, if yet we retain our Chambers of Imagery in private, and do not break down
the Idols of our Hearts; striving to be inwardly before God, what before Men we
appear to be outwardly; which we shall never do, if we take not our Hearts to
task in secret. Let us blow never so many Trumpets before our selves, ruffle
and brave it as triumphantly as is imaginable, in the phantastry of our Silk
and Satin Devotion, before Men; yet if our heavenly Father never meet us in a
Closet, if there we have nothing acceptable to present him, if we take no pains
there to dress up our inward Souls for his embraces; laboring to the utmost to
prepare our Work within there, when we design to build him a public Temple,
that the savor of our more retired Communion with God may abide upon our
Spirits, and the perfume of that Incense, which we offer within the Veil, may
ascend, and become a visible Cloud without; if not thus, I am afraid, that at
the great reckoning, for all our Trimming and Gallantry, the Crowns and
Garlands of our public Sacrifices, we shall stand in querpo, and be found no
better than Pharisees.

The Psalmist's Prayer was first a secret ere it became a public Application
to God. Learn then, Oh my Soul, to begin there, and make it thy first and main
business, to approve thy Heart secretly, to the Searcher of Hearts; and by
Communing with it and God alone, deal effectually with it, that he, who sees in
secret, may see, that it is in good earnest. Be much with God in thy
Meditations before, that thou may not have thy straggling Thoughts to gather
up and fix, when thy Affections are to enter into a vigorous pursuit after
Grace and God. See that there be not a reserved Lust within, that would hide it
self from the Lord, when thou should make thy unreserved Acknowledgments. Let
not thy Confessions be a bare heartless enumeration of thy Sins, but the real
exercise of true Repentance, least they pass only for self Accusations, and
thine own Mouth produce the Testimony against thee, which will cast and condemn
thee. O learn inwardly to loath in thy Heart those hateful Vomits which thy
Mouth casts out, that thou may return to them never, never. Learn to loath
thy self for the sake of the nasty Filth and Rottenness, nay the Venom, the
Toads, the Fiends that thou harbourest within, and what thou loathest resolve
utterly, eternally to relinquish and abandon, (from this very day forward) as
an offense and abomination to the Lord.

But thou must not only in thy recesses and personal converses with God, fly
from and abhor thy Sins as Styx that scalding River of Brimstone in Hell;
that is not all, Romans 12.9. (...).
thou must fix and establish thy self by Resolution and Grace invariably for
God and Goodness, and for that end endeavor that all thy Petitions, may be the
exercise of Faith, without which thou shall receive nothing at the Hands of the
Lord. Cold Petitions only beg denials, and faithless set a seal upon those
denials, to render them irreversible. Christ in the days of his Flesh, offered
up strong cries, Heb. 5.7. Well they might, the strength of Israel dwelt in his
Flesh, Job. 1.14. Col. 2.9. the fullness of the Godhead filled him with Vigor
and Power. But the strength of thy cries, Oh my Soul, is thy Faith, the
condition of the Promises; yet not absolutely in it self but relatively to him;
thy Faith is the strength of thy Prayers, and He the strength of thy Faith. The
Golden Scepter of Divine Grace and Love, will never be held out to any who
bring not this Tessera or Token; produce this, and then, What is thy Petition,
Oh Soul? and it shall be granted, and what is thy Request? it shall be
performed even to the half of the Kingdom. Nothing binds the Hands of
Miracle-working, helping, healing Power, but Unbelief, Mat. 13.58. Mark 6.5.
One Evangelist says he did, another he could do no mighty Work, because of
their Unbelief. But to Faith all things are possible, because to God, who has
promised upon that condition. Nothing therefore, Oh my Soul, do thou want but
Faith. Thus am I drawn unawares to that which should be another Ingredient of
the Character.

CHAP. IV. A Third Qualification of the Subject of Comfort, Faith.
3. THe Psalmist was a Person that lived by Faith, not by Sight, 2 Cor. 5.7.
Which Scripture warrants me to take the Word [Faith] in a special, not general
sense, as it is sometimes used. I suppose by [Faith] the Apostle means the same
Grace, in the same notion, that has so glorious things reported of it, Heb. 11.
The [(...)] substance or subsistence of things hoped for [(...)] the evidence
[convictive proof] of things not seen. A divine disposition which enables us to
behave our selves under the apprehension of Invisibles and Futurities, as if
present real Sensations; which gives those things that we feel not, as perfect
command over us as if we saw and handled them. An effectually working Heart and
Life-ruling Belief of God's Word and Promises. The first most immediate and
proper effect whereof is, a concrediting, entrusting our selves with God in
Christ. The Word [Trust] is for the most part expressive of it in the Old
Testament. Now that this holy Man thus walked by Faith, the Psalm gives full
evidence, and that as to both the parts, 1. Confidence, 2. Assurance.

1. As to himself, Ver. 2. Notwithstanding the Combinations of his Adversaries
to condemn him, he commits his Cause to God for defense, venturing himself upon
his Power and Goodness, as a sufficient security; and upon clear evidence of
interest claims propriety in God. God is my defense and the Rock of my Refuge;
there is lifs Affiance. My God; there is his Assurance. 2. As to Others, 1. The
Church of the Godly, ver. 14. The Lord will not cast off his People, neither
forsake his Inheritance: But Judgment shall return unto Righteousness. That is
either, 1. Though the Righteous be now condemned, ver. 21. and consequently
Righteousness it self by the perverse Judgment of evil Men; and therefore
Judgment may now seem to have left, parted from, and forsaken Righteousness:
They do not go together, there is Judgment, but no Righteousness in it: yet they
shall meet again. Judgment that has run away from it shall return to it; the
Righteous shall not any more have wrong, but right in Judgment; it shall not be
against, but for them.
Or 2dly. The Righteous which have been deprived of the power of Judgment, or
Government of the Kingdom, by a Throne of Iniquity, ver. 20. shall recover
their Authority. And it is very usual for the Abstract to be put for the
Concrete in Scripture, and even in this Psalm, as ver. 11. Vanity for Vain: So
ver. 17. Silence for a silent place, etc. So here Righteousness for Righteous
Men, and ver. 14. Inheritance for inherited People. Or thus, Righteousness had
the Rule in Samuel's days; now in Readiness, it is depressed; but shall be
restored. Judgment shall be administered in Righteousness under David 's
Government, and all the upright in Heart shall return or turn (as that word is
often used, as Jer. 8.4, etc.) after it, that is, shall own it, return to their
Allegiance, to Justice and David.

3dly. Judgment shall return to Righteousness, that is, God shall another day,
viz. on the day of Judgment, Vindicate the Righteous, clear up his
Dispensations, Judge righteously those that have judged his Righteous Servants
unrighteously; and judge his People, repent himself concerning his Servants;
and though in his Judgments upon Earth, he has seemed to be more against them
than any, yet will he then be wholly for them, Vid. plura c. 17.
and pass Judgment on their side.

2. As to the Coetus Malignantium, ver. 21. the Congregation of Condemners; he
forefees an end of their Prosperity, the beginning of their Calamity, ver. 10.
A Pit digging for them, ver. 13. and their sinal Execution, ver. 23. Thus we
see his Faith; and I am ready to think that this was the great Instrument of
his Comfort. Whatever troubles befell he could see through them by Faith. 'Twas
a judicious saying of a good Man, That in all Afflictions and Straits Faith can
find an outgate. This is a real ground of Consolation. All the Bonds, Chains,
Cords of Affliction to Faith are, like Sampson's, but as a Thread that has
felt the Fire. All the Rage and Malice of Earth and Hell, but like his Lion:
Faith can rend them in pieces. It Is too hard for them, it can fetch Honey,
Comfort out of them. If this Grace can make that present which is not yet;
realize that which being only in its causes is at present nothing; then can it
take up the comfort of a Blessing in the Promise, and live upon its sweetness,
as if it were already in Possession. There Is no distinction of times to Faith:
It enjoys not its objects in succession, but at once. Nothing to it is past and
to come, (though to sense there be) all is present and in view, in hand. It
sees with the Eye of God in the Promise, and therefore sees as he sees. It
lives with Christ in Heaven, and therefore lives as he lives, Gal. 2.20. It is
an endless possession of Life all at once, as they describe Divine Eternity. Oh
happy Soul, that is enriched with this noble Grace, whereby it is endowed with
God and all things: Oh unspeakable misery of those that live (or rather
continually die) without it. To be in Unbelief is to be in Hell, i. e. in
state, the place is but a Circumstance. The substance of Hell consisting in
three things, 1. Being under a Sentence of Condemnation and the Curse, Joh.
3.18. He that believes not is condemned already. 2. Irrecoverable loss of
Happiness, Joh. 3.36. He that believes not shall not see Life, i. e. if he
never believe he shall never see Life Eternal. And 3. Everlasting sense of
Wrath, Joh. 3.36. The wrath of God abides upon him; does not merely, as
Ezekiel's Flying Roll, pass over him; but on him it settles, and rests, and
dwells, as in its fixed and indefeisible Inheritance, its proper and
unchangable Home and Habitation. Ah dolorous State! Ah wretched Soul! Better a
thousand times thou had never been, than to have thus abused thy Being, in
precipitating thy self into so formidable an Abyss of woe. Will thou then, Oh
my Soul, live the life of the Just by Faith, that thou mast not always be dying
this accursed death of Hypocrites and Unbelievers; and be yet more grievously
racked with dismal expectations of infinitely worse to come? Shall invisible
and eternal things overruled thee, as having a present sensation or feeling of
their reality? Can thou now and then take a turn in the superior World, as
one come to Mount Sion, and unto the City of the Living God, the Heavenly
Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of Angels, to the General Assembly and
Church of the first born, which are written in Heaven, and to God the Judge of
all, and to the Spirits of Just Men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of
the New Covenant, and to the Blood of Sprinkling which speaks better things
than that of Abel, Heb. 12.22, 23, 24? What report can thou give concerning
the promised Land of Everlasting Light, and Love and Life? Have thou ever been
upon the Mount to take a prospect of it? What remarkable thing therein has
invited thy serious Meditations, to take a more strict and narrow view, and
make it thy perpetual repast and delight? Have thou walked through the breadth
and the length thereof, in a diligent search and survey to behold the Beauty,
the Sweetness, the Perfection, the Glory, of the Inhabitants; the Employments,
the Fruits, the Enjoyments, the Entertainments, the Joys and Consolations to be
possessed there, in an unconceivably rich degree of satisfactoriness; where
there is an everlasting Spring, and an everlasting Harvest of unutterable
Pleasure and Contentation? Do thou even now enter upon thy lot and rest
there, Heb. 4.3. and live upon the riches of that Inheritance, making a
spiritual livelihood for thy self out of the abundance and store of Heaven?
Where are thy Treasures, thy Jewels and pleasant things, thy most amiable and
delectable Companions? Seeing him who is invisible, Heb. 11.27. Can thou
endure, and bear up under the Rage and Violence of a turbulent ill-condition'd
World; the Reproaches and Scorns of Men, the Fury of Devils, the Pangs of
Affliction; and in a calm of sweet composure and rest, anchor thy self on the
Rock of Ages, as thy best security and singular satisfaction. Really, Faith is
all things, it is Wealth in Poverty, Health in Sickness, a good Report or Name
under Defamations, Heb. 11.2. Pleasure in Pain, Rest in Labor, Life in Death,
a Heaven of Peace and Joy in a Hell of Misery and Torment. If thou can not
bless thy self with the solace of a Friend on Earth, Faith will acquaint thee
with, and endear thee to Multitudes in Heaven. Although thy Circumstances be as
deplorable as thy Redeemers, worse than the Birds and Foxes; yet thy Faith has
for thee a House not made with Hands, Eternal. Is thy own Country or City too
hot for thee? this Grace finds for thee a better Country, a City that has
Foundations, whose Builder and Maker is God, Heb. 11.16. By it commit the
keeping of thy Soul in well doing to thy Faithful Creator. Espouse the ever
blessed Jesus, embrace the Precepts, kiss the Promises, Heb. 11.13. and then
all is thine own, from the clod under thy Feet, to the height and crown of
Heavenly Glory. For Faith to be a Menaicant is impossible. It has all and
abounds, and is full, if it be a full unfeigned Faith. A Believer is never in
want if he want not Faith, the due degree and measure of Faith. And the measure
effectual and acceptable is not high; it is the Truth rather than Strength. A
Grain will remove Mountains, Mat. 17.20. Make Trees to grow in the midst of the
Sea, Luke 17.6. Divide the Waters, and convert Seas and Rivers into dry Land,
Heb. 11.20. and make even a Nebuchadnezzar's Hell-hot Furnace of Fire so forget
its Property, as not to be able to singe a hair, Dan. 3.27. compared with Heb.
11.33, 34. Every thing must be a Rebel against its own Nature, and bow to the
Omnipotency of Faith; that is to the Almightiness of that infinite Nature,
which is engaged to, and by Faith. Oh then my Soul, where is thy Faith? What is
thy Faith?

CHAP. V. A Fourth Property of the Subject of Comfort, Inoffensive Conscience.
4. THis Sacred Writer was one that took singular care not to live under the
reproach of his own Conscience; That herein did exercise himself always to have
a Conscience void of Offense toward God and toward Man, Act. 24.16.

1. What apprehensions he entertained of that which is displeasing to God we
may judge, 1. By his applications to and pleadings with God for Vengeance upon
the workers of Iniquity, Ver. 1, 2, 3, 4. 2. By his deep sense of the
Omnipresence and Omniscience of God, which he vehemently urges as a pressing
Argument to restrain and awe Men from Sinning, ver. 8, 9, 10, 11. 3. By his
esteeming it a part of Blessedness to learn Righteousness under Divine
Chastisements, ver. 12. 4. By his enmity against Wicked Men, which he was so
wise and good, as not to direct against their Persons as such, but only as
infected with odious Crimes, ver. 16. and the whole current of the Psalm. 5. By
his accounting and acknowledging it a special Mercy to be upheld by God, when
ready to slip, ver. 18. which I unnderstand of sliding into Sin which is argued
and proved. c. 11.
6. By his deprecating the fellowship of a Throne of Iniquity with God, ver.
20. The Question there, Shall the Throne, etc. is to be resolved into a
Negative Proposition. It cannot, shall not. Why? What because a Throne? No
assuredly, it is then the Iniquity that dethrones and hurles it down from
Communion with Heaven, into Confusion with Hell. And ver. 23. exposes to a
certain and remediless cutting off and ruin. This was the Holy Authors sense of
Sin in others; and can any Man do thus that makes no conscience of dishonouring
God by Omissions or Commissions? Would a Man of his Condition, Understanding
and excellent Qualifications, prosecute other Men's Crimes with such a height
and heat of Enmity, and yet be at peace with and palliate his own? Arraign
Treason in others, and allow it in himself? Enhaunce Public Wickedness, and
hug Personal? The aggravations whereof he was more privy to than of any Man's
beside, and knew that the Treacheries of a Friend are worse resented than the
Violences of an Enemy. It Is his own reasoning, Psalm 55.12, 13. Would he not
with an implacable Vengeance pursue, and exterminate every Sin in himself, that
his own Soul might not become the Butt and Mark for that all-intelligent
Vengeance of Heaven, which he truly thought did look with such a formidable
aspect upon others? And if so, he must maintain a perpetual jealousy of, and
watchfulness over both Heart and Ways; and make Repentance a daily business,
prosecuting his Corruptions to the very Death in Mortification, living in a
never-ceasing Combat with Satan, and this present inticeing World, as afraid
of breathing in the Devils Air, or walking upon his Ground, or within his Pale;
with a Religious wariness observing every step, least it should be upon a
Snare, or into a Precipice, as became a Man after God's own Heart, whose whole
course of Life was designedly a walk with God. Would not a Man of this
Constitution, with a singular Providence and Caution, eschew all appearances or
occasions of, or Temptations to Evil, of every kind, both Spiritual and Carnal?
since both alike are visible to that God, who has [(...)] an Eye every where,
to direct his Vengaence, ver. 9, 10. Psalm. 10.14. Would nor this complexion of
Soul, oblige his utmost endeavors and diligence, circumspectly to keep his
Heart, and engage the assistance and care of Almighty Grace, to be his security
against whatever might entangle or defile it. I do not question but that with
the highest solicitude and Conscience, he attended the just and watchful
Government of his Actions, under the command of these Perceptions he
entertained of the invisible Eye, ver. 9. and of his most secret imperceptible
Thoughts, upon the Sensations he retain d of God's intuition and censure of all
humane Cogitations, ver. 10, 11. Which may be thus rendered. He that teaches
Adam Knowledge, the LORD knowing the thoughts of [Adam] because they are [Abel]
Vanity. The Septuagint translate [(...)] not participially but verbally, and
Adam, Abel, appellatively, and so they ought, and Adam plurally, Abel not in
the Abstract, but Concrete, thus; The LORD knows the Thoughts of Men that
they are vain, which the Apostle follows in all but the version of Adam, which
with him is [the Wise] 1 Cor. 3.20. The Lord knows the Thoughts (or
Reasonings as it is rendered Luke 9.46.) of the Wise, who of all Men have the
greatest skill and cunning to hide their Thoughts, and the highest abilities to
solidate, improve, direct and govern their reasoning and thinking Powers, that
if any Men's, their Cogitations and Discourses, one would think, might be above
the brand of the Text. The reason of this change I cannot determine, it is
satisfactory that it was made by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, who best
knew his own meaning. But shall I offer a Conjecture? The Appellative Adam
points to the first Man, from whom the denomination is drawn. And before his
fall, no doubt Adam was possessed of a degree of Wisdom, paramount to all his
Posterity, Solomon not excepted; and this Name was imposed upon him, when he
flourished in the glory of that excellent Spirit. I do not question, but that
even in his collapsed Nature, a degree thereof was preserved superior to all
in his Successors, unto whom it is derived very much rebated, partly though
corruption, partly through feminine imbecility. For the difference of natural
abilities in Man and Man, or Man and Woman arises not from the spiritual part;
all Souls being equal in Nature, Faculties and Power. But the defect of Vital
Flame, or Natural Heat and Spirits causing an indisposition of Organs in their
first Formation, with a coolness and torpidness in the Animal Spirits, the
Souls Vehicle and immediate Instrument in its Operations ad extra; is the true
Origin of all those Imperfections visible in the Intellectuals, both of that
cooler Sex, and the other; and all may be increased by the Immorality and
Intemperance of Parents, or other accidental Causes, Diseases, Passions,
External Occurrents, etc. Now may not St. Paul in translating [Adam the wise]
allude or have some respect to the incomparable Wisdom of that source of Humane
Nature? However it was most accommodate to the tenor of his Discourse there,
and not aliene from the scope of Place here. For undoubtedly those he calls
Brutish and Fools, ver. 8. and Proud, ver. 2. had no humble apprehensions of
their own Abilities; but did imagine that in their Oppressions they dealt
wisely, as the Egyptians, Exodus 1.10. Atheists, Deists, Persecutors, generally
conceiting themselves the wisest of Men, and the profoundest of Politicians;
but the rest of the World only a knot of Addle Eggs. Yet the Holy Ghost, who
best knows, and never can be out in his Judgment of Men, both here and other
where, even in this Book, calls them by their proper Names as Psalm. 14. and 53.
Folly, Atheism, Persecution, are both in Scripture and Nature individual
inseparable Companions, and no marvel. For if a Man can be such a Fool as to
turn God out of the World, and Being, in his Thoughts; no wonder if he be such
a Barbarian as to turn Men, who are most God-like, out of the World, with his
Hands; and again if a Man can be so bestially Savage, as to embrew his Hands in
the Blood of Innocents, it is his Interest to be so foolish as to believe there
is no Providence and God. I therefore again demand whether it be possible, for
a Man, living under the dominion of these most rational Notions of God, and the
folly, brutishness, and madness of working Iniquity, to contradict all the
Principles of Sense, Reason and Religion, in so high a degree as to invoive
himself in the same Condemnation? Could a Man sensible of Divine observance of,
and animadversion upon vain Thoughts, indulge such in his own Mind? and if not
vain, sure much less vile and wicked. Will a Man confidently believing and
asserting the all-intelligent Nature of God, here represented under the
Metaphor of Hearing, dare to permit his Tongue to take an unbecoming Parrhesy,
or liberty of bolting out any thing? Shall that Mouth spit froth or filth in
the Face of Heaven, which professes that it is all Ear and Eye? Lastly, How can
he who is so thoroughly persuaded of God's inspection, with an avenging Eye, as
to account those brutish and Fools that disbelieve it: Be so impudently daring
and flagitious, as (like that Blasphemous Dicer in Fincelius) with impious and
accursed Hands to throw his Dagger against Heaven, and stick it in the Heart of
God? Oh Hellishness! Oh Horror! I mean be wicked in his Works, which is
Deicide, or God-killing. Indeed a Man, i. e. one endowed with intelligent and
reasoning Powers, who can proportion his Sensations to the nature of things,
much more a Christian Man, that borrows his Light and Eyes too, in a more
especial manner from Heaven, must needs behold more uglyness and odiousness in
Sin, than any thing imaginable. For we do not take our measures of Privatives,
from themselves merely, but that positive Being and Goodness to which they are
opposed, and the excellency of the Subject wherein they are seated. Blindness
therefore in Man, the most noble Creature endowed with Sense, is a greater evil
than in a Brute, especially since Man is capable of using sight to more worthy
and eximious purposes. Sin is a privation of Holiness, which is the only mean
to bring Man to the possession of infinite Goodness. Heb. 12.14. Without
Holiness no Man shall see the Lord. Matthew. 5.8. Blessed are the pure in Heart
for they shall see God. So Isa. 33.15, 17. Sin therefore is the greatest Evil,
because it deprives mediately of the greatest Good natural [or supernatural]
God; and as it deprives immediately of the greatest good Moral Holiness. As
it is contrary to the purity of the Creature it is but a finite evil; but
infinite as contrary to the Purity of the Creator. As a violation of the Law
and Principles of Nature and Reason in us; it is only of a limited Malignity,
but of a boundless and unlimited Pestilency, as a violation of the Law and
Principles of Holiness in God. It Is a transgression of the Law of God,
therefore a contempt and scorn put upon his infinite Authority, and Justice,
and Holiness, and Power, and Goodness, and Glory, and Happiness. One would
imagine it was but a light matter to eat the Fruit of a Tree in Paradise; but
'twas no light matter to do it against a great God, against the express
prohibition, and in a slighting neglect of, or vilifying disregard or despite
to the severe Sanctions of an infinitely Wise, Holy and Just Creator. Therefore
Infinitennss it self being concerned in Sin renders it exceeding sinful; whence
nothing in it more afflicts a good Soul, than its contrariety and offensiveness
to that glorious Majesty. And indeed Sin as Sin is against none but God. The
Facts that are sinful as being against God, may be hurtful or injurious as
against Men; but the formal nature of Sin lies not in that, neither is the
violation of Humane Laws, therefore a Sin, because against the Sanctions of
Man; but only because and as far as Violations of the Law of God, immediately
in the matter, or remotely in the Transgression of the Fifth Command requiring
subjection to Authority. Therefore says David, Psalm. 51.4. Against thee, thee
only have I sinned. What? Because being King he was by no Man Challengable, to
none accountable for any wrong but God alone? Admit this true in Thesi, yet in
Hypothesi it is absurd and ridiculous, as part of an Address to God, and an
exercise of Repentance. If it be not understood comparatively, or with respect
to the formality of Sin; spoken absolutely, it is absolutely false. In Sin there
is a Fault and a Guilt, so in David's Murder, and Adultery. Consider the
former, taking away Life is sometimes Justice: When is it a Fault? only when
against Law. What Law? God's or Man's? Not as against Man's further than as
first against God's. For Man's Law cannot make that Murder which is Justice by
the Law of God; nor the contrary. That is Man cannot reverse what God has
established. It Is therefore the Divine Law in Nature or Scripture, and that
alone which determines concerning the Faultiness or Faultlessness of matters
Originally and Architectonically; Man's Law only Secondarily and Subordinately.
The formal reason then of the faultiness is the contrariety to the Law of God.
And nothing is Sin, merely in respect of the matter, but the Formality. So the
taking away Vriah's Life, was not a fault merely as taking away Life; for had
he been a Criminal that would have been Justice: But a Sin it was only under
the notion, as 'twas taken away under such Circumstances, as the Law of God
dissallow'd. The matter of the Sin therefore was against Vriah, but the Form
and Essence of the Sin did consist in nothing but only in its being against
God, a Transgression of the Law of God, 1 John 3.4. So then, it is not the
Offense against Man simply and abstractly considered; but the Offense against
God, that properly and formally constitutes Sin. Every wrong that is in Sin to
our selves, to Men, to our fellow Creatures, that groan under their thraldom to
our Lusts, and fare worse for their sake, should affect us, but most of all the
wrong we do to God, as being the greatest injury against the greatest Majesty.
For even upon Earth, Crimes advance in their heinousness, according to the
degree and dignity of Persons. To call a mean Man Knave is a light matter,
scarce actionable; to call a Nobleman, Scandalum Magnatum, deeply finable; to
call the King so, Treason, punishable with Death. Oh then, what is Blasphemy or
any Sin against the King of Kings, the infinitely glorious King of Heaven and
Earth. Common sense will assure us, that the more mischief and hurt a Sin does,
or may do, the greater it is, and merits greater Punishments. Now the more
public and useful any Persons are, so much the more mischievous are any
actings against them; because Government is essential to the good of the whole
Community, and therefore those who make attempts against Men in Public Place
and Authority, strike at and attempt the destruction of all subject to their
Jurisdiction. To kill a Judge upon the Bench is High Treason, both as a vertual
acting against the King, and also as a murdering the Justice of the Nation, a
violence against the Right, and Property, and Life of all, that are or may be
in a capacity to receive Justice from him. So to kill the King is vertually a
killing the whole Kingdom, with its Honor, Authority, Justice, Right,
Property, Government, all that the King is entrusted with, the Privileges,
Laws, Liberties, and Immunities of all Men. Sin therefore is an Evil
transcendently great, above all Expression, above all Imagination, as a horrid
mischievous attempt against the Life, the All of God himself.

1. Vertually and Practically as far as in the Sinner lies it annihilates, 1.
The Being and Presence of God. For to do that abominable Evil, in his very
Eyesight, which the presence even of a little Child would restrain from, this
makes nothing of him, lays him lower than the sillyest most despicable of his
Creatures, makes him less and more contemptible than a very Baby, and ranks him
with Irrational and Non-intelligent Beings, which is to un-God him. 2. It
Annihilates the Authority and Legislative Power of God. For to transgress
notwithstanding the impress hereof, upon the Law, is in effect to averr, that
there is no such thing, that it is but a Fable, a Fancy, nay, it is to despise
and spurn it out of the World, which is to kick out the Being of God. For that
which has no Authority cannot be God.
2. It Is a direct affront to the Holiness of God, as perfectly and
irreconcileably repugnant to it; and Contraries as far as they can destroy each
other. By thy Impurities thou thrustest God out of thy Soul; he departs when
this Evil Spirit enters with allowance; he bears an eternal Antipathy against
it, cannot live together it. There can be no Communion betwixt God and Bolial.
If Idols be set up God is tumbled down. If Sin must live within thee thou do
thy utmost to make God die, stabbing him to the Heart in that which is the
Heart of all his Perfections his Holiness. He cannot live if that die. 3. It Is
a Challenge to his Justice, and would Duel it to Death. For whilst I am not
afraid of, and restrained from Sin by the Sanctions of the Law, I send a
Defiance to the Justice of God, and set my self above it, trample it under my
Feet, with drawn Sword, drive it before me gasht with innumerable Wounds, make
a Dish-clout of it. For did I believe that there were any such thing indeed as
Omnipotent Righteousness, to vindicate to the utmost all violations of the Law,
'twould effectually curb and quell the licentiousness of my Spirit and Actions;
but whilst it does nothing with me, I make nothing of it. By not standing in
awe of it any more than if it were not; in effect I do my utmost endeavor that
it be not. I take away its being as to my self, and as far as in me lies to all
the World, by making a slight of it. How these Attributes Holiness and Justice
are the Noblest Life of God, his richest Glory, which whilst I I rob him of, I
labor to destroy him. Lastly, Sin is a Contradiction (or Contrafaction rather)
to Gods Government, an opposition to and counteracting his Regality, Dominion
and Rule over the Rational World; Treason, Rebellion against the Sovereign
Majesty of Heaven. Yea any the least Sin is no less. One would think that a
partly enforced transgressing a Law of God, in mere indifferent matter, when
done with a good intention, for a good end, were the least of all Sins. And
such was Readiness sparing the best of the Amalekites Cattle for Sacrifices to
God, 1 Samuel 15. Saul was but newly settled in his Kingdom, and some grumbled at
his Government, 1 Samuel 10.27, and 11, 12. In this not thoroughly composed state
of affairs God commands him to destroy utterly the Sinners, the Amalekites, and
all they had, chap. 15.3. But he for fear of the Peopel, ver. 24. i. e. least
they should be discontented with him, and upon his not harkening to them, ver.
24. obeying their Voice, be alienated from him and his Government, as a Man of
a stubborn inflexible Spirit, and uncounsellable, spared the best of the Cattle
for Sacrifices to God, ver. 15. A good and laudable end, had it otherwise been
duly circumstantiated. Yet this God calls Rebellion, ver. 23. and equals it
with the most horrid Crimes Witchcraft and Idolatry; and punishes it with the
utter rejection of Saul and his House from the Kingdom, 1 Samuel 20.17, 18. Now
Rebellion is Treason, to our power destroying the Sovereignty of God, therefore
his Being and Life. But an attempt against the Life of God is an Evil
astonishingly great and heinous. For 1. It Is in effect a hurling the whole
Creation into Ruin and Confusion, because it cannot possibly subsist a Moment
without him. But, 2. And, especially, it is a vertual annihilation of God
himself, i. e. of Infinite Perfection; and to design, nay to effect, the
destruction of all Created Nature, is nothing in comparison of acting toward
the destruction of the Diety. For to him the whole World is as nothing, all
Nations but as the drop of a Bucket, and the light small dust of the Balance,
Isa. 40.15. The World being but finite, to Murder and Ruin all of it entirely,
Angels, Men, Brutes, Inanimates, would but be a finite Evil. But God being an
Infinite Nature, a vertual destroying him must needs be an Evil vertually
infinite; and it is but Justice to proportion Punishments to Crimes; especially
where the only saving Remedy of infinite value is contemned, which is another
act of God-slaughter or Murder. The Holy Ghost therefore calls it a Crucifying
afresh the Son of God, and putting him to open shame, Heb. 6.6. And which
comprehends yet more Indignity, a treading under Foot the Son of God, and
accounting the Blood of the Covenant wherewith he (or rather it, viz. the
Covenant) was Sanctified (See Heb. 9.18, 19, 20, 22, 23.) a common (translated
unholy) thing, and doing despite to the Spirit of Grace, Heb. 10.29. Will thou
not then, Oh my Soul, dislike, disavow, relinquish, detest and abhor this
greatest of Evils; for God's sake whom it so highly affronts, and offends.
Shall any of this abominable cursed thing cleave unto thee? And will thou in
Affection adhere to it? Oh let the honorable Respect and Veneration thou
bear to that ever adorable infinite Nature, which thou unconceivably
wrongest by every Sin, prevail with and overcome thee, to a willingness to
debase and loath thy self for that Evil, that only Evil, Ezekiel. 7.5. Evil beyond
all superlative, even to an Hyperbole, Romans 7 13. How can thou do less than
prosecute with an indignant and implacable Malice those base sensual desires,
which have glu'd thee to the present, dreggy, dirty, Dunghill Contentments, of a
vain, ensnaring, turbulent, vexatious, defiling World, and diverted to a sordid
wallowing in the nasty puddle and sink of all Moral Pollutions those noble
Faculties which were formed by God to ascend above all Visibles, and ravish
themselves with the view and fruition of his own incomprehensible Glories. Oh
Folly and Frenzy not to be paralleled or equaled by all the Bedlams upon Earth!
to prefer the Devil and Hell, before God and Heaven. Thou art destitute of all
Sense, Reason, and Shame if it do not cut thee to the Heart, bleed out at thy
Eyes, blush in thy Face, and groan in thy Conscience. Will thou then, Oh my
Soul, in sincerity love thy Maker, who is infinitely worthy to beloved? Will thou from that Principle engage thy self to the utmost against every thing
which he hates? Shall he to whom thou owe thy Being, Beauty, Hopes, and
Happyness, have that interest in thee as to overruled all thy inward-Motions,
and byas them into a course perfectly contrary to that wherein they naturally
run, and convert all thy Powers into Irascibles, or passionate yet rational
Combatants, against those implacable Adversaries of the Divine and Humane
Nature, which turn the World upside down, and will ere long bury it in Ashes
and Ruins? Oh my Soul, What is there in thy Lusts thut thou can Love? What in
thy Sin that merits not a Vatinian hate? Is it not all Filth, Poison, Curse,
Hell? What, in a thing of so pestilent a Nature, can bewitch thee to dote upon
it? Why must that which is worse than all the Devils in the Regions of Infernal
Darkness, be advanced above thy Self, Virtue, Peace, Comfort, Christ and
Celestial Glory? Are thy reasonable Powers so abominably seduced and abused by
false and fallacious Shadows, and Phantasms, as to represent that in the dress
of Heaven, which is the very deformity, foam and venom of those dark Mansions
of Horror? Would any Man in his Wits ever choose and embrace those poysonful
Toads and Vipers to lie next his Heart, and be warm in his very inmost
Affections which to his in tolerable anguish and woe, will be gnawing out his
very Bowels for ever, and not intermit those torturings for a moment, but
augment them gradually to the uttermost?

But alas, this is only an Evil to thy self, a poor mean chip of Being. Hell is
but a sensible Comment and Paraphrase upon, indeed but an Epitome and Breviate
of those Evils which Sin attempts to inflict upon the Deity it self; which
being impassible, as a Rock of Marble and Adamant, reverberates and reflects
back upon the Head of the Sinner, those Arrows of Vengeance which were directed
against it. Were God capable of suffering, since he is infinitely sensible, Sin
would torture him more than all the punishments of Hell can possibly do the
Devils and Damned there. And the Son of God, for the same reason, and because
he suffered in such a measure, as to give satisfaction, which all the Eternal
Cruciations of the Damned can never do; did actually feel more evil in Sin,
though he never committed any, than there can be evil in the everlasting Woes
of Hell. And it is but just retaliation, to make the Violaters of that Law of
Grace, established by this Son of God, for the recovery of lost Man, and his
deliverance from the Wrath to come, even all unbelieving finally Impenitents,
to feel something of the evil of that wherein he felt much more, and from which
they will not be saved by him. Oh then my Soul, awake thy sense, and suffer
with him in this Life, under some paining doleful Reflections upon the evil and
sinfulness of thy Sin, as an offense and wrong to him. Oh be in bitterness for
it, for him, as one is in bitterness and mourns for his Firstborn. Let nothing
more afflict and vex thee, than the displeasingness of thy Sin to God, the
despite in it to the supreme Majesty of Heaven. Bleed over those Wounds thy Sin
has given the Lord of Life and Glory; be every day sick of that which made him
die; aggravate it to the height in thy Meditations; and look to Heaven with the
most ardent and passionate desires, that God would every day impress something
more of his own Image upon thee, that thou may hate Sin with the hatred of
God himself.

CHAP. VI. The Subject of Comfort, Inoffensive to Man.
2. AS the Psalmist maintained a powerful sense of Duty to God, so he walked in
a conscientious observance of his Duty to Man; as will be evident by
considering particulars, respecting his Equals, his Enemies, and his Superiors.

1. His Compassion to and Condolements of the Servants of God in Affliction,
intimated ver. 5, 6. with his Prayers for their deliverance by the God of
Revenges, ver. 1. and the comfortable relief and assurances he gives them, ver.
12, 13, 14, 15. testify his love to the Children of God. And 2. That he was
not awanting to his Enemies, appears in the instructive Rebukes he gives them,
ver. 8, 9, 10, 11. and the severe Cautions and Warnings he presents them,
throughout the Psalm. And often the denunciation of Wrath, by a terrible
brandishing the Flaming Sword of a Divine Threat, in the Eyes of Conscience,
becomes a means through God's Concurrence, either to convert or at least
restrain a bold and impudent Sinner. Neither is it usual for any Sinner, with
seriousness to look up to God, till he be first knocked down by the dreadful
menaces of the Law. Attrition is generally antecedent to Contrition, though
often the motions to Contrition be first presented. God himself humbles us ere
he will exalt us. When the gentle attractives of Grace cannot draw us, the
Terrors of his Wrath must drive us home to our Father's House. When God
prevails not by the Cords of a Man the Bands of Love, to win us into an
ingenuous acknowledgement of him; he will further try to vanquish our
stubbornness, by the direful Scorpions of his Indignation. And 'twas not
incongruous for the Psalmist to express a Love to the Persons even of wicked
Persecutors, in the same Methods that were made use of by his Maker. Lastly,
His conscience of Duty to his Superiors, is plain from ver. 21, 22. compared.
For though in ver. 21. he speaks indefinitely, and in general of condemning the
Righteous and Innocent Blood; yet the next ver. is determinate, and particular,
plainly demonstrating, that the Righteous and Innocent he spoke of were no
other than himself, or that at least he was one of them. They condemn the
Righteous and Innocent Blood; but the Lord is my defense. Impertinent, if it
were not, They condemn my Righteous Soul, my Innocent Blood. And of David this
was undoubtedly true as he elsewhere witnesses, Psalm. 59.3, 4. The Mighty are
gathered against me, not for my Transgression, nor for my Sin, O LORD. They run
and prepare themselves without my Fault. There they were gathered together,
here they gather themselves together; but 'twas against one whose Conscience
did not challenge him for any Crime that could merit this at their Hands. He
could appeal to the Lord, to be a Witness of his Righteousness and Innocence as
to them, who as to him were not Righteous and Innocent, but framed mischief
against him by a Law. But I cannot imagine, that in a solemn Address to God,
this Holy Person would profess to be so just and harmless, if it were only so
in outward semblance and act. Could he dissemble so grossly (that is act the
part of a Knave to God and Man) as to pretend these, and yet permit his Mind
and Heart inwardly to boil over in Gall and Bitterness, ready upon all
occasions to break out into Injury and Violence? Did he not know that the
inward Lust is as really a violation of Innocence, as the outward Act? And
durst he tell the Searcher of Hearts, that he was Innocent, when his Heart was
Guilty? Well that which was just and right he practiced, and his Tongue and
Soul did not move in a contradiction to his Hands. No hurt he did, offered no
wrong, either in Thought, Word or Deed. He was active for their good in
Righteousness; but not at all to recompense them Evil for Evil in Rancour and
Revenge. Had he taken a contrary Course? Had he been any other than passive
under their active Malice, it might have been a just impeach to both his
Righteousness and Innocence. Does he right that withholds from Man his due?
Does he no harm that acts to the prejudice and hurt of another? Let it then be
granted, that his activity in an opposite way would have rendered him Guilty.

Particularly, 'twas a Throne of Iniquity that did persecute him, for no Crime
of his own: Yet you see he does not in the least attempt or design to avenge
himself with his own Hand, or stretch it out against the Lord's Anointed, as he
speaks 1 Samuel 26.9, 11. He peremptorily determines, that it could not be done
without Guilt. Thus here he appropriates Revenge solely to God, as his Royalty
and Prerogative, ver. 1. it belongs to thee; and what then has any other to do
with it? This is a plain renunciation of all right to it himself: The
Repetition cannot but have a singular Emphasis. Twice, O Lord God of Revenges,
or to whom Vengeance belongs. Sure the Holy Penman would not have born up
himself in Conscience of Innocence, with respect either to God or Man, had he
harbored any designs to usurp the proper Honor of the God of Revenges, in
seeking by Violence to right himself, against that Throne of Iniquity, which
even by a Law endeavored to do him manifest wrong. So Sacred is the Majesty of
a Prince, that a good Conscience cannot be maintained in affronting it, though
it act Unrighteously, much less when it acts righteously under an absolute and
unlimited Monarchy. There Is no relief on Earth against a Throne, though of
Iniquity. From its unjust Judgment we have with the Psalmist liberty of Appeal
to Heaven; but to attempt otherways, is a manifest violation of the Rights both
of God and Man. Of God, by invading his Property. Of the King, for who made
thee his Judge, and set thee above him? Let the Supreme Monarch that rules be
what he will, Just or Unjust, Jew or Heathen, or Turk, or Papist, or
Protestant, true Worshiper, or Idolater, Christian, Antichristian, Religious,
Irreligious, Holy or Wicked, I find not any Warrant, either in the Word of God,
from Precept or Example, nor in any Ancient Father, not in any approved
Protestant Writer, for any Private Persons or Society of such, to oppose him by
Violence, but the quite contrary. Calvin I know is charged with Antimonarchical
Principles, but how justly will appear to any serious Considerer of that last
Chapter of his Institutions; where. 7. sub fin. he says, The Government of one
which least pleased the Great Wits of Old is commended by an eximious Testimony
of God, above the rest. And. 8. permits not private Men to dispute which is
best. And though he upon some accounts like Aristocracy, or a temper of that
and Polity, as best: Yet says, Non id quidem per se, Not of it self. But
because Kings rarely moderate themselves, etc. which plainly intimates that he
judged Monarchy the best in it self, though Monarchs not always the best: Yet
whatever be less eligible, ex vitio personarum, he will not allow so much as
the desire of a change in the Government set over us by God; but condemns it as
Foolish, Needless, and Noxious. Non modo stulta erit, and supervacua, sed
prorsus noxi^ etiam cogitatio. And how strict he is in requiring Subjection,
even to Tyrannical Princes, See. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31. which would be
too tedious to transcribe. That which some pick out to snarl at, in the end of.
31. De privatis hominibus semper loquor, Nam siqui nunc sint, etc. as though he
allowed the three States to resist the King: This cannot be concluded from his
Words, which are Hypothetical, limited with a Forte, and it is but pro officio
intercedere, and they are only Persons, [qui se Dei ordinatione libertatis
tutores positos norunt] which he does not forbid [non veto]. And let any Man of
sense judge whether this be a true or false Proposition. Those Persons who know
themselves ordained of God to be Guardians of Peoples Liberties ought to
interceed according to the tenor of their Office, with ferocient Princes, in
the Peoples behalf, and not connive at their Oppressions. To make pro Officio,
contra Officium suum, is wise Interpretation; but since he confines them within
the boundaries of their Office, or Duty, he must be a very Spider indeed, that
can such Poison out of it. But that may seem more important which we find here,
ver. 16. He demands, Who will rise up for me, etc. Whatever he meant doubtless
he judged it consistent with Innocence, and a good Conscience. To clear which,
1. The Hebrew to a Word runs thus, Who will rise to me, with the Evil Doers?
Who will stand to me, with the Workers of Iniquity? Now make what you can of it
for the Doctrine of opposing Princes. Admit that [(...)] may be Translated [For
me] or [in my behalf] as it is Genesis 23.8, etc. Yet (...) does not import
Opposition and Contrariety, but Conjunction and Association; being of the
kindred of (...) People. And it is not (that I remember) any where in the Bible
beside translated [against.] In all places where the Holy Ghost would signify
the Enmity or Contrariety of Persons, or things, another Preposition is used,
either [(...)] to select one place of Multitudes, because very like the Phrase
here, Psalm. 34.16. The Face of the LORD is (...) against them that do evil,
etc. Or [(...)] to look no farther than this Psalm, and but two Verses below my
Text, ver. 21. (...). They troop against the Soul of the Just. It Is not sure
for nothing that the Spirit of God here lays aside the usual manner of
expressing himself. The reason is above our reach. But may not this account bid
fair toward a Probability? That possibly some Persons were with Saul, and his
Pertakers, from whom the Psalmist had reason to expect better things, than from
those who were his professed Enemies. The sense then will be, Which of you all,
that being born down with the stream of the times, associate with ill Men, will
now rise and stand for me, to interpose and speak in my behalf, as once did the
truly noble Jonathan, a Friend incomparable? 2. The end for which he expected
they should rise and stand up, is not expressed in that Verse; but the next has
it express [a help] Unless the LORD (supply out of the former Verse) [had risen
or stood] a help to me, etc. For since those Words will make good sense, why
should aliene be inserted? Therefore on the other hand, make up the former
Verse, by adding that out of this which was the end of their expected rising
and standing, and it is thus, Who will rise or stand a help to me with evil
Doers, etc. Now consider the quality of this help he expected, was it Forcible,
Violent, Vengeful, by Arms and Bloodshed? No, this Psalm repudiates it in his
appeals to the God of Revenges: And 1 Samuel 24.12, 13. and 26.8, 9, 10, 11, 16,
23. He disclaims and abhors it as sinful; urgently dehorts from it, and rebukes
the temptation to it, when irritated by his Followers, and invited by a fair
opportunity and plansible argument. Behold the day of the which the LORD said
unto thee, Behold I will deliver thine Enemy into thy hand, that thou may do
to him as shall seem good unto thee. It was then Moral help that he expected.
Help by Counsel and Persuasion, not by Power and Compulsion: Such as he had
from God, which was not a coactive, but a gentle, rational, and unforcible
bowing the wills of Adversaries to desist. God did not constrain, but incline
the Mind and Heart of Saul to cease the pursuit at Selah Hammalekoth; 1 Samuel
23.26, 27, 28. To leave him untoucht, and return to his place, when by an
experiment he was convinced of his Innocence, chap. 24.22. and a second chap.
26.25. And since he foresaw that the LORD would cut of those Children of Men
who stirred up Saul against him, 1 Samuel 26.19. And here doubles the expression
of his assurance thereof, ver. 23. It Is madness to think that the aid he
expected from Men was to usurp upon God, and take the work out of his hands.
Therefore when the Amalekite told him he had killed Saul it cost him his Life,
2 Samuel 1.14, 15, 16.


The Psalmist then was a Man that made Conscience of his Allegiance to his
Prince, though wicked, unjust, and a Persecutor. No Man can maintain together
Disloyalty and Innocence. The Office of Kings remains unvitiated, under the
viciousness of their Persons. Nero was the Minister of God, Romans 13. in respect
of Authority, though the Devils Servant in his private Capacity. Subjection and
Loyalty is due to the Throne, and the Man in it, not to the Beast in the
bottomless Pit of Immorality and Barbarousness. Our Duty requires an owning him
Politically, rather than Ethically, i. e. we must of necessity be subject to
his Power, acting as the Vicegerent of God, and here obey him in every thing.
But we must not be actively subject to his Lusts, acting as the Bondslave of
Satan, nor therein obey, or imitate him. Yet do not his Crimes to us divest him
of his Right, any more than a Father. I find no exceptions or difference in the
Precept, Et ubi lex non distinguit non est distinguendum. Where the Law limits
not, we must not. Nothing that we suffer from Superiors can null the bond of
the First Command. The Gospel as well as the Law obliges to be subject for
Conscience sake, Romans 13.5. Ye must needs be subject not only for Wrath, i. e.
for fear of Punishment; but for Conscience sake; i. e. out of obedience to
God's Command, and from sense of Duty. In sum, since the Powers that be are
God's Ordinations, we must obey all their lawful Commands, submit to their just
Censures and Punishments, pay them all their dues both of Reverence and
Maintenance. But since there is an Authority paramount to theirs, which has the
first and supreme right over us, and which we must obey, rather than Men; if we
be commanded to do any thing forbidden or forbid to do any thing commanded by
God, we must not obey, but be willing to suffer without resistance. For whoever
resists the Power resists the Ordinance of God, and they that resist, shall
receive to themselves [(...)] Judgment to Condemnation, ver. 2. Now this
resistance consists not in a modest refusal to do or not do what these Powers
may enjoin, contrary to the Injunctions of God; but in a disorderly, or
forcible opposition to their Persons or Lawful Commands; [(...)] being to set
up an order contrary to their order, which is here reported damnable, i. e.
when their order is not against the order of God; their Laws not opposite to
his. I know not but that this is a sound Rule, That the Higher Powers are to be
disobeyed in nothing, except it be as plainly forbidden in Scripture or Nature,
as disobedience to those Powers is. I do not say expressly forbid, for
sometimes a Consequence may be as plain as a Proposition. But if a Man be not
as fully satisfied from clear Evidence, that he cannot obey the Magistrate
without disobeying God; as he may be satisfied, that he must obey the
Magistrate, in all things where God is not disobeyed; he cannot disobey with a
good and safe Conscience. For it is a Sin to disobey where God interposes not,
as well as a Sin to obey where he forbids. Nothing can take off the obligation
to obey, but only Divine Authority, which laid it on. If you are not sure that
you have God's Warrant to disoblige you from Obedience, you cannot be sure that
you do not sin. For what can repeal God's Law to obey, Cautissimi cujusque
praeceptum est: Quod dubitas, ne feceris.
but only God. And if you be not sure that you do not sin, you certainly do
sin, i. e. act doubtingly not in Faith, which is contrary to a good Conscience,
Romans 14. ult.

Since then the Command to obey is indubitable, what must I do when the matter
commanded is not indubitably Lawful or Unlawful? If the thing in reality be
lawful, I sin in disobeying the Power, if unlawful, I sin in disobeying God.
Suppose I have weighty reasons to induce me to believe the unlawfulness, and
but common to establish the lawfulness; only they are enforced with the weight
of Authority; I am not satisfied beyond all scruple, that I shall not sin
against God in obeying Man; yet the Arguments from God's Law in Scripture,
Nature, and the Reason of the thing would balance my Judgment, did not that
inartificial Argument interpose, the Judgment of many Learned and Reverend Men,
the Judgment of the Public Conscience as of late it loves to be called. How
shall I steer in this Case?

Ans. 1. The highest deference is to be made to the Public Judgment of
Authority, and the Private Judgment of the Learned; and I am obliged to suspect
my own Judgment, and Reason, when it runs counter to theirs; and proceed with
the greatest Caution and Impartiality, in forming my Sentiments and Arguments,
and beware of Pride and Obstinacy; give a full testimony of my Humility and
willingness to be informed, and use all possible means for that purpose.

2. It Is a very unsafe resolution of this Case, which I find in the Reverend
and Judicious Dr. Saunderson, Better obey doubtingly, than disobey doubtingly;
as allowing a less Sin to avoid a greater. For the Apostle, Romans 14. ult.
determines, that to act doubtingly is a Sin, immediately against Conscience,
mediately against God. For since Conscience suspects the Act to be a Sin
against God, yet admits it against its own sense, it is all one to it as if it
were really a Sin against God, though perhaps it be not. The Act is against the
supposed Authority of God, which at present the Conscience takes to be real,
therefore this distemper of Conscience is as real Rebellion against God, as if
it acted against the clearest Light imaginable. For apparent and real to
Conscience are all one, though not in themselves.

The Law of God in General, makes Sin and Duty, but not immediately to me in
particular, whilst I am inculpably ignorant of it: Promulgation being essential
to the obligatoriness of a Law. Except it be so published that none without
their fault can be ignorant of it, they are without fault in the violation of
it. The next and immediate ground of the binding of a Law, is the apprehension
and conviction of Conscience, that it is imposed by just Authority, with an
intention to bind as a Law; or that it is a Law obligatory in its own Nature.
Not that Laws stand or fall by the Judgment of Conscience, as if Conscience's
judging them to be or not be Laws, gave or deprived them of their Obligatory
Power; but that if there be sufficient light to make it out to Conscience (not
wittingly and willingly prejudiced and blinded) that this is, or is not, the
will of the Lawgiver, supreme or subordinate; accordingly it is, or is not,
obliged to receive and own this as Law. For if it be clear to any rational
consideration what the Legislators Mind is, with his intention to bind to
observance; this is a sufficient Promulgation, and does immediately found the
Obligatoriness to us. In short an unknowable Law binds none; because not to be,
and not to be known or knowable, is to us all one. But as soon as known, the
Law binds the knower. For as Dr. Saunderson well determines, The present Light
in the Mind for the time being, is the next and immediate Rule of Conscience;
though not the supreme and adequate. And if this Light be derived from, and
conformable to its prime and highest Rule, the Will of God revealed in Nature
or Scripture, in acting according to it, it is a good and right Conscience; but
bad when acting against its Light and Sentiments, though they be erroneous, i.
e. contrary to the revealed mind of God. For an erring Conscience hampers and
entangles a Man, though it really oblige not; because the Man judges that
really to be the Mind of God, which is indeed an Error, though to him unknown
so to be. Finally acting against an erring Conscience is formally evil, thongh
materially good. Acting according to an erroneous Conscience, is formally good,
but materially evil. Acting against a well informed Conscience both materially
and formally evil. Therefore that a Man may act without present and future
rebuke of Conscience, both his Light and his Act must be according to Rule. For
then only it is both materially and formally Good, and except it be both, it is
not acceptable to God; except it be both, the Man is not (though he may fancy
himself to be) really Innocent.

3. Where therefore both to obey and disobey is questionable, a Man must not
sin against his Conscience, doubting about the matter commanded, to avoid
sining against his Conscience, doubting about the Authority commanding. For
both are carefully to be eschewed; but, 1. If the Command require not present
observance, but permit a suspense for a season, a Man must diligently use all
means, with all speed and readiness of Mind, to get his doubts one way or other
resolved, out of the revealed Will of God, which is the Rule of Conscience. For
that which ties Conscience must loose it, or it is fast for ever. As it has a
Rule to bind, so it must have a Rule to unbind it. Pretended Conscience without
Rule is but Conceit: Conscience against Rule, Corruption. 2. If no time be
allowed for suspense, or if in the use of the utmost means no Resolution can be
obtained; a Man must quietly and patiently submit to the Penalty. To suffer
though for an erring Conscience is no sin, if the best have been done to direct
it aright; but it is always a sin to act against Conscience, whether resolved or
doubting, as an evident and impudent affronting the real or supposed Authority
of God, owned by Conscience. If then the Authorities and Powers set over thee
be good, and command Lawful things, thou must be subject in Active Obedience;
else thou sinnest both against God and the King, and thy Conscience too, if it
know them to be such. If the Supreme Magistrates be Erroneous, Heretical,
Wicked, Tyrannical, thou must be still subject, in Active Obedience to their
Lawful Commands, in Passive to their Unlawful. To a Tyrant with Title, both in
Body and Mind. To a Tyrant without Title, in Body. For thy Mind and Heart must
follow the Title and Right though thy outward Man be enslaved to the
Usurpation. Subjection then is absolutely indispensible to all Powers
whatsoever. Even as it is in the case of Parents and Children, Masters and
Servants; which therefore are together with Prince and People, etc.
comprehended under one general Name in the Fifth Command, and the Duties of the
Inferiors under the common notion of Honor. That we may rationally carry the
particular Instances of that Honor from any one sort to all the rest
respectively, mutatis mutandis. And possibly this may be one reason of St.
Peter's subjoyning the Duties of Servants immediately after those of Subjects,
1 Epist. 2.13. He requires submission to Kings, etc. 1. For the Lord's sake. 2.
As the Will of God, ver. 15.3. accounting this a well doing, which 4. will
silence the Ignorance of foolish Men.


Then that Servants be subject with all fear, not only to the good and gentle,
but even froward Masters, as 1. Thank-worthy. 2. An exercise of Conscience
toward God, ver. 19. though they suffer wrongfully: And 3. Honorable, though
it is no honor to bear buffetings for Faults, ver. 20.4. Acceptable to God. 5.
A thing to which Christians are called. 6. A piece of Conformity to Christ,
ver. 20. These are Precepts plain enough, and as strongly enforced with
Argument, that a Man had need to be secure that he have an ample and clear
demonstration of a release, from the obligation of them, if he intend not to
violate his Conscience, in a non-observance of them. From Servants, parity, nay
superiority of Reason will carry the Rule to Subjects, in as much as the
benefit of the Public is a more noble and necessary end, than that of a
Private Family, and the neglect thereof more fatal and dangerous, issuing in
Blood, Ruin and Confusion.

And now seeing Laws so strict and severe are imposed upon Inferiors by God,
necessitating their obedience; a singular Prudence, Tenderness and Conscience
is required in Superiors as they respect their own Salvation, to see that they
impose nothing by their Authority, that may entangle Men in Sin or Snares, as
understanding that they are only Lords over their outward Man, not their
Consciences, and that compulsion to Sin renders the Compeller a Principal, and
therefore if he reform not liable to a great share of the Damnation. However
the Subject Party may with a good Conscience obey, (as in paying unreasonable
Taxes) where the Supreme does not maintain a good Conscience in commanding, but
grievously sins both against Man and God.

I have made a large Excursion, (if that be not an impertinent Word, in so
pertinent a case) 1. To obviate a Slander, as though we generally entertained
odd and unsound Principles, contrary to the Duty of Subjects. 2. To direct the
tenderest part of Man, in the tenderest point of general and present
Concernment. 3. To correct the unsound and unsafe Principles of two Extremes,
1. Of some, who needlessly to advance Authority, do too much debase Conscience.
2. Of others who in an ungrounded deference to Conscience, too much depreciate
and depress Authority. I heartily subscribe to the Doctrine of Romans 13. in the
full latitude of its sense, and readily acknowledge, that Romans 14. follows
after it; but must not deny that the one as well as the other is part of
Canonical Scripture, of the Christian Law, of perpetual Obligation, nor affirm
that one is inconsistent with, and abrogates the other.

The chief Exercise of Conscience toward Men is toward the chief of Men.
God's Vicegerents on Earth may claim the first respect from his Vicegerent in
our Souls; but must not engross all entirely. We in Conscience are obliged to a
further Duty to Inferiors and Equals, nay even Enemies; in all things to seek
their good, that is Righteousness, in nothing to do them hurt, that is Innocence:
In every thing to please them for their good to Edification, Romans 15.1, 2, 3.
that is Perfection. It Is true, I am a Devil, if I humor Men in their Lusts,
indulge them in their Impieties and Sensualities: A Dog if I fawn upon and
flatter them in their Extravagances, for my own ends. A senceless unprofitable
Block, if I be altogether unconcerned. My first care must be, not to lead them
into Sin or Temptation; my next, to induce them to love and practice Goodness;
always having an Eye at their Temporal Good as well as Spiritual, though this
mainly, else shall I violate a Divine Law, Gal. 6.10. and therefore violate my
Innocence and Conscience, and therefore my Comfort. I am obliged to give no
offense to Jew, Gentile, nor the Church of God, 1 Cor. 10.32. Not to put a
stumbling block or occasion of falling in my Brother's way, Romans 14.13. and a
most dreadfully severe Sanction urges and enforces this Law against Offenses,
Matthew. 18.7.

By Scandal or Offense to Men, I do not mean what merely tends to displease,
but to defile: Words, or Deeds, or Omissions, inducing others to Sin, either by
acting against the Law of God and Conscience, or forbearing to do their Duty.
The World is at such a pass, that a Man can do nothing but 'twill displease,
and even Professors of the highest form in their own Imaginations, (who
therefore should be more candid and aequanimous) bitterly storm and censure
others, who will not both against their Reason and Conscience please them, in
their unreasonable humors. This is not to be valued at all. Mine own Light and
Reason must be the Principle to guide my Conscience, according to the Rules of
God's Word, in the choice of such Methods of pleasing Men for their good to
Edification, Romans 15.1. (which by God's Grace I will endeavor) that I may not
be one of the branded Menpleasers, Gal. 1.10. and plague my own Soul for ever
by pleasing another for his hurt, and to his Damnation. If any Man think to
impose his Judgment, Fancy, or Humor upon me, as the guide of my Conscience
herein, he really scandalizes me. If he do not convince me out of the Will of
God, which is the sole Rule of Conscience, he lays a stumbling block before me,
to induce me to sin, merely that I may gratify his Imperiousness, Pride, and
Capriciousness. I will keep my way, and follow my Light and my Rule; if any be
displeased with it, let them bark on, and bite too, it hurts me not. I Will give
away my Goods, and my Labors, and my Liberty, yea and even my Life, as far as
I can, with a good Conscience, to please, so as spiritually to profit; but give
away my Light, my Rule, my Conscience, I will not, I dare not, I cannot. It Is a
double scandal given first to me, when Men would thus Biass me, to a blind
Servitude, unto their Wills; another to them, when in a fond assentatiousness,
I become a Pander to their lascivient Humors, and imperious Imaginations. My
Soul is of a more noble Extraction and Temper, than to debase it self, to the
turn-skin trade of a Parasite, like a Serpent, with the same Tongue to lick and
kill, or Great Alexander's Miss, who was fed with nothing but Poisons that her
kisses might be deleterious and Murder him. No lighter would my Crime be should
I violate my Conscience, in being a pleaser of Man rather than God.

Neither therefore in this nor any other way will I scandalize my Brother
knowingly, nor must he exercise that Tyranny over my Conscience, as to give
other Law to it, besides what God has prescribed in Nature or Scripture. My
Practice shall be at his Devotion, as far as it does not entrench upon my duly
regulated Judgment, and wary will I be, that no unweighed Sentiments arrest my
Mind, and misguide my Conscience. I Will have an Eye, and an Ear, and a Heart
open to receive all Truth freely, without Prejudice or Partiality, and this
from any hands whatever, examining and proving all things, as fully as the
infirmity of my intellect will permit. But a slavery to the Opinions of Men
against the balance of mine own clear and distinct Reasonings I abhor.

1. I will not do any thing which is every way indifferent, if it be likely in
it self, or be found by experience of a tempting Nature and Tendency, If any
Man, either through the quality of my Act, or the power of my Example, in
matters of that nature, be drawn into Sin; or if it be very probable that he
will, upon such inducements, either transgress the Law of God, or imitate me
with a doubting Conscience; here will I freely forbear the use of my Liberty,
to prevent his Sin, that I may not make it my own by Participation; but then I
must not omit any known Duty, nor commit any known Sin my self, though possibly
it might prevent his Sin. For I must not venture my own Soul by dishonouring
God, to preserve ano. Do Evil, that Good may come, Romans 3.8. 2. But if in
indifferent things, my Liberty be determined, as by the command of a Lawful
Superior, I am in a greater strait. For not to obey the Magistrate in Lawful
things is a Sin; and by my Practice to induce my weak Brother to Sin, in
imitating me, is also a Sin; What Rule has my Conscience in this Perplexity? It
must be considered,
1. That my weak Brother's forbearance to obey, in a lawful thing is a Sin
against God, though not his Conscience; and therefore my forbearance will
edify him in Sin against the Law of God, that commands Obedience, although it
prevent the Sin against his Conscience; and the error of this cannot null the
Sin against that. So that forbear or not forbear I scandalize him, in the one
really, in the other putatively; when he acts against his Conscience he thinks
he sins against God in the matter done, but does not; in disobeying Authority
he sins against God, yet thinks it not. In this he sins immediately against
God, because he disobeys God's civil Vicegerent in Public, in the other he
sins mediately against God, because he disobeys his Spiritual Vicegerent in
Private. Now I conceive that my way here is to do my Duty in obeying the
Magistrate, wherein I sin not, whereas I doubly sin if I do not. 1. Against the
Law of Subjection and Obedience, engaging me to the Magistrate. 2. The Law of
Charity that requires me not to scandalize my Brother. If to gratify his
scrupulosity I forbear, I do certainly know that he sins in disobeying. But
it is only an accidental scandal may or may not happen, that he should be
emboldned by my Example, to act against his Conscience.

To throw this off the Stage, enter Christian Liberty; which to restrain is
Sin, though by a Person in Authority, having Laws under him.

Ans. True, but then be sure that it be indeed Christian Liberty, least
asserting it forfeit and lose your civil and corporal Liberty. Now because a
right understanding and use of Christian Liberty has a special influence into
Comfort and Peace of Conscience. Let Us a little consider it.

Let it be heedfully observed, that true Christian Liberty does not consist
merely in the indifferent use or omission of things not commanded nor
forbidden, but in the release of Conscience from an obligation to do or omit
some things, under pain of Damnation. Thus are we set at Liberty from the
rigor of the Law or Covenant of Works, which required perfect, personal and
perpetual Obedience, upon peril of Death. The Covenant of Grace does not
disoblige from such obedience, but from the peril of Death, though we come
short, provided we act sincerely. This is the main of our Christian Liberty.
Not a freedom to do or not do, but a freedom from Penalty, upon an easter
Condition. And this is all our Hope, Comfort, and Salvation.

Under the Jewish Law were included many Ceremonials, things in their own
nature neither Good nor Evil; yet that Law made the omission of them Sin,
exposing to Damnation. Christ by his Gospel has set us at Liberty. How? What,
to do or omit them at Pleasure? No such matters. For then 'twere lawful to
Sacrifice, to keep the Passover, to Circumcise, etc. as well as forbear. No,
the Liberty granted us must be doubly distinguished.

1. Into Natural and Adventitious.

The Indifferency of the use or omission of Lawful things, is a part of Natural
not Adventitious Liberty, which understand thus.

Some things which were in their own Nature lawful to be used, or not used, God
determined on one side, by positive Law, under the Mosaical Dispensation: But
over and above there were things made the matter of positive Laws, which would
never have entered into the Imaginations of Men, had not the first notices
thereof come from God. Who could ever have thought of such a thing as
Circumcision, etc. had not the first Injunction thereof proceeded from Heaven.
Our Natural Liberty did consist in a freedom from that, and like Yoaks. But not
in an indifferency to use or not use them. So then, by the Law of our Native
Liberty, we may use or not use some things without Sin; there is an indifferency
on both sides; as to take up a Straw or let it alone, etc. Yet also the
indifferency does naturally lie only on one side, in other things as to
continue the Body in its Natural State, without Circumcision. But God for wise
and holy purposes having abridged the Jews of this Natural Liberty for a
season; when the reason of those Laws ceased, was pleased to abolish them,
whereby by we became reinstated in our natural Right and Freedom, which
otherwise those Laws, when devulged to us, would have taken from us. Now the
reason of imposing those Laws was to succor the infirmity of the Jews in two
things.

1. In Faith, of which nature are all the things imposed which have a Typical
significancy, as Sacrifices, etc. 2. In Manners, of which sort are all that
have a moral significancy, as Meats, Washings, etc.
But now Jesus the substance of those Typical Shadows, being come in the Flesh,
the Laws concerning them were ipso facto vacated; and by the more plentiful
effusion of his Spirit of Truth and Grace, thoroughly furnishing Men for exact
Moral Goodness, he took away the necessity both of remembering us thereof, and
eeking it out by Washings, Circumcision, etc. The Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament as a complete Law from the Spirit of Truth, doing the one more
sufficiently than a few dumb signs; and the New Nature communicated by the
Spirit of Grace, together with Christ's Merit all-sufficiently doing the other.
This is the Liberty I call

Adventitious, not that it is new but newly given; not that we never had it, but
had it restored, after an interruption. During the restraint 'twas sin to use
it. To Christ we owe, that now we may again use it without sin, as at first
before God abridged it; and this is that we call Christian Liberty in things
indifferent as contradistinct to Natural. For Christ as Redeemer did not
parchase our Natural Liberty, but gave it as Creator: It Is only the
Adventitious that we enjoy, by virtue of his Merit; it is only this that we are
entrusted with the Preservation and Vindication of, by the New Testament.

2. Liberty is either Positive or Negative.

The former consists in an indifferency to act this, or that, or the other way
at pleasure. The latter in being loosed from the obligation to act. That which
Christ the Redeemer bestows, is chiefly of this latter sort. We are disobliged,
loosed from the Ceremonial Bands wherewith the Jews were tied, so as we need
not to act as they, under that Economy. It Is no sin to us to omit; incurrs no
Penalty. And this freedom from the guilt and punishment due for Omission, is
indeed a privilege, which constitutes the very essence of the Covenant of
Grace, in one part of it. The tenor thereof in its Negative part being this,
viz. Thy Imperfections, Failures, Omissions, shall not be imputed as Sins
effecting thy Damnation. This for want of a better Word I call Negative
Liberty. Although thou do not Circumcise, do not Sacrifice, do not Eat a
Paschal Lamb, do not Wash, etc. thou do not sin, thou shall not be cut off
from thy People, from my Heaven. This and none other in these indifferent
Matters is Christian Liberty, the Purchase and Gift of Jesus Christ our Lord.

So that except Magistrates do again introduce the Ceremonial Law in whole or
part, they do not at all touch upon Christian Liberty, but Natural only, which
they are allowed to restrain in civil things, upon just occasions, as is
evident from not only Scripture and Reason, but the practice of all Nations,
and Ages, and Families, For would it not be sweet to hear a Child or Servant
reply to their Superiors, commanding them to light a Candle, etc. It Is not
lawful for you to restrain my Liberty. Had you not commanded I might have
obeyed, but your imposing has made it unlawfal. Oh dainty, delicate Reasoning!
Yet such as some fob off their Consciences withal. It Is the same thing, when
they command in the Circumstantials of Divine Worship, etc. I charge you to be
present at Eight of the Clock, Morning and Evening, to join in Family Prayer,
etc. No, had you not imposed a time 'twould have been lawful, now it is not.
Away with this Foolery.

In Civils then, and Circumstantials of Spirituals the Magistrate has a Power,
not merely directive but legislative, to whose Laws all are obliged to be
subject in Conscience of the Divine Law, the Fifth Command.

Now suppose the Magistrate by a settled Law have enjoined some things, in
their own nature indifferent, which, 1. Induce some to act against their
doubting Consciences, for fear of Penalty; whereas. 2. Others are well
satisfied in the lawfulness of their Obedience, and accordingly do actually
obey; but some may be induced by their example to obey with a hesitant
Conscience. What is advisable?

1. Though the greatest tenderness ought to be exercised toward Men's
Consciences, and singular Prudence be requisite in Governors to direct them in
the choice of Laws, that they may obtain with the greatest inoffensiveness; yet
will not Men's being scandalized be a sufficient evidence of the sinfulness of a
Law, or ground to reverse it, unless the scandal be very general, among the
best, and wisest, or something in the matter or sanction of the Law be at least
a moral cause thereof. For what can so politickly or wisely be devised which
Men of soft Heads, and hot Hearts, may not make occasion of Sin; that there
would never be an end of making and repealing Laws, if Men can but pretend
scandal, and who beside God knows what is pretense merely, what not? 2. If fear
of the Penalty occasion the Scandal, from a Law about Indifferents; those are
not faultless who have not proportioned the Penalty to the Crime, an
indifferent tolerable pain to an indifferent fault. 3. Yet to be scandalized or
act against my Conscience, for fear of suffering, is a Sin, the cause or
inducement whereof will not excuse though it may extenuate it. Will it avail a
Man to say; I violated my Conscience through Fear, any more than I vitiated my
Neighbors Wife through Lust; when the Fear and Lust themselves are Sins as
well as those they introduce. Therefore the Rule is, Suffer rather than Sin. 4.
Either it is evident de facto, that some are scandalized through a Law, or
Example, or it is morally certain 'twill follow; or probable; or only possible.
This last and probability, except the presumption be strong, are not to be
regarded.
1. If the Law cannot be reversed without prejudice to public order, nor a
dispensation obtained, Men must not defame Laws, but submit. For the Law does
not necessitate Sin, there is an outgate by suffering. Yet if the Law be
needless; it is the first duty in the use of lawful means, to endeavor its
Abrogation, or get a Dispensation, which if not feisible, I say with Calvin,
Instit. lib. ult. c^ult;. 231. med.
No other Mandate is given us, but of obeying and suffering. 2. To obey the
Magistrate is a duty upon an affirmative Precept, which not binding ad semper,
if my obeying induce my Brother to Sin, out of tenderness, I will suspend for a
season, though I suffer; in the interim endeavoring 1. To give him
satisfaction in the lawfulness of my Practice, and the necessity of my Duty,
which if it convince not, 2. To demonstrate that my Practice, enforces not his
Imitation, since he may forbear and undergo the Penalty, as I have been willing
to do for his sake. 3. To let him understand that there may be danger of
scandalizing my Superiors, i. e. irritating them to wrath, and to exercise
greater severities, both against me as a Sinner against my own Conscience,
which is satisfied of my duty to obey, even whilst I suspend; and also against
him and others as obstinate, and unsatisfiable, Wranglers, and disobedient to
just Authority without just Reason, the matter of the Law being indifferent, ex
hypothesi. This Consideration has weight, we both hear and feel it, and may at
least balance the alledgement, that my compliance will edify the Magistrate in
the sin of Persecution.
Lastly, If notwithstanding he continue obstinate, since to me it is clear, that
only Fancy, not Reason, bottoms his disobedience; I will protest against his
Pertinacy, earnestly dehort him from acting against his pretended Conscience,
which indeed is only blind Opinion, return to my Duty, and leave him to the
Law.
For although my Charity may induce me for a season to be willing to suffer for
his sake, yet my Conscience will not permit me to do it always. Not that I
pretend Conscience to prevent suffering; but because active Obedience, where I
can is the primary intention of God in the Law that subjects me to the
Magistrate, and therefore the first and main office of Conscience. Passive
Obedience is not the intention of the Law giver at all, in the Law as a Law, as
being not enjoined therein; it is only the enforcement of it, as a remedy
against its violation; the hedge about it. 'Twill be no plea before God, to
justify my breach of his Laws, that I was willing to be damned; but an
aggravation of my sin, that I chose so great an Evil as the Punishment, rather
than submission to so great a Good as the Duty. I am bound to suspend my
Obedience, if I can, to prevent my Brothers Sin; but not sinally to deny my
Obedience and therein sin my self; to prevent his suffering, that is, damn my
Soul, to save his Skin.

Will thou then, O my Soul, herein follow Christ, and perfectly subjugate thy
self to that noble Law of Universal Love to thy Brother, whom thou have seen,
that the immortal God whom thou have not seen may not charge thee with
Hypocrifie in thy pretensions of Love to himself. Live thou must, thou shall,
in true Love to thy Neighbor, or renounce all Love to thy self. Profess and
practice, as thou love thy Purity, thy Peace, thy Salvation, a sincere and
cordial, not only Subjection and Honor, but Affection to thy Prince,
Benevolence, Charity, Beneficence to all Men, out of Conscience to God, as thou will answer it before his Judgment Seat. Whatever thou would have others to
do to thee, do thou to them; what thou would not have them to do to thee, do
not to them. Make their case thine, and act toward them as thy self. Do good to
all, but ospecially the Household of Faith. Seek their Temporal, Spiritual and
Eternal Welfare, as thine own; and do not think to patronize thy regardlessness
of them, by a careless sluggish unconcernedness in thine own nearest concerns;
but elevate thine affectionate care for thy self to the utmost degree of
Perfection, on purpose, that according to the second great Command, thou may
have a more excellent measure and rule, whereby to square thy affectionate
regard of others.

But it is not enough, O my Soul, to partake of a Moral, thou must aspire after
a Divine Nature, as well as escape, or fly from the Corruption in the World in
Lust, or Concupiscence, 2 Pet 2.4. To love thy self into Sobriety or Prudent
self Government, to cloth thy self with a Robe of Righteousness and Mercy in
thy dealings with Men, is not enough, is not the full and adequate Doctrine and
Duty taught by the Grace of God which brings Salvation, Titus 2.11. There must
be superadded not only a denying Ungodliness so as to crucify it; but a living
Godly, leading a Religious Life toward God in Love, Faith, Fear, Honor,
Universal Acknowledgment, out of Conscience. For what Conscience in dealing
well with Men, and ill with God? that is with the Subjects fairly, and not with
the Sovereign? What Conscience in breaking the first Article betwixt God and
Man, which is to give him the sole command in his House, thy Heart that living
Temple, which is the sum of the First Commandment? What Conscience to dwell in
his House and pay him no Rent? No external Acknowledgment and Worship, in
Public, in thy Family, in thy Closet? the sum of the Second Command. What
Conscience whilst tender of thy own Name to be regardless of Gods? forbid in
the Third Command. What Conscience in stealing time from God's reserved part,
when he allows thee so much beside? the Fourth Command violated. Be never so
sober, just, free, kind to Man-ward, if thou respect not God, O my Soul, thou
have no Conscience. For where there is no Godliness, there can be no Conscience.
Oh, make it thy first and main business to approve thy self to God. Thou can
never be true to thy self or Man if thou be a Traitor to God. Thou have no
greater assistance in thy dutifulness to Men, than a due regardfulness of God.
Thou can have no better evidence of a due regardfulness of God, than thy
conscientious dutifulness to Men. Thou forfeit'st the reputation of thy
Religiousness toward God, if thou be not Righteous toward Man, and of thy
Righteousness, if not Religious. Like Hippocrates's Twins, these are born and
act, and sicken, and die together. That Is the 4th ingredient of the Psalmist's
Character; he upheld universal Innocence and Integrity of Conscience.

CHAP. VII. The Subject of Comfort, Publicly Spirited, etc. True Christianity,
etc.
5. THis Holy Man was of a Public Spirit, living under a Catholic sense of,
and care for the common concerns of the Church of God. Lamenting its Miseries,
ver. 5, 6. longing and praying for its redemption from them by the Power and
Justice of God, ver. 1, 2, 3, 4, 20. and encouraging his own and its hopes
thereof, by a serious reflection upon the Divine Attributes, ver. 1, 2, 8, 9,
10, 11. Providence, ver. 12, 13. and his own particular experience, ver. 17,
18, 19, 21. withal by a Prophetic Spirit foretelling it, ver. 14, 15, 23. all
which are plain in the Psalm, and plain demonstrations of a Heart enlarged in
its desires, and endeavors for Public Good. A good Soul is not well at ease
when the Servants of God are ill at ease. The Sufferings of the Church are made
its own by a sympathizing Spirit, which is afflicted in all its Afflictions,
and cannot enjoy Prosperity, or it self in Contentation, when God's Children
are groaning under the Cross: Mourns with Mourning, Rejoices with rejoicing
Sion, and uses its interest in Heaven, to work upon the Bowels of the
ever-blessed Son of God, that he may demonstrate his tender Commiserations
toward his own Members in Misery, by turning the course of his Providence. And
that this is a proper method to Comfort we see, Isai. 66.10, 11. Rejoice ye
with Jerusalem, and be glad with her, all ye that love her, rejoyee for joy
with her, all ye that mourn for her; that ye may suck and be satisfied, with
the Breasts of her Consolations, that ye may milk out and be delighted with the
abundance of her Glory. God had a People, a Heritage, which though Afflicted
and broken in pieces here, ver. 5. yet he would not cast off nor forsake,
either in respect of Affection or Communion, ver. 14. So neither must we. For
it is by Virtue of our Union and Communion with that Body, and its Head, that
all those comfortable Spirits and Influences are derived to us, which refresh
and revive us. I confess it is through our internal and spiritual Confederation
and Fellowship; but he that values and receives benefit by this, cannot despise
and vilify the External. Hence our Psalmist here, as a Member vitally joined
to the Body, and partaking of a common Sense, does not only comfort himself and
it, with the consideration of the inviolableness of that Union and Communion
which was of a spiritual Nature, ver. 14. nor only reflects upon those external
Ligaments and Bonds which tied together so numerous a People, into one single
Heritage or Church; but also was grievously afflicted for those external
breakings in pieces, rents and disunion of parts, though involuntary, which
were the fruit of the outward Violence and Rage of Persecutors. So should we.
But then, Oh what Affliction would have rent his tender Heart, in the view of
those voluntary tearing in pieces the Seamless Coat of Christ, the Divisions
and Breaches we make amongst our selves. Those Fractions were only some kind of
dissolution of their Civil, Political Union, ours of the Ecclesiastical; and
Wounds are most dangerous in the most noble Parts. State Factions are not more
to be dreaded, than those of the Church, because these have more immediate
respect to the Soul and God.

Lamentable are the Miseries of a Civil War, where Thousands Born, Bred up,
Nourished by one common Mother, Brethren by Stock, Blood, Condition,
Cohabitation, Membership of the same Body Politic, perhaps of one Name, and
Kindred, and Family, of the same Body Mystical, the Church; Blind, and Dumb,
and Deaf to the Cries, and Shreeks, and Wounds, and Groans, and Deaths of their
own proper Limbs; in a barbarous drunken rage tear off their own Skin, Flesh,
and Bones; rive open their very Hearts to let out Spirit, Life, Strength, Soul;
hurl one another down to Hell under their Sin, in a deluge of Blood, and worry
themselves by piecemeal into eternal Damnation. And are the Church
Digladiations in the Christian World less deplorable, when those, whose respite
from everlasting Burnings, cost no less than the Blood of God, who are
denominated from that most venerable Name, washed in the same Laver of
Regeneration, Members of the same Spiritual Body, privileged with the same most
excellent Gospel, and Covenants of Promise, and would every one be ready to
tear out his Heart, that should dare to tell them, that they shall not each
possess the blessedness of an unspeakably glorious Heaven, where therefore, as
in a Center, they must meet, if their hopes fail not: When these, I say, who
thus concenter and agree in their Titles, Royalties and Expectations, are so
far from combining in the common profession and practice of Unity, Love, Peace,
Goodness, Virtue, Godliness, Brotherly kindness, Charity, as to grind one
another into Atoms, bite and devour one another Hearts, by bloody Animosities,
Reproaches, Railings, Revilings, Censures, Uncharitableness, Cursings,
Excommunicatings, Fines, Imprisonments, Murderings, Massacrings, for things
extrinsecal, and foreign to their holy Profession, recommended in the Mosaical,
Prophetical, Evangelical and Apostolical Writings. As if God had not delivered
Precepts enough to guide Men to Heaven, ever Party must have new of its own to
torture Men's Consciences, doubting that there are not Sins enough to damn Men,
unless we by our whimsies make large additions to the sum, discovering thereby
how much we are afraid, that those, who otherwise would securely tread in the
Paths of Life, and gain the Crown of Glory, should not stumble and fall upon
our new created Blocks, and thereby precipitate themselves into Hell. For what
else is the meaning of our unwritten Traditions, unwritten Canons, unwritten
Offices, unwritten Orders, and an hundred more by the by's; Tricks, and Snares,
and Trains, and Traps made to help the Devil more certainly to catch enough. Is
not the Holy Word of God, the Scripture, in its Rules and Laws, too often, too
much, too foully-transgress'd, but the Mouth of Hell must be gagged and racked
wider with new devices, that it may be capacious enough to receive the
numberless numbers that we resolve to send thither by man-made Sins, as if it
were in despite of God. And least our self-devised Engines should fail of
effecting this, and a poor quivering trembling Conscience, that looks asquint
at them should chance to preserve its Innocence and Allegiance to God, and its
present Light, and Sentiments, by sliping out of or breaking through the Snare,
and refusing to wound it self to eternal Death with the Poniard we put into its
hands; we must jog and thrust home, and drive on its slow and cautious
pendulous Arm, by the violence of such severe indispensible Sanctions, so
strictly looked after, so rigorously executed, and all under a bold pretense of
Divine Warrant, that if Men have any thing of Nature, Sense, and Commiseration
to their own Flesh, their dearest Yoke-fellows, their pretty tender innocent
Babes, they must be cruelly enforced to determine to be damned for them, or
kill their Hearts by dying before their Eyes, under as many Agonies as
ingenious Malice can invent, and this perhaps a thousand times over, beside the
bequeathing them to the same or more miserable Fortune, and all this is doing
God good Service. As if the Lord that bought Men's Souls to ease them, Matthew.
11.29, 30. had done it only to sell them again to the most bloody butchering
Fiends to torment them. And God who with so much severity prohibits Cruelty,
Murder, Bloodshed by his Laws, had laid in an exception, and given Commission
for this, to as many as can so divest all sense and bowels of Humanity and
Christianity, as to judge none to be Men and Christians but themselves, and
invest so much of Wolf, Tiger, Dragon, as to do the utmost to make all others
Proselytes of the Gates of Heil, like themselves, when in the mean time Men
with the greatest impunity, may violate the noblest Ordinations of Heaven, or
upon Prosecuon buy off or commute the Penance for a little Trash and Dirt. Oh
dear Lord Jesus! how long, how long shall such a Spirit Triumph and ride in
Scarlet? How long shall they tear in pieces thy People and Heritage, under the
Beasts Skins wherewith they have clothed them? Oh blessed Spouse of Christ!
How long must thou be affronted with the violence of such beastly Ruffians,
that under a disguise pretend to be thy-very self, that they may the more
securely ravish and destroy thee. The Wolf in the Lambs skin unsuspectedly to
devour it. A Beast with Horns like a Lamb, but a Voice like a Dragon, Rev.
13.11.

Well, Christ's Servants are not Wolves, Thorns, and Thistles, Matthew. 7.15, 16.
Profitable to none, hurtful to all, public Curses: But Sheep, Vines,
Fig Trees, their Temper, their Behavior, their Fruit altogether good, meek,
gentle, sweet, refreshing, reviving, pleasing, generally useful, public
Blessings, like their Master every way desirable, grateful; all being better
for them, none worse, in Goods, good Name, Body or Soul, their Designs, their
Principles, their Temper and Spirit, their Behavior and Purpose, and Practice
being the general benefit of Mankind, and the Church of God; especially that
wherein their Lines are fallen. They think it, they represent it, they
endeavor further to make and preserve it a goodly Heritage. If it hold the
Head, if it uphold the main, if its established Doctrine be truly Christian, if
its design be true goodness, if its Worship in the substance be Divine; They
bless God for it, they cover its Blemishes, they bear with its Infirmities,
they further its Ends, they endeavor to enlarge it, to adorn it with real
Beauties, to vindicate it from Reproaches, to promote its Unity, Prosperity,
Peace, Purity, Felicity; lament its Miseries, Breaches, Corruptions, Defects,
Deformities; but expose it, but defame it they dare not, they will not. This is
a truly Catholic Spirit, proceeding in all its actings upon truly Catholic
Principles: This and this only, when the risk of Partiality, Censoriousness,
Self-idolizing, Faction, Fury, Barbarousness, Madness, Devilism is run will
stand upon a secure basis, and yield a Man the blessed Fruits of Comfort, Joy,
Peace, and Contentation.

But I must come out of the Clouds, and be plain: Therefore shall first direct
what ought to be owned by a Public Spirit; next what Principles will enable a
Man to own what he ought.

1. Common Humanity engages to be well wishers to that general Nature which is
diffused through all the Species, and love that in any Man which I honor in my
self. All the Butcheries and Barbarities on Earth issue from Men's degeneracy
from Humanity into a ferine or diabolical Nature. But since I am a Man nothing
humane shall be foreign to my Cognizance, to my Compassion, to my Ear, to my
Conscience. When the Vices of Persons give a check to my Bowels, the virtue of
the Nature shall retrieve their yearning motions, and when I can see nothing in
Men to engage, I will endeavor to imitate the best of Paterns in taking
Arguments from my self. I will not so much regard their Conditions as their
Capacities, and that in all their Possibilities. If this Nature be personally
joined to God, why should not I be joined to it in Affection? Shall I tread
that Man in the dirt who may shine as a Star in the Firmament of Glory? Shall a
Companion of Angels and God himself, be worse dealt with than a Devil? May
Heaven receive him and shall not my Heart? Is God so unkind to me as to give me
an Example of brutishness to my own Nature? I must not be worse to him, than I
would have him to me, were our circumstances changed; the measures I meet to
him, shall I receive of God. 2. Christianity next, both renders a man more
meet, and lays upon me a further bond, to desire, endeavor, and effect his
good. The honor of the Name, the power of the Thing. The famed Mr. Fox could
never deny an Alms asked in the Name of Christ: but above all the Eternal
Father never will, Joh. 14.13, 14. and 15.16 and 16.23, 24. But the Nature, the
Life, the Power of Christianity is a Thing incomparable; the highest
communication of Divine Goodness, issuing from the lowest condescension of
infinite grace. Christ the God of Wisdom dwelling in our Nature by the Holy
Ghost, the God of love, and in our hearts by Faith, to root and ground us in
Love. Oh the height, depth, length, breadth, of the love of Christ! an
Hyperbole to our knowledge, infinitely surpassing, shooting above it, that we
may be FILLED WITH ALL THE FULLNESS OF GOD. Oh Mystery above all Mysteries! Oh
Grace above all Grace! The Height of most incomprehensible Majesty, in the
deepest humility of boundless Mercy, exalting poor degenerate man from the
lowest Abyss of unspeakable misery, to the utmost sublimity of celestial Glory,
in such an extensive amplitude, and fullness of all the richest blessings,
spread abroad over the whole latitude of humane nature, having their spring
from that everliving fountain of Eternal Love, and streaming in infinite
varleties to the length of all eternity, with such accommodation and
suitableness to every of our particular necessities, desires, hopes, as becomes
a fruit of unparalled incomparable Wisdom and Grace. Oh unfathomable Love!
thou have even outdone thy self, and undone me, a man of an unclean heart, and
lips for how shall such a poor weak polluted worm be ever able to conceive
aright of thy unconceivable plenitude; be thankful for, and speak well enough
of thy unspeakable magnitude; with a degree of Love and delight high enough,
entertain thy unmeasurable sufficiency, sweetness, and satisfactory Perfection;
or faithfully improve, and walk worthy of, thy unmatchably rich and glorious
communications. The unsuitableness, the unanswerableness of my Spirit and
practice will ruin me, if by another astonishing Miracle of demission, thou do
not spread abroad thy quickening, confirming, thy sanctifying and actuating
influences throughout all the powers of my Soul; that in thine own strength, I
may rightly glorify thee. That is Christianity in its causes; the Wisdom, Love,
and Grace of God, in Jesus Christ: and its general Notion an elevation of
Fallen Man to God. More particularly, Christianity in the Theory is the
Doctrine of Faith in Jesus Christ; in the Practice it is covenanting and keeping
Covenant with God. This is brief; enlarge your Thoughts thus: Christianity is
an undissembled acknowledgement, or owning and receiving Jesus Christ, as the
only Mediator betwixt God and man in a hearty Submission to the terms of the
Covenant of Grace, Repentance, Faith, and upright Obedience. It supposes
Natural Religion, in an universal subjection to the Deity as Creator,
Governor, and Owner of all. For if God had nothing to do with us nor we with
him, there would be no need of a Mediator; so neither if there were no Sin.
Hence it also supposes the Obligation of the Law of Nature, which is the Rule
of Natural Religion and the guide of man in his natural subjection to God. It
supposes also the Covenant of Nature (commonly called Works) with the violation
of it which none could expiate but God-man. And it includes as most essential,
the Covenant of Grace, and in special the New Edition thereof, (for the old is
Judaism) i. e. the Gospel exhibiting Jesus Christ as already come, God in our
Flesh Teaching for our instruction, Commanding for our direction, Doing for our
example and advantage, and Suffering in our room and stead, and for our Sin,
All things necessary for our Salvation, hereby satisfying Divine Justice and
meriting for us the Holy Ghost with his gifts, grace, pardon, peace and eternal
glory, to be given us upon conditions and terms suitable to his own goodness,
and our present state; viz. Repentance toward God, for and from dead works that
we might serve him the Living God; and Faith in Jesus Christ accepting of,
submitting and committing our Souls to him in well doing, with all the fruits
hereof, in Love, Meekness, Humility, Self-denial, Patience,
Heavenly-mindedness, Watchfulness; in Sum, Godliness, Righteousness, and
Sobriety, to be wrought in us and exercised by us, through the Grace and Might
of Christ which only makes them sincere and sound, and so acceptacle to God
through Christ, who alone intercedes with God on the behalf of Man, for this
end, as a Savior [(...)] to all perfection. Heb. 7.25. This is the sum of
Christianity owned by some Professionally only, by others Really also. But
because the reality of the Heart is only known to God, whereof he never made us
the Judges, We must proceed solely upon the external Profession, as far as it
renders the other (real inward owning) credible. Now it is in respect of this
credible owning of Christianity, manifested by Profession, that a Man becomes a
member of the Catholic Church Visible, has a right to all Ordinances, Baptism,
Fellowship with a particular Church, the Lords Supper, and consequently
Ministry, Ministerial and Fraternal Inspection, etc.
1. There Is no Vital Union, betwixt Jesus Christ, and any particular Person,
merely as a Member of a Particular Church, and under that Formality, but only
as a Member of the Church Universal invisible. For There Is no union of Life but
by unfeigned Faith, incorrupt Love, which are invisible things. These make no
Man a Member of a Particular Church actually, and ipso facto, though they give
the first and truest right thereto; but of the Catholic they actually do: Nay
the Visible profession of them though it give the right, yet does not actually
invest in a particular Church, but does in the Universal Visible, and after it
has been owned by the Church in Baptism, we are not only Visible potentially,
but seen and actually acknowledged Members of the Catholic Church Visible: yet
not presently of a particular Church. Though Baptism be in a particular Church
yet it is not into it, but the Universal. Consent without actual associating,
does not constitute any a Member actually, but only potentially and virtually.
That which makes a Man a Member of a particular Church is only Actual
Association with its consent explicit or implicit. Every one that is truly a
Member of the Catholic Church Visible, and gives any credible evidence
thereof, either explicit, or implicit, (as Mr. Tho. Hooker truly observes) and
essays to join himself to a particular Church; upon that evidence, ought to be
received to a participation of all Ordinances, and that particular Church
cannot de jure deny its consent, but it betrays its trust and sins greatly both
against the man, and Christ also. But then no man is saved under that Formality
as a member of a particular Church merely, but only as he partakes of that
common Christian Nature, which constitutes the Members of the Catholic Church;
Though he sin Grievously, and without Repentance general or particular, may
justly be damned, for neglect of joining in the Ordinances with some particular
Church or other if he have opportunity. 2. No man is the Object of our special
Love, as a Christian, merely because he is a Member of a particular Church: but
only as a Member of the Church Universal, i. e. the particular Circumstances
and Practices that confine, determine, and fix him as a Member, in this or that
or the other Assembly, are not the first Ground and Foundation of my Obligation
so to Love and do good to him, (although they may add to it) but only
Christianity. And if any think that a Church Covenant, etc. engage to a more
special regard; I answer, That is not, because they are a particular Society,
so joined nor as such merely, but because Christians. Else might the
Congregation of Condemners here, V. 21, be really obliged to Love one another
better than Gods People and Heritage, the Righteous and Innocent, whom they
Persecuted, but I think it is undeniable, that every one is obliged by the
Divine and Christian Law to love a Good, better than a Bad man, though
Confederate with him, in never so strict and sacred bonds of Union and
Association.
I grant that there is an act and fruit of Christian Love proper to Members of
Particular Societies, as such, which cannot be extended to Christians at large,
Unassociated: Or to Speak more Congruously. Since actual Coparticipation of
God's Ordinances, is the Formal act of a Particular Church, as such, and this
joint Communion is an Act or Fruit of Christian Love, Depending upon a
Condition which Christians are obliged to perform, but often will and do suspend,
though sometimes not without Sin; it follows that this Act of Love is not to be
extended to those that do not observe the Condition. In short, the Condition is
Consent. For Common Christianity, though it do oblige a Man to consent, to
partake of those Ordinances indefinitely, with any true Church of real
Christians; yet it does not confine him to this one individual, of which I am a
Member; but permits him a liberty to choose the best and fittest for his
edification, and other conveniences; yet not that neither, without the Advice
and Direction of Christ's Officers, or wise judicious Christians, or allowance,
or connivance at least of the supreme Powers Christian, who are obliged to
promote and countenance; yea and constrain Men by Law, to communicate in God's
Ordinances, and by no means permit them to be Recusants there, I say God's
Ordinances in general, and as his; for as yet I do not descend to consider them
in this, or that or the other particular Mode, Dress, Habitude, or way of
Administration. Now except other Circumstances concur, no Man by me can
regularly be forced to communion with me, though he may be exhorted to it. It Is
not his Duty, but his Freedom, which I cannot conclude, though possibly the
Magistrate may; he must determine it himself, at least if the Public Laws
interpose not; and till he do it though he be in a remote capacity, to be the
Object of this Love yet actually he is not the immediate Object of it, but
potentially only. But if he think to hang off, and will not resolve one way or
other; I look upon it as part of the Magistrate's office, to take care that he
do live in actual Fellowship, with some particular Congregation or other. And
it is conformable to right Reason, that the Laws which establish this among
Christians, should determine men to that particular Society which lies in their
Vicinity, caeteris paribus, not permitting them to ramble where they list,
whereby the Law will be eluded: Yet do I not think that it is in the
Magistrate's Power, to compel all the Neighborhood to participate in all
Ordinances, whether qualified or no. Exhortation before receiving the
Communion, etc.
There is a bar laid against this by an overruling former Law; viz. that of
Christianity, which the English Liturgy owns.

3. The Consequence of all is, That Publick-Spiritedness ought to respect
Goodness, and christian Goodness mainly, in abstraction from all Circumstances
of Persons and Things; and that no Bonds of Relation, etc. should further
engage our hearts than may be consistent with the general Obligation to own and
honor our common Christianity. Thou art a confederate Member of a particular
Church, and look upon thy self as obliged, with a more special Love to
embrace the Christian with whom thou do walk in Fellowship, I disallow it
not; but can thou dote so much as to think, that thou may be a Heathen to
all the world beside, and they such to thee. No all the Acts of Love which thou
extendest to the Members of thy own society, are as thou have opportunity, to
be extended to all that really own Christianity, except only such as prerequire
their consent, and those also upon occasion if they regularly desire it; and
all in as true a degree of sincerity, (though not perhaps in as high a degree
of intention,) as if they were of thine own particular combination. It Is
madness to conceit that the particular obligations of Christianity, do or can
null the General.

It Is true some men are to be to us as Heathens and Publicans, but then it must
be after a due and regular procedure against them, According to the tenor of
that so prudent, so equitable, so Charitative Christian Law, Matt. 18.15, 16,
17. But to paganize the whole world unseen, unheard, un-understood, undealt
with, is a piece of Charity, which no Charity can Christianize.

Can I then, dare I condemn, unchristen, unchurch the Christians in Africa, in
Asia or America; or the European in Greece, and its Communion, etc. or the
Protestants in Germany, Hungary, Poland, Sweden, Denmark, Holland, France, etc,
or this little Universe, or distinct World, where I reside? If I do I am worse
than an Infidel.

It Is a Catholic Rule, Gal. 6.10. As we have opportunity let us do good to all
Men, especially to them who are of the Household of Faith. Here is a
distribution of the whole World into two Classes. In some, community of Nature
efflagitates our kindness, in others peculiarity of relation, as Householders
with us. All these, not some only, must have something special. What have I to
do to make balks where God makes none? Heb. 13.1. Let Brotherly love continue.
1 Pet. 2.17. Honor all Men, Love the Brotherhood, Fear God, Honor the King.
What is this Brotherhood? What? only the Members of that particular Society I
am embodied with? Away, away, the Brotherhood comprehends all Christians, is
never so much as once in the New Testament restrained to a single Congregation
exclusively, when Love is commanded to it, or commended when extended to it. 1
These. 4.9, 10. But as touching Brotherly Love ye need not that I write unto
you, for ye your selves are taught of God to love one another. And indeed ye do
it to all the Brethren which are in all Macedonia, but we beseech you Brethren
that ye abound more and more. He is a Stranger to the Acts and Apostolical
Writings that does not observe all Christians every where called Brethren, even
by those who were not of the same particular Congregation, Acts 10.23. and
11.29. and 14.2. and 15.1, 3, 23, 32, 33, 40. and 16.2, etc. I challenge all
the World to give but one Instance out of the Bible where Christians of any
particular Church, were not styled and owned under the Name of Brethren, by any
one or more Persons of another Congregation, though of different Nations; nay
where Christians though not embodied (as they phrase it) were not so called, as
Acts 28.14, etc. All then that are Partakers of the same heavenly calling are
holy Brethren, Heb. 3.1. And this Title is not at all given to Christians with
relation to a particular Church, but only the Catholic, and upon common
Catholic grounds, and no other. Since then the whole Community of Christians
must be acknowledged for Brethren, Love them as Brethren, having compassion one
of another, be pitiful, be courteous, not rendering evil for evil, or railing
for railing, but contrariwise blessing, knowing that ye are thereunto called,
that ye should inherit a Blessing, 1 Pet. 3.8, 9. For 1 John 3.14. We know that
we have passed from Death to Life, because we love the Brethren; he that loves
not his Brother abides in Death, ver. 15. Is a homicide, ver. 10. Is not of
God, but manifests himself to be a Child of the Devil; chap. 4.20. cannot love
God. And sure if even Enemies must be loved, that we may be like our Father,
Matthew. 5.44, 45. and brotherly love be extended to Strangers, as the coherence
in Heb. 13.1. seems to evince, but the duty enjoined there, with the reason of
it much more, viz. entertaining them as we would do Angels: Neighbors may
challenge it upon a stronger ground, and Brethren most of all, and that in such
degrees as take in all things from the meanest Offices, to the very laying down
our Lives for them, 1 John 3.16. Jam. 1.26.
If the not bridling a ferocient Tongue render a Man's Religion vain; let those
with trembling measure the consequence, who neither will govern Tongue nor
Heart.

Lastly, That part of the Catholic Church comprehended within the confines of
any particular Kingdom, is and ought to be the more immediate object of every
individual Subjects or Members Christian Honor, Love, Care, and Respect, to be
manifested by his Prayers for it, Communion with it, defense of it, and
obedience to it in all lawful things; seeking its good in the use of all lawful
means, with a Religious care and caution, neither to say, nor do, nor allow and
permit any thing (which we can hinder) to be said or done to its prejudice. For
what is done for or against a part redounds to the whole, 1 Cor. 12.26. and
this is to be Public Spirited, viz. to embrace the Public with an universal
Love, Care, and Endeavor, active for its Good, preventive of its Hurt and
Damage, deploring its Corruptions and Miseries, laboring with affectionate
Industry to remedy and heal them.

Upon these Principles the old Nonconformists Bradshaw, Hildersham, Ball, etc.
and many of the later edition, loved, respected, defended, and held Communion
with the Congregations in the Church of England, where they could as appears by
their public Writings, and known Practice, notwithstanding the bitter
Reproaches and Censures of some few, who I wish had as well studied the Case.

'Twere a great impertinency and folly for me here to engage in a defense of
that which has had, and yet has so many more able Advocates, though if I do
not forget and flatter my self somethings occur which nearly touch the merit of
the Cause, yet not observed by any; and I will not betray that, which for the
main my Conscience tells me is a good Cause, with so short and imperfect a plea
as the straits of a little Chapter confine me to, therefore in prosecution of
my General design, I shall only suggest something of a more common influence,
and wave particulars, till better occasion or call.

1. In the Church of England are some (I wish there were more) Thousands of as
Sober, Pious, Discreet, Judicious Christians, and Hundreds of as Learned,
Religious Ministers as Europe affords; who in their Judgments and Consciences
seem to be abundantly satisfied with, and strongly plead for its Communion,
upon grounds of very great moment, to instance only in the late calm Discourses
of the Reverend Dean of Norwich. Now for me or any Man to send all these quick
to Hell, as mere Infidels or worse; as without Christ, Aliens from the
Commonwealth of Israel, (the true Church) Strangers from the Covenants of
Promise, having no hope, Atheists in the World, Ephesians. 2.12. may discover what
Spirit we are of, but will very little recommend our own Christianity, in
observance of the Rule, Phil. 2.3. Romans 12.10.1 Cor. 13.5, 7. 2. The Church of
England and Dissenters agree in all the main Substantials of Christianity, the
difference only lies in a few controverted things, of very inconsiderable
consequence in comparison. The same Christian Doctrine in all the Fundamental
Points, the same general design to promote Holiness of Life; the same Worship
in the Essential form, and matter and means, the same Ministry, of Persons
separate to perform Divine Offices in the same form of Churches, viz.
Congregational, who are embodied not merely by the civil Sanction, but consent
to submit to the Ordinances and Ministers of Christ, which with the Departers
(I call them rather than Dissenters) constitute the Explicit Covenant, and
Essence of the Ministerial Call; but differing only in a few circumstantial
Doctrines, in external Modes, and Rites, disputed and disputable to the Worlds
end. And shall so light matters alienate us, imbitter our Spirits, envenom our
Censures, when we agree in the main? Ah Sirs, should God Almighty thus mark
Iniquities, who could stand? Does he appoint a Sacrifice for Sins of Ignorance
and Infirmity, hold Communion with us notwithstanding them, not impute them to
us? And shall such things be unpardonable only in the Church of England, which
judges its own Constitution the most excellent in the World, and thinks it has
as much to say against you, as you against it, as much to say for it self, as
you for your selves, which you can no more convince, than it can you?
Lastly, To justify your departure, nothing can be justly alleged but fear of
Sin in Communion. Now nothing can determine what is, what is not Sin, but God
in his Word. You are then obliged to produce Scripture as clear to prove
Communion a Sin, as it is clear from Scripture that it is your duty to obey the
Magistrate in lawful things. For if the Communion which he commands be not
unlawful, you ought in Conscience to obey him in it, Romans 13.5. The General
includes the Particular. But I profess amongst all the Writings against
Communion, I have not yet seen any one, or more Scriptures alleged, which
apart or in conjunction, will evidently and certainly bear such a consequence.
Now turn we the Tables, and bleed a little over poor Sufferers (not as accusing
Laws of Government, but personal darkness and short sightedness, Infirmity and
Iniquity especially as the meritorious cause) whose Intellects and Consciences
may seem to be formed under an inauspicious Star, not Mercurial enough to be
born before the Wind, but of a genius too set, and Saturnine, which exposes to
the censure of being morose, obstinate, Melancholists, etc. But let us see
whether any place be left for Pity and Commiseration.

It is acknowledged just and reasonable, that all public Constitutions, should
be guarded with strong impregnable Sanctions, that the honor of the Public
Magistrate, which must necessarily, and in Conscience be upheld, and is as
highly concerned in his Laws as any thing, may not be at the mercy of every
wanton Head, or waspish Heart. It Is the general and acknowledged sense of all
Nations, and has been of all Ages, and (I think of all Persons) that Religion
must and ought to be established by Law. So is the Protestant Profession with
us and our Neighbors. And there is not a People upon Earth, nor ever was, but
would have Religious Concerns kept sacred and inviolable. Travel through the
Protestant World alone, and you shall experimentally find, that the Church of
no Nation, no not of New England it self, will endure that its Constitution
should be disgraced, its Fellowship disowned, its Worship disavow'd, its
Ministry disannul'd, its Discipline contemned, its Government condemned; but
will entertain all affronts of this Nature with a severe Indignation. No wonder
therefore that the like obtains amongst our selves, and even those that are
most sharp upon the Church of England, in that very thing give a Testimony how
patient a reception any thing must have, that shall depreciate their own
particular Models, and therefore may in Justice grant liberty to every Mother
to be fondest of her own Children: For my part I profess ingenuously I like
something in all Faces, but all in none, yet will not spit in any. If Men will
so far forget their Reason and Religion, not to say common Sense, as to speak
evil of Rulers, though unjust, Jude 8.
Acts 23.5. Despise Dominion, Blaspheme [Glories or] Dignities, I will not
justify them but the Law that condemns them. Yet there is a Chancery to
moderate the rigours, which otherwise may be just, and reasonable in some
cases; and this will, with a sweet and decorous (...), and temper distinguish
of Persons and Causes.

No Man is all Devil, no Party all God. The Heaven of Heavens only is all Sun.
The void spaces in the Firmament are larger than those filled with Stars. Even
those that out of a larger Sphere or Church, form to themselves a little
Epicycle, have dark as well as bright matter in it. The Sun it self has spots.

We therefore must make a difference, betwixt the Religious and their mimical
Apes; the Persons that are in good earnest in their way, and such as do but act
a part, and personate those they are not. Men that have thoroughly imbibed the
tincture, and others that are but lightly smutted with it.

1. Then it shall not be dissembled but bewailed, that amongst the Dissenters
there are some Venal Souls, that upon base Principles, and for sinister Ends,
fall in here as being disgusted by, or having a peck against some conformable
Man, or hoping for a plentiful Trade, or bountiful Contributions, or to piece
again a cracked Reputation, etc. Others owe their intromission to the
Principles of their Education, or customary Converse with others, particular
Employment amongst such, the persuasions of Company, etc. Some astonished by
the seeming imminency of Death, or awaked by some dreadful Calamity, bring
hither an akeing Conscience, to be stroak'd with a gentle Hand, into a secure
but fallacious Peace, and conjure down those Terrors which a a form of
Godliness is able to deal with. Some, lastly, in the simplicity of their
Hearts, having tender and scrupulous Consciences, finding more of strictness
and savor than where 'twas their lot to converse before, are pleased with the
agreeableness thereof to their Spirit and Temper, though they understand little
of the way, and might as well have been led by the Heart to the Church as to a
Conventicle, had it been their hap to have met with the like relish in their
Entertainments and Company. These are the most innocent of this rank. For some
of the rest are ordinarily the Hectors of the several Parties, from whom all
the Libels and Raileries (except such as common Enemies forge in their Names)
have their Origin. Better Men have better Work, they are not taught the manners
of the Court of Heaven, who dare bring an Accusation [or Judgment] of Blasphemy
against the Devil himself, Jude 9. much less they who do it against Christian
Churches and States.

But, 2. There are also a number of serious sober Persons, who have no greater
design than to be truly good, and promote the interest of real Christianity in
the main substantials of Faith and Good Life; who by their Modesty, Gravity,
Harmlessness, Honesty, Simplicity, Self-denial, Loyalty, Humility, etc. do
sufficiently distinguish themselves from the other, to the Eye of any prudent
impartial Observer, yet cannot in the use of such means as yet are administered,
receive satisfaction in the matters of difference, therefore are exposed to the
severities of Law: These I am concerned that a Court of equity should make
relief for.

1. They entertain a high Veneration for the Holy Scriptures, as a lively
Portraicture and Representation of that Eternal Truth and Goodness which is the
Nature of God, and the Schools make the Hypostasis of the Second and Third
Persons in the ever blessed Trinity. This with them is the Book of Books, which
they do not read as other Writings with a liberty to assent and consent as they
please, but with a full resignation of mind and will to its infallible
Dictates, entirely to subjugate all to its Doctrines, Counsels, Mandates, as
the most perfect indefective guide of Thoughts, Words and Actions in the
matters of Salvation, and to receive from it a sentence of Life and Death. This
Word of God is their daily Companion, Meditation, Desire, Joy, Delight, their
all. From these Divine Oracles they derive all their Sentiments, by them
regulate all their Worship, in them seek their Comfort, to them, as an
Instrument, ascribe their Spiritual Life, with them arm themselves against all
their Spiritual Enemies, and adverse Occurrents, and for them are ready to
sacrifice their Liberties, Wealth, Ease, Honor, yea their very Lives. 2. From
this reverence to the Bible, and diligent frequent converses with it, arises
that awful, feeling, terrifying sense they have of the exceeding sinfulness of
Sin, as Paul, Romans 7.13. For being brought to the Scriptures with a mind to
yield up all the Powers of their Souls to the Mind and Will of God therein
revealed, the Holy Ghost effectually sets home the Truths, and Laws, and
Threatenings, and Promises upon their Consciences. They have awakening
apprehensions of the Holiness and Justice of God, the dreadful menaces of the
Law, the bitter Agonies undergone by the Son of God for the Sin of Man, the
dismal Horrors, and Woes, and Cruciations, under the Vengeance of Almighty God
in Hell, which makes every Sin very formidable. They are made to understand,
that although, in respect of the matter, some Sins are greater, others less,
yet no Sin is absolutely little, which is committed against a great God; and
also that smaller Sins are aggravated relatively to our Faculties, that it is an
heinous offense to God, to do the least of Evils, against the clear Light and
Conviction of Conscience, or with a full bent of Will and Affection; and that a
Sin, in respect of the matter comparatively, and in it self greater, yet is not
so to me, if committed ignorantly, unwillingly. Under these Considerations,
their own particular Sins are set in order before their Faces, set on upon
their awakned Consciences, made bitter, and grievous, and odious; that they Day
and Night lament over them, are afflicted with them in anguish of Soul under
them, laboring, and being heavy laden, and able to obtain rest no where, till
by serions, hearty Repentance for, and from them, with a bitter loathing and
implacable malice and hatred against them, they be prepared for, and made
willing to embrace the Lord Jesus Christ, in his whole mediatory Latitude, and
entirely devote themselves to him, and his Father in the renewal of their
Baptismal Covenant, which they most solemnly and unfeignedly engage in, and
universally submit to the Terms of, in the Strength and Grace of Christ. Upon
this Covenanting with God, they see and know, that to sin against him in any
thing wittingly or willingly, will in them be yet more exceeding sinful than
before, and still the more they oblige themselves to God, and he engages them
to himself, and endears himself to them, by the communication of
Covenant-Mercies, the more do they find their Sins to be inhanced in their
abominable odiousness to God, and the smart and sting they leave in their
Consciences, is so much the more grievous. Oh none knows the dire and dismal
things which a wounded Spirit undergoes, but those that have felt. The Spirit
of a Man will sustain his Infirmity, but a wounded Spirit, who can bear? Prove.
18.14. And this too has its degrees of Intolerableness, in proportion to Sins,
and Sense, and Temper, and Time, and Spirit, and Improvement. Men of strong
Parts, great Reading, comprehensive Intellects, large Memories, ready and
present Minds, may sometimes soon and easily weather out the Storm. But all
Men's intellectuals and advances in Knowledge and Goodness, are not of one size.
What shall poor weak shallow Heads, or melancholic Constitutions, and
therefore strong Imaginations, defective treacherous Memories, but unruly
Consciences, do, when both Heaven and Hell seem to be set in Battle-array
against them? Horrid Reflections, virulent and violent Temptations, strange and
terrible Injections, and Infusions, as drawn Swords gashing, and galling, and
killing the very Heart, piercing it through with multitudes of Fears, Troubles,
Torments, Sorrows? Can a Man that has felt this, Groaned under, been Crushed,
and Crucified, and Racked, and Rent in pieces with it, and that perhaps many
Weeks, Months, Years together, ever make light of the cause of it, ever have
other than dreadful Apprehensions of it, as the burned Child?
Fancy and Reason can never comprehend what Sense, and Experience will testify
in these Cases. Speculative Men that stand upon their Heads, which have little
or no Communion with their Hearts, who understand every thing better than
themselves, very seldom feel any of these lamentable Twitches and Agonies, till
a Sickness, a Deathbed, set their thoughts upon another Bias, which in some
obtains; (in most not at all) and then according to the largness of their minds
are their Horrors of Conscience, and their feeling may teach them
fellow-feeling when it is too late; but the unconcernedness of their Spirits
before, conjures down all workings of Commiseration: As a Man of an Athletick
Constitution, in the triumphs of his natural Vigor and Health, accounts
valetudinary Persons a company of pitiful puling Sneaks, always whining over an
itching Limb in the Scurvey, or a smarting Toe in the Gout, or a rumbling Belly
in the Chollick or Gripes, or an akeing Back in the Stone, or a squeazy
Stomach, or tickling Tooth, etc. in which they are the Objects of his Ridicule,
rather than compassionate regard: But let his brass Pot receive a sound knock
from any of these mauling Distempers, or the like, and the Complexion of his
thoughts immediately change, and from the foot he can now Collect the
Dimensions of Hercules.

I doubt not but that (as many Holy Souls enjoy some refreshing Antepasts of
the future everlasting Feast of all Delights and Joys they shall sit down with
Christ at, in his Eternal Kingdom: So) many wicked profligate Wretches meet
with dismal and sensible Prelibations of the never ending Woes and Horrors of
Hell; that knowing by some Internal Sensations what awaits them, they may
either be awaked into Repentance, or if not, rendered more inexcuseable. And
sometimes God in his Infinite Wisdom so orders, that even those who ascend not
to any height in Debauchery, yet are reduced to such extreamities of Anguish,
and Pangs in the New Birth, that it comes very little short of those more
Dreadful Anticipations in the Reprobate; nay sometimes it exceeds in a
considerable degree. Sin must have its Hell of one kind or other, and happy is
it for that Man, whose Hell in this Life is preventive of, not introductive to
a future: For, beside the unspeakable Satisfactions in another World, this lays
the Foundation of the Richest, Sweetest, Fullest, and most durable Consolations
even in this Life, according to the common saying; God digs deepest where he
intends to build highest. But on the contrary, where be breaks no Earth, he
intends to sow no Seed. Those that he permits to be always whole, shall never
have, because they never need a Physician.

General Experience tells, That the Corruption of carnal Ease and Security, is
the Generation of a Dissenter. Troubles for Sin are the (...). the first
Rudiments of this Embryo. It seldom falls out, that a Man's or Woman's Conscience
is thoroughly disturbed, and their fallacious Peace and Comfort utterly ruined,
but either the want of a skilful and tender hand, to bind up their broken
Hearts, or some check they meet with in an unseasonable hour, from those that
should be versed in this Art, drives them (under that great uneasiness of mind)
to take Sanctuary in the bosom of one or other, that with more soft and
compassionate Bowels, will counsel and encourage them; yet not precipitate them
into the Pacifick Seas of Consolation, but gently and by degrees lead them
thither, through the Strait of a sound Repentance. I know not how it comes to
pass, God's Dispensations always are Wise, Just and Holy, but often
unaccountable; yet so it is, that either the Genius of Men's Troubles, under
their Penitential Throws in the new Birth, or the understanding, Spirit, manage
and conduct, of many Nonconforming Ministers, is such, or these both so
Adapted to one another, that the greatest number of Wounded Spirits betake
themselves hither for Cure, and find it. The Study of Casuistical Divinity
being less gustful to great Scholars, and Rational Theologers, is more the
business of those, who having felt some need themselves of it, have also
frequent occasion to deal with dejected Hearts, rather than elevated Minds: And
neither Rhetoric nor Reason, but effectual Medicines will cure the Maladies of
Bodies and Souls. The Sick desire not an Eloquent, Non quaerit ager medicum
eloquentem, sed sanantem, Sen. Ep. 75.
but Healing Physician; where they are profited, there they love.

Conscience is such an Impetuous, Imperious thing, as those may know who
converse with their own, but who with other Men's, much more; that a Man had
better have all the World to deal with, than it; especially in a Melancholic
Constitution. By Conscience I understand the inward Power, not in the nature of
a Guide, but a Judge, particularly in its Office of Condemning, or at least
Accusing; as Romans 2.14. O what Troubles, Tragedies, Confusions, Horrors, does
it beget, carry on and torture with, especially in the weaker Sex, that have
Souls to save and satisfy as well as the stronger, who sometimes also are made
terrible Examples: Witness Francis Spira, etc. which made one say, he had
rather undertake the Cure of a Phrenetick in Bedlam, than a Phanatick
Conscience. Truly (upon Experience I speak it) I had rather Study an Hundred
Sermons, than converse one hour with a Self-condemning Mind: It can understand
no Sense, it can hear no Reason, it can feel no Savor, it can receive no
Comfort. God is against it, it is against it self; the whole Bible in every Leaf
speaks to its Discouragement and Damnation, and all the Politics in Hell are
up in Arms to confound it, with Scruples, Objections, Fears, what not. Oh! the
Doubts, the Dolours, the Jealousies, the inextricable Straits, the Fightings,
the Perplexities, the dismal Apprehensions, the Despairs, the grinding
Reflections, the roaring Hell that compasses it round about on every side; that
it is a very Magor Missabib. Really 'twould make a Man sick to think of it,
break his Bones, Psalm. 51.8. to feel it. Ah! did but those who so bitterly
inveigh against Phanaticks, experience but one day what some of them have felt,
for Months, Years together, under the sense of God's Indignation, 'twould to
purpose cool that hot Humor which foams out of their Mouths. God grant them
Repentance, that they may never feel worse. I would not wish this to the
greatest Enemy in the World. It Is true, God uses gentle methods with the most,
yet these dreadful Instances are warnings to them, and all, not to Sin against
Light and Conscience: For this is ordinarily the spring of them, and they a
Judgment of God for it.

Lastly, From this Sense and Conscience arises their fear of offending God, in
the concerns of his immediate Worship, which I confess in some prevails so far,
as to involve them in the extremes of Superstition. This I take to be an excess
of curiosity in Religious Worship, either in thinking to please, or in fearing
to displease the Divine Majesty with little things, which are neither commanded
nor forbidden: For if the least things in the World be commanded or forbidden
in express words, or by plain consequence in special or general Terms, it is no
Superstition, except more stress be laid upon these than the weightier matters
of the Law. Plut. (...), etc. We require that you should pray to God, with an
upright and just mouth, not so much look at the Tongue, etc. of Beasts, whether
right and pure, perverting and polluting your own, etc.
So that I will acknowledge, that they commit this Sin who think to please God
with their extemporary Effusions without inward Devotions, as well as they that
conceit they do it, with the Churches form, without the Power of Internal
Grace: So they who fear to offend God, by using the Churches form, as such,
rather than by formality of Spirit, etc. as well as they that fancy they
should more displease him by immediate Conceptions in Prayer, than by luke warm
Affections. I will justify neither the Positive nor Negative, I think he
directs his discourse against the Jews mainly.
the Absolute nor Comparative Superstition. Plutarch I confess falls foul upon
that which represents the Deity as Tyranical, Noxious, hard to be pleased, and
works a desponding Dread and Terror, which render it unfit for, and unwilling
to engage it self in any Service of God, as fearing to displease in all, please
in none. And the Greek Word may seem to extend no farther, than such a fear of
Demons, which the Heathen World did not understand as we, in an infamous
sense. Demons with them, were those Blessed Beings, that ever lived in
Happiness, but in an inferior Station, Souls of Heroes and other Spiritual
Natures; much what such like as the Popish Canonized Saints, and Mediators of
Intercession; to the Noxious Malignant Spirits of the Infernal Regions, they
did not apply it: Yet no doubt, the other I have mentioned, are Sins, and may
go under this name, in regard of the Affinity they have herewith, according to
that common Synecdoche, in every of the Ten Commands. However I am right in
terming that over critical fear of displeasing God with little things,
Superstition; as supposing the Deity was of so cheap and easy a Nature, as to
be bought with Trifles, or so tetchy and supercilious, as to be lost and sold
away for such petty Matters, as he would never vouchsafe to take into his
Cognizance, and concern himself to Honor with the least Shadow of an
Injunction, but has entirely left to the will and liberty of Man: As if a Jew
having a Hundred Males in his Flock, without blemish alike in their nature and
goodness, out of which he has a free liberty left him by God, to choose any one
for Sacrifice, should demur all his days which to take, for fear of offending
God, or having chosen and Sacrificed, should perpetually vex his Soul with the
dread, that his choice has displeased. This leads me again to the
forementioned Point. The sense that some have of the more especial odiousness
to God, of blemishes in his Worship. Certainly, of all Sins, those in this most
weighty Matter, are most dangerous: For if that the direct and immediate end
whereof is to please God, and bring me into his Favor, do displease him, so
that I fall under his hate, I am in an evil taking beyond all expression. What
shall I do, whether shall I have recourse? The Scripture assures us that God is
most Jealous of his Worship, and External Worship, as the Sanction annexed to
the second Command evinces: and therefore calls the Sin there forbidden
expressly by the foulest name, Adultery, the highest Violation of the
Matrimonial Covenant; a Man can bear any thing in his Wife better than that.
It Is with allusion^ to this, that the Lord styles himself a Jealous God. This
imports that he has a peculiar and special enmity against the Violations of
the Second Command, beyond all other, since this is affixed to no other. And
indeed Idolatry may well be set in the uppermost rank of Sins, because the
External Woship of Idols does imply the Internal; together with the rejection
of the true God, which is a Violation of both the First and Third, yea and
Fourth Command, as well as the Second: For he that externally adores other
Gods, besides the true, has them inwardly in his beart, and therefore casts off
the Creator of the World; in that he gives him not the Honor of God which is
Supreme; takes his Name in vain, seeing it has not that due effect upon his
Mind and Heart; and therefore cannot Remember the Sabbath, as God's Rest from
his Six days Labor, nor keep it Holy to him, because he owns him not in his
Sovereign Excellency and Glory. These Considerations, with the terrible
Executions upon the Israelites, and others, for Corruption in the Worship of
God, as warnings to us, Romans 10. are of mighty moment, when duly applied; and
therefore no wonder, that Men, who have been in bitterness for other Sins, do
above all, dread these against the Second Command, which God, above all,
abhors; no wonder if they be jealous (where God is) of any thing that may seem
to entrench so near, upon the Honor God. Let Men prate and droll what they
will against serious Men, this is certainly the bottom of all their Fears; and
that is not a vain Superstitious Fear which is rightly directed here, but the
very first principle and beginning of all Divine and Spiritual Wisdom, and
ought not to be discouraged and wrested from Men, by the Power and Policy of
Earth and Hell, which combine to do this, by exciting other Fears, viz. of
Temporal Punishments. The Damnation of Men's Souls, by acts so abominable to the
Divine Majesty, is infinitely more formidable in its self than any thing: And
therefore weak frail Flesh, in which we are often more sensible, should not be
tempted and terrified into a regardlesness of this greatest of all hazzards, by
any designs upon that most natural Instinct and Law of Self-preservation; which
indeed is madness, when it cannot take place, but in the Eternal Destruction of
the Soul. I said this Fear must be rightly directed, that it may not be
Superstition: And it is so, when it is graduated according to the nature of the
thing, and the Sentiments of the Divine Majesty; so that what he most hates, we
most fear, and proceed therein, according to the Revelation of God, and let
fall our fear where he lets fall his loathing, or reveals nothing of it, for
there begins Superstition. So again, it is ill regulated, though we dread to
offend in lighter Matters, possibly under Divine Prohibitions; if yet we regard
not the main: For to fear, where no fear is, or to fear more, where less fear
is; or fear less, where more fear is; these three are Superstition. But to fear
proportionably to the greatness of the Sin, and clearness of the Light, is not;
but a regular fear of God, which he will accept, own, and reward.

It is not my Province or Design, nor Proper to this place, to recite, and
plead, or refute and disprove the Allegations of either one Party or other;
only do heartily wish, that I could see more of that true Christian Spirit of
Love, Moderation, and Meekness, on all sides, which the Gospel so earnestly
recommends; for Comfort shall we find in nothing else, when the Account is cast
up at last. Churchmen, of all others, should be men, of dispassionate, soft,
and tender Hearts; because entrusted with the Guidance of the tenderest Part of
their People, viz. their Consciences. But truly I meet it not on any hand,
except amongst a very few: The violent, bitter, irremediable Prejudices of the
Laity, in every Party, have their Root in the Clergy. It Is rare to light on a
man of a healing Spirit, which is as a speckled Bird when found; the Birds
round about are against her, every Man has an Arrow to shoot at her, But, Will
the end and issue hereof be Peace? No, it will not, it cannot.

Since then, that fear to offend God in the Concerns of his Honor and Worship,
which would approve it self not to be Superstition, must be a Branch of that
general Awe and Fear, which is the beginning of Wisdom; it is absolutely
necessary, that it have a sure and infallible Light and Guide: For, let not Men
think that a fear of offending the Divine Majesty, unprescribed by God in his
Word, either in express terms, or by plain consequence, can slip the halter,
and get out of the danger of that Scripture, which condemns the Traditionary
Man-created Fear of the Scribes and Pharisees, prophesied of by Isa. 29.13.
applied by our Savior, Mat. 15.8, 9. See then to your bottom, that some plain
Scripture teach you to be afraid of displeasing God, by joining in the Worship
used by the Church; else this very Scripture, which you think makes for you,
does really condemn you. For it is evident, that such a Fear is a part of that
Internal Worship, which you pay to God, and if that be unprescribed by God,
Where are you? But it never can be made evident, I think, that the Church
prescribes any parts or means of Worship, unprescribed by God; although there
be some things adjoined to the Worship, (which is in Circumstantials allowed by
all Parties) that are not commanded, (neither forbid) by God.

On the other hand, I doubt the Scriptures that are alleged by the Dissenters,
are not so thoroughly weighed, so calmly debated, so unprejudicately examined, so
fully answered, as they might be; not such a Spirit of Love and Compassion,
manifested in the manage of Disputes against them, (...) is necessary to win
them, and win upon them. For they generally conceive the Replies given, do not
reach the Case, and so thought Mr. Jeans also, a Man who has writ something,
that I have, in behalf of the Church.

Now let it be considered, what Christian Equity and Moderation should be
extended to Persons, whose Understandings are not omniportant, but Hearts and
Consciences good for the main, and in all the Essentials of Christianity; and
whether it does not highly become such a flourishing Christian Church, such a
noble, well-regulated State, to make a difference of Persons, Jude 22.
lest the Bowels of Christ be wounded through our want of Bowels to those, whom
the same Church might receive, if some inferior Matters were forborne, and the
same Heaven must receive, or we are of all Creatures most miserable. For the
Mercies of God's sake, for the Love of Christ's sake, consider again and again,
how light a matter a Mode or Ceremony is; how heavy a matter Sin is, and let
not Dust and Vanity, be balanced with Men's Salvation: Say not Contempt of
Public Order is not a light thing, though these be. Oh condemn not the Innocent
with the Guilty: Let those who contemn manifestly, and contumaciously, suffer;
but certainly it is not Contempt in all, but a reverend Fear of contemning the
public Orders of Heaven, which all Men confess, no Man can order the Violation
of. It seems clear to many, that to do things required, is forbidden by God;
they are mistaken: Grant it, yet they think, not. Their Consciences seem to be
resolved, though it be in an Error, unknown to them: Therefore to them, it is as
clear, that no force can be put upon them, no command of man overruled them,
where they judge God has obliged them. They read, they hear, they pray, they
study, and consider all things, on all hands, as they are able; yet cannot
change their minds, though it be highly their external Interest so to do. And
shall no humanity be extended to such modest, humble, loyal, patient, teachable
Dissenters, that are ready to engage in all Bonds to live peaceably, in all
Oaths to be true Subjects, to subscribe (according to the Act) to the Articles
of Religion, abating one or two Non-Essentials, and therefore are of the same
common Faith; to the Ten Commands, and therefore agree to lead the same godly
Life? Are there no Commiserations for such as these? Oh come Lord Jesus, come
quickly; diffuse abroad that excellent Spirit of Love, Unity, and Christianity,
which will engage every one of us to judge, that our proper Good is more in the
Public than Our Selves, that the common Interest of Religion, is infinitely
more our Concern, than any of our little Bones of Contention, that we may not
be cracking Nuts, pursuing after Butterflies, smiting our Fellow Servants,
eating and drinking with the Drunken, when the Heavens begin to crack about our
ears, and all is ready to be wrapped up in a common Ruin.

Well, Shall we be Christians, or shall we not? Must that which will be our
Glory and Crown above, rule our Hearts and Practices now? Let us be Persons of
great and generous Minds, disdaining to debase the Nobleness of those Natures,
which are capable of enjoying an Immense God, to such a degree of Childishness,
as to be infinitely concerned about the miserable things, which little Souls
continually scramble for, is it a piece of substantial goodness and honesty?
Does it conduce to promote and establish a real Deiformity, or Similitude to
God? Will it actually tend to subdue men's Passions, and Pride, and Worldliness,
and Sensuality? May we by and through it elevate our Minds to that Heavenly
Constitution, as to be mete for Converses with a Pure and Holy God? Does it
subjugate the Will of Man to his Maker, render him acceptable to Heaven,
profitable to Earth, in the Great Ends of Godliness, Righteousness, Sobriety?
Did God institute it for these Purposes? With all my Soul am I for it; I Will hug
it in my Bosom, lay it next my heart, honor it with my best endeavors, to
advance it in my self, and the world. But if it be only a Trick, a Device, a
Policy, to be Grand, and Gaudy, and Terrible, and Triumphant, and Imperious; to
salve a Sore, to make, maintain, please a Party; to countenance, keep up an
Interest, or suppress, oppress, depress real Religiousness, under some
disguising Pretenses: Away with it, it is unbecoming the Christian Spirit, it
savours not, nor of, true Magnitude of Mind.

This Man is for Prelacy, the other against it; one applauds the National
Constitution, comprehending all Congregations, as united under the
Ecclesiastical Government of Bishops, and the Civil Government of one Political
Head, the King; another allows it not, yet professes, and is ready to give all
desired Security for Allegiance. That Man pleads for, and uses a Liturgy, or
Set Form in Divine Offices; this would modifie all himself. There some think
for further Decency and Order, Ceremonies must accompany or follow Divine
Institutions; here are a Company tooth and nail against them. This Point of
Doctrine must be expressed in such and such Terms, the other is untenable,
except in such a Sense and Dress, and every Head in things of this nature, has
a different Crotchet. Well, Are the main Substantials of Christianity retained;
Irreligion, Idolatry renounced, the necessity of Government maintained, the
Deity worshipped in and through the only Mediator Jesus Christ, the Holy
Spirit, with his Gifts and Graces, in order to a New Life, acknowledged? In
fumm, the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, in their plain and most
obvious sense, received, submitted to, as the perfect Rule of Eaith and
Manners; Holiness and Virtue practiced, and promoted? Here fix. What do you tell
us of Unwritten, Unscriptural Phrases and Forms, and Modes, and Orders, and
Rites, and Circumstances, and Phylacteries, and Fringes, and Laces, and
Fancies, and Fooleries, and Phrenzies? To Bedlam with the Madmen, that cannot
be satisfied and pleased with the Noble and Incomparable Ordinations of
infinite Wisdom and Goodness, but must prescribe to their Maker, and outdo
boundless Perfection. Why (like the Egyptian Apes) do we tear in pieces one
another Ornaments; nay, one another for Nuts and Trifles? Are we not agreed in
the main Essentials of Christianity? Being therefore of the same Catholic
Body, Why must this Man's Head be struck off, because he has a Feather in his
Cap; and the others, because he has none? That Man be begged for a Fool,
because, by paying free Rent, he owns a Mesn Lord? Another branded for a Knave,
for desiring to be a Mesn Lord himself, or depend immediately upon the King?
Some sent to the Hospital, because they need, and would have Crutches, others
to Bridewel, who will have none? Are not the one Men as well as the other, and
should not common Nature ingenerate a common Sense? Must it still be Homo
homini Lanius, Lupus? Are not both Christians? And shall it be Christianus
Christiano Demon? That Man's a Heretic Devil, I Will sear and tear him with my
burning Pincers, says St. Dunstan. This is a Schismatic Dog, I Will have his
Ears, says another St. Somebody: Thou art a cold Formalist, and Hell must warm
and fire thee, says another St. Nobody. And a thousand to one, the Heretic,
the Sehismatick and Formalist, is the better Man and Christian. Oh Babylon,
Babylon, where art thou not? Really we may (with the Philosopher) light our
Candle at noon day among Christians, to seek for Christianity.

Let it then pass uncontrollable, that a Man can never be public spirited,
except upon Principles truly Catholic; nor will any other Spirit or
Principles, administer sound, true and solid Comfort, and Peace. As the
contracted shrivling, confining, narrow Temper, begets all the Confusions,
Broils, Branglings and Blood-sheds, in the world; so it leaves nothing at home
in conclusion but dire, ungrateful Reflections, and an horrible Combustion of
Conscience; or at the least, Inquietude and Uneasiness of Mind; any thing but
Satisfaction, Joy and Rest: Of such Men I say, as Genesis 49.6. Oh my Soul, come
not thou into their Secret, unto their Assembly mine Honor be not thou united.

And now, Oh my Soul, what is thy Trouble, and Sorrow, and Anxiety of Mind? Or,
what are thy Desires, Cares, Delight, Joy, Contrivances, Counsels, Activity
concerned about? Can thou feed upon thy sweet Morsels alone, and glory in the
Affluence of Personal or Domestic Blessings, while the Gates of Sion mourn?
Are any in Affliction, imprisoned, persecuted for Righteousness sake, and
wiltest not thou bear a part in their Dolours, Remembering those in Bonds as
bound with them, and them which suffer Adversity, as being thy self also in the
Body, Heb. 13.3? Do thou not partake of that common Spirit of Goodness,
Compassion, Charity, which as good Blood diffuses it self, and circulates
through all the Members of that one Body, ingenerating an universal
Fellow-feeling, and Care of mutual and general Concerns in all and every one
that lives by the Life of the Head in Heaven? Art thou weak with the Weak, and
with the Offended do thou burn? 2 Cor. 11.29. Can thou bear every ones
burden, and so fulfill the Law of Christ; and restore those overtaken with
Infirmities, considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted, Gal. 6.1, 2. See
the Apostle prosecuting this Argument fully, 1 Cor. 12.12. to 27. If thou be
acted by the private, strait-lac'd, selfish Spirit of the generality, who can
neither give a jot of ease to themselves, under their Personal Straits and
Sorrows, by a serious Reflection on the Welfare of the Church of God; nor will
in the least imbitter their Joys with any Considerations of the Afflictions of
Joseph; suspect thy self to be an Alien from the Life, and the Catholic Body
of Jesus Christ, which subsists by a Vital Union with him. What now are the
Measures, by which thou actest in thy Station, and with respect to the Members
of Christ? If thou espouse, and tenaciously adhere to, only the Sentiments of
some Particular Party, or Sect, farewell all public Spiritedness. Thou
professest a Belief of the Communion of Saints, as in one Catholic Church;
which is indeed an Invisible Thing, as are all Objects of Faith, in its
distinction from Sense. Does this Faith work by Love? Thou ownest also one
Universal Body, seen in its parts, visible in its whole extent throughout the
World, actually by the Eyes of its Head seen in its Unity at once; and
potentially by Man. Which is not a Chaos of every thing in confusion, but an
Organical Body that in diversity of useful comely Members, Parts,
Congregations, (the least of the denomination) Countries, and Kingdoms, makes
up a lovely Community. Not a Rope of Sand, but a Golden Chain, where every very
Link has its Beauty, Preciousness, Connection, Suitableness: A Garden enclosed,
where variety of Walks, Beds, etc. constitute a fair delicious Paradise. One
Spouse of Christ, one Body for one Head. Does thy Fancy or Partiality here make
Restrictions? Can thou, dare thou chop and mangle this Body? Tear off a
Limb of this Spouse? Break the golden Chain for one Link? And dote upon these,
without regard to the rest? Can thy Love walk no where but in little Severals,
and petty Enclosures? In this sense, I cannot disallow that Saying of a Great
Person, viz. That the Church of Christ is neither Rome, nor a Conventicle:
There may be some Part of it there, but confined to either it cannot be,
exclusively to the rest of the World. Art thou a Christian? Then must
Christianity command the freest Motions of thy Affections; the Interest of
that, thou must and shall respect, honor, promote and love; not as it is
pretended, or conceitedly monopolized by any distinct Party; but as (like the
Sun) it diffuses its efficiency, virtue and influence every where, and shines
with a lovely radiancy and glory, in any Man whatsoever. See thou one, that
in the judgment of rational Charity, makes Religion his principal Business,
above all laboring, that it may have a prevalent Interest in his Heart? Cleave
to this Man, embrace him in thy most near, and intimate Affections, be he of
what Party soever. Do thou find any diligently searching the Word of God, to
know him in all his Perfections, not merely for Notion sake, but that his
inward Soul and outward Conversation, may be under the Dominion and Command of
what he knows: A Man that maintains a high and honorable esteem of the ever
blessed Redeemer of the World, the only begotten Son of God, as the alone
Savior of Mankind; taking the greatest care, to gain a true and full
Understanding of his Excellency, Undertaking, Offices, and Benefits, that he
may entirely devote himself to him. A Man that is daily acquainting himself,
how much it is his Interest to live under the Conduct of the Holy Ghost, and
therefore studies his inspired Writings, to attain right Apprehensions
concerning his Nature, Gifts, Graces, Comforts, that he may aspire after them,
inwardly feel them in their power; and accordingly engages his Mind, Will,
Affections, Conscience, executive Power, all within and without him, in an
universal Subjection to this Holy Trinity in Unity; and with a reverend
Awefulness minggled with Love, demeans himself under the Government of that
ever Adoreable Majesty, as one that has present, powerful Sensations of its
immediate Presence, Oversight, and perfect Cognizance, of the most secret
recesses of his Soul. A man, that understanding his relation to God, owns Him,
pants after Him with insatiable Ardour, cleaves unto Him with full purpose of
heart, in a singular Complacency; fears, praises, glorifies, trusts, chooses,
embraces, acknowledges Him in all His ways, as His chief Good and Happiness;
and would not willingly displease Him for a World. And having with a Holy,
Religious Veneration observed, approves of, is singularly well pleased with,
that Wonder of all Wonders, the Grace of Almighty God, revealed by the Gospel,
in giving His Eternal Son, to be the Redeemer of Lost Mankind; God in our Flesh
manifested in the fullness of time, to do and suffer whatever Justice required,
that our Sins might be pardoned, our Persons accepted, sanctified, and
glorified. And Looking unto Jesus, does heartily acquiesce in the Method of
Salvation, ordained by God through him, entirely yields up himself to him, to be,
and do, and suffer, whatever he pleases; sincerely accepts of him as an
All-sufficient Savior, submits to his Government in all things, never can be
satisfied, but is in a restless Agony day and night, till he gain some good
Evidence, that Christ is his, and he Christ's; spontaneously, cheerfully, with
a self-denying, humble, penitent Heart, venturing his All upon him for ever, in
believing in him, hoping for his Sake, to obtain the Love and Favor of God, in
Justification, Reconciliation, and Eternal Blessedness; and therefore
deliberately, freely, with all readiness of mind, engages himself to Christ, by
the Renewal of his Baptismal Covenant, with a serious, upright, undissembled
Resolution, to stand to it, and abide by it, in despite of all Temptations,
and Opposition, through the aid and assistance of the Spirit of Grace; praying,
waiting, in Faith and Hope, to enjoy his Gracious Influences, leading into all
Truth, that by it he may be made free, formed after the image of God, by his
Grace, strengthened with all might inwardly, and revived by his Consolations. A
Man that in order to all these good Ends, diligently examines his Conscience,
searches out his particular sins, is afflicted, burdened at his very Soul for
them, as an Offense to God, rather than his own Damage; uses all possible means
to prevail with his Heart to relinquish them in its affections, forbearing
actually to commit them, lamenting over, and reforming sinful Omissions, groans
under, and is daily pained with the woeful depravedness of his Nature, his very
inward Bent and Inclination to Evil, the Vanity, as well as Vileness of his
thoughts, words, and deeds; accounting himself the Chief of Sinners, and
therefore maintaining an humble self-debasing Sense of his own Unworthiness,
and labors not only to desist from the Acts, but subdue the very Lusts, kill
the root by mortification. A Man who lives by Faith upon the Promises for the
Communication of a Divine Nature, the Law in the Heart, that he may not only do
the External Work of Duty, but have a Dutiful Heart; from and through which
Principle, he meditates, hears, reads, praises, confers about the best things,
as inwardly loathing the froath, and vanity, and venom of his former
Communication, and endeavors that it may be always savoury, seasoned with salt,
that it may administer to the use of edifying, minister Grace to the Hearers. A
Man that endeavors a right Understanding of himself, is Clothed with
Humility; in lowliness of mind, dehasing himself before God, preferring others
before himself, and condescending to men of low degree, and esteeming his own
Graces less, his Sins greater than any man's; admiring that either God or man
should favor him; and therefore with a calm dispassionate Spirit, bears
Injuries, Affronts, Reproaches, any Evils that extend to himself; but can bear
nothing with Unconcernedness that affronts the Divine Majesty; has a Bridle
for his Tongue, for his Heart, and with a composed Evenness of Temper, renders
his Converses amiable, profitable, desirable to all; grievous, hurtful to
none: In all Conditions, Companies, or Occurrences, prosperous or adverse;
being the same: An ill turn will make him a Friend as Cranmer, and the worse
the Circumstances, the better the Man; living under the power of the Spirit of
Sanctification in Obedience, Meekness, Patience, Gentleness, Simplicity, godly
Sincerity. A Man that can bear Indignities from all, forbear offering them to
any; keeping under his Passions, even almost to an Apathy; keeping down his
carnal Appetite, in a sober temperate use of the Pleasures of Sense, and an
Indifferency to this present World. A Man that sets his Mind and Heart
savourily upon Invisibles, which he evidences by a Conversation in Heaven, and
values the Wealth and Glory of the Earth, only as they deserve, and as far as
useful for God's Honor in Acts of Piety, the Relief of the Indigent in
liberality, and the maintenance of the Reputation of his Profession; with
Contentment, embracing the least share of the World, but unsatisfiable, without
a large Portion of God and Heaven. A Man that walks in his house with a perfect
heart, putting away Evil from his Tabernacle, and advancing Holiness in his own
Relations, especially to whom he is useful both by Counsel and Example. A Man
that dares not do, or design, or imagine any thing unjust, dishonest,
unbecoming Christianity, though it might gain Indemnity for his Life.
Uprightness, Loyalty, Honesty, Fidelity in all Promises, Dealings, Carriage,
are his Life; therefore will he not forfeit and destroy it by contrary
Practices. A man that has the fairest Notices of Divine particular Love to
himself, yet will not abuse them to Presumption or Arrogance, and Contempt of
others; that values the favor of Heaven infinitely above the Glory, Esteem,
Riches, Pleasures of the World; but despises not these as the Gifts of God: Yet
does not behave himself unseemly, when in the higest Repute with Man. Always his
Thoughts beget his Words, and his Word is his Deed, and a good Conscience the
Guide of all. A man truly faithful to God, and his Sovereign the King. Modesty,
Gravity, Seriousness, Industry, Clemency, Sedateness of Spirit, Peace of Mind
being his Individual Companions and Ornaments. Yet knows he nothing of those
natural or acquired, moral, or spiritual Endowments, that may recommend him to
God and Man, so as to swell and huff up his Heart; he has them, as if he had
them not. A Man that lives in the view of Death, and therefore dreads it not;
whence it is, that whatever he has or does, or feels, or fears, or suffers,
it is as a dying Man; and he therein possesses himself and God in Tranquillity of
Mind, and a quiet Rest and Contentation. He would be to others, what he expects
they and God will be to him. Chiefly minds the weightiest Points of Religion,
in Faith, Love, Mercy, Righteousness: Yet having done all, esteems himself an
unuseful Vessel unworthy regard, as having only done Duty, and but a small
degree of that neither; therefore finally flies for Refuge to the love of God,
and deservings of Christ, as the sole bottom of his hopes to be saved. This is
a Christian of whatever particular Denomination, Prelatical, Presbyterian,
Congregational, etc. All Persons, all Societies of Persons thus qualified, thou
art obliged, O my Soul, to respect, honor, embrace, do good unto, or thou
renouncest thy Membership and Fellowship with Christ and his Body. Wherever
all the Essentials of this Christianity are received, without such intermingled
Corruptions, as undermine or destroy them; so insisted upon, that without
violation of Conscience (and so Christianity) thou can not own them, there
impart thy best Affections, thither direct thy serious and religious Cares, and
to all, how bad soever, how hostile soever, thy Commiserations. I cannot
Communicate with an Idolater, etc. yet I can pity him, and every poor deluded
Soul, that either presumptuously, or in simplicity, is carried away from God.
For I my self am a Sinner, and stand in infinite need of the Compassions, both
of GOD and Man. Love, Unity, Peace, are Matters of so excellent a Nature;
Uncharitableness, Schism, Dissension, contain so much of Hell, that these are
to be relinquished, those pursued all possible ways consistent with integrity
of Conscience; that is, consistent with Allegiance to God: For Conscience is
nothing, except in Subordination and Allegiance to God.

CHAP. VIII. The Subject of Comfort, Honors God's Discipline.
6. THE Author of his Psalm, was a Man that embraced a just and equitable
Sense, and made a benign and fair Representation of both the Instructive
Discipline, and also the Dispensations of God; his special Teachings, his
severe Providence. Ver. 12. Oh the Blessednesses (Vocatively rather than
Nominatively) [(...)] of the mighty [strong, able, lusty,] Man, whom [(...)]
thou shall or wilt [ Instruct Correct
] him, (a Pleonasm of the Pronoun) and shall or wilt teach him out of thy Law.
So Ver. 10. [(...)], The [ Teacher Chastizer
] of the Nations, etc. The Primary Signification of the Word, is to Teach or
Instruct; which is very accommodate to the scope of the Place; and the whole
Paragraph may be rendered thus: He that instructs the Nations, shall not be
reason, [Isai. 1.18.] argue, or dispute, [Job 23.7.] plead, [Mic. 6.2.] even He
that teaches man knowledge, the LORD knowing the reasonings (1 Cor. 3.10. Luke
9.46.) of man that they are vanity. Oh the blessednesses of the mighty whom
thou will instruct. Oh Jah, and teach him out of thy Law. The Authority of the
received Translation with the Targum and Syriack, and some learned Interpreters
is the only Argument against this reading of the words; nothing in the Original
or the tenor of the Psalmists Discourse, but rather the contrary. And even
this sense will administer something toward the completing the Character.

The Psalmist then was one that accounted it a singular happiness to be taught
of God: to be thoroughly instructed in Gods law by God himself; that is to be
effectually brought under the power and led into the practice of Holiness,
whereof the Law is the Rule; for God's Teachings are not only notional and
doctrinal, but practical and effective of Obedience. It Is all one as if he had
said, Oh the blessednesses of the man in whose heart thou writest thy Law, and
thereby principlest for and impellest to a holy life. This is the Covenant way
to Peace. Isai. 54.13. All thy Children shall be taught of God, and great shall
be the peace of thy Children; although at present thou be afflicted, tossed
with tempest, and not comforted, V. 11. Oh! this is happy indeed, the very
Basis and Foundation of all Blessedness; without which it is impossible for a
Man not to be finally miserable. No Felicity is attainable if God do not Make
his Laws vital Principles in our Souls, which is the tenor of the New
Covenant, recited, Heb. 8.10, 11. through the exceeding great and precious
promises whereof, 2 Pet. 1.4. We are made partakers of a divine nature, viz. a
living, overruling Law within, a transcript of the Law eternal upon our
hearts, Without Grace there can be no true Peace, without truth no Grace; truth
in the light of it to gird up the loins of our minds, truth in the life of it,
the girdle of integrity in our hearts, without Illumination no Comfort, without
Sincerity no Salvation. They must combine, and be undivorcedly espoused
together, or farewell all true Peace. For to be taught true and sound Doctrine,
and to be led into the understanding of all the Divine Commands, though Christ
himself be the Schoolmaster, ( Luke 13.26. thou have taught in our Streets)
will contribute nothing to the happiness, but much to the misery of that Man,
who never feels the Power of those instructions, renewing his Nature and
reforming his Life. But if by the gracious Influences of Heaven, the Precepts
of the Law and Gospel become efficacious, to mould and form us into universal
Goodness, all the divided or joint Confederations of the Wit, Policy, Power,
Virulence, Rage, Malice and Fury, of both the Elements of Misery, Earth and
Hell, to mischieve us, can never make us really miserable. Whereof (not to
insist upon our blessed Redeemer) let Job be a Witness. Never had Satan so
large a Permission (not to say Commission) to spend all the Artillery of his
Madness and Malice against any Man, that ever we read of, as against this
incomparable Pattern of Patience; never did such a whirlpool of Calamities,
suck in, and swallow up in a Moment, and at unawares any mortal Man so singled
out, before, or after him. All his external Comforts Shipwrack'd, his whole
body, from top to toe, an universal Ulcer and Mass of Rottenness, except his
Organs of Speech, which the Devil reserved in soundness, for a malicious
purpose, his end in all the rest. Nothing lest him but an Eve, the Serpent's
Instrument to tempt and torture him, Job 2.9. and 19.17. The very inward quiet
of his mind ravished way, in such a degree that it did commit a Rape on his
bodily rest, and made all his Comforts and Comforters miserable, Job 6.4. and
7.4, 13, 14, 15. etc. Yet for all this, the Man was blessed and made a blessed
End. He was under the special regard of Heaven, dear to God, under his peculiar
care, and fatherly Discipline of Love, and therefore not really (although he
imagined himself to be miserable,) but truly happy.

On the other hand take an Ahab in the affluence of all worldly Delights,
Riches, Honors; triumphing in Victory over the most potent Kings, 1 King. 20.
Possessing his coveted Vineyard, Chapter 21.16. dwelling in a Palace of Ivory, Chapter
22.39. enjoying all imaginable carnal satisfactions; Yet untaught, untutored by
Heaven, destitute of that which would have been the fairest Jewel of his Crown,
the Grace of God, the inward sanctifying and saving Illuminations of the divine
Spirit, therefore continuing an Enemy to God and Goodness: and was this Man
happy or blessed? Was he not accursed of God and most miserable in the midst of
all his external Felicities. To have a Heaven in his House, a Paradise in his
Vineyard, and a Hell in his Conscience, a lamentable Happiness, from which good
Lord deliver us.

Be not thou envious, O my Soul, at the ensnaring prosperity of the one, nor
offended with the improsperous uprightness of the other; but earnestly implore
those Covenant-teachings of the Lord, Joh. 6.45. Isai. 54.13. Jer. 31.33. which
being the first seminal Principles of the new nature, will empower thee to live
unto God. Will thou be content with so faint and evanid a light in thy upper
Regions, as will make no reflection toward Heaven, nor beget a greater warmth,
than will permit thee to freeze in the midst of Summer? Oh! aspire after those
divine Irradiations, which convey an influence, more extensive, and efficacious
than themselves, which awakening or creating a central Fire, in all, the very
drossiest or deepest ramifications or branchings of thy thoughts, of thy
affections also, thy inclinations and imaginations may by a divine Projection
convert and concoct them into Gold, Rev. 3.18. i. e. give them a gracious
tincture; of moral virtues and motions, make them spiritual Gifts and Graces,
and render them acceptable to God. Be not satisfied till thou see, and
know things as they are, in their real nature; being apprehensive that pure
metaphysical Notions, that are not affective, nor lead to practice, for all
their tenuity and levity will never mount thee to Heaven, without inward moral
sensations, spiritual touches and tastes of Truths, in their internal Life. Fine
and thin speculations, like cobwebs may take, and take with Flies, aerie,
volatile Wits, and Fancies; but nothing is good in Religion, which does not
catch and overmaster rational Affections, reduce the will of Man into an
Harmony with the Will of God, and better the Life. Oh be not in love with a
notional Religion. Let the Holy Spirit that illustrious Ray of Divine Love,
reflected upon, and from the Son of Righteousness, descend into thy bowels,
dwell, and act in thy very inmost heart, by his Light to create Life. Be in
love with no knowledge but that which is of a transforming power, and tendency,
that by its virtue thou may be entirely renewed after the Imagine of God.
That Knowledge which will introduce Faith; that Faith, which will work by Love;
that Love, which to the rest will add (as 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7.) Virtue,
Temperance, Patience, Godliness, Brotherly-kindness; and in sum all the
Elements of a holy conversation; that, and that only, will be introductive of
solid Peace and Consolation.

But this has all been spoke only upon supposition of a dfferent, yet very
proper Translation of the Words in V. 10. and. 12. Which are rendered
[chastize]. Now must we Procecd upon this authorized Version; and it is certain
the Words will allow it as among other Places is demonstrable from 1 Kin.
12.11, 14. My Father chastised you with whips, etc. Psalm. 118.18. Chastening
the Lord has chastened me, but has not given me over to death. Here the word
cannot signify to teach, or instruct, in a proper Sense. Yet in the place I
discourse upon there is nothing to enforce this Sense, but rather the other, as
the English Annotator observes. Only the Syriack Version, the Chaldee
Paraphrast, Piscator, Vatablus, Ainsworth, etc. render it here as we do
[chasten]. And if it receive the former Sense, may it not seem restrained to
such Instructions, as in a peculiar manner qualify Men patiently to bear and
improve Afflictions? This Sense will be favored by that clause in the
following Verse, which is declarative of the end and use of these Teachings
[finding rest in the day of adversity.] Paraphrase the whole thus. Oh the
blessednesses of the mighty man [ Psalm. 33.16.] whom thou so instructest
inwardly by thy Spirit, and teach Outwardly by thy Law in the Ministry of
the Word and other Ordinances, So Calvin.
as to engage and enable him with an even composed Spirit, resting in the good
pleasure of thy Goodness, and with patience to endure Adversity. Thus I make
account it is a parallel to Jam. 1.12 [(...) happy] Blessed is the Man that (not
suffers merely, but) [(...)] patiently endures Temptation, For the
Substantive derived from it, viz. [(...)] is rend red Patience, V 34. and chapter
5.11. [(...)] we count happy (or bless) the patiently indureing [or biding
under,]; ye have heard of [(...)] the Patience of Job.
[or Trial, (...)] for being [(...)] approved, he shall receive the Crown of
Life, etc. It seems to be an allusion to the Isthmick or Olympic Games in
Greece; where if any doubt did arise about the Victory, the Agonists or
Contenders did appeal to the Judges, and he who by their Suffrage or Judgment
was [(...)] approved, did receive the Garland or Crown. Thus here, Blessed is
the man whom thou so disciplinest, and learnest, as to give rest or quiet,
sedateness or settlement of mind, or appeasement ( Prove. 15.18. the same word)
of all turbulent motions, in the working raging sea of his Passions and
Affections which otherwise cannot be quiet, composed, and rest, ( Isai. 57.20.
the same word again) till, or while the Pit be dug for the wicked. For as
Dr. Hammond well observes, if it be understood of external rest, or freedom
from the days of Evil the word [(...)] is not properly translated [until]. For
that supposes the rest in being, before the removal, and in the very time of
disrest, or oppression, or adversity by the wicked, and the rest to terminate,
or end, when the Wicked are destroyed. But [(...)] is translated [While] Job
1.16, 17, 18. While he was yet speaking, etc. and yet more accommodately to
this place, [When] Jonah 4.2. Was not this my saying, [when] I was yet in my
own Country, etc. Thus here, when the pit of corruption (as the word signifies)
shall be dug for the Wicked, the Lord's blessed ones shall rest from the
days of Adversity; Then is the season for it. This literal proper Sense seems
more suitable than Calvin's figurative: For Moral Rest answers not the Letter
of the Text as well as civil. It Is rest from, not in the days of evil, as it
should, if the moral sense [for quiet of mind] obtain, yet I think there may be
a commodious Sense given of the Words, retaining the [until] which is the only
Basis of the moral sense; and still interpret the words concerning Political
Rest. For [until] does not always signify the cessation of the preceding State,
upon the introduction of that which it relates to. Hereof there are multitudes
of Instances, Romans 5.13. Until the Law Sin was in the World; but it did not
cease to be when the Law came, Rev. 2.25. Hold fast till I come. Must they let
go their hold then? But to confine my self to the Hebr. (...) Isai. 22.14. This
Iniquity shall not be purged from you till you die. If not 'till then 'twill
never. Not to wander out of this Book of Psalms, Psalm. 112.8. He shall not be
afraid, until he see his desire upon his enemies; and sure his fearlesness
will not determine then, Psalm. 110.1. Sit thou on my right hand until I make
thine enemies thy footstool. Must Christ forsake God's right hand, when that is
accomplished? I Will add no more. It cannot then by necessary consequence be
concluded from the [until] here, that the Rest or Quiet of the Blessed, shall
expire when the Wicked perish; it rather infers a more eminent degree of it. So
also it does in the cited places, denote and import an answerable amplification
in the succeeding state of what was in the foregoing, if it be capable of
gradation, as sure David's fearlesness would be greater after his desire was
accomplished upon his Enemies, than before. Let that interpret this, He shall
be fearless before, even when his enemies hope to have their desire of him,
much more when he has his of them. Thus God will give those whom he graciously
instructs, and teaches, real quiet and rest, both when the wicked Reigns, and
when he is Ruined. So that I make it a privilege and part of Blessedness
granted by special indulgence to these to be secured from trouble in troublous
Times; to have a good day when others (not so taught of God) meet with an evil
day, to be hid in the day of God's Anger, to be preserved from the Malice and
persecution of the Wicked. This sometimes the Lord vouchsafes to his Children,
such like Mercy was promised but three Psalms before, viz. Psalm. 91.
throughout, so Psalm. 12.7, 8. Psalm. 37. Is. 26.20, 21, etc. and many other
Places. God reserves some in safety to behold the destruction of Persecutors;
has a Zoar for a Lot; a Pella for the Christians, etc. If this were not so, all
Good Men might be extinct, and the Gates of Hell prevail against the Church of
Christ. It Is also upon good reason. For the end of Affliction is Reformation.
If God meet with so good Proficients, under his instructive Discipline, as will
and do learn every Lesson he teaches, there will be no need of the Rod, and he
who does not afflict willingly will not bring into these Trials except need be,
1 Pet. 1.6. But this I will no further insist upon.

Let the English Translation then obtain, and it gives us this Point, That in
the sense of the Psalmist, 'twas a blessed thing to be under God's correcting
Discipline, or instructive Chastenings, as a means to prepare for rest, when
Instruments of Divine Severity were to be destroyed; Rest in this World, when
Judgment returns to Righteousness, and the Upright follow it; and especially in
the World to come, when all the Wicked shall be lodged in the Pit of Hell. For
the days of Eternity are to the Wicked days of Adversity indeed; and to enjoy
Everlasting Rest then, is a Blessing unutterable. This good Man saw nothing in
Affliction that could make a Man unhappy. He entertained such a favorable
opinion of God's rigours to his Children, that beholding by Faith the good and
happy fruit of them, he admires the Blessedness of those to whom so great Evils
issue so well; and therefore we may justly suppose, would not be discouraged by
the bitterness of the Cross, nor driven by it to an unwillingness to consort
himself with the suffering People of God. Would not he put in for his share of
that Blessedness, which descended from Heaven, though it cost him a
participation of that wretchedness, which was the product of the Rage and Fury
of the World? Choosing rather to suffer Affliction with the People of God, than
to enjoy the pleasures of Sin for a season; as having respect to the Recompense
of Reward, everlasting Blessedness and Rest, with Moses, Heb. 11. And indeed
this is an admirable Comfort in all Tribulations, to consider that there is a
reserve of eternal Joy and Peace, the sweetest the fullest; that there are
Blessednesses, the Blessedness of this Life, the Blessedness of the Life to
come, laid up in store for the Servants of God, though accursed by Men in this
World. If together with the Rod that we feel, he administer a Word that we may
hear, Mic. 6.9. and under his Corrections seal our Instructions, if by his
Providence he subdue our Wills to his Precepts, and by the sadness of our
Countenances make our Hearts better; if he discover to us the sunshine of his
Favor and Love through the dark cloud of Affliction, and bring down a Heaven
of Happiness or Blessedness to alleviate the tormenting Purgatory of our
Tribulations, whether from Men or Devils; this sure will bow our Hearts to such
a degree of aequanimous submission and resignedness to God, that we shall not
only sit down in a patient and quiet Contentation, but be able to rejoice in
the good pleasure of his Goodness, although we smart under it, and he that is
replenished with Content and Joy, is never destitute of Consolation.

Be not then displeased O my Soul, that thy Father in Heaven brings thee under
the discipline of his Family on Earth. If thy Afflictions be light do not
despise or make light of them, if they be heavy and grievous, do not faint
under them. Blessedness is a thing of so weighty Consideration, so great
Moment, that it is madness to forfeit it, by slighting an evil of little moment,
folly to reject all support from it, under a burden more intolerable. Let the
gracious designs of Heaven reconcile thee to the very Antipathies of thy
Nature, and render all those divine Methods, not only supportable but easy and
amiable, which have a tendency to endear God, and Holiness; although for the
present they do not administer matter of Joy but Sorrow. Heb. 12.11. The
peaceable Fruits of Righteousness will abundantly compensate the grievousness
of all Calamities; wherefore [(...)] lift up [ straight right
] the Hands that hang down, and the feeble Knees. Stretch out thy self
Heavenward to apprehend and reach by Faith, those unconceivable Pleasures and
Joys, wherein the Miseries of this Life will issue, if thou make not visible
but invisible things thy scope in this World. Thy Sin or Guilt which merits thy
Sufferings is indeed sinful [(...)] i. e. beyond all bounds of Thought and
Imagination, that thy highest Conceptions cannot overshoot in their Notions of
its real evil in it self. Let it be to thee proportionably grievous. But these
Fruits of thy Sins, viz. thy Sufferings, if thou live by Faith upon Invisibles,
will work for thee an eternal weight of Glory [(...)] from hyperbole even unto
hyperbole, that the glory in its superlative excellency does doubly transcend
the unfathomable malignity that is in Sin, and infinitely overshoot the
bitterness in the Affliction; the weight of Glory being commensurate to its
Eternity, 2 Cor. 4.17. The [transient] momentany lightness of our Affliction,
works out for us, an above all expression, conception, comparison eternal
weight of Glory. Will not the reviews hereof engage thee, O my Soul, with a
kind and dutiful resentment, to accept of the punishment of thy Sin, and
exterminate all harsh and unbecoming Conceptions of that God, whose hatred to
thy Sin evidenced in his severe Providence, is always accompanied with a
singular love to thy Person, whose Eternal Salvation he would compass by the
everlasting destruction of thy Sin. Oh be thou ambitious to demonstrate thy
self a good disposition'd Child, under that nurture of Love, wherein he
evidences himself to be a tender hearted Father. Is it only a gentle
Correction, not eternal Damnation, the desert of thy Sin? Is it only a
profitable Medicine, though it might have been Poison thy final bane and ruin?
Is it only the scarifying a gangrenated Limb, which might have been the
scalding and burning for ever of both Body and Soul in unquenchable Fire,
unappeasable Wrath? Oh love the Lord for the mitigation, for the transmutation
of thy Penance. That thou art in a state where thy Sufferings may be
sanctified, therefore are in Mercy; where they may be terminated, therefore are
no ground of Desperation; where they may be recompensed, and shall undoubtedly
issue in endless Blessedness, if thy stubbornness and non-improvement hinder
not. Take it well and kindly at those gracious Hands, that draw the flaming
Sword, and turn it every way against thy Corruptions, (which shut thee out) and
this on purpose, that thou may be received by the Lord Pure and Innocent into
Paradise; who by thine experimental knowledge of this evil of suffering, will
create in thee a saving knowledge of good, and through these Fruits of the Tree
of the Cross, lead thee to the Tree of Life.

CHAP. IX. The Subject of Comfort, Eyes God in all things.
7. THis Man of God enjoyed and lived under much experience of divine Goodness
and gracious Providence. Under all that happened he eyed and owned the Hand of
God. 1. In Affliction. Ver. 17. Unless the Lord had been my help, my Soul had
almost dwelt in silence. Ver. 22. The Lord is my defense, and my God is the
Rock of my Refuge. 2. In Temptation. When I said my foot slippeth, thy Mercy, O
Lord, held me up, ver. 18. 3. In both ver. 19. the Text, In the multitude of my
thoughts within me thy Comforts delight my Soul. A Man of common Principles
would have looked no farther than second Causes, and the activity of
Instruments and Means in his deliverance from Death, ver. 17. Than his own
Prudence, Caution, Foresight, Care, and Endeavor in preservation from falling,
v. 18. Than his own reasonings and wise conduct of his Affections in the calm
and serenity of his Mind, v. 19. But this Holy Soul ascribes all to Divine
Goodness. And indeed to such a Man nothing is accidental; he is never at a loss
for the cause of any occurrent, when he has not the least prospect of the
agency of any thing on Earth, he can find out a supreme mover in Heaven, to
whom nothing falls out by chance, without either the foresight of his
Intelligence, or the conduct of his Wisdom, or the determination of his Will,
or the interposal of his Power, or the liberty of his Permission, which though
no cause at all properly, but only that called sine qua non, which is but
Fatua, yet is governed by his Providence, and all the possibilities thereof
visible to his Prescience. God is more concerned in the World, than the
Artificer in a Clock, who when it is set together, set up, and agoing, forsakes
it. He is sure little conversant in Scripture, that imagines the Deity only a
general cause, who having constituted things with such and such particular
Natures, Propensions, Biasses, leaves them to run out their course without
further Concurrence and Solicitude, than to preserve them in the being,
constitution and activity he first gave them. There Is nothing so mean so
fortuitous, but the Scripture intitles God to it, either in way of Efficiency,
Direction, Ordination, or Permission. If it be Good, Natural or Moral he is the
doer; so if evil Natural, if evil Moral, though he abhor it, cannot effect it,
or concur to it as such, yet can he, does he direct and order it, to such ends,
as are consistent with his Wisdom, Justice, Holiness and Goodness; which he
well foreknows how to do, therefore hinders not its existence, as he easily
could do without any violence to Nature, blemish to his Government, or
infringement of the Liberty of his Creatures. For to me it is no little Mystery,
that although God be able to form a Rational Nature, with liberty of Will and
Prudence so to manage it, that it shall at no time be compelled to offer
violence to its own freedom, but in every act proceed with an even, gentle,
sweet Spontaneity, according to the dictates of its own finite Understanding;
yet that the infinite Intelligence and Prudence of the Divine Nature, must be
thought unable and insufficient, by the reasonable Understanding and Will, to
elicite, manage and guide these very humane Actions so as to preserve the same
Liberty inviolable. Let something be allowed to Infiniteness; sure it can do
whatever Finiteness can, if it be not to its disparagement. If I can bring
about my own resolute and fixed Purposes, without prejudice to my own or others
Liberty, sure boundless Wisdom and Power can tell how to bring about its
determinations by the liberty of the Creature. A Reverend Judicious Divine, my
Relation, told me, that for experiment sake, to try the power of an
over-mastering Imagination, he had often requested such things of some Persons,
in whom he had no Interest at all, which he knew they had an aversation to,
using no Reasons, Arguments, Motives, Importunities at all further than the
bare proposal; only engaging himself strongly to fancy, that he should obtain
his desire, and he seldom failed to prevail. I never had the curiosity to make
a trial, but am apt to think there may be something in it, upon consideration of
the strange effects of the Mothers imagination upon her enwombed Infant, as to
both Impressions on its Body, and Antipathies in its Mind; the transpiring
animal Spirits, modified and moved strongly by a material Faculty, may
intermingle with those of a differing Body, and overruled their weaker
Modifications and Motions, and thereby the material Faculty that acted them, as
in Sympathetick Cures, and the votatil Particles of Vitriol, etc. Crude or
calcined, do mix with the extravasated vital Spirits, and return with them to
their Fountain. I confess these act only as Physical Causes, and cannot vary in
their effects of themselves, though other external Causes may thwart them. And
what if a Man allow some such like thing to Spiritual Natures. By what
impressions they can communicate their Minds to one another, by what impulses
they bow one another Wills; we know not but only the Effects. God never fails
to obtain the free voluntary Obedience of Angels. And the more determined their
Wills are the more free. The Devil acts with less Liberty than a Glorified
Saint; and a Holy Angel, with more than a self-determining Man, who has both
liberty of Contrariety and Contradiction, can do both Good and Evil, Act and
not Act. Well if my Imagination further, if my short defective Understanding
can, the one make such impresses, the other produce such weighty momentous
Reasons as shall sway my own and others Wills, to an inhesitant and free
compliance, shall I not give that deference to the unfathomable Intellect and
Reason of God, as to suppose it endued with Ability, to suggest such things, as
shall bow mine own or others Wills to a ready, spontaneous, ingenuous
Concurrence, than any thing can, that is deduced merely out of the promptuary
of mine own Mind. I find my freedom in acting is gradually more or less
intense, according to the satisfaction of my Reason. And if the Reason of God
which is boundless cannot induce a more ample satisfaction, than the Reason of
a Creature which is but lame and imperfect; and if he cannot with as much
Facility without all impeach to our Liberty, lead our Minds to the
Contemplation thereof, as in the use of the empire our selves have over them,
we can do; if he cannot also more thoroughly excite, acuminate, quicken and
enlarge our considering Powers, freely to engage, I have done. It Is not strange
therefore that the Scripture ascribes all to God as the Origin of every
individual Motion. I find holy Men in every, though never so fortuitous an
effect, of a spontaneous Agent, to look at God. I Will not instance in other than
David. And, 1. for evil Events. As he intimates a possibility of Readiness being
excited against him by God, 1 Samuel 26.19. and was foretold that the Lord would
raise up evil against him out of his own House, and take his Wives and give
them to Absalom, under the notion of his Neighbor, 2 Samuel 12.11. So even when
he was cursed by Shimei, he owns it as from God, 2 Samuel 16.10. Not that he
supposed God had a hand in the sin of the Act, but ordered it as a part of the
punishment threatened for his own Sin. 2. Good Events of all kinds he more
frequently ascribes to God. Does he conquer his Enemies? It Is the Lord that
lets him see his desire upon them, Psalm. 59.10. and subdueth the People under
him, Psalm. 18.47, 48. See the whole Psalm; and smites his Enemies in their
hinder parts, Psalm. 78.66. Do his Friends own and anoint and crown him King? He
entitles God to it, Psalm. 21.3. When his Father and Mother forsake him, the
Lord takes him up, Psalm. 27.10. Is he secured in a strong City? It Is the Lord's
mavelous kindness, Psalm. 31.21. What do I enumerating Particulars? every
Psalm is an Instance. And indeed were it not so, Prayer would be mere Mockery,
and Praise Hypocrisy; Epist. 31.
and that of Seneca would be better Divinity, than we are taught by the
Scriptures, (which yet to suppose is most horridly Blasphemous) Per maxima acto
viro turpe est etiamnum Deos fagitare. Quid votis opus est? Fact ipse
foelicem. Let those English it that allow it.

Now when a Man does thus in all Events take notice of the Finger of God, and
thereby give him the glory of his Efficiency, he is in a disposition for
renewed Experiments of the Divine Power and Goodness in Peace and Joy. Where
the Glory will be given to God he will grant the fullest and sweetest tastes of
his Graciousness. But who will lose a Benefit? It Is lost where no likelihood of
any grateful Acknowledgement. Unthankfulness is the most hateful of Sins.
Ingratum si dixeris, omnia dixeris. If God must not reap Praises, he will not
sow Mercies. Not that he needs our Gratitude, but that we must own our
Benefactor, and testify our advances in Love, when by new Instances he
testifies his Love to us. Nevertheless this Love of ours is not profitable to
God, but highly (as all other Graces) to our selves. Our own Advantage and
Interest is always at the bottom of our Duty; which indeed can add nothing to
God, Job 34.
is nothing to him, as neither can our Iniquity detract from him, or hurt him.
His good will toward us moves him to take care, that it may be well with us,
therefore does he follow us with his tender Mercies, and richest Blessings,
that we may proceed upon ingenuous Motives, in our observance of him, and
obedience to him; and may not be obnoxious to the check of Satan, or our own
Consciences, for servility of Spirit in that work, wherein consists our
Liberty, Honor, and Happiness. Indeed we are not really good if we be not
ingenuously good; nor act at all for God if we act not from a filial
disposition. Love is every Grace and Virtue, that Spirit of Life which as an
universal Cause diffuses its benign animating Influences, through all the
Regions of true Goodness and Honesty. All in us that lives to God, every holy
Disposition, every gracious Habit, is only a distinct particular modification
of Love. Even as the varieties of Nature, in those innumerable differences of
Plants, sensitive Creatures and Men in their Bodies, are but Earthly Particles
diversely modified, formed, fashioned, and qualified. Hence Love is said to be
the fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13.10. But without Love to be Good is
impossible, 1 Cor. 13. Where this Grace dwells, God dwells also; and the Soul
inspirited by it dwells in God, 1 John 4.8, 16. The more of Love therefore the
more of God. He will never be out of our Eye if he be thus in our Hearts. Love
there will command our Looks, 'Twas the dominion of this Grace in his Soul,
that moved the Psalmist to make such honorable mention here of the Love and
Graciousness of God, in his aid and sustentation; 'twas this that in his
distress inclined him to take Sanctuary in God; and own all the Spiritual
Refreshments that solaced his Heart, as derivations from God; and engaged him
to devolve all the Glory thereof upon God. And how should that Soul do other
that has all in God?

Have thou then, Oh my Soul, evermore and in every occurrent, an Eye toward
Heaven, and by thy acknowledgement of the Finger of God in every thing that
befalls thee, Do thou honor his Providence, endeavor to relish his
Goodness, and make some progress in thine affectionate pantings after him,
complacency in him, resolution for him, and dutifulness to him? O let every
thing remind thee of his everlasting Commiseration, that in thy lost Estate
remembered thee, gave Blood for thy Ransom, the Blood of God. Acts 20.28. The
time of thy lothing was the time of his Love, Eze. 16.5, 8. He loved thee out
of the Pit of Corruption, Isa. 38.17. He has prevented thee with the Blessings
of Goodness, Psalm. 21.3. He redeemeth thy Life from Destruction, and crowns
thee with loving Kindness and tender Mercies, Psalm. 103.4. He has not dealt
with thee after thy Sins, nor rewarded thee according to thy Iniquities, ver.
10. Therefore, ver. 1, 2. Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me
Bless his Holy Name. Bless the Lord, Oh my Soul, and forget not all his
Benefits. Hallelujah.

CHAP. X. The Subject of Comfort, Seeks it solely in God.
THus much of the Character deduced from the Context, there only remains one
thing out of the Text it self, Viz.

The Psalmist was a Man, who discerned such an emptiness, and insufficiency in
all inferior Contentments, as to seek no relief from them, nor take up with
any in them, as his rest in Trouble; but in deepest anxiety and distress, did
look for, and find all his comfort solely in and from God: This is the very
substance and marrow of the Verse. Indeed the whole Psalm is a Testimony of his
ceasing from the Creature, from Man, in a believing and affectionate recourse
to God: Wherever he cast his Eye upon Earth, the Inscription was Vanity and
Vexation. A deluge of Sin and Misery covered the World, that like Noah's Dove
he could find no rest for the sole of his Foot below, therefore does he direct
his course toward Heaven. Thus Psalm. 55.6. Oh that I had wings like a Dove, for
then I would flee away and be at rest: But Rest is not a Denizen of this World.
Nothing but the Heaven of Heavens is at rest, and here does he fix only. There
was a Windy Storm and Tempest without, as Psalm. 55.8. and which is worse, a
Tumult and Combustion within in his thoughts. A Man may escape from External
Confusions; but how shall he fly from himself? If he be out of the reach of all
the Blood-suckers on Earth, and all the Furies in Hell; yet be dogged and
haunted with his own turbulent, ungovernable Cogitations, he needs no other
Tormenters. This Holy Man was thus doubly distressed; a Storm Abroad and an
Earthquake at home rendered his Condition most dolorous: But for both he has
[(...)]: he goes not about with the Foxes of this World to relieve himself with
subtle Stratagems and Wiles, by carnal Shifts and Policies, a Vanity tossed to
and fro by them that seek Death: No, his one great Refuge is to get aloft, to
ascend to God. Here is his Defense from outward assaults, v. 22. Here is his
Ease in the Torment and Mutiny within; thy Comforts delight my Soul. Nothing
can really comfort without God, or any further than as it leads to God. The
Creatures are but dry Breasts and a miscarrying Womb. The empty Cisterns will
sooner be filled with the Tears of the disappointed Hopeless, than distill upon,
or replenish and fill their Souls, with the refreshing Dews of true
Consolation. It Is in vain to look for living Comforts amongst dead Enjoyments.
There Is no Life or vital Influence in any thing, to enable it to quiet a
troubled Soul, if God be not in it: He is the Soul of all real Contentment. In
Separation from him there can be no Heaven; i. e. no Life, no Peace, no Rest,
no Glory; all is only Dream and Fancy, and will vanish into Smoke and Fire; yet
such as is outer Darkness: And if without him, there can be no Heaven above,
much less below in the mind of Man, least of all in the outward Objects of
Sense, and carnal Affection, which the Men of the World make their gods and
adore. Truth is, whatever they pant after and love in the Creature, is a
Shadow, a Counterfeit God. I was going to say, even that which they wickedly
dote on below, is only a presumptive Excellency of God: For no Appetite can be
taken with Evil, as such; it never solicits us in its own form, but only in the
disguise of goodness. Real, it has none it self, therefore is only good in a
Vizor, or Mask like a Devil in the habit of an Angel of Light. Omne malum
fundatur in bono: When it wooes our Affections it brings some visible or
apparent good, to speak for it as being in it self likely to meet with nothing
but abhorrence. The apparent good is Pleasure, Profit, Honor, the Worlds
Trinity; these are the Baits to our Affections. Now the perfection of these is
Heaven, and God: pure and undrossy Pleasure, and fullness of Joy, Psalm. 16. ult;
solid and immarcessible Treasures, Riches, and Gain, Matthew. 6.20. 1 Timothy 6.19.
Ephesians. 3.8. Phil. 1.21. Luke 12.33. Romans 2.4. and 9.22. and 11.3. Ephesians. 1.7.
and 2.4. Phil. 4.19. Substantial and Royal Honors; whence God so often is
styled a King, and Heaven a Kingdom, into which all that are admitted are
Crowned as well as the King himself. In short, God is the most pleasing, yea
infinitely pleasing, profitable, honorable, honoring Good; the Fountain of
all Honor. It Is true, the Profits, Pleasures, and Honors of this World are
quite of another Genius, Sensitive and Sensual, not Rational and Spiritual: Yet
I hold, that if the Spiritual Bodies in Heaven, 1 Cor. 15.44. be endowed with
Sense as it is probable ( Job 19.26, 27. Rev. 1.7. Seeing will infer the rest,
External and Internal) even sense it self will receive in Heaven and God, and
the most ample Ravishing Satisfaction, in all its possible Capacities, both
outward and inward, in Compensation for all those Mortifications and Miseries,
wherewith it has been Cruciated in this Life, even as the Body in Hell, in all
its sensible Possibilities is Tormented, as a just Recompense for its Communion
with the Soul in all sinful Sensualities. Indeed the sinful Sensuality shall
not, cannot have place in Heaven: Not a Man there will desire it, not one need
it, but all Everlastingly abhor it. 'Twould be the most unspeakable Torment to
those Spiritual Bodies and Divine Souls. The Body there does not so much affect
the Soul, as the Soul the Body, and God both. The Spring of all Satisfaction is
in God, derived from him to the Soul, from the Soul to the Sense and Body; and
whatever Sense does introduce is of the same alloy and quality. There can be no
Sensations of Delight in any thing, but what is really refreshing to those pure
sinless Spirits: What things soever would be disgustful to the Sanctity of the
Soul, would therefore be Torturous to its ever Sympathizing Individual
Companion, the Body; which Torture, since it is utterly Incompatible with
Heaven; hence carnal Sensualities are there absolutely impossible. But then
Spiritual and Metaphorical Sensualities are the very Life and Soul of Heaven,
perceptible by the Spiritual Body, as well as the Soul: I cannot exclude all
Natural. The Body in all its Possibilites of sense will be in a perpetual
ravishing, rapturous Ecstacy of Delight, through the overflow of those
Celestial Joys, which evermore solace the Soul, in the Embraces of eternal,
infinite Love and Goodness. I have had a Conceit, which I submit to better
Judgments; thus I expressed it, Christ comes in Flaming Fire, 2 These. 1.7, 8.
Psalm. 50.3. which shall consume the Material Heavens, as well as the Elements
and Earth, 2 Pet. 3.7, 10, 12, and is designed for Vengeance to those that know
not God, and obey not the Gospel; 2 These. 1.8. and Perdition to ungodly Men, 2
Pet. 3.7. Now his Saints, Jude 14. Zech. 14 5. as well as Mighty Angels, 2
These. 1.7. shall come with him, which I understand of Glorified Souls, to meet
and be rejoyned to their raised Spiritual Bodies. Upon these Bodies that Fire
shall have no Power; to them it shall be no Torture and Cruciation, it shall
only be refreshing Light to them, tormenting Fire to the Wicked. The Bodies of
both shall be raised Incorruptible, 1 Cor. 15.52, 53. The Fire shall torment,
but not corrupt and consume the Bodies of the Damned in Hell it self. God,
Christ and the Saints dwell for ever in Light unapproachable, 1 Timothy 6.16. Col.
1.12. and the Light wherein Christ appeared to Paul, was greater, more glorious
than that of the Sun at Noonday, Acts 26.13. else could it not outshine it.
This singularly Intense Light of Heaven is questionless, an unconceivable, even
sensitive Pleasure to the Saints refined Bodies. Now this is my fancy, since
Light is delute Fire, the Sun its Fountain a vivid Flame; yet everlasting Light
in its highest Perfection, is one of the Pleasures and Delights of Heaven,
being the Royal Robe of the Divine Majesty, Psalm. 104.2. And his Angels are a
flaming Fire, therefore called Seraphims, from their Fiery Splendour and Glory,
Psalm. 104.4. Heb. 1.7. Isa. 6.2, 6. yet Minister to our good, even in that form
Isa. 6.6. Heb. 4.14. Hence may it not be inferred that the framing Fire in
which Christ appears, will be so far from being hurtful, painful to his, and
their glorified Bodies, as to be an object of special Sensitive Delectation,
and cause a pleasurable refreshment wonderfully grateful, to those Celestial
Natures, which shall dwell for ever in, and be clothed with the Eternal Light
of Heaven: That if it were possible for a glorified Saint to be hurried into
the material Fire of Hell, 'twould not be hurt; or for a Damned Wretch to be
led through Heaven, the Light thereof to him would be tormenting Fire: But this
I leave in Medio as a Speculation perhaps too curious. I question not but that
the Almightiness of God, which is engaged to promote to the utmost, the
happiness of the Saints, can make those things, that now to the Body are most
painful, to be then most pleasureful; that even in its Physical Constitution,
as well as Moral, it shall be delighted with that which is distastful in this
Life, if it be not sinful. And possibly Adam's Body in its Primitive Innocent
Estate of Creation, might be of the same Constitution, invulnerable,
incombustible, etc. as far as was requisite to his security from Death: For I
cannot so much as implicitly impute such Collusion to the Divine Majesty, as to
imagine that he only threat, ned that, as a Punishment of his Sin, which was
the condition and necessity of his Nature. Neither will I deny that the Tree of
Life was a Sacrament of Immortality: But conceive that, nor he, nor it could be
ubiquitary or inseparable; nor do I think that the Deity obliged himself to a
Providence respecting innocent Mankind, which would have been a perpetual
series of Miracles, since 'twas as easy with God to make Impassibility an
amissible Condition of this Nature, as Immortality: But I am not Determinate
here neither.

However the Elevated Sense of that Immortal State above, will be abundantly
pleasured with Supernatural and Super-sensual Gratifications, in the
Jucundity, Profitableness and Honor of Heaven; the vain and empty Shadows
whereof, engage it in endless Pursuits, during this its Degenerate state on
Earth. The Generosity and Nobleness thereof will be so Transcendent, that it
cannot but entertain with Indignation, Scorn, and Horror; all imaginable
Solicitations to any thing sinfully Delightful, Commodious and vain Glorious:
Every thing to it being as it self, Sublimated into a Spiritual and Celestial
Nature, that it enjoys the sweet of all without the sour, in an unfading
Quintessence of most exquisitely delicious Contentments: where although there
can never be any troubled Thoughts, yet may we ever sing, Thy Comforts, Oh
Lord, delight my Soul.

Then, Oh my Soul, delight thou thy self in, and with them alone; and not
merely as in the Streams, but in the Wellspring it self. Own God in every
inferior means, but rest no where except in God Oh do not in a pompous Dress
of Shadowy delusory Satisfactions, cheat thy self into substantial Miseries.
Secure to thy self something of a solid durable Nature, by making the son of
God, Jesus Christ, thy sure and everlasting Foundation; that being strongly
built upon the Rock, when the Rain descends, and the Floods come, and the Winds
blow and beat upon thee, thy Comforts may not perish with thee: And Phil. 4.7.
The Peace of God which [transcends or] passes all [mind or] understanding,
(...).
shall [watchfully guard or] keep [as with a Garrison, 2 Cor. 11.32.] thy
heart, and [the devices, thoughts of thy] mind, through Christ Jesus Must God
be all in that Eternal Heaven, after which thou aspirest, and is there enough
in him to satiate the most raised and sublime Desires of the Spirits of just
Men made perfect, and even the Angels, those more Noble and Capacious
Creatures: Nay is there an all sufficiency in him Commensurate to his own
infinite Love, in all the possibilities of its Perfection? And can not thou,
Oh my Soul, fill thy self to the brim, and measure out a Satisfaction more than
adaequate to thy Rational Appetite, in that unmeasurable fullness which
comprehends the eminency and glory of all things. If Infiniteness cannot
overfill thee a poor Worm, a little Atome of that which in comparison of him is
less than nothing, Isa. 40.17. then may thou with some Shadow of reason
attempt, to eek out thy content, with the Accumulation of other things. But
since there is in God all that good Vertually, Unitedly and Transcendently (as
in a common Storehouse and Treasury, and that without the rebatement and allay
of any the least commixtures of Evil, Vanity, or Imperfection, which stain the
Glory of all those dispersed Excellencies in the Creation) that thy most
unboundable desires, in all their conceivable Varieties, can court or make Suit
unto; and whatever thy longings reach out after, thou may enjoy it, cheaper
and better in God than any where; and since beside all this, there is an
unfathomable Surplusage of proper Excellency and Glory in that [(...), as
Maximus Tyrius calls the Deity] Immense Ocean of all Goodness, which has been,
is, and will be his own and the whole Superior Worlds Everlasting
Contentation: And since he declares his ready willingness to communicate and
impart of all this unto thee; not only what thine own Rational Consideration,
but even what his own unmatchable Love and Graciousness can make thee willing
to receive, thou can not but be altogether inexcusable, if thou go about
to patch up an evanid and delusory Felicity to thy self, out of those castaway
Shreds and Rags of the inferior Creation, which are not sufficient for
themselves, but will be fatally disappointing to thee, and frustrate thy most
Solicitous Expectations, whilst in the mean time thou sottishly and frantickly
defraudest thy self of that plenary Satisfaction and Joy, which is tendered to
thee by, and in God, both on Earth to raise and quicken thy devout and active
Suspirations, and in the Heaven of Heavens to terminate, and perfect them in an
Everlasting Fruition.

Here then only, Oh my Soul, build thy Tabernacle; Is it not good to be here?
Where thy Faith it self shall be converted into Sense, Sight and Taste, in a
never ending Possession, of what Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, nor has
entered into the Heart of Man to conceive. Thou art allowed to eye and enjoy God
in the Creature, obliged to make all sensitive Contents, which thou may
lawfully or sinlessly receive from the Creature, as so many steps to mount
upon, and ascend toward the Spiritual Contents of Heaven; necessitated to use
every good thing below, as a Remembrancer to thee of its Perfection in God,
that it may blow up thy passionate Aspirations, into a more vehement and
inextinguishable Flame and Ardour toward him. In all things thou may taste
that the Lord is Gracious, and enjoy sweet and comfortable Prelibations of
Heaven. This is thy privilege: But on the other hand thou art prohibited to
make a God of this World, and Sacrifice the Creature to thy Sense or
Sensuality. To be happy in Exterior Things relatively to God, making a
Deference to him, whenever that which he has shed abroad of his Goodness upon
them, meets with thine Appetite in any agreeable Harmony, is a part of
Happiness indulged to Mortality; but to hunt after Sensitive Pleasure for
pleasures sake, and Profits for profits sake, and Honors for honors sake;
taking up an absolute Rest in them, as if the ultimate end of Life, and
advancing them to a Competition with, if not Preference before all-sufficient
Goodness, this is the greatest Debauchery of Humane Nature, a step of
Degeneracy below the Diabolical. For, though the Temperament of this, admit of
some hot and dry, fiery and aerie Sins; as Pride, Revenge, Malice, etc. yet does
it not of all the Four Elements of Sensuality, Fiery Lust, Aerie Ambition,
Watery Drunkenness, and Earthy Covetousness, against which, Oh my Soul, it
concerns thee to Fortify and Arm thy self, with the contrary Elements of
Godliness, viz. Watery Repentance, Earthy Humility, Fiery Zeal and Love, Aerie
or Ethereal Hope, and Heavenly Mindedness, and that which as the Heavens is
the Magistery and Quintessence of all Faith Unfeigned. This is the Grace which
will carry thee aloft, above all restless Visibles, and possess thee of an
Everlasting Sabbatisme, and Rest in the Invisible God, through the ever Blessed
Jesus.

Oh therefore, take heed of changing the Truth of God into a Lie, worshipping
and serving the Creature more than the Creator, who is Blessed for ever Amen,
Romans 1.25. Let thy sweetest Enjoyments be so far from creating an Acquiessence,
and Cessation of those ever active Desires, which nothing but Infiniteness can
satiate, as to envigorate and heighten their Motions toward that Supreme and
Sovereign Goodness; where as in a Center (yet Uncircumscribed, Unlimited) all
the Rays of inferior Excellency meet, all the unquiet Pulsations and
Palpitations of troubled Hearts, are terminated in a perpetual and inviolable
Stability and Rest. Cease from the Creature, Man, thy self, and be filled with
God. The Divine Majesty cannot with patience endure to be cast in the Balance
with Vanity; it is a high affront and disparagement. And, what is it, that in
thy Appetite does so often Counter-balance the Felicity to be enjoyed in him?
Behold and Judge: The whole Earth is but as an invisible indivisible Point to
the Heavens; What is it then to God? And what a point of this Point do the most
Potent scramble for? And how unspeakably less still is the utmost possibility
of thy Quantum? But then again, how large may thine Empire be in thine own
mind, if God be Sovereign there? How unbounded thy Lot in the Jerusalem that is
above? How Unfathomable, Incomprehensible, Unlimitable, Inestimable,
Incomparable thy Portion in God? If thy undervaluing it, and over-valuing that
which deserves not to be named the same Day, Age, Eternity with it, do not
forfeit it. Here thy mind shall be, not only Illuminated, but Invested,
Clothed with the Sun of substantial Wisdom and Truth; thy Will and Appetite
dwell in the very affluence and fullness of unboundable and everlasting Love,
Goodness, and Righteousness; thy Heart even overwhelmed with a perpetual
Torrent, and Inundation of Prosperity, Peace and Joy unspeakable, and full of
Glory, in the Fountain of all Perfection the One only God, in Three Persons,
Father, Son and Holy Ghost; to whom be Majesty, Dominion, Adoration, Blessing
and Praise in the Church, and thee, Oh my Soul, throughout all Ages, World
without end, Amen.

Thus far the Character.

CHAP.XI. The Nature and Quality of the Psalmist's Thoughts.
2. I Have obliged my self next to give some account of the Thoughts, the
excellent Penman of this Psalm thus decyphered, was cumbred with, under which
he could find no redress on this side Heaven. In this Inquiry we shall gain
little assistance from the proper signification of the Original Word. It is but
by guess that Interpreters render it Thoughts, no necessity from either the
Word it self, or the scope of the two places where it is used, [here, and Psalm.
139.23.] does determine it for Thoughts properly so called, any more than other
Actings of the Soul. Of the Inclinations of the Affections, of the Will, it may
be understood as well as the Mind and its Motions. Any thing proceeding from
any of the Faculties and Powers of the Soul, that resembles the Branchings of a
Tree, whether it appertain to the Head or Heart, or both, may be included in
the sense of it. Therefore we must not exclude any thing within, deny no
workings either of Understanding, or Appetite, or Conscience, to appertain to
the meaning of the Word.

But since the Translation confines us to Thoughts, and the Original inforces
no sense but what relates to the Physical quality of such like operations of
the Mind in general, which resemble the Ramifications or spreading dividing
Branches of a Tree; whereas it is their moral Nature we are chiefly concerned
about in this disquisition; hence are we again put upon a search into the
Context, and Scope of the Psalm, and the Psalmist's present case, that we may
obtain a more clear and distinct Idaea of them. Now I take it for granted, that
in some part or other of the Psalm, these Thoughts are expressed in Words, or at
least plainly implied and hinted. Therefore shall I survey it as impartially as
may be, to find them out and not clog my Discourse with Impertinencies.

1. In General, The Thoughts were such as in their Nature did enforce a
necessity of Comfort, and that from God himself, as the Text evinces. There
seem to be insinuated a contrariety betwixt his Thoughts and Comforts; that the
latter were absolutely needful to antidote the former. Had they been good and
delightful cogitations, they would have carried a spring of Satisfaction in
their own Bowels. Had they been sinfully evil, he would not have said, IN the
multitude, etc. which supposes a continuance of the Thoughts, even whilst the
Comforts were applied as a remedy to remove the Malignity of them. But sinful
Thoughts are not to be opposed with Comforts, that will permit them to
continue; but with Contrition, Repentance, Grace, Conversision, Holy Thoughts,
which will immediately eject and discontinue them. Yet may I admit that the
Thoughts might be such as were occasioned by Sin; Sin might be the object of
some of them, the cause of others, yet the form of none.

They were without all peradventure Uncomfortable, Undelightful, Unpleasing
Thoughts; therefore does he derive his Comforts from another Sourse and Spring.
His Thoughts though a broad spreading Tree with multitudes of Branches, yet did
not bear a dram of this Fruit. No he never looks for it there, but steps into
Paradise, and takes it from the Tree of Life. Thy Comforts. We therefore will
suppose, that they were not such as did corrupt his Mind, but disquiet it;
sinless they were, but saddening; they induced no guilt, but only Grief; they
did not avert his Mind from God and Goodness, but only from Peace and Rest;
sinking it into Disconsolateness, till he took Sanctuary in the Refreshments of
Heaven. The Text plainly intimates that if he had not found some effectual help
in these, his Thoughts would have been an overmatch for him, and have born him
down. Therefore Afflicting they were but not Defiling. This was their General
Nature.

2. Particularly, They were of the nature of Meditations, i. e. Heart-affecting
Thoughts. Not mere Speculations, or notional Thoughts that were confined within
the boundaries of his Mind, and Understanding; but Thoughts that sunk downwards
and produced some effects on his Soul. For since no Thoughts are afflicting to
us, but only as they work upon those Passions of our Minds, which are of a
turbulent tormenting Nature; hence it appears that these had an influence upon
his Irascible Affections, (as by a Synecdoche they are called) representing to
them some Evils from which they could not but retire in an hostile aversation.
For no Evils without us cruciate us, till they thus get within us, and fight us
by our own Passions. This is the Beelzaebub that possesses us, and creates a
Hell in our Minds, even our masterly imperious Appetite. The Thoughts that
create a tumult here, are as so many Fiends to torture us. That rebel rage
which they infuse into our Blood and Spitits, disorders, discomposes our whole
Man, and makes us Devils to our selves. Thoughts then they were exciting
Passions. Therefore we must search and consider what Passions in particular
were in a civil war within the Psalmist, and also the quality of those Evils
which excited them. And that I may not be necessitated to repeat things over
and over, as the more natural Synthetical way and method of enquiry (first
after the Objects here particularly set down, thence concluding the general
Acts which only are employed) would compel me: I shall choose the Analytical
rather, proposing first the General Passions, conversant about the numerous
special Objects, which shall respectively be referred to their general and
proper Heads, together with such as are of Affinity therewith, though not
expressed in the Psalm.

The Thoughts then were of three kinds, answerable to three Affections, which
were vehemently moved by them, viz. Fear, Grief, Despair. Any one of these
alone is torturous, but altogether intolerable. Grief pains our Hearts as an
oppressing load, wastes and washes away those Spirits that should support us,
weakens and effeminates our Minds into an insufficency or unwillingness to
regard any thing, but what will contribute to its own excesses, till as an
impetuous Torrent or Deluge it overwhelm our Soul and Spirit, and sometimes
destroy the Body also; and herein it is more anguishful than Fear, because the
Evil present and felt stings more cruelly, than when only foreseen in its
Causes; the Sense presenting many things to torment us, which before our Fears
were not privy to; even as Fear sometimes represents Evils more terrible than
they are in reality found to be. But now if to the present troublesome
Experience, be adjoined a dreadful expectation of worse to come, or more of the
same kind, this will double the torture, because it doubles the perturbation,
and further betrays the succors which Reason or Hope might administer to us.
But if to both these be superadded an absolute hopelessness of relief that we
see, and foresee, and feel our selves miserable, without any likelihood of
Redemption, that either our Reason is darkened by the suffusion of our
Passions, so as not to be able to gain a prospect of remedy, or the magnitude
of the Evil it self is altogether invincible; this strangles Nature, and makes
it sink under its despondencies, into a Hell upon Earth. Of these Fear is the
first and lightest, and many times comes single. For whilst an evil is at a
distance there is a possibility to prevent its actual incursion. But Grief does
often succeed the torment of Fear, as when the evil does not surprise, but
gradually invade us, and this is like a new Wound in an old Sore, therefore
does more smartingly gall us. Yet both these together are nothing to Despair,
which is a compound of the other two, besides what it brings of its own to make
a Man inexplicably, unsupportably miserable.

1. Fearing Thoughts, terrifing Imaginations are bloody Tormenters, 1 John
4.18. and tear the Soul in pieces. When an Evil is imminent and we are
conscious of an inability to avoid or resist it, our Spirits succumb, sink, and
in a pale horror retire, and run away from the approaching danger. For some
kind of danger is commonly the object of Fear, which is excited when the Mind
apprehends, and the Thoughts dwell upon the greatness, nearness, or
unavoidableness of the Peril. The danger in the Psalmist's Thoughts seems to be
double, viz. of two the greatest evils Sin and Death.

1. Of Sin: for of that (under Correction) I interpret, ver. 18. When I said my
foot slippeth, etc. The Expression is but thrice beside, that I find in the
Psalms, and in two of them it is evident that a moral slipping or sliding into
Sin is meant, and the context gives fair probability for the third also, Psalm.
17.5. Hold up my goings in thy paths, that my footsteps slip not, that is, that
I sin not, Psalm. 38.16, 17, 18. When my foot slippeth they magnify themselves
against me, For I am ready to halt, and my Sorrow is continually before me, For
I will declare my Iniquity, I will be sorry for my Sin. These 3 Verses are
connected causally; I know not how to make sense of them, if the slipping and
halting be other than the sinning he sorrowed for. I take Sorrow in the latter
clause of the 17. ver. not formally, for the Passion of Sorrow, but materially
and objectively for the thing he sorrowed for, viz. his Sin; and so account
this an equivalent Expression with that Psalm. 51.3. My Sin is over before me:
And this is not an unusal thing in Scripture for Affections or Actions to be
put for their Objects or Effects, as in that very Psalm ver. 3. There is no
soundness in my Flesh because of thine Anger, i. e. the effects of thine Anger.
And ver. 9. Lord all my desire is before thee, i. e. the objects of my desire,
the things I desire. However the Sorrow there was for Sin, ver. 18. and so the
Sin was before him, immediately in the Sorrow. I account that the Clauses of
those two Verses answer one another thus, I am ready to halt, for I will
declare my Sin, -- I Will not deny the Truth though it give advantage to my
Adversaries, and occasion their magnifying themselves against me. I find my
self often liable to fall into Sin, I acknowledge it, let them make the best and
worst they can of it, and triumph as they please. Only do not thou forsake me,
ver. 21. Hear me, ver. 15, 16. so as to uphold my goings, that though I fall I
may not be utterly cast down, Psalm. 37.24. The third place is a perfect
parallel to this here, ver. 18. and so also in many things is the whole Psalm.
It Is Psalm 73.2. But as for me, my Feet were almost gone, my Steps had
well-nigh slipped: For I was envious at the Foolish, etc. This seems a plain
indication, both of the nature of the slip that 'twas moral, a slip into Sin,
and also of the kind of the Sin, into which he was ready to slip, or did slip,
either Envy or some effect thereof. To Interpret it of slipping into Suffering
appears very incongruous, the whole scope repudiates it. For suppose he thought
himself in danger of Death, as we shall see our Psalmist was, and intended in
this Metaphor to declare it thus, I had almost slipped into Destruction. For I
was envious, etc. This sounds harshly to rational Ears; the reason of the
coherence must be far fetched, and suppose our sense ere the illation will
hold, as thus, That Envy is a Sin, and Sin exposes to Destruction; but this
plainly supposes that the first slip must be into Sin, as we Interpret. Why
then go we about the Bush? The Original Word where it is not translated slip,
does often submit to a sense, through the force of the matter it is applied to,
which imports some thing of Sin, as Psalm. 82.5. All the Foundations of the
Earth [(...)] are out of course; Nod, slip, are moved out of their due moral
course of Righteousness in which they ought to move. Ps. 55.3. [(...)] They
slip, move, cast Iniquity upon me, that is, they lay it to my charge, which
without Iniquity they could not do to the Innocent.

I confess there is nothing in the Context to enforce this moral sense, so
neither is there any thing to urge the other. It lies indifferent to both.
Therefore it is but rational to apply that sense to it, which other places
necessitate. For why must a new sense be imposed upon an old Phrase here only,
when there is nothing to constrain it? Let it therefore imply it is fear of
falling into Sin, his sense of a Temptation to it, as Psalm. 73.2. That very Sin
there insinuated, seems to be in the Psalmist's Eye. Help failed him on Earth,
ver. 16, 17. Iniquity was triumphant, ver. 20, 21. and Innocence trampled on;
this touched him to the Quick, and was the ground of his Plea, ver. 20. He
therefore seems to be inclined to envy that Prosperity, wherein they
flourished, whilst himself was in a condition full of trouble, fear and
hazard; and yet being aware of the Temptation, he flies to God. Oh! my Foot
slips, I am like to be born down with the violence of the suggestion, help
Lord, and sustain me, that I may not sin against thee and my own Soul. The
Temptation had in sinuated it self into his Thoughts, but had not obtained the
consent of his Will, that rises against it, and calls in the aid of Heaven, and
God is merciful to him so as to relieve him.

To this Head therefore may I refer all the disconsolate Thoughts, that arise
in the Hearts of God's Servants through the suggestions of Satan. Whether
ordinary Temptations, or those extraordinary sudden Injections, which strike a
dread and horror into the Mind, and are so far from ravishing its consent,
that it rises in Indignation, Enmity, and Abhorrence against them, and would
give Worlds to be freed from them. As Atheistical, Blasphemous, Execratory,
etc. thoughts of God, Christ, the Holy Spirit, the Scriptures, Providence, etc.
These though in the matter of them, they be more abundantly enormous than
common Temptations, yet have proportionably a greater check from the Will,
which in a more violent Antipathy sets it self against them, and therefore,
though they be more our Trouble, are less our Sin, than such as with more
freedom are entertained into our Minds. For if it were a sin to have evil
suggested outwardly, or from a Devil without us in the gross way of Temptation,
whilst our Hearts abominate it, the sinless Lamb of God would not have been
free; so neither when invisibly and inwardly; since even external Proposals
cannot be understood and known, without inward Thoughts; and it is all one
whether the Thoughts be excited mediately from something without, or more
immediately from something within; whether the Tempter raise the Storm by a
Witch, or his one immediate Empire over the Clouds, Vapors, Exhalations and
Winds; whether he bring it in at the Cinque Ports of Sense external, or impress
it upon the internal working upon the Fancy and Invention, with the aid of
Memory. For that by Gods Permission he can move matter, is unquestionable,
therefore congest our animal Spirits into such Forms and Representations by an
immediate impulse, as they are apt to receive from the Objects of outward
Sense, which he has the advantage of doing more effectually, upon inspection of
our natural Temper and Complexion, and therefore Inclination, that cannot be
concealed and hid from his insinuating intellect, and critical Observation.
Whence Melancholic Constitutions are most haunted with these black Spirits,
and Temptations.

Hither also is to be reduced Horror of Conscience, either antecedent or
subsequent to sinful Practices or the Temptations to them; the former whereof
is so commendable in all, the latter confounding. For if Conscience startle and
be struck with Amazement and Astonishment, upon the temptation to some horrid
Crimes, (as it will sometimes, even in the profligately Wicked, which is an
evidence that they are not wholly given up by God) it may be still capable of
being touched with lesser, with all, which may issue in true Conversion,
through the Grace, Concurrence, and Blessing of Almighty God; or in further
degrees of tenderness and reluctance to Sin, in those that are already
Converted, as a fruit of that gracious Promise of taking away the Heart of
Stone, and giving an Heart of Flesh, Ezekiel. 11.19. and 36.26. The Psalmist's
here, was a dread of this Nature, and although this Psalm give us no intimation
of any horror in his mind at present, consequent to evil Actions; yet part of
the scope of the Psalm is to excite it in others, whose Crimes he lays open,
and aggravates as they deserve. The Conscience of his own Innocence now, did
antidote such troubles in himself, but his impleading his Enemies for the
foulest Injustice and Babarousness, has a tendency to rouse their sleepy
Consciences, into such an awakening sense and feeling as might make them
Terrors to themselves; as himself was afterward, upon his two foul
Commissions, Psalm. 51.

Neither are those fears and dreads of Satan, and Spiritual Enemies, which
sometimes rack and cruciate the Minds of Men, altogether to be forgotten. He
that is amazed at, and implores Divine Mercy against the Temptation, cannot
easily be reconciled to the Tempter, in whom, with his Angels there is a
combination of every thing that can render Adversaries formidable. What
numerous Legions in which not one single Enemy, but is brim full of rancor and
rage against us, endowed with a world of crafty Politics, and inventive
cunning, to devise whatever that unfathomable depth of Malice and Emity, can
direct against us, to ruin us everlastingly; together with an unknown and
unimaginably great sufficiency of Power and Activity to execute what they
contrive, and they have no limits of their duration on this side Eternity. Oh
dreadful Host indeed, what may they despair to effect, upon impotent and
degenerate sinful Man. But the dependence of things one upon another, I see,
has made me forget my Scope, which was to remember the Fears of Sin, and
Temptation to it, rather than the Tempter. I proceed to the

2. Danger wherein the Psalmist did apprehend himself, viz. of Death, not so
much Natural as Violent. His Enemies designed to Murder him by a pretended
Law, notwithstanding his Righteousness and Innocence; and for that end had
sentenced and condemned him, ver. 21.22. Whence he declares, ver. 17. Unless
the Lord had been my help, my Soul had almost, or quickly, dwelt in silence.
[My Soul] that is I my self, the better part by a Figure being put for the
Person, or rather for the worse part, the Body, [dwelt in silence] i. e. the
Grave, as is unanimously agreed by Interpreters, according to Psalm. 115.17. The
Dead praise not the Lord, nor any that go down into silence. Which is not to be
understood of the Soul, but Body only. Psalm. 49.12, 20. Nevertheless [or And]
Man being in Honor abides not a Night, he is like the Beasts that [(...)] are
silent, i. e. Dead. Psalm. 31.17. fully.

Death indeed is the King of Terrors, (...). Arist.
Job 18.14. Of all Terribles the most terrible to Nature, because it dissolves
its most amicable Bands, and utterly extinguishes all those hopes, which it has
for many years been kindling; and were it not for the reliefs of Grace, it
would certainly fill Men with unspeakable Agonies, could they view it in all
its antecedent and consequent Pomp and Circumstances. For it is only ignorance
of this very solemn change, that causes the most so fool-hardily and without
concern, to entertain the thoughts and approaches of it. But a violent Death,
God's Effections are always better, milder, than his Permissions.
when a Man lies at the mercy of those whose tender Mercies are Cruelty, must
needs cause more bitter Reflections than where Nature gently expires under the
compassionate tender Hands of the God of Nature, who always contends in
measure, that the Spirit may not fail, and the Soul which he has made.

To this Head then appertains the trouble arising from Fears of Suffering and
Affliction, of what kind soever. In particular those that accompany and follow
Death, especially the Terrors of Judgment and Hell, which is Eternal Death.
This the Psalmist sometimes felt the sting and torture of, as a preventive
Medicine that he might not feel it everlastingly. Psalm. 116.3. The pains of
Hell gat hold upon me, called the Cords of Hell, Psalm. 18.5. marg. (...)
(whence perhaps our English Word Cable) it sometimes signifies Corruption,
Destruction, Mic. 2.10. Troops, Bands, Companies, Psalm. 119.61. either of these
may suit well enough. But above all Fear of God's Anger, and just Displeasure,
most heavily sits upon the Spirit of a Gracious Man. All the Troops of Hell,
and Triumphs of Cruelty, are but Mormo's in comparison. Finite Fury cannot
plague infinitely; therefore our Savior advises, Luke 12.4, 5. Be not afraid
of them that kill the Body, and after that have no more that they can do; But I
will forwarn you whom you shall fear: Fear him which after he has killed, has
power to cast into Hell, yea I say unto you fear him. Filial Fear of God indeed
brings no trouble, but joy. It Is only a Fear working to Bondage, oppressive to
Nature, a Rebel against Reason, stupifying the Spirits, enervating the Will,
damping the Affections, over-throwing our Resolution, defeating our Counsels,
confounding our Consciences, betraying us into a base and unworthy servitude to
our own corrupt Imaginations, Errors, and Ignorance, and every exterior Agent
that has the power or will to abuse them, and our Credulity to our Prejudice
and Perdition.

2. Grieving Thoughts and Impressions. The Evils did not lie perdue at a
distance, but in a close encounter charged home, and wounded his Heart, that it
bleeds here in godly Sorrow. Indeed whatever causes Fear and Despair, does also
introduce Grief, when it becomes present; but his Mind was overwhelmed with
such Reflections, as had a peculiar influence upon his Sorrow, beside those
that did produce Fear and Despair.

As, 1. The Sins of others. The foul Enormities of Wicked Men, whereof several
are named.

1. Pride, Ver. 2. Render a Reward to the Proud; a Reward in Vengeance. In this
Sin the Devil began the Dance, and all his Servants wear his Livery, and tread
in his Steps. For this their Loftiness and triumphing Arrogance, his Heart
groaned out the double, How long? ver. 3. Words of Lamentation. Indeed when men
are despised they are either angered or grieved, angered if Proud, grieved if
Lowly, incensed if Passionate, if Meek troubled. It Is the property of Pride to
despise and slight all, but bear slighting from none.

2. Boasting. The inward filth of Pride and Arrogance foaming out at the Mouth,
ver. 4. All the workers of Iniquity [ speak boast.
] themselves; the coherence seems to intimate, that the things they boasted of
were their own height and power to oppress the Innocent. Being got to the top
of the Mount of Honor, and Worldly Prosperity, which puffed them up they
imagined it for their Security, and Glory, to fall down upon, and crush, and
break in pieces God's Heritage, and this they gloried in as becoming their
Grandeur Potency. Now to be not only trod and trampled upon, with the foot of
Pride, and spurned, kicked away like a Dog, but also hear the Proud-doers brag
of it, as a brave and worthy Fact, as it heightens the Sin of the Actors, so
the Sorrow of the Sufferers; both as an addition to their own Affliction, and
also a further aggravation of the Sin. It Is easier to bear a scorn in deeds,
when a Man has the liberty to suppose that possibly it may not be the issue of
design, and a malicious Mind, or that the Agent may after grieve for and repent
of it; than to bear their blessing themselves in it, praismg themselves for it,
which is a testimony of their love to it, delight in it. But if the Word
[(...)] be taken in a softer sense [ shall will
] or do speak of, or speak themselves, praedicabunt se, The future for the
present tense, a common Enallage except the (...) be repeated here again, out
of the foregoing Verse, as our Translaters think it must: But then why not also
in the Fifth and Sixth Verses, where the Verbs are all future, yet rendered in
the present.
Interlin: i. e. will vaunt, praise or extol themselves, in Words magnify
themselves, both think and speak highly of themselves, and by consequence,
basely, scornfully, slightingly, of those that are not like themselves in
Wickedness; and therefore of those qualities that difference both Parties,
speak well of Wickedness, that denominates and delights them, but ill of
Godliness which they oppose; yet both perhaps under the disguise of other
Names, plausible for their one Wickedness, disgraceful for Holiness, as the
manner and guise of the World always has been, and will be; this has not a
little of guilt and grief in it. Sin is ashamed of its own Name, and therefore
sights against Goodness under borrowed Colors, transferring its own title to
that which it opposes; and it cannot but be grief to an Innocent to suffer
under the notion of a Malefactor, to have his Name murdered as well as his
Person; whilst his Adversaries add Ignominy to Cruelty; but especially it
afflicts his Soul, that God and Religion and Holiness suffer, in the repute of
the ignorant, and sequacious Multitude, which is led in its judgment of things
by the Hand rather than Head; by the power and opinion of its Masters, without
making any disquisition or inspection into the reality of matters; taking all
upon trust whether it be true or false, good or evil. A Beast that with a
strong Bridle, and sharp Spurs will ride freely Blindfold post have into Hell;
but is infinitely malapert and restive in the course toward Heaven; its Eyes,
like those of a Fly, consisting of infinite little dim Atoms, without a due
proportion of Brains of their own to govern them, and therefore are as wild and
wanton in their motions.

To this may I join the trouble which the Psalmist seemed to be affected with,
through other perverse speeches of those wicked Persons, which though not so
expressly, yet may implicitly seem to relate to Pride; because interposed
between the mention thereof and the effect of it, in Boasting, ver. 4. How long
(...) shall they pour out as a Fountain does Water, and speak (...): which
properly signifies things hardened with age, yet upon the point to be removed,
and pass away; as may be gathered from the use and signification of its root.
These hard things they spoke, I take to refer unto others chiefly, as what
follows did to themselves. 1. Hard things, in Enoch's Prophecy, recited Jude
15. were spoken against God. May not our Psalmist refer to that Prophecy, which
no doubt came to his knowledge, either by Tradition or the Prophetic Spirit:
If so, then may they possibly be those recited ver. 7. or such like false
Atheistical, Blasphemous against God, his Providence, Word, VVays, People. 2.
Hard things, Psalm. 31.18. were spoke against the Righteous, proudly and
contemptuously in Reproach, ver. 11. and Slander, 13. whence his Eye was
consumed, and his life spent with grief, ver. 9, 10.

To this Head then may we reduce all those troubles which arise from the
Persecution of the Tongue. Threatenings, Aspersings, Defamations, Detractions,
Censurings, uncharitable rash Judgings, Mockings and Deridings, and clothing
Goodness and good Men with Reproaches, branding them with odious Names,
contrary to their real Nature, speaking all manner of Evil, Matthew. 5.11.

3. Persecution, which here was bloody and barbarously cruel, ver. 5, 6. They
break in pieces thy People, O Lord, and afflict thine Heritage; they slay the
Widow and the Stranger, and murder the Fatherless. Wherein both their
Inhumanity and base Cowardice manifest themselves, in that they rage against
the weak, impotent, and friendless, that have none to plead for, succor,
relieve, and help them alive, or revenge them when dead. This is justly
imputable to Dreg and Saul. The former by killing the Priests of the Lord, 1 Samuel 22.18. did exceedingly afflict God's Heritage and People, and brake them
in pieces and made many Fatherless and Widows, and afterward murdered them in a
savage unparalleled manner, ver. 19. and when he had done boasted of it, Psalm.
52.1. as the Wicked here, if that was not the same fact. Saul also slew the
Gibeonites, 2 Samuel 21.1, 2, 5. called Strangers, 2 Chronicles. 2.17. These may be
here understood as well as Proselytes.

Here then David lost his Friends and Favorers by a violent Death, and hither
may we refer the loss of Friends and Relations by a natural Death. A cause of
Grief as just as common. But especially to this Head belongs the troubles for
the Miseries and Calamities both of Church and State. When the Gates of Sion
mourn, we are but ill Members thereof, if it create not some kind of Sympathy
in our Hearts.

4. Atheism, disbelief of God's Omniscience and Providence. Ver. 7. Yet they
say the Lord shall not see, neither shall the God of Jacob regard it. This was
indeed the spring of all their other Sins, and therefore as Asaph, in another
like case was affected with it, Psalm. 73.11. They say how does God know, and is
there knowledge in the most High, etc? So here is David very much concerned
about it, and so much the more because Divine Vengeance seemed to be concerned
so little, ver. 1. whence he spends the 4 following Verses to evince and
convince them of the infinite unlimitable Knowledge of God, whereas he contents
himself with a bare mentioning their other Sins, without such reasoning against
them.

And indeed any serious Heart that duly ponders its dependence for Life, Motion
and Being upon God, will be tenderly sensible of all Affronts put upon him;
will not with patience endure that he should fall under Disparagement. As a
dutiful Child will hear untoucht the Reproaches cast upon a Stranger, or any
other rather than its Father. He who can be content that God should go less
than infinite in all Perfections, can be well pleased that he should not be
God, and that the World be deprived and destitute of his Government and
Providence, which would be the greatest mischief to it conceivable. Better
infinitely, that the whole Universe should be hurried back again into its
Primitive Chaos and Confusion, than God be lessened in any one of his
Excellencies. If ungodly Souls disavow any Divine Attribute, and seek to rob
God of the honor of that, without which a good Man cannot live, or live
comfortably, it is a Dagger at the Heart, and wounds the very Soul, and so ought
to do in all that are tender of the Glory of their Creator. For our own sakes
we have reason to abhor Atheism, in every degree and form of it; because if
there were not a God, or if he were not of infinite Understanding, we were of
all Creatures most miserable; not only as deprived of our true Felicity, and
the hopes of it, (for how should he reward us did he not know or regard us, and
our Integrity?) but we should fatally be exposed to all the vilest Indignities,
and most deplorable Calamities, the Wit and Rage of Men and Devils could devise
and inflict upon Earth; and since their and our Beings are altogether
incorruptible, as far as Spiritual, we should in like manner be dogged and
pursued with their implacable Malice, in our separate and immortal State; and
be desperate of succor and deliverance from that Eternal Erynnis, those
innumerable Legions of ever torturing Furies, that would be let loose upon us,
to lash and sting us, with the utmost of their virulent Indignation. For how
should the Deity relieve us, if he know nothing of us. It Is therefore the
highest Interest of real goodness, that there is a God of Vnlimitable
Intelligence and Love, to supervise and care for us, that no Evils can be
imagined against us, in the most dark and secret recesses of Hell, much less on
Earth, but are to him as visible, as though Writ or Graven in the Roof of
Heaven, by the Finger of God, in Letters formed all of Suns or Stars; and he is
replenished with that Wisdom and Graciousness, which both knows how, is
perfectly willing, and effectually engaged to counteract them.

But as this and the other Three, so all the Sins of the Wicked are a bitter
Grief to a good Soul. Whence David, Psalm. 119.136. Rivers of Tears run down
mine eyes, because they keep not thy Law. Be their Sins only Omissions, which
in the Estimate of the World are of a lighter Nature, though not in the account
of God, and an Illuminated Conscience; yet will they be grievous to those that
love the Lord and his Laws: And it is a good token of Integrity when the Sins of
others are a burden. Self may engage a Man against his own Sins, but if the
wickedness of those we have no concern with, deeply affect our Hearts, it is an
Evidence we are acted by the Interest of God.

Let this then, Oh my Soul, overruled all thy Passions. Live under some sense
with God: What dishonors him, let it humble thee. Be not so much troubled at
the Mischiefs, wherewith Men in the Triumphant Madness of their Prosperity,
endeavor to plague thee, as at the Sin whereby they duel Heaven. Where thy
Father suffers most in his Glory, do thou suffer with him. Thy Irascibles never
act more commendably, than when they run upon the Errand of thy Maker. Thou art
angry and sinnest not, when angry at Sin. It Is hard not to Sin in Sorrow, if it
be not Sorrow for Sin. And if thou groan under the Wickedness of others, sure
thou wiltst not, can not, dare not be so much a Hypocrite, as to go light
under the greater Load of thine own. Thou art conscious to thy self of many
Circumstances, aggravating thine own, which thou have no reason to apply to the
Crimes of any beside. Where thou know of most Evil, and that is in thy self,
there must thou spend Oceans: since the little in comparison, which thou
know of other Men's faults, requires thy Rivers. Let thy Sorrows bear
Proportion to thy Condition and Conscience. Weep, or at least mourn for, and
bemoan others, but most thy self. There must thou pay thy Drops, here a Deluge.

To this place therefore appertains all Spiritual Trouble for Sin, and the want
and weakness and defectiveness of Grace, with the effects thereof; That Anguish
of Mind, which springs from the sense of Sin's odiousness of God: The Agonies
and Anxieties of the New Birth, and under Relapses, whatever goes under the
name of a Wounded Spirit or Troubled Conscience. But,

2. Not only the evil of Sin, but other Evils, in themselves or to him in
effect, did sadden the Holy Psalmist's Soul. Two especially,

1. The Prosperity of the Wicked, their Joy; but his smart, Verse. 3. How long
shall the Wicked, Oh LORD, how long shall the wicked triumph? A common Offense
and Trouble, to both the Religious and Rational World. The Gracious Servants of
God often bemoan it. What a Multitude of Precepts and Comforts does the 37.
Psalm. present, as an Antidote against fretting about it? Habakkuk bewails it,
Hab. 1.2, 3, 4. Jer. Chapter 12.1, 2, reasons and pleads with God concerning it. In
Job, How many Discourses are there to this purpose? And every where in the
Psalms; to instance in one more only, Psalm. 73. Verse. 3. I was envious at the
foolish, when I saw the Prosperity of the Wicked: After a Description whereof
he adds, Verse. 21. Thus my heart was grieved, and I was pricked in my Reins.
This also was a stumbling Block to the Philosophical World, whereof the more
Considerate and Virtuous made a good use, others a bad; reasoning from the
unequal Distribution of Temporal Things, against the Being of God and
Providence; into such Absurdities may those run, who having but dark
Apprehensions of Immortality, and the Eternal Recompenses of a Future State;
take their measures from sense, and consider not the Unproportionableness of
this present moment of Temporal Life, to a vast Immense Eternity.

2. The Unprosperous, Afflicted, Persecuted State of the People of God, did
excite in him sorrowful Reflections. I doubt not but that with a broken Heart
he Writ down that Complaint, Verse. 5. They break in pieces thy People, O LORD,
and afflict thine Heritage. They slay the Widow and the Stranger and murder the
Fatherless. Sure with a Soul melted into Sympathizing Commiserations does he
remember this. So Asaph, Psalm. 73.10. Therefore his People return hither, and
Waters of a full Cup are wrung out to them. 21. Thus my Heart was grieved, etc.
which refers to all before Discoursed, concerning prosperous Wickedness, and
suffering Godliness. And, How can the Body in many parts of it suffer, and the
rest have no Fellow-feeling? Thou art not vitally united as a Member to the
Body of Christ, Oh my Soul, but may justly dread that he will cut thee off,
as a dead Libm, and bury thee in Hell, if thou be insensible of its Pains and
Agonies. Show that the common Soul and Spirit Animates thee, by a common sense
with the rest of the Members, that Communicate in it with thee. If thou be not
with them in Passion, yet be in Compassion. Why Persecutest thou me? Says
Christ to Saul, Acts 9.4. The pain is in the Members, the sense in the Head.
Christ disclaims thee, thou art none of that [me] whereof he is so tender, if
thou suffer'st not by Commiseration, when his Servants suffer Affliction. Put
on thy Bowels, if thou desire the Yernings of his, when thy Condition shall
be like theirs. With the Prophet Jerem. 9.1. Say Oh that my Head were Waters,
and mine Eyes a Fountain of Tears, that I might weep Day and Night, for the
slain of the Daughter of my People. My Bowels, my Bowels, I am pained at my
very Heart, the Walls of my Heart make a noise in me, I cannot hold my Peace,
because thou have heard, Oh my Soul, the sound of the Trumpet, the alarm of War.

To this Head may be reduced all those Troubles, which are Fruits of Public
Calamities to Church or State, Persecutions, Martyrdoms, Massacres, etc. Wars
and Violence, Oppressions, Injuries, etc. whatever may be the Effects of the
Rage and Fury of Men, and Malice of impure Malignant Spirits. These being the
Permissions of Providence to punish Sin, which, as Executions of Justice, God
attributes to his own Efficiency. Amos 3.6. Though mediately, may we not also
refer hither the immediate Effects of his Power and Justice, in Plagues,
Sicknesses, Famines, etc. Since they agree, though not in the Instruments and
Means, yet in the Original and Author, and Meritorious Cause, and Principal End.

3. Despairing Thoughts and Reflections, are beyond all Imagination Afflictive;
and of this Nature, we find some oppressing the Psalmist's Spirit, although
they were not of the worst kind. For despair he did not of Mercy and Relief
from Heaven, a Misery of all other most intolerable. He only despaired as being
destitute of all Hope, of Help and Succor from Man. Verse. 16. Who will rise up
for me? Who will stand up for me? The redoubled Interrogation implies a more
vehement Negation. None, none at all: For, unless the Lord had been my help, I
had gone without Redemption. Verse. 17. All the hopes I had upon Earth, did
utterly fail, there was none shut up or left. I was reduced to the utmost
extremity, and that was Gods opportunity. He was seen in the Mount, when the
Knife was at the Throat, and defunct was all considence in Man.

Now although the failure of all Earthly Supports be grievous, yet when a Man
has encouragment to devolve himself on the never-failing Goodness of God, he is
never destitute of a Satisfaction which will abundantly Counterveil those
troublesome Disappointments; and therefore his Condition is not really
miserable: But if this fail also, if his strength and hope Perish from the
Lord, Lam. 3.18. that he be in Readiness sore Distress, 1 Samuel 28.6, 15. and can
have a Prospect of nothing but Eternal Death and Damnation: Tongue cannot tell,
nor Heart imagine the Anxieties, and Agonies, which as a Prolepsis and
Anticipation of Hell, sting and excruciate his miserable Soul. There Is nothing
on this side that Dungeon of everlasting Darkness and Woe, can equal this;
which made Spira sometimes wish himself in Hell, that he might feel the worst.
Oh doleful Perplexity indeed! when a Man out of a distracting fear of Hell
desires to feel it. Oh Horror! when anguish of Mind under dreadful
Expectations, enforces his will to choose what is infinitely more anguishful;
and the Drops of Brimstone and Fire that scald his Conscience, urge him to a
strange unaccountable freeness, to be ever consuming in that Bottomless Ocean,
where Mitigation of Torment, end of Misery, abatement of Sense, will be not
only desperate but impossible. Oh Despair! thou art the sum and strength of
Wretchedness, the Bitterness and Poison of a never ending Death, the Fuel and
Flame of an unutterable Torturous Hell. Blessed is the Soul that never shall,
never must feel thy racking Horrors in this, or another World.

CHAP. XII. Comforts in general.
MY last Explicatory Undertaking, was to consider and describe the Comforts,
which now cast so benign an Aspect and Influence upon this Holy Man's afflicted
disconsolate Soul.

They may be considered either [ Formally or Materially,
] Formally in their proper Nature and true Constitution, as an inward
refreshment and ease to the Heart.

Comfort is a Map of Paradise, the lovely Meet-Help and Succor of desolate,
distressed Man, the Blessed Repast and Banquet of Holy Angels and Saints: The
Uncreated, Eternal Heaven and Jubilee of God himself; the Light wherein he ever
dwells, that spreads abroad its sweet reviving Rays, as largely, and liberally
as its Fountain, the super-intending Care and Goodness of Heaven, and
especially unto the humble and contrite Heart, settling it in a firm and durable
Repose and Peace. And when the Sin of degenerate Man had banished it from the
Earth, and his own Soul; the infinitely Wise and All-knowing God, the Father,
the dearly beloved Word and Wisdom of God, his only Begotten Son, and the
Eternal Spirit of Truth and Grace, did by an ever adoreable astonishing Method
of Goodness and Love, contrive a Retrieval thereof, that under its loss Man
might not continue the most miserable of the whole Creation. It Is the sweet
reviving Breath of boundless Grace, and compassion in the Eternal Father,
infusing new Life and Vigor into Fainting, Groaning, Bleeding, Dying Hearts,
and Enspiriting them for God. A refreshing Beam from the Son of Righteousness,
which infuses Warmth, Strength and Soul, into the disconsolate Heart of
dejected Man, that lies benighted in a Hell of Misery and Darkness: The Oil of
Life poured out by the Holy Ghost, upon a Benumbed, Frozen, Restive Soul, which
gently turns the Wheels of Action in a smooth, free, ready, easy, speedy
Course, and continues them in an unwearied motion toward Heaven: A sweet and
lovely Paraphrase upon the Promises, Engraven in a Wounded Heart by the Finger
of God: A powerful Antidote to the Poison of Tormenting Grief and Despair,
sweeter than Sorrow can be sour: An all-satisfying Foretast and Anticipation,
of the never Intermitting, never Terminating Joys of Eternity.

When the Sovereign Majesty of Heaven would Ingratiate himself, and though in a
humble Demission and Debasement of his Glory, yet appear in his highest
Loveliness to Man, it is in a Robe of Light, Joy, Comfort and Peace; and when a
Wounded Spirit that is discouraged in its Work, by the pressure of its own
self-created Woes, desires to be entertained into, and empowered for, and
cheerfully to engage in his Service, it implores and sues for the Joy of the
Lord, to be its Strength. When God's Heralds have been denouncing War to
Rebels, Vengeance against Enemies, thereby terrifying them into a War and
Enmity against their Sins: He next Commissions them as his Ambassadors, to
revive those troubled Souls with a message of glad Tidings of Joy, and Peace,
and Consolation. It Is the refreshing Dew of Heaven upon a barren heart, that
has been scorched and parched with the fiery Indignation of the Almighty, which
causes it to bring forth Fruit with rejoicing: The gracious Smile of the ever
Blessed Jesus, upon a weeping wounded Spirit, that is sick of its sins and
sores, sick for the sense of his Love: A hand let down from above, to lay hold
upon, and bring up from the deep an oppressed Spirit, sunk with the weight of
its own woeful thoughts, into an unfathomable Abyss of Miseries: A returning
Pillar of Cloud and Fire, to an Israelite indeed, that was bewildred and lost,
in a vast howling Wilderness of Danger and Horror, to direct and lead it with
Joy to its Celestial Rest: A secure and welcome Port of safety and repose, for
a weather-beaten Soul, that by the storms and surges of Almighty Vengeance,
has been Shipwrack'd and split all to pieces, in a Contrition and Humiliation
for Sin: A Bed of ease and quiet for a weak and sickly weary heart, which has
been wrestling and laboring under the weighty Load of Divine Wrath; set on,
and made more grievous by the Lashes of a Scourging Conscience: A Heaven of
unspeakable Delight and Satisfaction, descending into, and raising up a
dejected Mind, which it found deeply buried in a doleful Hell of Wretchedness
and Woe. Oh sweet and amiable Peace! How lovely are thy Looks? How dear and
pleasing thine Embraces? What art thou not that is good, desirable, delightful,
contenting, satisfying? Riches in Poverty, Health in Sickness, Honey in Life,
Heart-ease in Death, the Glory of Eternity.

But to give a Logical Description of it, Formal Comfort is the inward Rest,
Quiet, Contentment, Satisfaction, Ease and Refreshment of the Mind, arising
from the View, Sense, Consideration, Application, and feeling of such proper
and suitable Remedies for all manner of Troubles, as answer the Necessities,
Exigencies and Desires of the Soul in all things, strengthening for Work,
supporting under Temptations, inspiriting for Sufferings, cheerfully to bear
them, perfectly to conquer them, and everlastingly to triumph over them.

Taken Actively, and in Fieri, it imports a Man's applying to himself the things
which God has provided, to refresh and strengthen him.

Passively, a Man is comforted when upon the Application of such things, the
Mind, Heart and Conscience are satisfied, and settled within themselves, in a
calm and quiet Rest and Peace. This is Comfort in facto esse, as the Schools
phraze it.

If we speak properly, and according to the English Translation here, This
Formal Comfort is not that Comfort which the Psalmist reports; but rather the
delight in his Soul, which did, or might issue therefrom, as an effect from its
immediate Cause, and therefore is not a stranger to the Text.

Yet indeed, the Comfort here mentioned, is not to be understood Formally, but

Objectively, or Materially, for comforting things; as in Physic, a Cordial is
not the Comfort the Heart receives, but the Medicine, which has Virtue and
Power to Comfort the Heart, as a means under Providence.

In Discoursing to this, several things might be considered.

1. The Matter or Thing it self, which comforts, which is God, his Being,
Nature, Perfections, etc. 2. The Instrument, Vehicle, or Means.
1. Revealing, Tendering, Conveying; The Word, and in special, its Promises. 2.
Receiving, Appropriating, Applying.
Faith 1. In the Mind, Thoughts. 2. In the Heart and Will, Consent.


3. The Condition or Qualification, without which no right to Comfort is
possible.

True Goodness, particularly, Goodness in Distress.

4. The Principal immediate, Efficient,

The Holy Ghost the Comforter.

Some of these, I acknowledge, concern Comfort Formally considered, as well as
Materially. For though the matter or thing Comforting, [God] have no cause, and
the Spirit cannot be said to be in respect hereof, an Efficient, but only of
the Formal Comfort, or Satisfaction in our minds, and of the Instrument and
Condition, the Word being of his Immediate Inspiration, and Sanctification, his
proper and peculiar Work: Yet the Word is a means to beget Formal Comfort, as
well as convey the matter of it; so also is Faith. And Goodness is a
Qualification necessary to inward Peace, as well as right to the Material Cause
of it.

I am not concerned, except about the Matter, Means, revealing, containing, and
the Believing Thoughts, that receive and apply; with the Holiness, that
prepares the Heart for Reception and Application of Comfort.

Whatever Comforts, is something of, or from God, The Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost; yet those things from them, Comfort not in the same manner, as they do
themselves. The Word and Promises are a Cordial, as far as Messages of Love
from Heaven, no otherwise: As they bring good News from our best Friend, they
revive us; but nothing can give ease to our Minds, which does not report
something of God. If our Troubles be Spiritual for our Sins, the assurance by
any sound Evidence, that God has pardoned them, dispels our Sorrow, Fear, and
Despair: The feeling that God has purged away their Filth, taken away their
Dominion, quiets us, as an Evidence and Testimony, that he has pardoned us,
and is reconciled to us; but all this only as a token of God's Love to us. For
a good Soul cannot sit down with its own Mercy, without the God of Mercy.
Nothing Spiritually Comforts on Earth, but what will solace in Heaven. There
God alone is the Eternal Ravishment of glorified Souls. Now God, as the matter
of our Comfort, solaces us merely as apprehended, and applied by Believing
Thoughts. If we think not of him, we derive no Content from him; and our
Thoughts taking in some comfortable Notion of God, lay it before our
Concupiscible and Irascible Affections, that being embraced by the former, it
may appease, still, and quiet the other; which is heedfully to be observed,
this being the true and natural Method to attain solid, and substantial Peace,
and Consolation: For they are Brutish, not Rational Comforts, that we are not
led to by Light in the Mind, observing the suitableness of the Object to our
Condition, which prevails with our Will, to close with, and embrace it. Till
this be done, our Passions cannot be rationally calmed. God does not work upon
them, as Christ upon the raging Sea, by way of Empire, and immediate Power, to
hush them in a moment by Miracle. That Peace which springs in the Conscience
immediately, without any antecedent Actings, and Perceptions of the Mind, or
Election of the Will, is Delusory, not to say, Satanical.

There Is nothing that can any ways Comfort, but God is that very thing, either
Formally or Eminently: He is the sum and substance of all Appetibles,
Eligibles, Comfortables, as the Chief Good and Happiness of Man; who, as he
wants nothing for his own everlasting solace and contentation, so neither for
ours: Whatever is of a refreshing Influence, either to Body or Mind, is the
Ordination of God, both in its Matter, and that peculiar Formality: For he both
made all things, and endowed them with all their Powers and Virtues, which all
are superlatively in himself; i. e. either in his Nature or Power, in Essence
or Equivalence. God's Love is a Comfort to our Souls, and God is Love. Meat and
Drink are a comfort to our Bodies; God is not these, but he can create and give
them, and in Heaven supplies the want of them, by causing us not to need them,
and giving us better in himself, that Countervails them. Thus it is also in all
other Cases; whatever satisfies us, is from him, is in him. Thy Comforts
delight [or look favorably upon] my Soul. Thy Comforts which thou [ Ar't
Give.
]

CHAP. XIII. Comforts in God.
I. THE Comforts which God is, delight the Soul. These or none. For nothing
issuing from God, is greater or better than himself, He is much more than all
without him, therefore a more sufficient satisfaction; both because there is a
plenitude of Perfection in him, and because he can enlarge the capacity of the
Recipient, and quicken the perceptive Powers, more exquisitely to sense, and
relish the Sweetness of all those delectable Excellencies that adorn his
Nature. Now as God is every thing which is comfortable, so every thing in God
is a Wellspring of overflowing Consolation, to a good Heart, his Being,
Names, Attributes, etc.

1. His Being or Existence. That there is a God, therefore a regarder of
Goodness, infinitely concerned to promote it, to support it, to reward it. The
First without beginning, the Last without end. Who possesses all Being in
himself eminently, and gives Being to all things, that have a positive Entity,
and that very good, Genesis 1.31. Without whose Agency, neither thy Sorrows, nor
thy Comforts can be; and if they receive their Being, then also their Balance
from the best hand in the Universe. One that has Being so, as nothing else can;
not thy Sins, not thy Sorrows, not thy spiritual Enemies, etc. not an arbitrary
precarious Existence; but necessary, uncontrollable, self-originating,
unalterable, unperishable: To which all other Beings are nothing in comparison,
faint, evanid, fading, Isai. 40.17. There Is none beside. As his own Being is
the greatest reality, so can he make those Comforts which depend upon it, to
administer abundantly more reality of refreshment, than there can possibly be
real evil in all the Miseries of a thousand Worlds. He will be and abide by us
(when all else fail us,) as an everlasting Fullness of all Essential
Consolations.

2. His Names and Titles.

El.] Verse 1. Elohim] Ver. 7.22, 23. A strong Plurality, in Unity of singular
Excellency: Sufficient therefore to relieve: for he is

El shaddai] (an additional, not indeed express in the Psalm, but necessary to
be mentioned in order to the explaining of the following Jehovah, so often used
here) God All-sufficient, or Almighty. In him therefore is there abundantly
enough to satisfy intensively all Appetites, in all their extents and
possibilities. This Name he gives himself, with respect to his making Promises,
wherein mercies are exhibited as future; whence it secures to us fully his
singular Good Will, and engages our Faith and Hope, and improves, and heightens
them into an Assurance, that Blessings and Comforts, now out of our hands,
shall in due Season (which himself is fittest to choose) be put into our
possession by him: Under his Name

JEHOVAH], mentioned Ver. 1.3, 5, 11, 14, 17, 18, 22, 23. the proper and
immediate reason of his giving himself this Name, being his present purpose to
fulfill with his Hand, what he had spoke with his Mouth long before, and give
actual Being by his Power and Providence to that, which only had a possible
Vertual Being, in his Promise made under the Name of Elshaddai. This then is a
Name, intimating, that He is not a Promiser afar off, but a Performer at hand,
ready to comfort us in, and save us out of our Spiritual Thraldom, under
Corruption, Temptation, and Affliction of Body and Mind. And being

Adonai, (which the Jews always read instead of the Tetragrammaton (as the Name
Jehovah is called) except where they are together) Lord and Sovereign over All;
he has a Right and Power to dispose of all Persons, and Things, according to
the good pleasure of his own Will, and cannot be controlled in his Purposes, or
Performances, by any, but at their Peril. Whence it is always likely to be best
with those that in reverence and humility, subject themselves freely to his
Government, which is designedly managed for the Good and Comfort of his
Subjects, and the final Trouble and Disquiet only of his Incureable Enemies;
therefore must and will for his own Glory, and his Servants highest Advantage,
overrule, and overcome the Malignity and Malice of Hell, the Madness and Rage
of the World, and the Corruptions, and Confusions of our own Hearts; all which,
without his Interposal, would be irremediable and intolerable. And as

Jah, Ver. 7.12. It Is congruous and decent for him to do all. It highly becomes
a Nature so excellent, so communicative, and bountiful, to disspense of those
Delights, in which he for ever dwells, and solaces himself; to such of his
Creatures, as place their sole felicity in Him, and cannot, will not take
pleasure in any thing without him.

. 3. His Attributes, are a rich Mine of Comfort: both singly and conjunct; as
diverse Conceptions, but one only indivisible Perfection.

. 1. His Wisdom and Omniscience, Ver. 9.10, 11. 'Twas a Question only becoming
the Frenzy and Folly of a degenerate wicked Heart. How does God know? And is
there Knowledge in the most High? Psalm. 73.11. Yes that there is, as you shall
know to your sorrow; but the Godly do experience it to their wonderful
Satisfaction. All the Evils we feel, He knows very well, though we cannot; nay,
though we will not, though we dare not represent or describe them; and a
Friend's Knowledge of its Troubles, is some ease to an oppressed Heart. But our
Griefs are not only the Objects of his Understanding, but the Dispositions of
his Wisdom, which being infinitely more comprehensive than ours, did design,
and knows how to effect our greatest Good out of that, which our shallow
Capacities apprehend to be the greatest Evil. It Is no little Solace, that
boundless Wisdom, which can never project Evil, does perfectly see and know
this to be best for us, which it dispences to us: And though now we cannot
fathom the Mysteries of this manifold Wisdom, Ephesians. 3.10. (as how should Finite
comprehend Infinite?) Yet the Reasons of its Proceedure, will be unfolded
hereafter, to the general Satisfaction of the whole World. Have we not then
sufficient ground to acquiesce, and be pleased with that now, (although we cannot
dive into its Methods) which with the highest complacency we shall acquiesce
and rejoice in for ever, when we more truly understand it?

Beside, Infinite Wisdom is stored with Means, Devices, and Ways, to comfort
us, beyond all we are able to conceive. The incomparable Riches of Divine
Consolation, are owing to the inexhaustible Treasures of that Wisdom, which can
find out such as are most suitable, and most seasonably and effectually apply
them: And foreseeing what may be a Bar to them, can tell how to use the most
proper Methods to remove it, this being its most genuine work, to know, choose
and use, the most accommodate and efficacious Means, to bring about the most
excellent End. We triumph in the enjoyment of such Relief in a Friend on Earth;
Have we not abundantly more reason, to solace our selves in the friendly aspect
and superintendence of such an infinite Perfection in Heaven? Is Satan
continually injecting Terrors or Troubles, or exciting disgustful horrid
Imaginations? Does he appear in the guise of the Fool, and say, in thy heart
there is no God, etc.? Psalm. 14.1. Does he with Job's Wife put on the desperate
Bedlam, and bid thee Curse God, etc. and dye? Job 2.9. Does he personate the
Cheating Knave, and advise thee to defraud either God of his due Worship and
Honor, or Man of his due Respect and Right? Does he transform himself into an
Angel of Light, and engage thee to be wise and Righteous overmuch? Eccles.
7.16. Or lastly, Does he come in his own Form, to invite thee to Lying, Pride,
Malice, Revenge, Slander, Backbiting, etc. his proper Sins, in which, with a
daring Impudence, he would out-brave and outface even his Maker, in his
Accusations of the Brethren, etc.? Whatever his Methods, Ephesians. 6.11. or Wiles,
Devises, 2 Cor. 2.11. Snares, 1. Tim. 3.7. 2 Timothy 2.26. Depths, Rev. 2.24.
Whatever his Stratagems, Policies, are, to delude, defile, disquiet, or destroy
thee, however cunningly, craftily managed: Yet still is he not too wise for
God, who well knows how to defeat all his Designments, and amongst infinite
other, has this one Method to lead thee to Comfort, (even when thine Adversary
has outwitted and got the better of thee, and is leading thee into
Temptation, Trouble, and Torment,) viz. to bring thee through the narrow way of
Repentance, to a New Life of Grace, Peace, Joy, and Consolation, present and
eternal. This he does oftentimes with Man, Job 33.28, 29. Read from the 14th.
to the 31st. Job 28, 28. Unto Man he said, behold the fear of the Lord, (true
Religiousness) that is Wisdom, and to depart from evil, (true Repentance) that
is Understanding. He knows how to rule the raging of that Sea of Sorrow,
Terror, and Anguish, wherewith the Devil attempts to overwhelm thee, and
shipwreck all thy Hopes, and Happiness; and so turns the Storm into a Calm of
Godly sorrow, that Satan's Creature yields, and gives place to the Creation of
God, and the Grief which God exhales, does issue in the fruit of the Lips,
Peace, of the same extraction; Is. 57.19.
and thus is Satan over-reached and baffled in his most subtle Contrivances,
and his Machinations to ruin our Comfort, become means for its Establishment.

But if his own immediate Actings be seconded with the Agency of his
Instruments, that all the Politics on Earth combine with those of Hell, to
overturn our security and rest: Yet are they never the nearer their Purpose, of
subverting the Counsels of Heaven, for the solace of our troubled Hearts; but
rather promote them, whilst they drive us nearer God, as our everlasting
Refuge, and Sanctuary, in whom we may be sure to find a Fullness of Joy and
Compensation. Is all the Carnal Wisdom on Earth set on the rack, to devise the
Ruin of True Religion, and Thee in the Profession and Practice of it? Are
wicked Men thy particular Foes, in a Confederacy against thee, contriving thy
Destruction in Spirituals and Temporals? Yet wherever they deal wisely,
proudly, cruelly, He is above them? Art thou thy self, are all Men else at a
loss in their Thoughts, either, how Religion should be secured, in whole, or in
part, when at any time its Enemies conspire against it; or how Jacob should
arise when he is very small; or how thy Personal Interest should be
safeguarded, or how thy Health restored, or Death prevented, or Deliverance be
wrought under some grievous Calamity, or any Mercy obtained for Soul or Body,
thy self, thy Friends, or the Church and Nation? Be not solicitous, the
All-comprehending Wisdom of Heaven can never be at a Loss, this unsearchable
understanding has all Possibilities present in view, and cannot but choose the
best for Himself, for Thee, for All; and it seldom begins of its Work, till all
be at their Wits end; when every thing else fails, and the Wisdom of Men has
given up all for gone, Divine Wisdom resumes the Work, and glorifies its self,
in bringing it to Perfection. In short, all the Artifices of Earth and Hell,
cannot invent or reduce into Circumstances, so deplorable and desperate, as to
overmatch the Contrivance of Infinite Wisdom for our Comfort, under and after
them; its Provisions are truly Catholic, extending to all possible Cases,
Conditions, Seasons, Places, and Persons; whereof the Holy Scriptures are a
full Evidence, as a legible Declaration of the Unfathomable Wisdom of God. Here
are the Rivers, whose Streams make glad the City of God, Psalm. 46.4. Oh the
Adoreable Plenitude of the written Word of God, which comprehends the whole
Counsel of God for our Illumination, Effectual Calling, Sanctification,
Justification, Comfort, and Eternal Salvation! There is nothing devised by the
Infinite Understanding of God, for the Ease and Quiet of troubled Hearts, but
which is contained in the Bible, a Transcript whereof upon the Heart, creates a
Life of Joy, Peace, and Rest. God's Wisdom speaks Peace to us, in no other
Language than that of the Word. It Is indeed visible in his Works of Creation,
and Providence, which are under its Conduct, and bear its lively Characters,
but these scarce intelligible, without the Sacred Writings. Here only is all
perspicuous and plain, that is needful, either to purify, or pacify the
Conscience. What a World of Consolatory Matter is couched in this one Psalm,
will appear anon: What then is there in the whole Book of God? Judge of the
Immense Ocean, by this Little Rivulet. Admire and Reverence that incomparable
Abstract of the Wisdom of Heaven, in these Lively Oracles, and hence derive all
thy Consolations.

. 2. This Wisdom is not alone, nor in this Case, a Self-mover, but goes upon
the Errand and Designs of Infinite Gooodness: An Attribute brim-full of Solace,
Joy and Rest; as our Psalmist found, Ver. 18. especially, and every where, Ver.
12, 13, 14, 15, 17.19, 21. Indeed, every Request in the Psalm supposes it, and
every Assertion refers to it, even his Complaints are Addresses to it, and all
his Expectations are from it; it is the good Blood that runs in every Vein, not
a Verse but points at it. Now, as Wisdom chooses the Method and Means of
applying Comfort, and pitches upon such as are most accommodate in particular:
So Goodness administers the Matter in general. Every thing that creates the
light of Gladness and Consolation, in a dark benighted, troubled soul, is a
spark, a beam of Goodness.

The Goodness of God lies in Two Things, Love and Holiness. Did I call them
Two? They are both but only Love. Love in us, is Holiness, as a Conformity to
the whole Law of God: Holiness in God, is nothing but Love to himself, as the
alone perfect Law and Standard of all Incomprehensible Excellency and Glory.
But to consider them as distinct.

Love is that illustrious greatest Light amongst the Divine Perfections, the
benign Rays whereof, are plenteously reflected through the Sun of
Righteousness, upon wretched and miserable Man. God is Love, 1 John 4.16. and
Love in its Perfection is God; that Love, which God is, is God, and diffuses
its sweet Influences upon us, in wonderful variety. Not that it is other than
Unity indivisible, invariable in it self; but that it meets with several
respects, and produces diverse effects in us. We are Sinners, the guilt it
pardons, the filth it purges, the power of Sin it subdues. We are miserable
through sin; Love lays it to heart, that is Mercy: Is afflicted in our
Afflictions, there is Compassion; has yerning Bowels toward us, which is Pity;
bears much at our hands, and this is Patience; suspends the Punishment due to
our sin, either for an Indefinite time, therefore called Forbearance; or a
great while, whence it is styled Longsuffering; or exempts us wholly, under the
Name of Sparing-Mercy; or deals moderately with us, in Gentleness and
Tenderness: We want many good things, especially Himself: Benevolence will our
Good; Bounty and Kindness impart All to Us; Graciousness does All freely: Oh
Astonishingly Rich and Glorious Wellspring of Everlasting Consolation! There Is
no Exigence befalls Man, either through emptiness, or misery, that is destitute of
a Perfection in Infinite Love, to make a peculiar and accommodate Relief and
Supply. Divine Goodness bears such a singular respect to our indigent Nature,
that notwithstanding its individual Singleness and Oneness, it does as it were
parcel out it self, into a multiplicity of sweet refreshing Cordials, in
Condescension to our Infirmity, that in it we may have a particular
Satisfaction, for every distinct Appetite, a proper Remedy for every single
Malady. There Is no Case, in which we can need, or desire Comfort, but there is
a Revelation of some comfortable Perfection in God, which speaks directly to
it, and administers a succor and support to us, no less than Infinite; that
is, incomprehensibly more extensive, and Intensive, than our Circumstances can
be necessitous, or dolorous. Indeed, nothing comforts but Love; nothing more
disquiets, than sense of Enmity, Hatred, Anger, Displeasure. The more we are
concerned in any, the more pleasing is Respect from them, and an unloving
Deportment more grievous. We are not much affected with the love of Strangers,
but rejoice in the Good Will of our Neighbors, our Friends, our Relations,
expecting it should bear proportion to our Interest in them, and theirs in us,
else it pleases not. We must have more Love from those in our Vicinity, than
from Aliens, from intimate Acquaintance, than either; from our Flesh and Blood,
than all, or it troubles us. But the due measure (nay if it be an excess) of
affection is most taking, we are most at ease under it. Again, as the Relation,
so the Quality of Persons must vary the degree of Love, or we are not at rest.
The regard of a mean Man does not so much delight us, as of the Great; that of
Bad Men is not so sweet as that of the Good. Further, those we expect most good
from, most refresh us with their Love; where we lay out no hopes, from those,
(such is the Selfishness of our Nature) we are not solicitous to gain any Love.
So we are most earnestly desirous of the Affections of those, whose Anger can,
and is likely, and engaged to do us the greatest Hurt: whom we therefore have
reason most to fear; if we can win their hearts, it is a wonderful Contentation.
Now God, the nearest, greatest, most potent Neighbor, Friend or Enemy, is not
only Loving, but Love its self, in the abstract; not limited in kind or degree,
but unmeasurable, infinite Love; such on the contrary, is his Wrath also. Of
all other, his Love is most capable (and engaged too) to do us the greatest
Good, if we be capable of it: His Hatred and Anger, like to do us the greatest
harm, if we do not betake our selves, to the refuge and security of his Love.
But he who is essential unconfincable Graciousness, does with a natural
Affection regard us, as the Work of his hands in Creation, with a Paternal,
Conjugal Respect, embrace us as his Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus to
good Works; if forsaking all other, we cleave unto him with full purpose of
heart, in a sincere Child-like, Spouse-like Affection, being again begotten by
his Word and Spirit to a lively Hope, and so in Marriage-Covenant with him.
This then is a Comfort, as large as its Subject; Divine Love, a satisfaction as
boundless as the Deity; for it infinitely pleases even God himself: Infinite
though he be, therefore is sufficient sure to administer a Content to us, sweet
and great beyond all Expression, all Cogitation. The Holy Men of God, which the
Scripture propounds for our Examples, always took Sanctuary here, in the
assaults of their most grievous Troubles and Temptations. Jer. 31.12. They
shall slow together to the goodness of the Lord, etc. And their Soul shall be
as a watered Garden, and they shall not sorrow any more at all. 13. I will turn
their mourning into joy, and will comfort them, and make them rejoice from
their sorrow. 14. And I will satiate the soul of the Priests with fatness, and
my People shall be satisfied with my Goodness, says the Lord. Psalm. 119.76.
Let I pray thee thy merciful kindness be for my Comfort, etc. And indeed, let
the storms rage, and the sea roar, and beat as high as it can, there will for
ever be sure Anchor-hold, for a good Soul, upon the Rock of Ages: Fix there,
and thou can never shipwreck; nay, if thou can but weakly and waveringly,
with a trembling heart and hand, hold this Love, be not discouraged; for with a
strong unconquerable hand, it holds thee, Joh. 10.28, 29. All other Divine
Perfections minister to his Love, which has already bestowed the greatest
Gifts: Himself, as an overflowing Jordan of enriching Goodness; His
Only-begotten Son, Joh. 3.16. The choicest Blessing, and the surest Pledge of
all other, Romans 8.32. Nay, thy self to thy self freed from the bondage of Sin
and Satan. Though I be in no desirable Circumstances, as to other things, yet
if I be mine own Man, and enjoy a just Liberty of Body and Mind, in no slavery
of Spirit and Condition; I can sing over my other Misfortunes, especially when
I can read my own Felicity in the Misery of others, through a Thraldom, which I
escape. Indeed, my Commiserations impress some part of their Calamity upon my
Soul, but it is countervail'd and over-top'd by the Comfort of mine own
Indemnity. But there can be no liberty under the Dominion of Sin, nor any true
Self-enjoyment, till I enjoy God, and my self in him, in whom I have my best
and sweetest Being, Motion, and Life. And though I enjoy my Civil and Moral
Freedom, which is no little Comfort, yet Vassalage to the Prince of Darkness,
is an Affliction more grievous, than the other can be solacing. When a Good Man
is satisfied from [of, with] himself, Prove. 14.14. it is only as far as the
Goodness of God dwells in him, and he in it. For if I possess not God, I have
nothing with a Blessing, therefore not with Comfort. I have no Right to
comfortable Thoughts, contenting Enjoyments, no not to my self, and in my self.
For what am I that is good, what am I not that is evil, without God; and what
satisfaction can I receive in that which is evil, as I my self, and every thing
in me will unavoidably be, if not antidoted and animated by the Goodness of
God? Men are not more miserable, in a Deprival of all the Content of their
Lives, than in the Dereliction of God. God gave me my self as a Loan of Love;
what I am I owe to Him; but by my sin, I have lost both my self and Him: If now
by a new Charter, He restore to me a better Right to Himself, and to my self,
in His Son Jesus Christ, whose I am by Right of Redemption, and not mine own;
if He re-invest me in a Liberty to enjoy my self in Him, which I could not do
under so bad a Master, so cruel a Tyrant as the Devil; this is a piece of the
choicest Happiness which I can enjoy on this side Heaven. Liberty to sin, is
the most uncomfortable Bondage. Necessity to serve God, the most solacing
Liberty. The most of this do we enjoy, when we live most in, and are swallowed
up of the Love of God. Corruption is a Dungeon, a Prison, a Pit; God loves us
out of it; Isa. 38.17. into the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God, Romans 8.21.
Love is the Wealth of Heaven and the World, a Treasure invaluable, in
Comparison whereof, every thing, all the Riches, Honors, Pleasures; all the
Substance and Glory of the World, is contemptible, Cant. 8.7. Every Comfort is
comprehended in it, it is the Life and Soul of all; they are but
Carrion-Contents, that are possessed without it. Oh Incomparable,
incomprehensible Love! How have thou even outdone thy self in thy Provisions
for the Consolation of inconsiderable Man? What infinite Desires could ever
have wished, what infinite Goodness could ever have bestowed a Gift greater
than Infinite? God's Love gives no less, and sure it can no greaten.

Love is all Comfort, and Holiness in God, is not a Barren Womb, but Pregnant
also with the sweetest Consolations. From this Topic, the Psalmist derived
Refreshment to his thoughtful mind, Ver. 20. Shall the Throne of Iniquity have
Fellowship with thee? The Quaere carries in its bowels a Negative Resolution.
No, it shall not. Its Iniquity, and thy Sanctity, are altogether Incompatible.
Though it attempt, yet cannot it prevail, to overturn thy Throne; 'twill
therefore assuredly be overturned by it. Ver. 15. Judgment shall return to
Righteousness [(...)] and after it, all the Upright in Heart. I take (...)
there, to be significative of Time, as well as Place. The Expression is
allusive, supposing Judgment and Righteousness were parted to a great Distance,
and that Righteousness was in a settled, fixed Habitation, from which Judgment,
as a thing in motion, was departed. And it is true, Righteousness is of a
stable, Sunt certi denique fines, quos ultra citraque nequit consistere rectum.
firm, invariable nature: Judgment or Proceedures in Law, are changeable,
sometimes wrong, sometimes right; now on this side, then on the other,
depending upon the mutable Constitution of the Judges. Whence it is, that
Judgment is here represented as a Traveller from home, but upon the Return, in
which motion it should never rest, till it (which had been so long absent) got
to the abode of Righteousness again. Unrighteous Judgment did then prevail, but
begun to be weary of it self, and at length must down, and Righteous Judgment
be set up and established; which, when once accomplished, the upright in heart,
would certainly be advanced. Let but true Justice obtain, and immediately after
that, Upright Men will return out of the Retirements, into which
Unrighteousness had driven them, and be in repute again. Goodness cannot be
suppressed by Justice, but only by Injury; and when it is turned out of doors,
cannot be introduced, except by the Sovereign Goodness of God, to which its
Restitution is here ascribed, Ver. 14. as a Fruit of his Abode with, and
constant Adherence to his People. The whole Process then of the Prophet's
Reasoning, is this; Although God's People be now oppressed, and ruined by the
violent Perversion of Judgment: Yet God will not always permit it to be so, but
will establish Righteous Judgment first, and then relieve his People by it.
Divine Purity then, will not long permit the Dominion of Unrighteousness. God's
Holiness will e're long harass all Unholiness out of the World, and confine it
forever unto Hell. There shall be none in thy sight abroad, there shall be none
in thy heart within. That which is thy greatest Discomfort on Earth, which
muddies thy Thoughts, disquiets thy mind, racks and tortures thy Conscience,
discomposes thy Affections, blasts thy Hopes, sowres thy Joys, burdens thy
whole Soul, makes Heaven and Earth groan, and sigh in Pain; shall finally give
place to the Divine Nature, which the Promises bring thee in part, 2 Pet. 1.4.
and Heaven will perfect. Oh blessed solacing Hope, a secure Anchor in the
deepest Sea of Sorrows! Art thou at present in Affliction for thy unholiness:
Know that this very trouble is a dispensation of boundless Love and Sanctity,
directed by unfathomable Wisdom, and of most illustrious Wisdom, acted by
unconceivable Love and Holiness, for thy highest advantage; to embitter thy
Corruptions, separate them from thy Soul, and prepare thee for the embraces of
the tenderest Affections of Heaven, and its everlasting Joys and Rest. Neither
can there any other Temptation or Affliction befall thee, without God's leave,
and his Goodness can no more be excluded out of his designments than his
knowledge; even his Permissions are subservient to the purposes of his Love,
nor can any thing betide us, which will yield an Argument to prove that he is
not Good, any more than that he is not God. Whatever Perplexities sink thy
Heart, if they have a tendency to defile thee, they are Enemies to Divine
Purity, and it will overcome them, cannot be vanquished by them; if they tend
to disquiet thee, the unboundable Love that embraces thee, will not, cannot
leave thee to succumb, and finally to despond under them; if Spiritual, this
infinitely gracious Spirit, is an Adversary to them, and will master them; if
Temporal, there is a Remedy against them in the Goodness of God which is
Eternal.

Divine Goodness answers all things, not as Money, limitedly, and with
restriction, but universally, and infinitely. In it is the substance of all
real Good, in it Compensation for all Evil, else could it not be, what it
cannot but be, infinite. A Feast is made for Laughter, Eccl. 10.19.
and Wine makes glad the (...); The Lives, or Living.
Life. Often in Scripture do we find comforting the Heart, attributed to our
Natural Repast, by Meat and Drink, Genesis 18.5. Judge. 19.5, 8, etc. Or, Truly
Meat, and truly Drink.
Poor Comforts, in comparison of Jesus, whose Body is Meat indeed, whose Blood
is Drink indeed, Joh. 6.48. to the 59th. Wine makes glad the Heart of God and
Man, Judge. 9.13. Psalm. 104.15. But the Love of Christ is better, Cant. 1.2. And
more to be remembered, Ver. 4. The Bread of Life, and the Waters of Life, are
the very Life of all Comforts, the Sweetness of all Comforts and Joys. Any
Mercy enoy'd with the Love of God, is sweet indeed. Whence in the Return of the
Ransomed of the Lord with Songs, and everlasting Joy upon their heads, Isa.
51.11, 12. Jer. 31.11, 12. It Is Prophesied, That They shall flow together to
the Goodness of the Lord, for Wheat, and for Wine, and for Oil; and for the
Young of the Flock, and the Herd; and their Soul shall be as a Watered Garden,
etc. Yea, there it is. The Blessings of this Life, are then good indeed, when
the Donation of the Goodness of the Lord, Divine. Love with them, gives them a
Relish incomparable.

Job sometimes consulted his Bed for Comfort, Job. 7.13. and it is no little
satisfaction, to enjoy the quiet Repose of a single Night: But what are all the
downy Contents of this Nature, to the Everlasting Repose and Rest, both of Body
and Soul in the Love of God; who, though he be an everliving Activity, yet is
an ever-loving, quiet, resting Place, for all that having been wearied out,
with the Sins, and Labors, and Troubles, and Miseries of a Cumbersome World,
betake themselves to him, as their only Contentation. Cant. 3. King Solomon (as
a Type of Christ) made Himself [(...)] a Conjugal Bed, This the Original Word
may seem indeed most properly to signify, from the 7th. Verse, where the
Espousals plainly refer to this; that Exhortation being grounded upon this
Narration.
the midst thereof, being [(...)] Strowed with Love, for the Daughters of
Jerusalem. A Bed of Ease indeed: The Whole World cannot Afford a Bed as soft as
Love; as sweet as the refreshing Love of an infinitely Lovely, and Loving God.

I have read of a Man, who not content with Epicureism in Retail, resolved at
once to gratify every Sense with an accumulated Association of all imaginable
Sensualities; yet all was only the Swinish Pleasure of a Day: But there is an
Eternity of Delights in the Favor of God, first to the Soul, but redounding to
the Sense also. Truly Light is sweet, and it is good for the Eyes to behold the
Sun, ('it is a Periphrasis of Life, as the Connection with the followng Verse
demonstrates) Eccl. 11.7, 8. How delicious is the Flavor and Fragrancy of
Odours, and the inexplicable Varieties and Ravishments of Sounds? etc. But are
these worthy to be thought of, in Comparison of the ever Refreshing Light of
God's Countenance, the Never-fading Delights of Divine Love and Goodness, the
Unimitable Splendor of the Sun of Righteousness, Mal. 4.2.
who is the Brightness of his Fathers Glory, Heb. 1.2.
the savor of Christ's Precious Ointments, Cant. 1.3. The rapturous Melody of
the Celestial Quire, but above all the every thing Harmonious, Beautiful,
Lovely, Glorious in the Divine Nature; wherein our very sense shall be in a
generous transport with the highest incomparable, supersensual, everlasting
Gratifications; much more our Minds. For the Goodness of God is every thing,
pleasing, profitable, honest in the utmost eminency of Glory. There Is no mole
in this Beauty, no spots in this Sun, no Night to this Day; but an immense and
eternal variety of all delectable Excellencies in an invariable unity of
unblemishable Perfection, nothing to give a check to the Appetite, to interrupt
and abate the pleasure of Enjoyment, or put a period to the solace accruing
from it.

It singularly pleases a Man to be well thought of, and well provided for. When
Men are low, yet if their Reputation run high, it bears up their Spirits in the
depression of their Estates, and as Noble Blood in the Veins is by many
accounted an essential Dignity, when their Wealth and Substance falls into
detriment, that their Heart cannot stoop to any servile Offices or Employments,
below the Grandeur of its more stately and generous Pulsations; their Glory
they think shines as the Sun through a Cloud, and is like a Cordial Elixir in a
fainting fit of Fortune: So Credit of both kinds [ Fame Trust
] both as it imports the Honor of a fair Reputation, and Good Name, and as it
entitles a Man to a right in the kindness of his Friend, and the belief of all
Men; that every one speaks well of him, is ready to do well to him, all Honor
him, all Credit him, and freely Concredit their all with him; this is valued as
much as Money in the Purse: The Wisest of Men prefers it as more eligible,
Prove. 22.1. and affirms that it makes the Bones fat, Prove. 15.30. But if the
Love of God put a value upon us, (and worthless that we are, we have nothing
else to recommend us) as the Kings Stamp upon a Brass Farthing; if he ennoble
us with his Grace, -- Nobilitas sola est atque unica virtus.
that we can derive our Pedigree and Extraction from Heaven, through the New
Birth, this is the truest, sweetest, noblest Satisfaction. We are indeed the
basest (through Sin) of the whole Creation. God made us at first, through his
Image, next in honor to the Holy Angels; Psalm. 8.5. We by our Apostasy and
Corruption, make our selves not a little lower than Devils; and in this
debasement does Divine Goodness find us; but here it does not leave us. Love,
and Love alone exalts us, and crowns us with Glory, Dignity, and Hon ur; and
how high we are in the account of Love, (however base in our selves) is
demonstrated by the price it was willing to pay for our Redemption. Nothing
raised us to this height in the estimate of Love, but only Love, according to
Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8. The Lord did not set his Love upon you because ye were more, etc.
But because the Lord loved you, etc. His Love was its own and only motive, and
why should it not? What can be a more noble Incitement to it, than the Glory of
its most excellent communicative Nature? What moved it at first to design an
Object to diffuse its benign influences upon? What lovely qualities were in a
nonentity, to draw it out into such admirable Condescentions? Let it then go
no less than self-sufficient, all-sufficient, without the subsidiary invitement
of all external Objects. Divine Goodness neither needs nor desires a
Procatarctick cause. And this is a Comfort unspeakable. Were I to bring my
welcome to Heaven, and to be dignified with the honor of so renowned a degree
of Perfection, as to be able to stand upon my Reputation before God, and not
beg his good Opinion but merit it, the Conscience of my deficiency and demerit,
would for ever confound me. But since Love brings my all with it, and its
arguments to respect me, are derived from its own Bowels, and its height is so
wonderful, that there can be no proportion in the highest created goodness to
it, so as to deserve it; and its depth so unfathomable, that the greatest
misdeservings cannot put a bar to the liberty of its actings for the relief
even of the Chief of Sinners. 1 Timothy 1.15.
Have I not a World of reason to cast off all melancholy desponding
Imaginations, and solace my self in this Paradise of everlasting Love and free
Grace? Oh Joy unspeakable and full of Glory!

To be well provided for is next. The World had rather live by Sight than
Faith. He Is but ill to live, all whose Wealth is in another Man's Pocket; and
may be puffed away with the malevolent Breath of a third Man. A Bird in the hand
is best. Faith and Hope are beggarly things in the estimate of most Men. A
competency of Necessaries in Possession, more contents us than a World in
Reversion. In that modicum we can rejoice, though we do not wallow in those
affluent Delights, which the sensual Beasts of the Earth batten and rot in. A
sufficiency of suitable Comforts fills our Appetite; Convenience being the
essential Property, if not Essence of Goodness. When every thing hits us, lies
pat, and even, and easy upon our Hearts, in a pleasing agreeableness, we do
not envy Crowns and Scepters. But if we have all and enough to spare, can never
see through our Enjoyments, be full and abound not only in opinion, and with
respect to the content of our Minds; but in the reality of the thing; we then
begin to sing a requiem to our Souls, and sit down under the shadow of these
Gourds with delight. And have we not a sufficiency, nay a redundancy, an
infiniteness of all Necessaries, and Agreeables in God's Love and Goodness? of
which Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither has it entered into the Heart
of Man to conceive the fullness, the glory, the sweetness, the amiableness, the
suitableness, the comfortableness. Thy Mansion House here is the Bosom of Love,
replenished with a confluence of all desirable Satisfactions; thy Garden the
Paradise of God; thy Demesne, the Celestial Canaan; thy Revenues and Incomes,
the unperishing Treasures of Divine Goodness, and Grace, and Glory, the
unsearchable Riches of Christ.

But be a Man's-Comforts never so sweet, if there be an equal mixture of sour,
he writes Cabul upon the front of all his Enjoyments. And ordinarily a dram
of Gall will spoil an ounce of Honey; one Cross embitter a thousand Comforts.
If now I be secure either that the Evils will be as the morning Cloud, and
early Dew, or that I shall be no loser, not be robbed of the least real
satisfaction, but gain equivalent, if I have a reserve of other, better,
sweeter Joys, and Blessings which will countervail my Sufferings; or if when
the Tempest lies hard upon me I be certain of a safe retiring Place, and Refuge
where I am out of danger; or if I have weathered out the Storm, that the worst
is past, and a prospect is given me, of so great an advantage, so happy an
issue as will compensate the trouble; if all along I find by experience that
it is for the best, and if I had been to carve for my self, and spin the thread
of my own Fortune, I could not have pitched upon any thing so eligible as what
is dispensed to me without my choice, by the Wisdom and provident Goodness of
Heaven; every of these things singly yields me a plentiful harvest of quiet in
my Mind, and contentedness with my Condition; much more jointly altogether. And
has not every good Soul the amplest security, that it shall be blessed with all
this, and much more, in and through the benignity and Love of God? Have we not
ground to believe that Love will not permit any evil to interrupt our Joys,
except there be need? That Love will cut it short in Righteousness, it shall be
but for a moment, a little moment? Love being afflicted in all our Afflictions,
will not long torment it self. What Love promises, Power can command. In that
very small moment of continuance, I am secure, that Love will not suffer my
Miseries and Disquiets, to commit a rape upon my best satisfactions in it self:
and that I shall lose no Metal, but only Dross, which it is my happiness to do,
and even that loss (if my gain of Refinement and Purity deserve that Name) will
be recompensed to the full, in those infinitely better things laid up in store
for me, in the plenitude and all sufficiency of unboundable Goodness in the
Divine Nature and Persons. But be the Calamity as great and malignant: as is
imaginable, I have a Rock higher than I, where I may be safe, above the reach
of ruin. For having past the pangs of the New Birth, the worst is past, both in
respect of Pain and Danger, Sorrow and Fear. Though my Vessel, the Body, may be
broken; yet shall I certainly land in safety upon the blessed shore of
Eternity, with all my real Riches and Comforts environing me. I am I hope in a
sound bottom indeed; Christ carries me in his Body, his Bowels; that is the Ship
wherein I am wafted over the Tempestuous Ocean of Miseries in this World, to
the fair Havens of everlasting Loves, Joys, and Rest. The foreknowledge
whereof, together with my present sense of profit in my Soul, strength against
Sin, resolution for God, evidence and experience of his Presence, Support,
Influence, Grace, the affectionate workings of his Heart in Love, Care,
Kindness, flowing over all the banks in multitudes of unmerited Blessings in
Temporals, but especially in Celestials: These sweeten all my Sorrows and ease
my burdened Spirit, that I cannot but acknowledge the Provisions of Infinite
Wisdom, incomprehensibly more eligible and beneficial than the utmost that
could ever enter into my utmost raised Imaginations.

But if the pinch come yet a little nearer, that though accommodated with an
affluence of all terrestrial Contentments without, yet a dangerous Disease
preys upon my Vitals, or the Arrows of the Almighty gall, wound, and smart in
my Conscience, that I am destitute of the Blessings of a sound Mind, in a sound
Body, the enjoyment whereof would add an Emphasis, to all external Comforts, a
living, Lam, 3.39. Neh. 2.2.
a healthful Man and Mind having no reason to complain and be sad. But now Love
is Life and Health and all things: The breath of thy Nostrils, the length of
thy Days and Delights, but the shortner of thy Pains and Sorrows. Do thou
keep thy Tongue from evil, Psalm. 34.12, 13, 14, 15.
and thy Lips from speaking guile, depart from evil and do good, seek Peace and
pursue it? Then are the Eyes of the Lord upon thee, and his Ears open to thy
cry, thou shall enjoy desired Life, and beloved Days, that thou may see Good,
yea the Goodness of the Lord in the Land of the Living; Psalm. 118.17.
thou shall not die but live and declare the Works of the Lord. How can that
Body or Soul be sick that is embraced in the healing Bosom of the great
Physician? Forgiveness of Sin is a Medicine for every Malady, Isa. 32.24. If he
whom Christ loves be sick, it is not unto Death, but for the Glory of God, Joh.
11.3, 4. Love will loose the Pains of Death. Thou have loved me from the Pit of
Corruption, for thou have cast all my Sins behind thy Back, Isa. 38.17. God
bears not a grudge against those he loves. It Is Loves property to chastize,
none of its Office to impute guilt, and punish, but to cover a multitude of
Sins, 1 Pet. 4.8. An infallible Cure or Remedy for Distempers of Body and Soul,
supports a sinking Spirit, revives a disconsolate Heart, encourages a fainting
Hope, alleviates the grievousness of Pains, discusses Trouble and Fear: and
under the Wings of the Son of Righteousness we have it, his Power and Skill are
not lessened, nor his Bowels and Love diminished, by his translation into a
state of immutable Perfection. Here Is an Antidote against every Plague and
Poison, a Salve for every Sore, not like Humane, only of a finite limited
Virtue, but of infinite and universal Efficacy. Oh wonderful Love! thou art the
only (...); the true Elixir of Gold; which is always at hand, because
Omnipreseat; can never fail, because Omnipotent; never decay and lose any
virtue, because Eternal. Who can do less than ever dwell upon thee, who hopes
for ever to dwell in thee, 1 John 4.16.

If a Man be always bending his Mind to pore upon his Troubles, they sink him;
but if any admirable strange thing, if any thing of singular pleasure, and
delight, present it self, it gives a diversion to our Minds, and putting by our
bitter Reflections upon those ungrateful damping Grievances, that swallow up
our Thoughts and Joys, makes us forget our Pains and gives us ease, whilst we
are taken up with those more powerful Contemplations. And is there not a relief
of this Nature in God, in whom every thing is wonderful? He is all Miracle, his
Essence, Subsistence, Perfection, Providence; but above all his Goodness, Grace
and Love, with the fruits of it; What infinite Beauty? What admirable Fullness?
What unconceivable Freeness? What astonishing Descents? What transcendent
Varieties? Oh the Riches! the Joys! the Pleasures! the Triumphs! above
expectation, Desire, Thought, all freely tendering themselves, and wooing our
Minds and Hearts to a serious Consideration, a kind and dutiful Embracement. Oh
sweet inviting Magazine of Wonders! how shall I endure to leave thee, who can
with no patience endure to think of being left by thee? In thee I am in Heaven,
how can I descend from thee, yet it is time to give my self the divertisement of
a walk in another Paradise.

. 3. Justice it self under the Conduct and Influence of this over-shadowing
Goodness and Love, though perhaps not sensibly at present, yet really is become
the most comfortable of all Divine Attributes, Remuner ative Justice is in
reality goodness.
to a believing Soul, through Jesus Christ; notwithstanding that it is the most
terrible, to the impenitent Christless. A Paradox easily made out, thus: That
which makes our Mercy and Comfort sure, and necessary, that we cannot miss of
enjoying it, is more comfortable, than that which leaves it at liberty, and
only renders it possible. When a good thing is in the free dispose of a Donor,
that he may choose whether he will bestow it or no, we can have no certainty at
all that we shall receive it; no not when we have infallible assurance of his
Inclination to bestow it: For it is still in his own Power, and he may suspend
the Gift as he pleases, without any impeach to his Honor. And though it may to
us seem Congruous to his goodness to grant it, yet is he not necessarily tied
to our Laws of Congruity, neither can they impose upon his Freedom, and make
his Mercy fatality. God Almighty bears a singular good Will to all his
Creatures, especially the reasonable, would not that any perish, it is no
pleasure to him; but that all Mankind should come to the knowledge of the
Truth, and (through Repentance and Faith in Christ) be saved. This Repentance
and Faith are his Gift, which remain in the free disposal of his own good
pleasure, to confer upon whom he pleases: therefore the Gift of Repentance
stands upon a Peradventure, 2 Timothy 2.25. without any injury to Divine Goodness,
which is not at all the less, though this Blessing be denied to the greatest
part of the World, and to all the fallen Angels: For more Goodness and a strong
Inclination to Communicate, transfers no right, therefore no wrong is done by
the suspense or denial of the Gratuity expected. But then Justice supposes a
right, and dueness of the Blessing, and that it cannot be in Righteousness
withholden, therefore makes it undoubtedly sure from him, that cannot possibly
be unjust. Now, though nothing be, or can be due from Justice to a Sinner,
considered as such, but only Indignation and Wrath, on account of the Covenant
of Works; yet the Covenant of Grace transfers a right to Mercy, upon those that
fulfill its Conditions: Therefore the gift of Pardon to the Repentant, is no
less an Act of Justice, than free Goodness and Grace; and there the Scripture
lays it, with Sanctification also. 1 John 1.9. If we confess our Sins, he is
faithful and just to forgive us our Sins, and to cleanse us from all
Unrighteousness. Mark first [Faithful] which respects the Promise and Covenant,
granting aright out of mere good Will and Grace, and then, and not till then,
[Just,] distributing what the Covenant and Promise had made due, and an
Irrevocable Right. Oh rich Comfort! Pardon and Purification, and both from
Justice! What can we expect more to satisfy our utmost Cravings? Since these
are Vertually all Spiritual and Celestial Mercies, giving a right to Peace and
Glory. Oh everlasting inexhaustible, mine of the sweetest Joy and Rest! What is
the source of all thy Sorrows? Nothing but sin: This grinds thy Conscience in
pain; this brings all the external Grievances of thy Life. By Nature thou art
as bad as Sin and Hell can make thee, though not in the degree, yet in the kind
of badness, viz. Moral Conscience of forepast Wickedness, is a Cutthroat to
all Comfort. Men's eyes when opened indeed, are more apt to look backward than
forward. Upon Reflection, past Evils of Sin sting more smartingly, than the
Remembrance of past Evils of Suffering can refresh and solace. It Is not so
Comfortable to think that the worst is past in Affliction, as grievous to
consider past Evils of Sin, for which the worst is to come. The pleasure in
acting is infinitely short of the pain in repenting; especially in Hell. A Man
would forfeit all the Joys of his Life, upon Condition he had never defiled his
Conscience: as the Devil in the possessed Woman told the Bishop of Cambray,
that he could be willing to suffer all imaginable Torments to the Worlds end,
so he might but then return into Heaven. Nothing more bitter in the Belly, than
the Sins that were most sweet in the Mouth: The Digestion troubles the Bowels
infinitely more, than the Mastication gratified the Palate.

But why is Sin so dreadful? What is it that makes thy formerly pleasing
Transgressions so torturous in the Recognition? Truly this, God knows them,
remembers them, is concerned about them, engaged to animadvert upon them; his
Justice and Wrath will not let them pass; thou can not get through his hands,
with thy Lusts about thee, as easily as they past through thine. Oh this is the
sting of Sin! it is a fearful terrible thing to fall into the hands of the
living God. The unutterable Agonies and Woes of Hell, and the horrible Tempest
of Divine Vengeance, and indignation in everlasting Burnings, which will be
tormenting above all, that any understanding, but that of God, can comprehend;
the bitter Weepings, Wailings and Gnashings of Teeth, without Ease, Release,
Mitigation, Relief, or End; this intolerable after-clap of Sin, is even to the
remembrance and forethought, almost as Cruciating as it self to the sense and
feeling will be confounding. God's Writing down all our Miscarriages in his
Book, out of which all the Power and Policy in the World can never expunge
them; his setting even our secret Sins, in the light of his Countenance, which
makes them infinitely more visible than the Sun in the Firmament; is a
consideration that sticks and stabs us to the Heart, and Murders all our
Comforts at once, and buries us in Horror. Yet now, if there can be any good
token found that this Handwriting is blotted out. If a Man can be assured that
Iniquity and Transgression, shall by God be remembered no more, this is the most
reviving transporting Solace in the World. But, how can I have a Testimony that
God has thus privileged me? How shall I know that he will forgive and forget
my wickedness, if he do not tell me? Who can search into the bottom of his
Counsels, and know his purposes and practice in Heaven, if himself do not
reveal them? And there are but two ways of revealing any secret thing, viz. by
words and by works. Words spoken and written; Deeds in Signs. The Holy
Scriptures reveal God's general Will to pardon some, yet do they not name, but
only describe the Persons, giving their true and lively Moral Character,
setting down at full such Qualifications, as may be to any Man a clear
Evidence, who is, and who is not made happy in this forensecal Mercy of
Justification. If an Angel from Heaven should address himself to thee, with
this Comfortable Message, That thy Iniquities are pardoned: If a Bath-kol, a
voice in Thunder should name thee, and say, Be of good Comfort, thy Sins are
forgiven thee, thou could not be secure, that this was not an Illusion to
abuse thee into Presumption, if thy inward sense did not report those tokens,
on which the Word of God does suspend thy Pardon: But if thou can but produce
these, all the Angels and Voices from Heaven imaginable, though as particular
and clear as possible, telling thee thou art unjustified, must be acknowledged,
accursed Deceptions, because they Preach another Doctrine, than Christ has done
in the Gospel, Gal. 1.8.

Well then, that thou may find a good token for good, thou need'st not
ascend into Heaven to search the Archives, or court Rolls of the upper Bench
there, nor turn over the Book of Life in a curious tracing out thy particular
name; but having duly informed thy mind, what are the signs of a Pardoned
State, look within thy Soul and Conscience, and diligently enquire and examine
without Partiality, and a biass selfward, whether the present State,
Constitution and Frame of thy heart, be that in reality which is enrolled in
the promises of the Book of God, the Scripture, which tender to thee
Conditionally, the forgiveness of Sin, produce but those Conditions, let it but
appear upon sound Evidence, that will satisfy thy self and the World, and thy
Judge; that having truly repented of thy Sin, thou live under the Dominion of
Faith and a good Conscience; and Justice it self is obliged to Faithfulness,
for the granting thee Indemnity and Remission, and the sense thereof in thy own
Soul. For if a Man can truly say, that he has repented, and stands to what he
has done, in steadfast Resolutions, never to return to folly, his Reflections
upon former Sins will not be torturing, though they may be grieving, because he
has the promise of Mercy and Pardon, Isa. 55.7. Acts 3.19. which Justice it
self is obliged to perform: For Conditional Promises in themselves are
Dispensations of free love, which was not obliged by any necessity or
Congruousness to offer such Blessings upon such terms; yet once made, and the
Conditions observed, the Donation of the Mercy becomes the interest of strict
Justice and Righteousness. But, although the New Covenant admit of Repentance,
which that of Works could not; yet this Condescension is only through a
Mediator Jesus Christ. If therefore to thy Penitence thou do not superadd Faith
in him, neither will those after Thoughts be sound nor introductive of Peace,
because without Christ our Righteousness and Peace objective and causal without
us, Jer. 23.6. 1 Cor. 1.30. Mic. 5.5. Ephesians. 2.14. there can be no Pardon and
Peace formal within us, Romans 8.1. and without Faith no Justification, no
Christ, Romans 5.1. Joh. 3.18, 36. Yet both these must be evinced to be sincere
and sound, and thereby be themselves justifiable and justified; which nothing
can do but the exercise of a Good Conscience, Acts 24.16. This alone is to us
the surest Evidence, that our Repentance and Faith are unfeigned, and that we
deceive not our own Souls. Indeed the basis of all true bliss and solace is a
good Conscience, in Justice and Innocence toward Man, Inoffensiveness and Piety
toward God, Moderation and Sobriety in my self; the contrary to these and
Comfort are incompatible. It Is but a colloguing with my Conscience to my utter
Confusion to tender it Peace, if it be not pure, Jam. 3.17. No Man can be
groundedly quiet in Mind if filthy in Heart and Life. If thou be a Devil thou
must carry thy Hell about thee, visibly, or under disguise in its self, or its
Causes. Thou have no just Right to the sweets of Religion, if a stranger to its
Power. A Man's first Designs for Joy, are, or ought to be laid in Self-survey
and Reflection. If he can find nothing of God within, he can take comfort in
nothing of God without, but by an unjust Usurpation and Sacrilege. All the
goodness of God signifies nothing to an ill Man: But a Good Conscience [or
heart] is a continual Feast, Prove. 15.15. (...)
He that finds all right at home, who has no rebuke nor cause thereof from the
Domestic Comptroller and Comforter in his Bosom, is happy. Now, there can be
no goodness in Conscience but only from God, and as far as in Conjunction with
God. God in thy Conscience makes it good; for he is all Goodness, and there
neither is, nor can be any except in, and from him. And all the goodness which
is in thy Conscience from him, is first from his Faithfulness, acting under his
Love in the Covenant, wherein he promises to give a new heart of Flesh, Ezekiel.
36, 26, 27. Jer. 31.33.
and Write his Laws in it by his Spirit of Promise, which he engages shall
cause us to walk in his Statutes, etc. Next and under Faithfulness all the
goodness in thy Conscience is from Justice: For the Right that Fidelity gives
to Mercy, Justice is obliged to maintain. God must perform his Word, because he
cannot deal fraudulently, that is unrighteously. If thou be good and holy, it is
only because God is Just and Righteous. He cannot pass away a Right by Deed,
Hand and Seal, and afterward resume it. If we have thus made a Mercy thine, he
will not defraud thee of it. Lastly and under all, Power actually confers upon
thee, all that goodness that adorns thy Conscience. Oh sweet Combination and
Harmony of Love! in all concurring to create thy Peace! Oh how valuable is it!
that Love must unite so many Perfections, in so strong an Engagement to
qualify thee for it, and then enrich thee with it, and the sense of it. Here Is
the Glory and Crown of free Grace. Grace is free thus. 1. As nothing but God's
free Will and Goodness moved him to design so great unmerited Mercies, upon so
mean and inconsiderable terms. 2. As nothing but his free Grace, without all
desert in us, prevails with him to work the Conditions themselves and terms in
us. But now, when free Grace has proceeded thus far, then Pardon, and Holiness,
and Peace are not any longer free in this sense, viz. reserved wholly still in
his Power to withold; but by the Motion and under the Conduct of free Grace, as
its Ministers, Fidelity and Justice take up the Administration where free Grace
left it: so that God cannot deny these Mercies, his Word being past, because he
cannot deny himself, and cease to be faithful and just; that is, to be God.
Thus, what is free Grace in the Original, Rise, and whole process mediately; is
in the closing and completing Acts thereof immediately Justice and
Righteousness. Thou Repentance and Faith be not claimable upon any account, but
mere free Love; yet when this admirable Goodness has conferred Repentance and
Faith, it makes Pardon, Peace, Comfort and Heaven challengable, even in Justice
(though not as merited yet) as Conditionate Mercies. Whence the Apostle speaks
roundly, Heb. 6.10. God is not UNRIGHTEOUS, to forget your work and labor of
Love. In some the Gift of the Conditions, Qualifications, Dispositions for
Blessings, is only from free Mercy and Grace in God; whence those Conditions in
us are called Graces, the name of the Cause Metonymically given to the effect;
Grace within us, from Grace without us in God: But the gift of the Blessings
and Privileges themselves upon performance of the Condition is really Justice.
Our absolute positive State is from Grace, our relative from Righteousness; yet
such Justice is also Originally free Grace, because it is not a natural Act of
Justice but Voluntary. I mean such Justice is not a thing, which God of himself
by necessity of Nature was tied to, antecedently to the free Engagement of his
own Will; but his free Mercy without any other Motive, than its own Generosity
and Nobleness of Disposition and Ingenuous Freedom, did pitch upon such a
Series of Dispensations in boundless Wisdom and Goodness, that (these Acts of
Liberty interposing) Justice must needs be obliged to prosecute the beginnings
of Love, and do such things in order to our Happiness, as before those Acts of
Grace, it was not tied to at all; and this is chiefly done by the Interposition
of Faithfulness. An instance will render all more plain, it shall be that which
we Discourse of Comfort. Justice of its own Nature is not at all obliged to
comfort a Sinner, though Penitent; but contrarily, the natural state of Justice
engages it to punish Sin, not only with the Pains of Penitence, but Wrath and
Vengeance, although a threatening should never intervene: For I suppose the
threats to be in this different from Promises, that the former declare the
natural, both right of the Lawgiver, and dueness of the Penalty, and desert of
the Crime, which the reason and nature of the thing had fixed before, only
since the Right was invested in the Lawgiver, it was in his Power, upon just
and valuable Considerations, to make a Relaxation, or Commutation. But,
Promises do not declare, but give a Right, not to the Promiser, but him to whom
the promise is made, either absolutely or upon Condition; whereby things are
put out of his own Power, either absolutely or conditionally. Now therefore,
God by his Son has freely made this Declaration, Matthew. 5.4. Blessed are they
that mourn, for they shall be comforted. God cannot utter Falsehood, nor break
Promise, nor withhold Right; hence it is, that the Administration here falls
into the hands of Justice, upon the Interposal of this free act of Mercy, in
making the Promise. Threats proceed according to the natural right of the case,
in the substance of it, though they may vary from it in Circumstances, in which
the Punishment may be alleviated or heightened, at the Discretion of the Judge,
or Solemnity, Pomp, Grandeur of the Matter and Process. So Promises proceed
according to the will of the Promiser, as to the matter or thing promised,
which he may pitch upon, and choose at his own Arbitrament: But, when the Bond
is once out of his hands, it may be Sued at the Bar of Justice; only he retains
a liberty to Circumstantiate his own grants, when he cannot recede from them in
substance, the Right to which is not invested now in him, but the Persons to
whom the Promise is made. Comfort then he must in Justice give, it is the
Mourners Right, if they be right Mourners. Mercy and Fidelity gave the Right,
and Justice cannot disannul it, although it be not a natural, but adventitious
Right; and although this Justice be not the Original necessity of his Nature,
but the free Dispensation of his Grace. For, Gone. 18.25. shall not the Judge of
all the Earth do right. His Love has made this Just, and his Justice will give
its due to his Love. That Eternal invariable Righteousness, which is a steady
fixed Propension, to render and distribute Right in all possible Cases, and
give all imaginable dues, is no changling in this Case, where the right and due
is not any natural Resultancy from the condition of the Creature, but a mere
Condescension of undeserved Grace: Justice may suspend, but cannot overthrow
the Right of Mercy, but is obliged to own and observe it, upon account of the
Sacrifice, and Merit of Our Lord Jesus Christ.

Indeed, this is all the Foundation of a Believers hope in Judgment: For
Judgment is a Work of Justice, which distributes Dues, and particularly Rewards
and Punishments according to Works. Therefore the Reward of Believers, is
attributed to the same Justice that punishes Unbelievers, 2 These. 1.4, 5, 6, 7.
We our selves glory in the Churches of God, for your Patience and Faith in all
your Persccutions, and Tribulations which ye endure; a manifest token of the
Righteous Judgment of God, that ye may be counted worthy of the Kingdom of God,
for which ye also suffer. Seeing it is a Righteous thing with God, to
recompense, 1. Tribulation to them that trouble you, 2. and rest with us to you
who are troubled, etc. This, as well as the other is [(...)] Just. It Is the
Office of Justice to take notice in all its proceedings of Right and Wrong; but
if the Right approve its reality, it is no Work of Justice to take Cognizance
how we came by it, whether it be natural Inheritance, or personal Acquisition,
whether our own indefeisible Possession, or another free Donation, these are
things Foreign, and out of the Circuit of Justice. Right must carry it,
whatever be the Foundation of it, whatever be the Nature of it, whatever Title
it proceeds upon: For no Varieties in the Right, alter the Justice of the
Procedure, nor convert Justice into Injustice, or any other thing. The very
Essence and Formal Nature of Justice as Distributive, consists in dispensing
Right: Wherever that is, the Act is formally Justice, and nothing else;
although some other Virtue may have an antecedent Influence in forming the
Right. So here, No Man has a Natural, Personal Right to that everlasting Rest,
neither do the best Services of the most perfect Creatures, Angel, Archangel,
Cherubim, Seraphim, found a right to it, able in the nature of the thing, to
command and necessarily overrule strict Justice, so as 'twould be Injustice
properly so called to withhold or deny it. For Heavenly Glory in its full
Latitude (which I understand by that Rest) is a thing boundlesly above the
Proportion of any finite Qualities or Operations. Those ever Blessed Spirits
are doubtlesly incapable of exerting any Acts, that in Arithmetical Proportion,
can be as considerable and valuable as the Reciprocal Actings of the Deity,
that are returned upon them. For instance, those flaming Ardours of Love in
Seraphims, which denominate them, cannot in the Estimate of Reason and Justice
be conceived equally valuable, with those reactions of Love in the Deity to
them. Certainly God loves them better, than they can possibly love him; and his
Love rays out to them in infinite more Varieties, than theirs can to him, and
the least degree of his Love, is more honorable and worthy, than the highest
of theirs: So that in Commutative Justice, they cannot expect his, for theirs;
especially since theirs is this due, and the Payment of a Debt cannot make the
Creditor a Debtor. I have a Conceit, but will not impose it, that the Devils
sin was not an aspiring to a Coaequality or Superiority to his Creator, which
his Innocent, nay even Corrupt Understanding, could not but represent as
impossible, impracticable, therefore not designable. But rather a challenge and
expectation of those Honors from his Maker, as due in Commutative Justice, to
the Excellencies and Actions which he admired in himself, and would have had
his Inferiors to adore. Whence in that Kingdom of the Beast, which he
established and upholds, this is, or has been a principal Pillar, though now
painted over a new; and is indeed the Universal Sentiment of all, in whose
disobedient hearts he retains the Dominion, which he usurpt upon the Fall. Even
good Souls have a difficult Work to disengage themselves from it. However it is
madness to conceit, that the imperfect Duties or Graces of the lapsed Sons of
Adam, can stand in a Parity with Celestial Recompenses: Nay, the Proportion
cannot amount to the height of that called Geometrical, proper to distributive
Justice, which consists in a likeness of Reason. For, can there be any
comparison betwixt finite and infinite, imperfect and perfect, temporal and
eternal? Can any say, as the Work to the Wage, so is Duty to Heaven. The Right
then here stands upon another bottom, than the reason of the thing, and that is
the free investiture and gift of Sovereign Love and Mercy, by a voluntary Grant
and Covenant. It Is not common Soccage, but Copy hold only.

Yet on the other hand, Hell and Sin stand more in a Parity, or equal
Proportion. There is full as much evil in the Sin, as in the Punishment, though
not as much good in the Duty as in the Reward. The demerit of Sin is
unlimitable; the Treasures of Wrath and Woe comprehended in it, are
inexhaustible; therefore eternal. It Is just then to recompense Tribulation to
the wicked, because their Works merit it. Just to recompense Rest to the godly;
not because their Works merit it, but because free Grace has promised it. Neh.
9.8. And have performed thy Words, for thou art Righteous. God cannot be just
to the Wicked, if he reward not their Works, he cannot be just to himself, to
his own Word and Covenant, if he reward not the Works he has wrought in the
Righteous. Now even Troubles and Afflictions are less grievous, if recompense
may be hoped for, upon good and sure Grounds. If our Miseries become Antidotes
to greater Miseries, it encourages our Patience; if they Work out greater
Mercies, it increases our Courage, and so our Comfort. The gain sweetens the
pain, and we are not so much offended with our Crosses, as pleased with the
Compensation. The World is as a Lottery, for a while we must draw nothing but
Blanks, or what will more grievously vex, disquiet, or torment us; but the last
cast will pay for all, to our fullest Contentation, if we belong to God's
Election. For this light Affliction, which is but for a moment, works for us a
far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. The happiness of
the recompense of Reward, is a thing of so transcendent Nature, that even the
serious Thoughts of it may entertain us with more abundant Joy, than there can
be Grief in the feeling it self, of the bitterest Sufferings. The Antepasts or
Foretasts of Heaven, are incomparably a greater delight than the very sense of
Misery can be a Torment: Therefore sure these exceeding glorious Riches of
Celestial Satisfactions, will be an all-sufficient Requital for all the labor
of Love, the patience of Hope, and work of Faith, that we exert in this
Semibrief moment of our transitory Life. And it is no small Comfort to
consider, that the Fidelity of God has made these Gratuities Justice, by making
them the subject Matter of so many gracious Promises; that what otherwise was
mere liberty, is now necessity; and God by virtue of these his Bonds, is become
a Debtor to God. Oh rich Treasury of strong Consolations! God's grace having so
ordered it, not only that he may, but that he must give the penitently troubled
Soul, in his own way and time, the sweetest Peace, Comfort and Rest. It may
indeed be delayed, but never can be finally denied; and this we owe chiefly to
the Justice of God, his sweetest Perfection, through Christ, and the Covenant,
to an humbled Soul.

But there are also external Administrations of Justice, which are of a
refreshing consideration, and such did the Psalmist reflect upon, and solace
himself withal, Verse. 1, 2, 15, 23. Vindictive Justice is a notable relief to
the Oppressed, and the sweetness of Revenge a potent Cordial. To see those
suffer from whom we suffer, and the Wicked fall into the trap and snare they
lay for us, does not a little glad us; especially if it be done by another hand
than our own, that we are secure no guilt (therefore no ground of greater
trouble) can cleave to us, in the requital of those Evils, which they contract
Guilt by inflicting upon us. Therefore David Blesses God for preventing his
avenging himself with his own hand, 1 Samuel 25, 39. But, is there an avenger
like God? Who not only can and will vindicate his Peoples repute, from the
scandal and reproach of the Malevolent, but revenge their wrong upon the
sturdiest and stoutest, that strengthen themselves in the Mountains of prey.
For, he is engaged thereto, both by nature, as the God of Revenges, Verse. 1.
and by Office as Judge of the Earth, Verse. 2. and also by Covenant and Promise,
Deuteronomy. 32.35, 36, 43. Romans 12.19. Vengeance is mine: I will repay says the
Lord. He will prosecute the injurious with a vindictive hand; and this is no
small Comfort, to see a perfection in God thoroughly engaged, and active to
plead our cause against the wrongs of Men, when their height and power procure
for them indemnity, that to seek, or even think to regain our right is
formidable. Hence we must not, cannot avenge our selves; nor is it fit we
should. We are not wise and good, and just enough to be entrusted with a matter
of such moment, as Judgment in our own cause. Where we feel hard hands, we know
not hearts, therefore cannot fathom the deep abyss of malignity therein, nor
consequently measure out, and proportion our Punishments to Crimes in their
full or right Dimensions, but must be constrained to leave something to God;
and why not all? We shall be prone to act our own Passions, rather than execute
Justice, and by over-doing out of self-respects, or under-doing with respect to
Persons; expose our selves to the revenges of Heaven, which needs not our wrath
or wrong, to work its Righteousness, nor will overlook our miscarriages
without due Animadversion. But, if we commit all to him that Judges
righteously, we shall have right our selves, and do no injury to others. And it
will be no grief, staggering, stumbling, or offense of heart to us, that we
revenge not our selves, 1 Samuel 25.31. (which implies how much that might
trouble us) but a Satisfaction and Comfort, that it lies in his hands, who both
can, and will do it, and time it for the best, Luke 18.7, 8. It Is the fate of
Innocence to have the weakest visible interest on Earth. The Wicked walk on
every side: Their Numbers, and Powers, and Policies, and Malice combine against
Holiness, and for the most part oppress it, Eccles. 4.1. and 8.14. and 5.8. but
yet it shall rise when they fall, be glorified when they are condemned; and
though the guiltless, oppressed, meet with no comfort or Comforter on Earth;
they have both in Faith and Hope, and may rejoice and triumph, in prospect of
the Day of the Lord, which will both right and recompense the wronged, beyond
their utmost Imaginations; they shall be comforted over all the Evils they have
suffered, while the other are tormented. Thus does Justice administer Comforts,
in reversion to the outwardly afflicted, by the injustice of Men, and in
possession to the inwardly Wounded, by the mixed actings of the Mercy and
Justice of God. Thus are all Comforts, as products of Love or Rightcousness,
the fruits of gratuity, liberty, or necessity in God.

. 4. The Omnipotence of God, as Executor to his Mercy and Goodness, Executioner
to his Vengeance and Justice, does not carry an aspect of Terror, but comfort
to a Holy Soul. Even out of this Eater comes their Meat, and out of this strong
sweetness. It Is able, and the Perfections upon whose errand it goes, engage it
to fetch our Comforts out of, even their contraries, and convert our Corrosives
into Cordials; much more to derive and deduce them out of their Causes, out of
all their Possibilities. This helping hand, was one of the Psalmist's
encouraging Supports, and gave no little ease to his Heart, Verse. 17, 21. With
what an undauntable courage did Achilles adventure himself into all perils, in
confidence of his case-hardned impenetrable Armor; the assurance that he was
out of danger, that no Weapon could make a breach upon his Vitals, was the
strongest support to his Magnanimous Heart. But, What are Brass and Steel and
Adamant, to the impregnable Defenses we enjoy in God? Our Buckler and Shield,
Psalm. 18.2, 30. Genesis 15.1. Deuteronomy. 33.29. Prove. 2.7. Psalm. 28.7. and 33.20. and
91.4. and 115.9. and 47.9. and 84.11. and 144.2. Prove. 30.5. Psalm. 3.3. A
Shield about me; therefore Verse. 6. I will not be afraid of Ten thousand of
People, that have set themselves against me round about: And here, Verse. 22.
The Lord is my defense. Here Is a Security unparalleled, Armor indeed
unpeirceable. The Body of Christ is truly invulnerable: No Weapon formed
against it shall prosper, Isa. 54.17. Nothing can reduce it into the State of
Mortality. The Gates of Hell cannot prevail against it, Matthew. 16.18. nor
against the meanest Member thereof, because built upon the Rock. If Christ
dwell in thy heart by Faith, and thou in him by Love, Men may rage and Devils
storm against thee, but the Rock cannot shrink under thee. The Ship cannot sink
that carries Christ within the hope of Glory. The Covenant is inexpugnable,
Grace inextinguishable, God's Love unchangeable, his purposes irreversible.
Thou art unconquerable because God is. Forsake not this thy Defense, be not a
Traitor to thy self, and nothing can hurt thee; nothing can wrest thee out of
an Omnipotent hand, and whilst in it nothing can ruin thee, though Fury and
Malice may kill thee; yet it does not damage thee, it does but only render thy
happiness immutable, it does but only bring thee back to the felicity thou
lost, reinstate thee in Paradise and Innocence, nay, advance thee above it, in
Impeccability and Immortality. And, to what more can the loftiest Ambition of
Humane Nature aspire? To be freed from all Evil, and enjoy all good, is the
substance of that Felicity, which the most enlarged Appetite pants after. And
the Omnipotence of God is all things real and possible. There cannot be a
created desire commensurate to its ability to secure us, or satisfy us. It is
a proper and all-sufficient remedy, against the Disconsolateness, which may
arise in our Hearts, through two of these kinds of troubles, in our Thoughts,
which I instanced before, viz. the dreadful and despairing. Nothing can
possibly be so formidable, as to be capable of being a match for Almightiness;
nor can there be the least shadow of reason to despair of any thing, if
infinite Power undertake it. To be safe from fear of Evil, is a wonderful
Satisfaction. Danger of all kinds must be removed, or we are not safe; the fear
of all removed, or we do not think our selves safe, and the conceit does
torture as much as the thing, which disquiets no further than as apprehended;
and the foresence sometimes, becomes more grievous than the feeling. But, where
can there be safety, if not in an Omnipotent hand? Where without it? He is the
Rock of my refuge, says the Psalmist, Verse. 22. The Name of the Lord, is a
strong Tower, the Righteous runs to it, and is safe, Prove. 18.10. and 29.25.
and 21.31. Psalm. 4.8. and 12.5. Infiniteness is an impregnable Fortress, Psalm.
18.2. Here have we the comfort of being above the reach of Malice, in a quiet
and secure Sanctuary. Build thy Tabernacle here, and nothing can endanger thee;
make sure of an interest in this, and thou have no reason to be afraid.

But if thy Fears be not blown over, yet a solid Hope may waft thee into
Paradise. This is a thing that in the greatest hazard will buoy up a sinking
Heart, and the more grounded our Hope, the more refreshing. Cut the Cable and
loose this Security and we float a drift without Card or Compass, in a
bottomless Gulf of Misery. Nothing so deadly as Despair. It Is the utter wrack
and ruin of all our Joy. But if we have good reason to expect liberation from
an unsupportable Evil, or to wait for the communication of a satisfying Good,
or of the continuance of its Enjoyment, so that a sufficient compensation will
be made us in this, for the hurt we received by the former; or if the evil
invading us cut off our hopes of present recompense; yet if we be certain of a
competency of support and succor, or that we shall not feel it in the full
amplitude of its malignity, but with abatement and mitigation, that it shall
only have a short being, but no biding and rest upon us, that we shall see
through it, we are less solicitous in our Minds, and herein feel no little
relief. Now what a safe ground have our Hopes to anchor upon in God's
Almightiness. Here Is all Hope, naught to be despaired of. What is there not to
be had in boundless Perfection? What may not be hoped for from omnipotent
Goodness? Can there be any capacity in a finite Being, to which infiniteness
cannot extend? Can there be a rational expectation in a limited Nature, to
which unlimited Grace will not accommodate it self. The unfathomable excellency
of God declares him all-sufficient to answer thy expectance to the full, and
his free gracious Communicativeness and Promise, render all thy hopes from him
rational. Thou can not desire, much less expect, more than God can give, and
he is willing to grant more than thou can hope for. Nothing in thee can be
the measure of his unmeasurable Power and Bounty, in dispensing whatever may be
for thy good, and it is not rational Hope, which is not guided by this
discretion, to look for nothing but what is good in it self or to us. For evil
is not appetible, and what is not the object of Desire, cannot be of Hope, but
Fear. Now the Judge of what is Good or Evil in it self, or to us, is not our
Fancy, or Appetite, or Lust; but the unbiassable Wisdom of God.

We must therefore have recourse to that powerful Hand, which is the Agent and
Factor for such unconceivable Wisdom and Grace; and what cannot that do in our
troubled Hearts, which both in Heaven and Earth can do all things, exceeding
abundantly above all that we ask and think, Ephesians. 3.20. It can both prepare us
for Comfort, by conquering our enmity against it, indisposition for it,
unsuitableness to it, and by creating those Qualifications and Conditions,
which are prerequisite to our enjoyment of it; and also prepare it for us, and
apply it. Is thy state so bad that thou can not be duly comforted?
Almightiness can change it by regenerating thee, Ephesians. 1.19, 20. with 2.1. And
supply out of the foregoing Verse, [that ye may know] what is the exceeding
greatness of his Power to us ward who believe, according to [(...)] the
inworking of the might of his Power, which be wrought in Christ, raising him
from the Dead, -- and you who were dead in Trespasses and Sins. For as the
Learned observe, this is the plain and evident coherence; what interposes, is
to be included in a Parenthesis. Is thy Heart so stubborn, sullen or
overwhelmed with Anguish, or any other Passion, that Rachel-like thou will not
be Comforted? even this his Power can subdue and bow into a spontaneous
forwardness to accept his gracious offers. Art thou so debased and vile in
thine own Eyes, that thou dare not presume to be Comforted? Omnipotence can
and will be the instrument of Goodness and Fidelity, to create inthee an humble
confidence in receiving and applying it, as thy peculiarly designed Portion,
for which thou art under an immediate preparation. The Tempter is not so able
to molest as thy Redeemer to pacify thy Conscience, and because he is more
able he is more willing also. The liberty to act, in acting, being proportioned
to the potency of the rational Agent. What we can best do, we most readily,
freely and cheerfully do. Every thing that can be congruously done, is not only
possible, but facil, easy to Omnipotency. He made a World with a Word, Genesis 1.
By a Word sustains it, 2 Pet. 3.7. And the mere suspense of that Word will
destroy it, as follows thence by necessary consequence; For if by that Word
they be reserved in store for the Fire of that day, it follows, that without it
they cannot be reserved. The effect must needs be removed, with its immediate
continuing cause; they cannot be kept and reserved without a Keeper and
Reserver, continuing his influence for that end, as the Light cannot subsist if
the Sun, Moon and Stars be taken away. This Word of Power which upholds all
things, Heb. 1.2. is engaged for the sustentation of troubled Hearts, Psalm.
55.22. For the bruising Satan (the great troubler of Souls) under our feet,
Romans 16.20. which is spoken, I conceive, with relation to the Devils
discomforting Power: My ground is the title given to him who effects this, viz.
The God of Peace. The Devil's power to discompose and disease us, cannot equal
God's power to heal with Peace; which therefore, and because it is produced out
of nothing in us is styled a Creation, Isa. 57.19. I create the fruit of the
Lips, Peace, Peace to him that is far off, (the Gentile) and to him that is
near (the Jew) says the Lord, and I will heal him. What the end of his
creating Peace was, he had told in the foregoing Verse 18. viz. to Comfort him.
I have seen his ways, (Covetousness going frowardly in the way of his own
Heart, ver. 17.) and will heal him, I will lead him also, and restore Comforts
to him and his Mourners. And who is this I, that undertakes all this? You may
be resolved herein by ver. 15. It Is the high and lofty one that inhabits
Eternity, whose name is Holy, who dwells in the high and holy Place, etc. Words
importing the most Majestic Sovereign Power. Kings have the Power of Peace and
War. The Creation of Peace is an Act of God's Supreme Majesty, as well as
tender Mercy; speaks the height of his Power as fully as the depth of his Love;
whence Elihu in Job 34.29. When he makes quietness, who then can (condemn, so
all Translations, Chald. Greek, Lat. etc. or) make trouble; and when he hides
his Face, who then can behold him, whether it be done [(...)] upon a Nation, or
upon a Man only: [against] is not so ordinary a signification of the Word, not
does so well suite both the opposite parts of the foregoing Clause of the
Verse, which it respects in common, If God thus give Rest and Quiet, and
thereby Peace and Comfort, what Power can control him, and destroy his Work?
surely none. And why? the reason is to be deduced from his Almightiness. All
the Malignancy and Enmity of Earth and Hell, though in a confederacy of united
Virulence, Policy, Power, and Violence, endeavoring to make a breach in, or of
that secure Peace, wherewith a Good Conscience, as a Brazen Wall, does guard,
fortify and surround a true Servant of God, by a Commission derived from
Heaven, will but be like the vain attempts of the impotent Waves against a
Rock, which instead of overturning it only dash themselves in pieces.

Without the interposure of Omnipotence, the Comfort of sinful Man would be
impossible, in that order of Government which Divine Wisdom has pitched upon,
as most congruous for his Salvation. For supposing Sin, and God's purpose not
to permit all Mankind to perish everlastingly, under that Justice, into the
Hands whereof the administration of his Kingdom did necessarily fall, upon the
Apostasy of Man; and supposing God's determination, to uphold the honor of his
Justice and Government in pardoning none but upon Consideration, and in virtue
of a satisfaction given to Justice; I affirm, 1. That satisfaction could not
possibly be made for the injury done to God by Sin, except only by Omnipotency.
For Death being threatened for Sin, the threatening in the substance of it must
be executed, or both Justice and Fidelity violated. For since in the nature of
the thing some Punishment cannot but be due for so high an affront to the
Divine Authority and Regiment, and since the Commination had determined and
expressed the kind of Punishment in substance to be Death with an Emphasis: How
could the Deity be just in his Word, or his Deed, had all been wholly waved?
Therefore the Satisfaction given must be by suffering the Penalty to the full,
in its substance. The Threatening does not express any thing concerning the
greatness, extensive, or intensive of the Punishment, only that it be
proportionable to the Crime Justice requires. The Crime is vertually infinite.
The Condition of the Creature will not admit of a Punishment intensively
infinite. Therefore the Death threatened can only be extensively infinite, that
is Eternal. But an eternal duration that has a beginning is not actually
infinite, vertually therefore. The Sin then being vertually infinite, the
Punishment proportioned and threatened must be vertually infinite also, i. e. as
infinite as the state of the Creature was capable to admit. If now this, viz,
an Aeviternal Death, be inflicted in kind, because an end of it is impossible,
there could not possibly be any Satisfaction, any Salvation. Satisfaction
therefore must be in another kind of vertually infinite suffering, viz. that
intensively so. And it is very consistent with Justice to admit this
Commutation, since it has its full demand therein, viz. a Punishment
proportionable to the Fault, i. e. vertually infinite. But now nothing short of
Omnipotency, or infinite Power can bear, or wrestle through a Punishment
infinite, or which is Omnipoenal.

2. Neither could any Power less than infinite, raise the Satisfier of Justice
from the Death Temporal, which was indispensibly to be undergone by him, and to
this it is ascribed, Ephesians. 1.19, 20. to be presently transcribed.

Lastly the same Power qualifies for the Fruits of this Satisfaction, in Pardon
and Consolation. Ephesians. 1.19, 20. [(...)] the exceeding greatness of his Power to
usward who believe according to the working of his mighty Power, which he
wrought in Christ, raising him from the Dead, and you who were dead in
Trespasses, etc. Chap. 2.1. If this be not Omnipotency, what is? I had rather
speak and think as the Holy Ghost teaches, than in the profundity of my Reason
make my self wiser than him, who inspired the Holy Men of God whose Names these
Writings bear. Yet do constantly and confidently affirm that in working these
Preparations, (or creating Grace in the Heart, which quickens it) Omnipotence
is sufficiently able, so to act under the conduct of Omniscience, as to offer
no violence to the faculties of Man at all; Cleared before.
but through the influence of a more commanding Light in his Mind, does lead
him in the exercise of a full intemerate and ingenuous liberty through the
strait Gate of Regeneration, into Eternal Rest and Peace.

In short we are sometimes involved in such Soultroubles so insuperable and
intolerable ( Prove. 18.14. A wounded Spirit who can bear) and such inextricable
insupportable straits, exigences and occurrents of Providence; and are reduced
to such a pinch of extremity, that without a (...), God in the Mount, a
supernatural Conduct and Power, it is impossible to bear up under them, or be
delivered from them. These were often experimented Cases with our Psalmist, as
appears particularly from ver. 17, 18. and as much is insinuated ver. 20, 21,
22. and the cruel oppressions of the whole Church, ver. 5, 6. evidence that it
was not exempted. And where can an overwhelmed Soul, or a wasted desolate
Church, groaning under the Fury and Madness of Malice and Violence, in
numberless Legions of Principalities and Powers, and spiritual and carnal
Wickednesses in high and low Places, and the Rulers and Sons of the Darkness of
the World, the whole Militia of Satan in Hell, Earth, and their own Hearts? O
where can they find defense, refuge and relief, against such an over-match of
barbarous Enmity, except in the Almightiness of Heaven? In such distresses we
have nothing left to comfort us, beside this Omnipotent Power of God, and it is
enough, more than enough, All-sufficient.

. 5. God's Fidelity and Vnchangableness in Word and Deed, to which I refer,
ver. 14, 15. For the Lord will not cast off his People, etc. This is still a
more near ground of Consolation. For other Divine Perfections stand in an
indifference to us, we have no right to take comfort in them, till a Promise
bring and lay them before us, and engage them for us upon certain terms, which
accomplished, all our Mercy is rendered Necessity and Destiny. Yet a Promise
that may never be performed will administer no certain indefeisible relief,
being only as a broken Reed. Hence the promised Mercies are suspended upon
Conditions in us, that the whole right of performing them may not stand in the
liberty of the Maker, but become Justice and Necessity to him that performs the
Condition.
Therefore also the comfortableness of the Promises, depends as much upon the
invariable Nature of God, as the sweetness of the matter it self, which is
tendered in the Promise; and here the Holy Ghost leaves it, Heb. 6.16, 17, 18.
An Oath is [to Men] an end of all strife. Wherein God willing more abundantly
to show to the Heirs of Promise the immutability of his Counsel, confirmed it
by an Oath; That by two immutable things, in which it is impossible for God to
lie, we might have strong Consolation, who have fled for refuge, to lay hold
upon the Hope set before us. No state is perfectly comfortable that is
changeable for the worse. Be our Contentments never so refreshing, yet the fear
to be despoiled of them will introduce a secret sting and bitterness which will
allay their Pleasantness, and so much the more, by how much the sweeter they
are, and yet the more, as the parting time still approaches nearer. But when it
comes indeed the torment and anguish in their loss is so intolerable, that the
satisfactions of our forepast Enjoyment are utterly obliterate and forgot, like
the seven Years of Plenty in Egypt; and we are ready to wish rather never to
have felt them, than so to be deprived of them. But now the Nature of God not
admiting the least variableness or shadow of change, Jam. 1.17. And all the
Promises of God, being in Christ, yea and in him Amen, 2 Cor. 1.20. And the
Gifts and Calling of God being without Repentance, Romans 11.29. We are secure
that our right and possession is indefeisible, and the Comforts that we really
partake of in God at any time, are ours for ever. For he abides faithful, and
cannot deny himself, 2 Timothy 2.13. Though we believe not, and so the Promise be
not fulfilled to us in particular, because we observe not its condition, yet
this will be no impeach to the Fidelity of God, but rather a confirmation of
it. For if the Mercy were granted, where the condition on which it is suspended
is not performed; God would not act according to his Word which is conditional,
but would appear to change both his Word, and that whereof it is a Declaration,
viz. his Will and Purpose. God's Promises therefore are of an invariable
Nature, because he himself is so. Absolute Promises shall undoubtedly be
fulfilled absolutely, Conditional, conditionally, not otherways, because God is
unchangeable. Heaven and Earth shall pass away but of his Word not a Jot or
Tittle. For it is for ever seated in Heaven, Psalm. 119.89. His Faithfulness
therein is to all Generations, ver. 90. His Promises are a sure never failing
Foundation. For even those Promises which in their immediate Nature are
conditional to particular Persons; yet to the Church in general are made
Absolute, because the Condition it self is promised. For he that has engaged
that the Church shall not be extirpated and destroyed, no not by all the
Malignity and Violence of the Gates of Hell; has obliged himself to such a
series both of special and common Providence as will infallibly secure it both
from internal corrupting Principles, and external destroying Powers. Which yet
cannot be done unless the inward Graces be given which entitle to the Promises,
as well as those outward defenses granted, which may guard against external
assailings. And indeed every Promise is made absolute by the greatest Promise,
which if it do not this, under the notion of a Covenant, properly so called,
yet does it as a Testament; under which Title the Holy Ghost recommends it to
us in the Gospel, especially in the Epistle to the Hebrews. Those holy
dispositions which are required by the Covenant and Promises as terms of Mercy,
are bequeathed as Legacies by the Will and Testament of our Redeemer. The
Covenant by him is converted into a Testament. That which is (...) Heb. 9.15.
The New Testament taking place after the death of the Testator, ver. 16, 17. is
also (...), Heb. 8.8. A New Covenant. It gives the Privileges, Pardon, Peace,
Comfort, Glory, upon Conditions: But then it gives the Conditions themselves
also inconditionally. For he that has made Repentance, Faith, Love, working
Obedience, the Conditions of Forgiveness and Salvation, has promised also to
write his Laws (therefore the Laws requiring those) in the Heart; whence they
are styled Gifts of God: Repentance, Act. 5.31.2 Tim. 2.25. Faith, Phil. 1.29.
Joh. 6.29. Love, Gal. 5.22. 1 John 4.7. Though all after-Grace be given
Conditionally; yet the Condition it self, or the first Grace, must necessarily
be given Inconditionally, or we shall make a process in infinitum, and never
find a First to be the Condition of the Second, etc. or we must resolve the
first Grace into mere Nature, or admit a work of Man for which he is not at all
beholden to the Grace of God, that yet is so acceptable to God, as to have all
the exceeding great and precious Promises of the Gospel Covenant suspended upon
it.

To every Promise there is an answerable purpose in the Will of God. For if
Promises were not expressions of Divine Purposes, they would be mere Mockery
and Delusion, i. e. Engagements to give what never was intended to be given. As
therefore the Decree to pardon and save Men, is Conditional, but the Decree to
create in them the Conditions is absolute; so also it is in the Promises, which
are therefore immutable, because the Decree, the Will, the Nature of God is.
Whence Divine Veracity stablishes and fixes our grounds of Comfort, from the
rest of God's Perfections, and adds new poyse and weight to the Balance,
without which, all our Mercy is only Liberty, and our Expectation nothing but
strong Imagination, our Faith Fancy. For what have we to do to hope, that a
Majesty so exalted, and eminent, will in a peculiar manner, above the course of
ordinary Providence, (or indeed in that) concern himself about us, till he
declare it? And what considence can we have in any Declarations, if we have no
assurance of Fidelity in the Revealer? Sinners have nothing in God interested
about them, but vindictive Justice and its subservient Attributes, whilst they
continue under the First Covenant, and reject the terms of Grace. Men may
declaim what they will at rovers concerning the merciful Nature, and boundless
Goodness of God to his Creatures; it is acknowledged they are unspeakably Rich
and Glorious; but though they be the necessity of his Nature, essentially
considered, yet their egress and flowing out into transient Acts, is Arbitrary
and merely Gratuitous. His Nature is all Love, and Kindness, and Goodness; yet
these are not the next ground of Hope. Go preach this Doctrine in Hell to the
Apostate Angels, extol the Mercy of God as high as the highest Heavens,
Rhetoricate upon it with the Tongue of a Cherubim, through all the Varieties
and Flowers of an Invention as large as the Universe, as lofty as the Sky; make
them believe if you can, that they are under the dispensation of Grace, that
infinite Bowels will not permit any of his Creation to be finally Miserable;
see whether you can mock them into hopes of Salvation, with so comfortable an
Oration. No, there can be nothing but Despair where no interposal of God's
Faithfulness. Goodness and Love, be they never so unmeasurable and free, do but
only contribute to the height of the Misery of those who having forfeited all
the excellent Fruits of them, cannot find or expect a return of their Embraces
and Blessings in the hand of Veracity. For the remembrance of lost Happiness
does but only Torture and Crucify, with the more grievous and anguishful
Reflections, if there can be no retrieval; and none can possibly be secure,
that Mercy once forfeited and lost shall again be presented to his choice, and
acceptance till Fidelity be engaged, that his Faith and Hope may stand firm
upon the bottom of a Promise. But upon the intervention of this Attribute, if
there be a bond upon the Truth of God, there is one also upon every other
Perfection of God. Wisdom, and Goodness, and Justice, and Power and all; even
the very Being of God is laid in pawn, and every thing in God must subserve to
the interest of Veracity, all concur to observe and accomplish its Obligations,
all are responsible for it; since it is no more possible that God should be a
Liar, than a Fool, Wicked, Unrighteous, Impotent, Nothing: Fidelity therefore
is in a more special manner every Attribute of God, because every one is under
a special voluntary bond, to stand by it, over and above the Natural. For
though it is true, that there is no real difference in God, but all that is
represented to our infirm Faculties, under distinct Notions is in him, one
omnifarious, single indivisible Excellency, producing various Effects from
whence it has its various Denominations; the one uncompounded Divine Essence,
as wisely managing all things, in Himself, Heaven, and Earth, being called
Wisdom; the same undivided Essence as Loving being called Goodness; the same
also as distributing Right being called Justice; and as Effecting all things
called Power, and immutably engaging in Promise, Faithfulness; one and the same
Being, in the most perfect simplicity of Nature, is all; which Unity of
Attributes I call the Natural Bond, that binds them; and the Plurality being
merely nominal not real, is only instanced in accommodation and condescension
to our imbecility and shallowness of Understanding; yet to sublevate the same
impotency in us, and beget the firmer Confidence and stronger Consolation, the
Holy Ghost does associate Divine Perfections and Actions, throughout all his
inspired Writings, in an Engagement for us. As those two immutable things, Heb.
6.17, 18. both which, viz. Counsel and Oath, being mere spontaneous bonds, yet
are bottomed upon and derive their Immutability from something in God that is
of Natural Necessity, i. e. his Unchangeable Nature; but are combined in a
strict voluntary Union, (I mean depending merely upon the Will of God) to
confirm our assurance of Mercy. So here, that Wisdom, Goodness, Justice, and
Power, which no necessity of Nature did oblige to own sinful Man, with any
gracious Condescentions, are all by the free act of God's Will, which nothing
but mere Grace moved him unto, ( viz. by his Counsel and Oath the bonds upon
his Veracity) so immutably engaged to act in subserviency to his purposes of
Love, that they cannot be themselves, if those Counsels obtain not. Thus those
Perfections which are naturally one in Essence, are voluntarily made to be one
in Efficience; as they are one in Nature, so freely made one in Operation;
whilst by the gratuitous and unnecessitated Act of God, all are tied to a
concurrence in observing the designments and ends of Faithfulness, this
voluntary Bond he has laid upon himself, evidencing that to be his free
choice, which is the necessity of his Nature; that as it is absolutely
impossible in it self that God should be a Liar: So there may not be the least
imaginable shadow of a reason for us, neither to make him one, by our unbelief,
1 John 5.10. But our unbelief may be rendered utterly and eternally inexcusable;
nor to make him evil and unloving by our Disconsolateness, but his boundless
graciousness under the conduct of his trueness to his Promise, may re-establish
our Comfort upon an everlasting Foundation; that as the matter of our Joy and
Consolation is treasured up in that inexhaustible Magazine of all delectable
Sweetness and Satisfaction, the Goodness of God; so his Veracity may be a most
certain and infallible means to secure it for us, and ascertain us, that in
Gods due time, we shall enter upon the full, and perpetual enjoyment of it.

. 6. The Presence of God is a wonderful Comfort. That he who is all this Good
insured to us, is not a God afar off, but at hand, both in a general and
special sense; both as a God and as our God. Here you see he is represented as
Hearing and Seeing, ver. 9. which necessarily imply Presence. For these Powers
being attributed to him (...) in a Figure after the manner of Men, who are
never admitted in Law, as Eye and Ear witnesses of any thing, unless present;
when we divest them of the Figure, and interpret them (...) after the Nature of
God, they here import, That God is Present, as a Witness of all the Cruelties
of these savage Butchers of God's Servants. But whether this will carry it or
no, it is sure, the special Presence of God does infer the General. For if he be
in a peculiar manner Present, this cannot be in the exclusion of his Essence;
which is Immense, circumscribed by no place, yet in all. Now this Gracious
Presence is plainly implied in ver. 14. Neither will he forsake his
Inheritance. The Negative infers the Affirmative, not to forsake is to tarry,
to continue present with. Neither is that ver. 22. aliene from our purpose, My
God is the Rock of my Refuge. It would be a strange Refuge in which we were not
capable of being present, and our being present in, and unto, and with God,
does clearly demonstrate his Presence with us. The Presence is mutual. When
therefore a good Soul takes Sanctuary in God, under the assurance of Propriety
in him, this imports the Gracious Presence of God.

That the Psalmist derived comfortable Considerations from hence, to compose
and allay the Fluctuations of his turbulent, unruly Thoughts, I doubt not. And
it is a Theme very pregnant, to think, that wherever I am, I am with God,
infinite Wisdom, Goodness, Justice, Power, Faithfulness; that there are more
with me than can be against me: Why should not this revive my troubled Heart,
under all the Machinations, and Violence of Men and Devils? As it did God's
Servants of old, 2 Chronicles. 32.6, 7, 8. And he [Hezekiah] set Captains of War
over the People, and gathered them together to him, in the Street of the gate
of the City, and spoke to their Heart, saying be strong and courageous, be not
afraid nor dismayed for the King of Assyria, nor for all the Multitude that is
with him, for there be more with us than with him: With him is an arm of Flesh,
but with us is the Lord our God, to help us, and to fight our Battles: And the
People leaned themselves upon the Words of Hezekiah, King of Judah. The Comfort
of these Words, which was a Stay to their disquieted Minds, did consist in the
Assurance he gave of the Presence of God. And what more common in the
Scripture, than for God himself immediately, or mediately, by his Prophets, or
Messengers, to encourage his Servants unto, or in, any difficult, hazardous,
displeasing, terrifying, troublesome Undertaking by this, I am, or I will be,
or God is, or shall be with thee? But incomparably above all things of this
Nature, is that most satisfying Ground of everlasting Consolation, beyond all
Miracles, which we have in IMMANUEL. That for the Recovery of Lost Mankind, the
Eternal Son of God should descend from the Height of his Sanctuary and Throne
in Heaven, to become GOD WITH US. The Excellency and Beauty of Heaven. The Son
of Righteousness, did Eclipse and shroud his Transcendent Light and Glory, in
the dark shadow of mortal flesh, that in the humility of our Nature, he might
do and suffer that for us, ( who had debased our selves even unto Hell, Isa.
57.9.) which would be effectually conducible for our Exaltation, to the very
Akme of Celestial Perfection and Felicity. This, This is the everlasting Wonder
and Astonishment of Men and Angels, an Act of Grace, and a Means of Peace,
truly worthy of an infinitely Glorious God! It Is only in Virtue of this, that
sinful Man has any gracious Presence of God at all. Joh. 1.14. (...).
If God had not thus Tabernacled in our Flesh, dwelt in our Nature, we could
have had no dwelling in God, but as in a Consuming Fire, and Everlasting
Burnings. All the Support we can derive, either from God's Essential Presence,
or Voluntary, depends entirely, upon the Hypostatical Union and Presence, of
the Only-begotten, Dearly-beloved of God, to our Nature. But dismiss we this to
further Consideration, in its proper Place, 'twas necessary to mention it here,
as the very Basis of all our Comfort, in any thing of God.

Let a Man be Paradis'd in the sweetest refreshing Garden of all Sublunary
Delights; yet, Solitude will be an Embitterment to all his other Joys; he that
can evermore be alone, is either a Devil or a God. The Deity pronounced that
State Bad, when Man's State was at the Best: It Is not good for Man to be alone,
Genesis 2.18. No, his own Thoughts would devour him, his Troubles crush him down,
and sink his Spirits into Despondency and Confusion. It Is no little Solace in
Misery it self, to have a Fellow, though it be in Suffering; and an
Aggravation, when our Sorrows are unparalleled. Is it nothing to you, all ye
that pass by, behold and see, if there be any Sorrow like unto my Sorrow? etc.
Lam. 1.12. was the Sting of the Church's Misery: But There has no Temptation
taken you, but such as is common to Man, 1 Cor. 10.13. is a singular Comfort,
under the most grievous Depressions. Solamen miseris, socios habuisse doloris.
Society is an Alleviation of Calamities; our Griefs are not so oppressive, if
they be in Consort: Company begets a Harmony in Sorrows, and the Consonancy of
their Dolours makes a kind of pleasing Music in Consent with our own, although
no other Interest knit them to us, than Community of Cares and Troubles. But
how pleasant is the Society of a Friend, to whom we can ease our Hearts in
Adversity, and who, by condoling our Afflictions, and bearing our Burdens,
lightens our Crosses, and cheers our fainting Spirits by comfortable Discourses
whom also in all our Prosperity, we can make Partaker of all our Joys, and all
in whose Comforts we have a common Interest, whose Good we can rejoice in, when
we suffer Evil our selves, in the noble Sensuality of reciprocating Kindnesses.
If the accidental Society of any be sweet, much more this Elective; neither is
the Natural and Relative inferior, especially where the Love is not mere
Liberty, but Necessity. What an unspeakable Solace, is the tender pretty Babe,
to the Compassionate Mother? With what ravishing Exultations, does she
entertain it into her Embraces? How does her Heart leap for Joy, at the very
sight of it? And her Bowels yern over it? And in its Enjoyment, can triumph
over all her other Misadventures and Misfortunes? In general, any thing to
which we can let out our hearts, in an entire Affection, administers
Satisfaction: The very working of Love, and Commiseration, singularly pleases.
There Is no Solace but in something that delights. Thy Comforts delight my Soul.
Under Perplexity no Peace. The Heart cannot rest in what displeases. What Is
unlovely is indelectable. Whatever delights, comforts; whether it be in our own
Act, or an outward Object. Now in incident Company, there is something pleasing,
something (and often much more) displeasing; else we embrace it with
Friendship. In a choice Friend, there is much more pleasing than displeasing;
for we always give some Allowance for Humanity. If a Relation, in which blind
Love sees the least ill, yet do in nothing displease, it is adored and made a
God. Whatever is mortal, is not without some kind of Embitterment. The purest
Gold has its Alloy, it is but so many Caracts fine: But God is infinite
Delectation always in thy Company. Thou art altogether incapable of Solitude. He
that fills the Universe, is ever with thee, Ps. 139.18. Yet not accidentally,
but substantially, essentially; nor only as a Spectator, but every way
concerned: Afflicted in all thy Afflictions, Isa. 63.9. So thou enjoy'st that
Solamen. And if thou have elected him for thy Friend, he has no less chosen
thee. In his Love may thou rejoice, into his Bosom pour out all thy Griefs,
and meet with a Sympathy in his Compassionate Heart. Upon him may thou cast
thy Burden, who has promised to sustain it, and thee, Psalm. 55.22. He cares
for thee, 1 Pet. 5.7. He is tenderly affectioned toward thee, kind to thee,
all his is common to thee; when none else will or can, a Friend will he be, and
a Relation too, the nearest, the sweetest. To the Natural Relation founded in
forming and begetting thee, as a Faithful Creator, Merciful Father; he has for
thy further Comfort superadded a voluntary tie, in the condition of a
Bridegroom, Mat. 25. the beginning. But as if Espousals were not firm enough to
prevent thy jealousy of a dereliction, the Conjugal Bond is actually tied, Thy
Maker is thy Husband, Isa. 54.5. Romans 7.1, 2, 3, 4. therefore has he obliged
himself to ever enduring Cohabitation and Love, with everlasting Kindness will
be embrace thee, never leave thee nor forsake thee.

Neither are his Converses, and Communication less delightful than his Company
and Presence. The Discourse of Friends and Relations, mightily revive a
dejected Heart; not only by diverting and putting by sad disconsolate thoughts,
but in respect of their matter as Hezekiah's, before mentioned, to the People
of Jerusalem. A kind Friend is a Dove with a Olive Branch in his Mouth, in, and
after a deluge of Calamities. Good Words are as Oil to the Joints, Marrow to
the Bones, a refreshing, reviving Medicine to a sick oppressed Heart. As a soft
Answer turns away Wrath, Prove. 15.1. So a sweet one turns away Sorrow. Good
Words make the Heart glad, even when heaviness in it causes it to stoop, Prove.
12.25. Pleasant Words are as a Honeycomb, sweet to the Soul, and health
(Medicine) to the Bones, Prove. 16.24. God is with us to speak to our Hearts,
even in a Wilderness State, Hos. 2.14. How often are his Words compared to, and
preferred before Honey and Honey-combs? What a revival was it it to Zechariah,
and the Jews, when the Lord answered the Angel-Intercessor for Judah and
Jerusalem, with good Words and comfortable Words, Zech. 1.13. And with no less
exultation did the Psalmist say, Psalm. 85.8. I will hear what God the Lord will
speak, for he will speak Peace to his People and to his Saints. Christ himself
when present on Earth came preaching Peace, Ephesians. 2.17. His Ambassadors by and
through him preach Peace, Act. 10.36. He is a good Man, says David of Ahimaaz,
and brings good tidings, 2 Samuel 18.27. Good Words with a good God are gladsome
indeed. O take pleasure in the Message, more in the Messengers, in the Sender
most of all. The inward secret whisperings of the Spirit of Grace and Peace in
thy Conscience, the outward publication of Peace by God's Ministers and People,
are only in the matter and method of the Scriptures, in which alone, God realy
speaks Peace. Nothing can comfort but Truth, nothing savingly Comfort but
Scripture Truth. All truth is originally from God, Essential Truth is God, the
Son of God, Mat. 28. ult. who is, wherever he speaks and maks that comforting
Truth, which is his Image, efficacious by his Presence and Power, so that the
very Instrument of Comfort, does but only delight us relatively to him of whom
it is a lively Representation. Thou may be mocked with a Lie, and bewitched
into a false deceitful Joy, with a Falsehood, but when the Mask is taken off,
thy bare Countenance will appear more sad than at first, and thy Comforts more
unretrievable. No real Peace, but in the God of Peace, through the Prince of
Peace.

Friends and Relations cannot always be present personally, with their Company
and Counsel to minister to our Peace. A Vertual and Vicarious Presence and
Conference, does not a little contribute to our Consolation, when distance of
place, renders the other impossible; and with what a transport of Joy do we
receive their Tokens, their Letters, their Writings, with what a (...), do we
peruse, and in a manner greedily devour them? How are our Hearts ravished with
the kind and affectionate Expressions, Professions of Remembrance, Respect,
Love; every Word is a Cordial, we are in an ecstasy of Contentation, here as in
a Glass we behold them, their lively Portraicture is afresh painted hereby in
our Imagination; we hear them, we talk with them, solace our selves in this
Fantastical Enjoyment as if it were Real. And why should not our Delights be
more transcendent in God, who can never be absent; whose Presence is Substance,
and not Phantastry; and whose Tokens of Love, and Letters of Comfort, are not
the Curates of a Non-Resident Being, nor the Missives of a distant
Superintendency; but the immediate Visitations of an Overseeing Care and Love,
that naturally minds and regards our highest Concerns, and cannot will not
desert us, if we first do not desert him.

How comfortable is good News of any kind, what a reviving to our drooping
Hearts? With what passion do we long for it? With what gladness receive it,
believe it, bless God for it? The Gospel of Christ is better News than the best
on Earth: Glad Tidings of the greatest Joy, Peace, Love, and Life. Here may
thou see the omniform motions of Christ's richest Grace, perceive the
compassionate workings of his Bowels, feel the solicitous beatings of his
affectionate Heart, in a tender regard of thee; read of the astonishing effects
of his wonder-working Power and Goodness, all the Miracles of his Love and
Kindness, for thy Good, in Illumination, Sanctification, Justification,
Salvation; what he has done, what he still is doing, what he further will do,
to raise thee up, out of the bottomless Pit of unspeakable Misery, to the top
and crown of Heavenly Felicity and Glory. Well might the Apostle tell of the
Comfort of the Scripture, Romans 15.4. And David long for it, as a means to his
solace, Psalm. 119.82. This and this alone is the richest Promptuary, fullest
Treasury, of all real Soul-satisfactions, hence have we them, or they are but
mere Legerdemain, and Illusions. And if the very News of Christ be so sweet,
what is he in himself? What is he in Person? None have reason to say of him, as
the Corinthians of Paul, 2 Cor. 10.10. His Letters are weighty and powerful,
but his bodily Presence is weak. His is not the presence of a weak contemptible
Body, but of an all-powerful Spirit, he that can be Omnipresent, cannot but be
Omnipotent. Christ as God is in all, is all, and even as Man full of Virtue, a
touch of his very Garments wrought a Miracle of Healing, Matthew. 9.20, 21, 22.
And if in his Mortal Body there was such Power, what is in his Immortal and
Glorified. The Principle I know was Heavenly, though the Vessel Earthly; yet
this has lost nothing by its Exaltation to the Throne of God, no nor we
neither, for in lieu of that Corporal Presence we enjoy a no less Comfortable
Companion, the Paraclete, the Holy Comforting Spirit of God, to abide with us,
not for a few days, and years, but for ever, Joh. 14.16. So that although our
sweetest Relation be gone to Heaven, yet are we not Orphans, ver. 18. The Angel
of God's Presence, Isa. 63.19. that saves us comforts us now by Proxy, yet is
not absent from us, but essentially with us, though Corporeally at a distance
from us.

Gods Natural Presence is an immensity of Being, Unconfinable to any Place,
Incomprehensible by all Places, Exterminable out of none; and with its fullness
filling all in all: So that there is no need of the supplement of any thing to
avoid a vacuity, nor is any thing by this Being excluded, that needs a Place.
He is in all Space, and beyond all Space, not commensurate with it, but
infinite; The Dimetient of all, yet without Measure, and all Corporeal
Dimensions; boundlessly greater than all things, comprehending all within the
Circle of his Essence, whose Center is every where, Circumference no where; in
all Varieties of Co-present Beings, the same invariable Perfection, no other on
Earth than in Heaven; that he can without any alteration in himself, or varying
of his place, make Heaven to be any where, every where; therefore the Joys and
Comforts of Heaven: For, I reckon that Heaven does not import any difference in
God, but in us; no change in his Being but our Vision; no new Object, except
Christ's Flesh, but new Eyes. Every Spirit (and therefore the Father of
Spirits) has a Power to conceal its Presence, as well as its Sentiments, from
all other Spirits, except God: Yet there is a difference betwixt the Latency of
other Spirits, and the Deity. A finite Spirit is hid through the suspense of
its Agency Ad extra, its acting upon things without it self; so the Deity
cannot be hid. For, if it wholly cease to act upon any Being, that Being will
wholly cease to be, because all live, move, and have their Being, in and from
Him, Acts 17.28. which Spirits that see not with Eyes, but Intellects cannot
but perceive; only it is unobserved by Man, whose Mind looks through the
Apertures of Sense; which together with it self being darkened through Sin, has
but very obscure and weak Reflections upon that Being, without which he cannot
be; it is hid to him by a Veil of Flesh, that envelops his Intellectual Eyes, or
else he shuts, and will not open them to behold this invisible Nature; which is
in reality, more conspicuous and evident, that is, knowable than any thing in
the World whatever. But, the Deities concealment of it self, is with respect to
some more special Voluntary Operations, which give Testimony to his presence,
and demonstrate the Finger of God; which when suspended he is (and therefore
the Comfort of his presence is) hid from our Eyes. Such are either Miraculous
or Gracious: For although every thing in Nature, both in respect of his Being
and Agency, be a sufficient Indication of the Existence, Presence and
Efficiency of God; it being impossible that any Natural Powers should exert
themselves in a suspense of the Influence of his; the Concurrence whereof gives
them to be what they are, and do what they do: Yet the Deity, sometimes, as
being it self the Law of Laws, does in its Actings, vary from, go beside, nay
contrary to the common and ordinary Laws of particular Natures, and so invert
the course and order of things, as to give peculiar evidence of his Presence,
and Power by Effects, wonderful surprising and astonishing: As the Flood of
Noah, the first that falls within the Cognizance of History after the Creation.
I need not particularize more, the Scripture is full, nor balk that, for all
the ingenious attempts of a late Author, to deduce it from Natural Causes, it
being demonstrable, that some necessary parts of his Hypothesis, stand in need
of the violence of Miracle, or the whole process will stick, and produce
nothing.

Yet the Manifestations of the Divine presence, which constitute Heaven, are
not in the instances of Power, but Goodness; even as the Discoveries of it in
Vindictive Justice form the Miseries of Hell. That Goodness and Justice
essentially considered, which make Heaven and Hell are Omnipresent, as being
the Divine Nature. But, the Objects of them cannot aspire to an Ubiquity, being
of a limited Nature. Should they circulate through all the Regions of
Immensity, the condition and sense they partake, would present them still with
the same unaltered, unalterable Nature of God. Heaven and Hell would be in
every place, where Souls so sensed reside; the Discoveries of God importing no
change in him, but only in those to whom the Discovery is made: Heaven and Hell
not being more the alteration of our State, than the awakening of our sense to
discern, and apprehend, and feel that, which before we did not, though before
it was the very same immutably, and will continue so everlastingly.

This is the Natural State of Heaven, but the Christian State is somewhat more:
For the choicest, sweetest Discoveries of God are therein made, in and through
the Mediator God-Man, and in special to Mankind, through the Manhood of Christ;
which being of a limited presence settles the Divine Manifestations, in a
certain limited place, sufficient to comprehend all Elect Angels and Men. This
Divine Presence we enjoy by Faith here, by Sight hereafter. We have as much of
God and Heaven now, as we have of Faith. Divine Manifestations are proportioned
to our Believings. All the Effects of Divine Goodness, in, and upon us, depend
upon this Christian Grace, and the degree of them, upon the degree of it. Gain
but this, and thou have God and all. Nothing can pierce the Heavens, but this
Eye. It Is the [(...)] substance of things hoped, for the [(...)] Evidence
[Eviction] of things not seen, Heb. 11.1. By it Moses saw him who is invisible,
verse. 27. We never can be without a Heaven, if we have but Faith; it realizes
to us that presence of God, which through Christ is the sole and full ground of
all Celestial Comforts, Satisfactions and Joys. Psalm. 16 11. In thy presence is
fullness of Joy, and at thy Right Hand are pleasures for evermore. In Heaven thy
presence, Chamber where thou sit'st upon the Throne of Glory, clothed with
Honor and Majesty as with a Garment, and discoverest and displayest the
Splendor of thy incomprehensible Excellency and Perfection: And at thy Right
Hand, where thou have said, my Lord should sit till his Enemies be made his
Footstool, Psalm. 110.1. In and through this Jesus, at thy Right hand are
pleasures everlasting. But, these are chiefly the Comforts of a Future State;
Is there not something at present to stay, and yet inflame the Appetite? Yes,
verse. 8. I would always possess that Saturity of Joys, which is before thy
face. Therefore, I have set the Lord always before me, because he is at my
right hand, I shall not be moved: Therefore my Heart is gladed, and my Glory
[Exults] rejoices; my Flesh also inhabits in hope, because thou will not leave
my Soul in Hell, nor give thy merciful [or excellent] one to see the pit of
Corruption, but thou will make me to know the path of Lives -- He is at my
right hand, and therefore Gladness and Joy in my Heart and Soul. But, Oh what
is there at His right Hand! My Faith setting him now as present before me,
brings singular Satisfaction and Delight? Oh then, what will sense and sight
be, when I shall possess the reality of that which I now believe. The result
is, That the presence of God, apprehended by Faith, or Vision, is a thing which
comprehends the substance and fullness of all Pleasure, Joy, and Consolation.

Indeed, nothing Comforts, but through some kind of presence: It either is, or
is conceived to be and made, indistant by our Cogitations. Humane Infirmity
requires something in hand, or in hopes that are as secure, and therefore as
good as in hand. Absence of a solacing good, although only imaginary, is
tormenting. God cannot but be near every one of us in Essence, and we find him
so to be by the effects of his Goodness. Since then he is at our right hand
naturally and necessarily, we must voluntarily by Consideration and Faith set
him before us, have an Eye upon his presence, fix it in our Minds and
Meditations always: And it will replenish us with Spiritual refreshment and
solace unspeakable. For, if God he with us, and for us, who, or what can be
against us? What can trouble or terrify us? How can that Soul be left in a
Hell of disquiet, that lives in the presence of God, i. e. in Heaven? For,
where God is, there is Heaven; he is the all of it, it is nothing without him,
and his presence is enough to convert any thing into Heaven. There cannot
possibly be so much Evil in those Infernal Regions of Wickedness and Woe, as
there is good in the presence of God. It Is an infinite good. There is not so
much Power in Hell it self, to impress the sense of its Evil upon a tormented
Soul, as there is in God, to impress the Comforts of his presence upon a
gracious Heart. Neither does the Justice of God more enlarge the Capacity of a
Man, to sense, and anguishfully apprehend and feel the Misery of his absence in
Hell, than his goodness does widen the Soul's Capacity, to comprehend the
felicity of his presence in Heaven; that I Judge the Saints to be more happy
above through their Inheritance in Light, than the Damned are miserable in
outer Darkness.

In the Omnipresence of God we have with us, all Things, all Perfections, all
Satisfactions, all that ever God can be, or do, or give; and in his gracious
Presence we have an Engagement upon him, to be, do, and give all that he can to
us; And what can we wish, what can we imagine more? God is All-present by
condition of Nature, but graciously present only by Compact and Covenant,
whereby he obliges himself to be our God; that is, every thing which he is in
himself, that we shall enjoy the benefit and comfort of all, and every of his
Unimitable Soul-satisfying and saving Perfections. Now the gracious Presence of
God is nothing else but his manifesting himself to be with us, by his
Communicating all Covenant Mercies to us: Making us Partakers of a Divine
Nature, granting us Pardon, Peace and Comfort; giving us the full use and
advantage of all his Attributes, of his Son, of his Spirit; every thing that he
is, and has, which will do us any good for this and another World; satisfying
us with his likeness, and filling us with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory.

When Esau therefore came off only with his Lean [(...)] Genesis 33.9. I have
much, well might Jacob roundly and triumphantly declare, [(...)] I have all,
verse. 11. He can want nothing, Habet omnia, qui habet habentem omnia.
who possesses him that has all things. He is never Poor, or Naked, or Blind,
or Wretched, or Miserable, who enjoys the presence of God. He can never be
distressed for want of Grace and Holiness, or Pardon, and Peace, and Pleasure,
and Joy, and Comfort, who is not without God. For, Isa. 57.15, etc. Thus says
the high and lofty One that inhabiteth Eternity, whose name is holy. I dwell in
the high and holy place, with him also that is of a contrite and humble Spirit,
to revive the Spirit of the humble, and to revive the Heart of the contrite
ones: I will restore Comforts, etc. I create the fruit of the Lips, Peace,
Peace, etc. A Blessed Denizen indeed: But as he dwells and resides in us, so
also do we in him, Psalm. 90.1. Lord thou have been our dwelling place in all
Generations. Psalm. 91.1. He that dwells in the secret of the Highest, shall
abide in the shadow of the All-sufficient. Verse. 9, 10. Because thou have made
the Lord my hope, even the highest thy Habitation: Evil shall not befall thee
by chance; Plague shall not approach thy dwelling. Make God thy home, and no
harm can reach thee: Thy Spiritual home will secure thy Civil: That Eternal,
thy Temporal: That was thy first, and must be thy last; toward which, it is
strange that thy Appetite works with no greater Violence. In every Creature
there is a natural instinct and pressing desire, inclining to return to the
place of its Birth, to that Country, to those Persons which had its Maiden
Affections. Notwithstanding the Dominion of reason in our selves, it is no
little Gratification to our Fancies, to enjoy a retiring place, and home, where
we may refresh our selves after all our wearisome Labors and Travails.
Wherever we are beside, we are not well, here are our Hearts, our Delights,
our Joys; whence we say Proverbially, Home is Home though never so homely: And
the Spaniards.

My House, my House, though thou be small,

Thou art to me the Escurial.

Our Spirit is from God, in his bosom was it born; there is our House, not made
with Hands, 2 Cor. 5.1. our Eternal Mansion, and is there not infinitely more
agreeableness and pleasingness, in him to our Souls, than there can be
sweetness and suitableness in any material Home to our Imaginations. We do not
inure our selves, by Love to dwell in God, 1 John 4.16. therefore are so well
content to be absent from him, to ramble like Vagabonds, choosing the Life of
Cain or Coryat rather than that of Christians and Saints, whose being and
bideing, should be solely, and electively in God as it is essentially and
naturally. On for such a Disposition of Soul, as would never permit us to be at
ease, but in serious Reflections upon the presence of God, with which we are
ever surrounded whether we will or no: And if we consider this, how can we be
any other, than Engarrison'd in Peace, and Joy, and Consolation? Well might the
Psalmist say, Thou comfortest me on every side, Psalm. 71.21. for round about
him and within him also, dwelt a Comfort no less than infinite, the Supreme
Majesty, able, and of Authority to command the presence of all Good, and
countermand the presence of all Evil; and the Sovereign Mercy of Heaven,
willing, and of sufficient Love and Fidelity, to make every thing a means of
Grace and Peace, and all things (according to his Promise) Work together for
good, to the true Lovers of him, and the called according to his purpose, Romans
8.28.

. 7. Lastly, The Eternity of God is a ground of Comfort, as fingular, as it
self is incomprehensible. Everlasting Consolation is built upon no other
bottom. A perishing Content is in effect none, because it issues in nothing but
the greater dissatisfaction. The durableness of our Joy, is its Crown; and
since it is in the Eternal God, it can be no other in Duration than what he is.
Therefore as there is in God's presence a saturity or fullness of Joy, in
respect of Magnitude and Intensiveness: So at God's Right Hand pleasures for
evermore, in respect of extent and continuance. And it is probable our Psalmist
might derive some of those Comforts, which did bear so favorable an Aspect
upon his troubled Soul, as verse. 14. does not obscurely intimate; For the Lord
will not cast off his People, neither will he forsake his inheritance. The
Negative excludes universally, perpetually, He will never cast off nor forsake;
it also infers the Affirmative, He will own, and accompany his People, and
Inheritance for ever and ever: Which he is enabled to do only by virtue of his
Eternity. Possibly that Expression, verse. 22. may also import something of like
nature; My God is the Rock of my Refuge. He could not be unacquainted with the
Song of Moses, and the Blessing he pronounced upon the Twelve Tribes, Deuteronomy. 32.
and 33. There are these Titles first of all given to God. Rock in the Song is
five times applied to the Lord, verse. 4, 15, 18, 30, 31; twice to Idols, verse.
31, 37. But, that which I have chiefly in my eye, is Chap. 33.27. The Eternal
God is thy refuge; very proper and Emphatical: For it is the Eternity of God,
that renders him a sufficient, and complete Refuge. Notwithstanding all other
Perfections, if he were not the Everlasting God, our Refuge would finally fail,
and be none at all. He is called The Rock of Ages, which our Translation
renders Everlasting Strength, Isa. 26.4. And indeed a Rock the most
indissoluble and durable part of the Earth, is an Emblem of perpetuity, A Rock
of Refuge, is therefore an everlasting security and comfort. Nor is it a mean
Satisfaction to remember, that as there is a sufficiency of Ability and good
Will in our God; who by Covenant is engaged to put an end to our troubles, and
replenish us us with the Joys of his Salvation: So he lives for ever to
continue them, that they shall have no period short of Eternity. He is an
ever-over-flowing fountain, of Everlasting Consolations, as they are called, 2
These. 2.16, 17. Now our Lord Jesus Christ, and God even our Father, who has
loved us, and given us everlasting Consolation through Grace: Comfort your
Hearts, etc.

Our Consolations are Eternal, because God is, for in him they are as in the
Wellspring, therefore cannot be as Waters that fail; as Jerem. Expostulates,
Chap. 15.18. If they could, our Wound might be incurable indeed, refusing to be
healed, and our pain perpetual. But, all this shall certainly have an end,
because God cannot: This cannot be Eternal, because God is. Whatever is wanting
in the durableness and sweetness of these fluxible, perishable Enjoyments,
which we possess on Earth; whatever we suffer, through the continuance and
bitterness of our Calamities, is made up, and amends made us abundantly, in the
Perennity of all Excellencies in God.

There is in this Attribute, a suitable relief in all kinds of Distresses,
outward and inward. All the short lived Comforts of this World, have a better
Being and Life in the Eternity of God. Thou losest thy Friends and Relations,
the sweetest, the best; perhaps by the immediate hand of God, as the Psalmist
here by the violent hands of wicked Men, verse. 5, 6. The Church of God in some
places is laid waste, and the stormy Cloud hangs over more, and its implacable
restless Adverries threaten all. The Innocence of Christ's Lambs is no
Protection against the Thrones of Iniquity, in Babylon and Hell, verse. 20, 21.
No, that is the very ground of the Quarrel and Enmity. Conformity to them,
Innocence and Iniquity would reconcile them. Do thou tremble for the Ark of
God? And is thine own Personal Jeopardy or Suffering in Body, Mind, or Estate,
in any extremity? Be not disinay'd. Nubecula est cito transitura: The greater
the Tempest, the sooner over. Storms may huff against the Heavens, yet cannot
hurt them, but only spend themselves: And the Church is often called Heaven in
the Apocalypse, and its Officers Stars from betwixt our Eyes, and which the
most raging furious blasts, may dispel and drive away the Clouds, that Eclipse
and darken them, but still leave those Celestial Lamps more clear and
inextinguishable, whilst themselves are extinct in a moment. The Dragons Flood
will be soon swallowed up, and the fury of Men and Devils shall quickly faint
and melt away, but the Love of God to his chosen, never, never. Isa. 40.27, 28.
Why say thou, Oh Jacob and speak Oh Israel? My way is hid from the Lord,
and my Judgment is passed over from my God? Have thou not known, have thou not
heard, that the Everlasting God, the Lord, the Creator of the ends of the
Earth, faints not, neither is weary, there is no searching of his
understanding? Therefore possesses he an unfathomable Skill, and Ability to
refresh and revive thee; but this is laid as the Foundation Stone, upon which
thou may rebuild thy decaying hopes, viz. that he is the Everlasting God. I
therefore return again to that, Deuteronomy. 33.26, 27, 28. There is none like the God
of Jeshurun, who rides upon the Heavens in thy help, and in his Excellency on
the Sky. The Eternal God is thy refuge, and underneath are everlasting Arms,
and he shall thrust out the Enemy from before thee, and shall say, Destroy
them. Israel shall then dwell in safety alone, etc. Happy art thou, Oh Israel,
who is like unto thee, Oh People, saved by the Lord, the shield of thy help,
who is the Sword of thy excellency, etc. Hence in the Title given to Christ,
Everlasting Father, and Prince of Peace, have an immediate Connection and
Dependence, Isa. 9.6.

If trouble be long, it is light, but brief, if grievous. Si longa levis, si
gravis brevis.
Goodness cannot groan for ever, because it leads to God; and the more it is
oppressed, the more it grows upward, Heavenward, where it shall only enjoy its
everlasting Crown. The Fire upon the Altar of God, will be inextinguishable, if
from Heaven; and those Celestial Sparks of Divinity, or Grace, which the Holy
Spirit kindles, will by the bluster and storms of Affliction, conceive a more
vehement Flame; perish and die, they cannot, as long as God lives, from whom
they derive their Being and Eternity. But, suppose all other sweet
Satisfactions, whether Spiritual Joys and Refreshments, or Temporal
Contentments be totally extinct as to present sense; yet finally they shall
not, because they possess a perennity of Life in God: And when Goodness and He
meet in the Superior World, these will revive, and Misery die. I grant the
most flourishing Gourds of Earthly Pomp and Glory, may wither in a Night, as
being a vain Pageant, and mere Phantastry, Acts 25.23. The fairest, freshest,
sweetest Flowers, of the Youthful Spring, of Humane Life, may be blasted in a
moment, and converted into dust and rottenness: The most pleasing Sunshine of
the smiling Morn, of a fortunate Prosperity, may suffer an Eclipse, and issue
in a dismal Hurricane of insupportable Calamities: Nay, Heaven it self may seem
to frown, and a dark Cloud to cover the Light of God's Countenance, Lam. 3.44.
But, none of these Evils can extend beyond the Grave there are they buried, and
with them Sin, their Cause, never to have a Resurrection: Then dawns the Day of
everlasting Light and Blessedness, and all Darkness, Dolours and Shadows flee
away. Be our Miseries as great as they will, or can, they cannot outlive
Mortality, if our guilt do not, and it shall not if true Repentance live within
us. At the daybreak of Eternity we enter upon a Life of Contentation and
Peace, as endless, as transcendent. The Death of our Bodies, is the Death of
our Troubles, and the Resurrection of those Joys, over which Death has no
Power. As there will then be no more beginning of Wretchedness, so no end of
Felicity. The worst turn that the Devil, and his Instruments can do us, will
turn to the best advantage, and those Souls that die to the Body, shall live in
Christ; they are uncloathed of Dirt and Putrefaction, that they may be for ever
Clothed with God and Glory: That as the Death of the Body, is the easer of all
our Pains; so the No-death or Immortality succeeding, is the Introducer and
Maintainer of an unboundable Fullness, of everlasting Soul-Satisfactions. This
we owe to the perpetual Duration and Life of God. Whence the Psalmist, in a sad
Prospect of the evanid Nature of present Things, does solace himself with a
view of the permanent Being of God, Psalm. 102.11, 12. My days are like a shadow
that declineth, and I am withered like Grass: But thou, Oh Lord, shall endure
for ever, and thy Remembrance to all Generations. I said, Oh my God, take me
not away in the midst of my days, thy years are throughout all Generations. Of
old have thou laid the Foundation of the Earth, and the Heavens are the Work of
thine Hands: They shall perish, but thou shall endure; yea, all of them shall
wax old as a Garment, as a Vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be
changed: but thou art the same, and thy years shall have no end.

We are possessed of many Transitory Comforts, but of none Eternal beside God:
And if any true Content arise from those movable Enjoyments, it springs from
nothing else in them, except that, which being eminently in God, is in him of
an everlasting Nature and Perfection: Whatever pleases, does so far refresh and
comfort; but all that pleasantness, is only a little ray of Divinity,
transmitted through the Cloud of Flesh and Blood, or the more clear Heavens of
our Rational Powers. Amiable Relations are Comforts, beyond all things under
the Sun; but their lovely Qualities are only a dark Shadow of the unparalleled
Amiableness of God. To be beloved by thy Friends is a Comfort estimable above
Gold, but neither the Act, nor the Object durable, no, nor the Motive exciting
or inviting that Affection. Can any Man Rationally solace himself with a Being
loved for a moment, when he shall be deserted or hated for ever? Fading Love on
Earth will not do, without the never fading Love of Heaven: Though all the
World for a while adore thee, What compensating Pleasure can that bring thee,
if Hell everlastingly burn thee? All thy fore-past Joys on Earth will rather
add new Fuel, than administer one drop to cool thy flaming Tongue. No Love
therefore is indeed considerable and comfortable, without the Eternal Love of
God: Nor in the assurance of this is any hatred or rage valuable, dejecting,
formidable. As Eternity is the Venom and Sting of the Torments of Hell; so it is
the very Triumph, Jubilee, and Heaven of the Joys of Heaven. If in the loss of
these lauguishing expiring Comforts, we can succenturiate or substitute any
thing of God, we richly gain by the loss as possessing unspeakably more pure,
substantial, heart-reaching, durable, everliving Comforts, in the everliving
Spring; who can, and will give them that relish and sweetness, which shall
abundantly more than answer, what is slipped away from us, as well in its
delicious Gratefulness, as Eternity. Mortality is the great disgrace of all
Worldly Enjoyments, but it receives a plentiful Compensation in the Immortality
of God.

Thus have I considered the Comforts comprehended in those Attributes of God,
which offered themselves to the Psalmist's Meditation, as I find them either
expressed, or plainly implied in this Psalm.

CHAP. XIV. Comforts from God.
COuld I allow my self the liberty, I might here instance those Comforts, which
are administered from the consideration of the Divine Persons, Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost; and the Relations wherein God stands to us, and we mutually to God.
But I have determined to confine my Discourse chiefly to such Heads of Matter,
as fall within Cognizance of the Psalm, and not make endless Excursions to
things, which none can imagine ever to enter into the Author's mind, in order
to the Revival of his disconsolate Heart. I pass therefore from the Comforts,
that God is, which was the first general to the 2. The Comforts which God gives.

That which God is in himself, and has revealed to us, is wonderfully
refreshing: But, there is also something, which not being immanent, and
essentially Constitutive of the Divine Nature, but passing from him to us, does
singularly relieve our troubled Souls. Of this kind, Promises, Providence,
Privileges, Experiences, offer themselves to Consideration. What was needful to
be observed concerning Promises, fell in under Divine Fidelity, as included in
its very Notion, therefore shall all further Disquisition anent them be
superseded.

Providence is the transit of God's Wisdom, Power, Justice, Goodness,
Faithfulness, out of Heaven, and himself into the visible World, Governing,
Protecting, Caring for, Directing, and Ordering all, for most excellent Ends,
worthy of God. Under the conduct hereof, all things prosperous, or adverse, the
greatest, the most minute, Natural, Moral, Spiritual, necessary or fortuitous
are deduced from their immediate proper Causes, guided and sustained in their
Actings, secured from external Violences, maintained in a due steady, agreeable
Station, and order to compose the Beauty and Harmony of the Universe, and be
conducible to advance the Glory of their Maker, in both the general and special
purposes of his Love and Goodness, or Justice and Righteousness. And there is
not a more reviving consideration to God's afflicted, tossed with tempest, and
not comforted, Isa. 54.11. than this, that they are the peculiar care and
charge of Heaven, which as it is concerned for the Catholic good, so in
special for those that love God, and are the called according to his purpose,
Romans 8.28 insomuch, that Prosperity cannot be more delectable to their sense,
than Afflictions of all kinds are made to their Souls useful and profitable.
It Is always best for them to be in the worst external Circumstances, as never
being more dear to God, more regarded by him, who is most tender of them, when
the Devil and World are most cruel, and when the outcasts, offscouring, and
refuse of the Earth. When here they can expect nothing, beside Reviliags and
Buffetings, the liberal Alms of the Churches Enemies, they are likeliest to
receive the more bountiful tastes of Divine Goodness, possess more of his
Grace, as a Preparation for more of his Glory, 2 Cor. 4.8. to the end.

Upon this Providence of God, our Psalmist had a special eye throughout the
Psalm: Whatever he desires and prays for, whatever he believes and hopes for,
whatever he acknowledges and praises God for, whatever he bemoans and afflicts
his Soul for, whatever he experiences and feels, was some Act, Effect, or
Permission of Providence That God in the course of his Providence, would
annimadvert upon the insolent Barbarities of his, and the Churches Enemies, is
the Expostulatory Petition of Verse. 1, 2, 3, 4. What was the Permission of
Providence? Is the condolement and moan of Verse. 5.6. The singular concern of
Providence, is the Doctrine of Verse. 8, 9, 10. as the happy Fruits of the very
Severities thereof, the Triumph of Verse. 12, 13, and the returns of its
favorable Aspect, the belief of Verse. 14, 15, the notable, needful, suitable,
and feasonable Interposals thereof, the experience of Verse. 17, 18, 22, and the
turning of this great Wheel upon the Adversaries to their confusion, the
Prophetic hope of Verse. 23. All jointly, together, the comfort of the Text,
which in the Multitude of his perplexed Thoughts, did look with such an amiable
regard upon his Soul: So that although the Fundamental. Ground and Matter of
his Satisfaction, was the Nature of God, in all its plenitude of Perfection;
yet the more immediate Spring thereof, was the Egress or Issuings out of those
Attributes, in all these Varieties of Providence. And the truth is, although
what God is in himself be eminently and vertually all Comfort in the utmost
degree of Excellency; yet should he confine his infinitely delectable Glories
to himself only, and never ray out, and communicate of his Beauty, Grace, and
Life to his Creatures, they would be utterly at a loss for Happiness. It Is
therefore not only the Nature of this Supreme Goodness, as it transcends all in
Perfection: But, also it is its practice and delight, and highest end; the very
thing, that is called God's Glory, which he has a prime respect to in all his
Actings: For, then have his Creatures the highest Motives to Honor him, when
they taste most liberally of his bounty, in the noblest Instances, and he
glorifies himself, in the Estimate of the World, when he is most beneficial; as
the Sun is most glorious, when diffusing, without any Interception, his benign
rays and influences: All which Glories vanish, as to us in a total Eclipse, or
his descent under the Horizon.

Hence then does our Joy, and Peace, and Solace actually germinate and grow,
even from the glory of Divine Perfection, branching out it self, in infinite
methods of Providence, wherein he dispenses to us of his own fullness, according
to our various Exigences and Appetites. The out goings of his Wisdom, Goodness,
Justice, Fidelity and Power, in sweet and suitable Blessings and Supports, that
in every Condition we can behold something of God, of greater value and
consideration, than either our Mercies or Crosses. This is a potent Cordial to
our Disconsolate Hearts, and replenishes them with wonderful Contentation. If
these Divine Glories compass us about, care for us, keep us, we are comforted
on every side, Psalm. 71.21. Yea, though we walk through the Valley of the
Shadow of Death, if God be thus with us, in his providential Efficiency for our
good, his Rod and Staff will comfort us, Psalm. 23.4. Rod and Staff Pastoral,
not Judicial or Corrective, as some understand it. But, Providence being
vertually included in those Attributes, whereof it is an effect and issue in
discoursing of them; I was unavoidably led into some consideration of it also.

2. The Privileges which administer Consolation in the greatest hurry and
perturbation of Thoughts are many; Two whereof only are insinuated in this
Psalm, yet such as suppose more. They are, 1. Sanctification. 2. Propriety in
God and assurance of it.

1. Sanctification by the Word and Spirit of God, is an excellent ground of
Consolation. It Is indeed the first Foundation Stone laid in the Fabric. In
virtue of this we receive Comfort from other things. Tell any disquieted Heart
of the inexhaustible Treasures of everlasting Joys and Refreshments in God the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, That Multitudes have enjoyed on Earth, and in the
Eternal Fruition whereof the Blessed Saints and Angels ever triumph in Heaven;
which the bounty and goodness of God exhibits and offers to all: Tell it of the
free and gracious Promises, and Covenant of God, that tenders the sweetest and
strongest Consolation: Exhort with the most charming Rhetoric, and ravishing
Suada, to embrace these so rich, so profitable, so necessary Provisions of
abounding Love: Alas! it cannot, it dare not: Why? Because it is Presumption,
it is Stealth, Robbery, Sacrilege, to snatch away any thing, to arrest these
Divine and Holy things without Right. But have you not Right? No: How do you
prove that? It Is plain: All Right is founded in Sanctification. I am not
Sanctified; I lie in my Sins, dead and buried in Guilt and Wrath, unregenerate
out of Covenant, as not having submitted to its Conditions, in Repentance,
Faith, and New Obedience: Therefore the Comforts of the Covenant, and of the
Promises, its Branches, do not at all appertain to me. This Argument cannot be
gainsaid, if it assume right. It Is undoubtedly true, That none have Right to
the Mercies of the Covenant, who do not submit to its terms; and that very
yielding unfeignedly to the terms, is an act of Sanctification, which
necessarily supposes the Communication of a Principle, because none can act
grace sincerely, except from an inward Life of Grace, it being essential to the
sincerity of an Act, that it proceed from a gracious Disposition, from a
renewed sanctified Heart: Ezekiel. 36.26, 27, 31, 32. and Chapter 20.43, 44. and Chapter
11.19. Jer. 32.38, 39, 40. and 31.31, 32, 33, 34. and 24.7. Deuteronomy. 30.6. Acts
5.31. and 3 26. Phil. 1.29. Ephesians. 2.8, 9, 10.
For none but acts of Life (as contradistinct to Dead Works) entitle to the
Promises. God gives a Heart of Flesh, a new Heart, and Writes his Law therein,
infuses his Fear and Love thereinto, gives Repentance through the Exaltation of
Jesus Christ; to whose benignity we owe the Donation of Faith also, and are
altogether his Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus to good Works, that we may
walk therein evermore. Admit that these Promises and Asseverations were
designed primarily for Israel according to the Flesh: Yet can it not be denied,
that they delineate and describe the manner, and method of God's Proceedings
with his Israel according to the Spirit. For he no where declares his intent,
to alter that economy of Grace in the substance thereof, which was established
by the Covenant of Grace, to reduce lost Man to the obedience of the Just,
though the Circumstances and Ceremonials vary. Now if acceptable (that is
sincere) Acts may issue from any Man, without, or antecedently to all holy
Qualifications, or Habits (as they are usually called)' twere a supervacaneous,
needless, fond thing, for the Deity to promise them, or interest his own Agency
about them, which yet is of a blasphemous importance, as 'twould savor of the
highest Arrogance to imagine, that I am in a Capacity to act well-pleasingly to
God, without God. For does it consist with the Divine Wisdom, and God's
Ingenuous procedure with Man, to promise what is in Man's power, whether he
promise or no. And if we be capable of exerting one acceptable Act without
Divine Influence, Why not another and another, till frequent Acts produce a
Habit, and all this exclusively to the aids of Heaven? That he must be made a
liar, who said, Joh. 15.5. Without me you can do nothing. And 2 Cor. 3.5. Not
that we are sufficient of our selves, to think any thing, as of our selves, but
our sufficiency is of God. See also again Ephesians. 2.8, 9, 10. Let him stand forth
and be a public Spectacle of Ignominy and Malediction; who will not subscribe
to, or having subscribed, contradicts the 10th. and 13th. Articles of Religion,
which are these.

X. The Condition of Man, after the Fall of Adam, is such, that he cannot turn,
and prepare himself by his own natural strength, and good Works, to Faith, and
calling upon God. Wherefore we have no power to do good Works pleasing and
acceptable to God, without the Grace of God preventing us, that we may have a
good will, and working with us when we have that good will. XIII. Works done
before the Grace of Christ, and the Inspiration of his Spirit, are not pleasant
to God; forasmuch as they spring not of Faith in Jesus Christ, neither do they
make Men meet to receive Grace (or as the School Authors say) deserve Grace of
Congruity; yea rather for that they are not done as God has willed and
commanded them to be done, we doubt not but they have the Nature of Sin.
If formally upright and acceptable Acts of Submission to the Covenant, and its
conditions, could issue from wicked Men and Hypocrites, so continuing in State
and Disposition, and therefore Enemies to God and Goodness; as there would be
no need of the promise to Write his Law in the Heart, so God would be obliged
in faithfulness to fulfill to them his part of the Covenant, in communicating
all Covenant Mercies: But the whole implies a contradiction. For sincerely to
observe the terms of the Covenant, is to be sincere in that thing, and
therefore supposes the Law to be Written in the Heart, or obliges God to Write
it. For the condition being observed by Man, the Engagement upon God becomes
absolute; he must do his part or violate his Covenant, and be unjust to
himself, and his Son Jesus Christ, whose undertaking founded this New Covenant
Dispensation. Whence a cordial performance of the terms of the Covenant on our
part, does really introduce or infer that sincerity of State, which is implied
in the Writing God's Laws in our Hearts, implanting therein his fear, and
pouring out his Spirit on us, which is the very Work of Conversion, or
Regeneration, and the basis of all Consolation; for Psalm. 119.50. This is my
comfort in my affliction [(...)] because thy word has quickened me. Thy word in
general as the Instrument, its precepts in particular as the Matter,
principling my Heart in the nature of a Law, engraven on that Fleshly Table by
the Finger of God.

Whatever Men's Sentiments may be under Temptation, Melancholy, etc. yet
ordinarily, let but this be made out to a considering Man, viz. that he is
truly born again of God; and all his Troubles, Disquiets, Agonies, Horrors of
Conscience vanish into nothing, and all other his Disconsolate Thoughts are
very much moderated. If his Grace be found real and sound, his Repentance,
Faith, and Love unfeigned, his Heart is at ease, he has a perfect
Demonstration, that God the Father is his God and Father, Jesus Christ his
Savior, because the Holy Ghost has been his Sanctifier. Now does he not doubt
of the pardon of his Sins, of the special Love of God, of an interest in all
the Benefits purchased by Jesus Christ, of a Right to all the Promises, and
everlasting Consolation and Salvation. This is the bottom of all, nothing
without this will avail in the least, to bring the glad tidings of Peace into
the Conscience. This, as a sure and immovable Foundation, establishes all our
hopes of Comfort, which without it, is absolutely impossible. But this ground
laid, Joy, and Rest, and Satisfaction of Soul, will infallibly arrive sooner or
later; all the Malignity and Rage upon Earth, all the Malice and Policy of
Hell, all the Melancholy Imaginations of a Man's own Heart, though they may
obstruct and delay it, yet cannot finally avert and hinder it, any more than a
gloomy Night can the rising of the Sun in its season. The day of Glory, Peace,
and Consolation everlasting, Cant. 4.6.
will undoubtedly break [Hebr. breath] upon such a Soul, and Darkness, Sorrows,
Shadows flee away. For these Redeemed of the Lord by power, and therefore by
price, shall return and come with singing unto Sion, and everlasting Joy shall
be upon their heads, they shall obtain Gladness and Joy, and Sorrow, Mourning
and Sighing shall flee away, Isa. 51.11. Weeping may endure in the Evening, but
Joy comes in the Morning, Psalm. 30.5. A Child of Prayers and Tears said
Ambrose to Monica, cannot perish. Isa. 53.3. A Man of Sorrows, and acquainted
with Grief, whom it pleases the Lord to bruise, shall see of the Travail of
his Soul and be satisfied. This was verified first in the Head, and shall be
also in the Members. They must pass through the Jordan of Repentance, and there
be washed seven times, that they may be healed of their Spiritual Leprosies,
but their next Stage is a welcome Canaan of Solace and Rest. This is the basis
of the other Privilege, viz. Propriety in God, and assurance thereof, and
therefore being a connex Blessing, more concerning it will necessarily fall
under the following Head.

Now that the Psalmist had some Reflections upon his Sanctification, in
assuming to himself the Comforts of God, seems evident from the 21. verse. where
he makes a tacit Profession of his Righteousness and Innocence, which no doubt
were to him, as in like case they are to any Man a singular Support and
Satisfaction, under all the Calamities and Cruelties endured, through the
violence and fury of Man. Though the Floods, and Waves, and Storms beat high
from without, yet if there be a sweet Calm within; though the World with a
savage barbarousness persecute and pursue me to Death, yet if mine own
Conscience do not reproach me, but testify that in simplicity and godly
sincerity: I have had my Conversation in this World, not by fleshly Wisdom, but
by the grace of God, in innocence and usefulness to Men, 2 Cor. 1.12. This is a
singular rejoicing and ground of Comfort, though our sufferings abound, Verse.
5. The Peace of a good Conscience, is a powerful Antidote against the Poison of
all adverse accidents: For since nothing diseases, disquiets me, but only as
far as it gets within me, and no external Occurrents can be so great Evils; as
internal Sanctity is a good, because the utmost that the fiery rage of Earth
and Hell can do against me, is but finite, whilst under the conduct and
influence of real Holiness, I am secure, that I do, and shall enjoy the
all-sufficient Reliefs of infinite goodness, and therefore my Miseries only
commit a Rape upon my imaginative and irascible Powers, whilst my Comforts are
seated deep in my Rational, which through Divine Grace have regained the
Sovereignty; it necessarily follows that the potency of all outward Evils to
torment me, is boundlesly short of the Omnipotency of that Internal Heaven,
that I feel in my conscience to content and ease me, and my Sorrows will be
perfectly run down by my Joys and Consolations. But then, this I must
acknowledge, that neither can my Conscience be good, nor I comfortably Innocent
( i. e. neither acting nor imagining evil against Men) nor Righteous ( i. e.
designing and doing all the good I can, out of an inward principle of Love and
Justice) unless I be truly a Sanctified Person. For external fair demeanor
toward Men, without an inward Inclination, and Affection thereto, is but only
Hypocrisy before God.

2. Privilege is Propriety in God, with the assurance of it, both in Verse. 22.
and in those Two Words MY GOD. For he could not without presumption or falsehood
say this, if he knew it not. And it is not the common interest of Nature founded
in the Relation of Creatures, which every Man, nay Devil may justly claim, that
these words here import; but a special Propriety, through Grace, founded in
Regeneration and Adoption: In short it is not a congenit and general, but a
federal and peculiar right in God, which must bottom our Consolation. When we
are taught of God out of his Law, Verse. 12. in such a manner as to have that
Law of God Writ in our Hearts, according to the tenor of the Covenant of Grace,
Jer. 31.33, etc. God thereby giving us a sensible Demonstration that he is our
God, so as he is not to those, who though the Work of his hands of Power, yet
are not his Workmanship by Grace, created in Christ Jesus to good Works, Ephesians.
2.10. Then, and not till then have we Right to the Fruits of Righteousness in
Peace and Joy unspeakable, and upon our assurance, Right in them. It Is but
little Satisfaction to be able to plead no better title to God, than Apostate
Spirits or Infidels: But if we can upon good Grounds assure our selves that God
is ours, in the singular Relation of a gracious Father, who has begot us again
to a lively hope, through the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the Dead; we
therein have also the evidence, that every thing in God is ours, to enstate us
in the Perfection of Felicity and Consolation. He that is blessed with any
Plerophory that God is federally his, and consequently that he has a clear
title to Jesus Christ, and all his Benefits; has also a full and sufficient
Testimony, in that very thing, of a sure and indefeisible right to the Holy
Spirit and all his Comforts: For these are absolutely inseparable both in
Nature, and Divine Donation. And if we have an interest in one Covenant
Blessing, it is a pledge of assurance that we have all. They are four.

1. Sanctification (of which before) I will put my Laws into their Minds, and
write them in their Hearts. 2. Propriety in God or Adoption. I will be to them
a God, and they shall be to me a People. 3. Special Illumination, or saving
Knowledge. They shall not teach every Man his Neighbor, and every Man his
Brother, saying, Know the Lord; for all shall know me, from the least to the
greatest. 4. Pardon of Sin or Justification. I will be merciful to their
Unrighteousness, and their Sins and their Iniquities will I remember no more.
All here is, will and shall, Words of Authority and Command.
These Four, are not only by the Covenant indissolubly connected, but also in
the reason of the thing: For there can be no possible evidence that God is
ours, in special, and has savingly enlightened our Minds, and pardoned our
Sins, but only real and undissembled Goodness, and that which is of God's
Creation, by Writing his Laws in our Hearts can be no other: Therefore this is
the leading Mercy in the Covenant, as inferring the rest, and declaring the
truth of all. If then God be ours, we are certainly Sanctified, Illuminated and
Pardoned; but the contrary, if God be not ours by peculiar and special Right.
They mutually prove each other, and the absence or denial of one excludes all;
it is impossible they should be divided. Can thou without self-deceiving, say
with the Psalmist, and in his sense [MY GOD] then can thou as truly say, I am
Pardoned, I am Sanctified, etc.

Here then is the very Root of all Spiritual Comfort. For trouble of Conscience
(which is its contrary) is founded by Sin. The Filth, the Guilt, the Power
afflict and wound our Spirits. If these be removed, the ground of the trouble
vanishes; and if we have an inward feeling, and assurance, that they are
removed, the trouble it self is actually taken away. Now Pardon is the taking
away the guilt of Sin, we have no reason to fear the Wrath to which it did bind
us over; and Sanctification is the taking away the Power and Filth of Sin in
us. I say [in us] for Sanctification does not abolish the filthy Nature of Sin
in it self, but rather discover it to us more abundantly, to excite our
abhorrency and loathing, and this very Detestation is the main of our cleansing
from the filth of Sin; this washes away that stain, wherewith our Souls were
blemished, that is, God deals with us as if there were none, is as kind and
favorable to us, and as freely converses with us, as if we never had been
polluted, and will continue so to do till we renew the defilement. For the sake
of Christ he overlooks all those spots and deformities, the turpitude and
disgrace whereof made us cover our Faces in shame, before his pure,
all-discerning Eye; and he looks upon us, and we look upon our selves, as
clear, unblamable, and beautiful in his Eyes, when we really hate those Evils
that have defiled us, and (as the spring of that hatred, without which it can
never be, nor be pleasing to God) when we are replenished with the Riches of
his Grace, and adorned with the Robes of his Sons Righteousness; for both
concur to our acceptance. Sanctification also destroys the Commanding, but not
at first the Rebelling, the Regal, but not Tyrannical Power of Sin; though it
be our strength even against this, and at last will abolish it. It so subdues
our Lusts, that they shall not Reign, though they may resist as contumacious
Enemies. They are looked upon as Traitors to be destroyed. That is, our
strongest and most delightful bent of Will, being for God and goodness against
Sin; we sin not out of Love to sin as dntiful Subjects obey their Sovereign out
of love to obedience. Yet so masterful and imperious are our Corruptions, that
they will fight against us under their Chains, and taking their advantage,
knock us down and ravish us; that according to Romans 7.18. to the end, we
sometimes do that we would not, or do not that we would, our delight being in
the Law of God, after the inner Man, which no unregenerate Man can truly say.
But the Law in our Members does [(...)] counterwar and captivate; and Sin
dwelling in us does overbear our most determinate purposes in some particular
Act, although for the-main, and in the general course of our lives we keep it
under, always dislike it, are afflicted with it, would give Worlds to be rid of
it, and use God's appointed means for mortifying it, that we may gain an
absolute Victory: Though it may get the better in some slighter skirmishes, yet
we remain Masters of the Field. In brief, when Sin has our liking, allowance,
love, delight, it is a King; when not a Tyrant. The former is inconsistent with
Sanctification, not the latter; therefore does not debar our right to Pardon
and Peace, though it may darken our Evidence, and so damp our Comfort. But if
we enjoy this assurance, that God is ours, we have Evidence also that Grace is
ours, Pardon is ours, Peace is ours, and therefore may solace our selves in its
abundance, Psalm. 37.11. As on the contrary, antecedently to this assurance,
there can be no secure and well bottomed, although there may be a fallacious
and presumptuous Peace. For Peace of conscience always supposes Peace with God,
and this discovered by some overt act, else it is but a drunken Dream. If a Man
have no testimony that God is reconciled to him, it is all one in effect, as if
he were not reconciled. The old Maxim must here obtain non esse, and non
apparere, tantidem sunt. The privilege we enjoy is to us a nonentity; the
comfort we feel not, to us is not. My Soul is in woe because I have offended
God, my trouble cannot, must not cease, till I know that the offense is past by
and forgiven, no nor then neither wholly; if I be an ingenuous Child, I shall
be grieved whenever I review the disingenuous baseness of my behavior toward
my heavenly Father, although he resolve never to remember it to my prejudice;
yet with this difference; before pardon I shall be afflicted with a tormenting
Sorrow, the issue of Fear, which will at present extinguish and overthrow my
comfort; but after sense of Remission only, with a more generous Compunction,
and godly Sorrow, the fruit of Love, consistent with, although it something
diminish and detract from, the fullness and sweetness of my Consolation. If I
can sit down content under the dishonor I have done, and the Provocation I
have given unto my affectionate and tender hearted Father, I am an unworthy
Child; nay if I so little and lightly regard his anger, as to be in no pain,
but at ease under it, and so affront and undervalue his Love, as to be at rest
and content without it; I am a Rebel, not a Child, a Devil, not a Saint. Now
let a Messenger be with me, one of a thousand, to show my uprightness, Job
33.23, 24. that I have sincerely observed the Conditions of the promise of
Pardon, and therefore God is gracious to me, and says, deliver him from the
pit, execute not the sentence of Condemnation pronounced by the Law against
him, I have found a Ransom or Atonement, the Satisfaction my Justice has
received at the hands of the Redeemer, shall be available for him, to all
intents and purposes, as fully as if he himself in person had given it: Mine
anger is turned away from him, I am at peace with him, I have pardoned him: If
I have good testimony of this, it quiets my Heart, dispels my Doubts, allays my
Sorrows satisfies my Conscience, replenishes my Soul with Comfort and Peace.

Hence that sweet reviving Proclamation, Isa. 40.1. Comfort ye, Comfort ye my
People, says your God; speak ye comfortably [Hebr. to the heart] to Jerusalem,
and cry unto her, [(...)] because her warfare is accomplished, [(...)] because
her Iniquity is pardoned, [(...)] because she has received from the band of
the Lord [(...)] two double for all her sins. There is an express causal
Connection betwixt these things. Proclaim Comfort, because it is thus and thus.
Here are three Grounds of Comfort, and all from [your God.] I begin with the
last and lowest, which is therefore the Foundation.

1. Punishment inflicted to the Satisfaction of Justice. She has received two
double. She, i. e. the Church, a Body complex and compounded of Head and
Members: If not in the Members, yet in the Head Christ Jesus, she has born the
Indignation of the Lord in so full a measure, that all the further claims and
demands of Justice as to her, are sinally silenced as far as they concern the
Penalty. And it is not unusual in Scripture, for that to be ascribed to the [
Head Christ Body the Church
] which is proper to the [ Body Head,
] and this in consideration of the Mystical Union, and Communion betwixt the
Head and Members. Act 9.4. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? 2 Cor. 1.5. As
the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our Consolation abounds by Christ,
Romans 8.17. if we suffer with him. Isa. 49.3. And said unto me, thou art my
Servant, O Israel, in whom I will be glorified. It Is apparently spoke to, and
of Christ, as the whole Context demonstrates. But let the sense be proper and
not relative to Christ, viz. that the Body, the Church, had suffered Double, i.
e. sufficient in the estimate of her tender and compassionate God, who is
afflicted in all her Afflictions, and in the depths of his Love, makes
aggravating, greatning Representations of all the Miseries she groans under, as
if she had born Punishments truly more than proportionable to her sins; yet
this implies both an antecedent Compensation made by Christ, in virtue whereof
God is so wonderfully propitious, and candid in his Opinion and Sentiments
concerning her Sufferings: And also, that although these were not a real and
full Satisfaction in the nature of the thing, yet they were accepted as such,
and so accounted in the repute and benign Interpretation of her reconciled God,
who seems as it were repentingly, and rueingly to declare this, as Jer. 31.20.
Hosea 11.8, 9. 2. Since there seems to be not only a causal dependence of these
three, and the Comfort here tendered, but also of each upon other, that the
latter appears to be a ground and reason of the former, hence grievous
Suffering is alleged as the Motive upon which the Divine Majesty was pleased
to vouchsafe Pardon. Her Iniquity is pardoned, because she has received
two-double, etc. Else [(...)] must be here Translated [that] as in the two
former Clauses. Indeed in the New Covenant Economy, Satisfaction made [
Actually or Vertually] (as the Lamb of God was slain from the beginning of the
World,) is Antecedent to Pardon, and the meritorious Cause of it. 3. By like
Reason both from the Nature of the thing, and the Contexture of these Clauses,
Warfare [or appointed time for hostility] is accomplished, Remissa culpa,
remittitur poena.
when Sin is Pardoned. The Fault being forgiven, the Punishment [Eternal at
least] is remitted, and sometimes the Temporal wholly, however in the nature of
a satisfactory Penalty. Guilt is pardoned, but the Essence of Guilt consists in
a binding over to Wrath or Punishment: Therefore the punishment is remitted in
this Notion, that it shall not be inflicted in virtue of that Obligation to
Wrath, although the very same material Pains, under another form, viz. as
Corrections, ver. 12. may be undergone, nay must be, in some degree and kind.
Acts 14.22. Psalm. 34.19. 2 Timothy 3.12, etc. I know no Declaration or Promise
made by God, that these and the like shall not continue part of Canonical
Scripture, and be true to the Worlds end. Afflictions are formally Penal, till
Sin be remitted, but afterward the Sting is taken out, and they are not
Conflicts of War, but only Chastisements of Peace. The Enmity of God is then
terminated, the Warfare betwixt him and the Soul issued, in a serene, perfect,
and everlasting Tranquillity and Peace. And therefore, 4. These Foundations
being laid, the Word of Promise Proclaims and Cries, Comfort ye, Comfort ye your
selves, for I am your God, who command and warrant you to do it: There Is
nothing now to debar you from assuming it, and quieting your troubled Hearts
with the application of it; it is ready for you and you for it; it invites you
with its amiable aspect, to run into its Embraces, and solace your selves with
all the Marrow and sweetness comprehended in the Covenant and Promises; all is
yours by right. And consequently, Lastly, When God proclaims Peace, and cries
Comfort ye, Comfort ye, Conscience transgresses, if it do not so likewise. For
being God's Viceroy and Judge in Man, it has no Commission to Act, but derived
from God; from which it must not, cannot swerve an Hair's-breath without
incurring the Penalty of its Presumption. The Law of God in Nature and
Scripture is the perfect and adequate Rule, and Standard of all its
Proceedings; herein are all its Powers contained, a counterpart whereof it
retains, (after Illumination) within it self, which Copy is null if it do not
perfectly agree with the Original: To interline, or raze out, does wholly
evacuate, and destroy the validity of its proceedings. Therefore whatever God
says or does in the Concerns of his Government within us, Conscience must not
vary from in the least tittle; it must speak when and what he does; and be
silent where he is so. If God condemn, Conscience must do so likewise, if he
absolve, Conscience must justify also, neither adding to his Words, nor
diminishing, nor yet concealing his Counsels. If then he be at Peace,
Conscience is obliged no longer to proclaim War. If he call to Comfort, it must
not contradict his Calls, and so oppose and blaspheme his Grace, it must
harmonize with Heaven, or else it abjures its Allegiance to God, and acts by
Commission from Satan, and lies against the Holy Ghost.
In sum, all Spiritual Discomfort is finally resolvable into trouble, 1. about
a Man's 1 State [ Absolute Relative
] or 2 Frame of Soul, or 3 Way of Walking, or 4 Particular Acts of Sin, or 5
Satan's Temptations, or 6 Divine Derelictions; under all which there is
abundant Comfort in this [MY GOD]. For if he be, my State is good, witness the
Covenant. My Ways and Frame shall be so, Jer. 32.38, 39, 40, 41, and 24.7.
Deuteronomy. 30.1, to 10, Inclusive. Ezekiel. 11.19, 20. and 36. 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30,
31, 32, the latter part of 36, and beginning of 37. By these exceeding great
and precious Promises, not only Healing, Sanctifying, Stablishing, but also
Preventing and Pardoning Grace is given for particular Acts of Sin, and
assurance that God will not finally forsake us, therefore not leave us to the
Will and Power of the Old Serpent, though he tempt to Sins as black as the
Regions he Inhabits, as foul as his own Face, as malignant as his own venomous
Heart. The Fear of God which his everlasting Covenant engages to give, will
command, urge and enforce thy dissent; or the Love of God will oblige him to
Pardon as he has promised: if thy Consent be ravished, because his Covenant
Grace, the Law in the Heart, will enable to Repent and Believe for Pardon.
Here Is all. The Comfort of Sanctification we have in the forecited Psalm.
119.50. and Isa. 12.1. O Lord, I will praise thee, though thou wast angry with
me, thine anger is turned away and thou comfortedst me. Romans 5.1. Being
Justified by Faith, we have Peace with God. There Is the Comfort of
Justification, upon which two all Spiritual Comforts depend, yea and Temporal
also; upon the latter as to their Substance, and the former as its Evidence.
For we know not that we are pardoned, but only by feeling our selves purified
by God's Holy Spirit of Grace. Whence Isa. 32.24. The Inhabitant shall not say
I am sick, the People that dwell therein shall be forgiven their Iniquity.
Sickness the sharpest, the nearest, the most perilous of all Bodily Troubles,
by a Synecdoche, put for all the rest; the bitterness whereof is antidoted by
the sweet of Pardon and Peace; sense of Pardon will take away sense of Pain,
because it takes out the Poison and Curse of it. That is the comfort of
forgiveness or exemption from eternal intolerable Pains, does out-balance the
trouble of any temporary tolerable Pains, as joy for the birth of a Man-Child
drowns the remembrance and sense, of all preceding Pangs and Sorrows, Joh.
16.21.

Lastly, If to all these be superadded any plain and sensible Experiments of
Divine Goodness, in the special Fruits of it, this does abundantly satisfy and
solace our Souls, as completing our evidence of right, to the Comforts of God;
being as it were an immediate Testimony from Heaven, that God is ours in
Covenant, and owns us as his peculiar Treasure, Mal. 3.15. For it is a
confirmation of our Assurance of, and Title to Comfort, under the Hand and Seal
of the Holy Spirit of Grace and Consolation. This contributes to Comfort thus,
and thus only, as corroborating our assured Persuasion and Evidence, that our
Peace is not self-flattery and deceit. For it is merely in virtue of Assurance,
that we are enabled to comfort our selves in God. Assurance, I say, in both its
parts, both as referring to an external Object, viz. Propriety in God, all of
God, and as respecting those inward Qualifications, and Dispositions, which if
I do not know to be true and sound, I can have no Evidence that God, or any
Covenant Mercy is mine. For I can have no demonstration hereof but only by the
Effects: And if I be not sure that these are genuine, the true Productions of
God's Relation-Love, the Legitimate issue of the Marriage Union betwixt Christ
and my Soul, I cheat my self, under the disguise of a fallacious Peace, into
real Wretchedness, and Woe. The Assurance therefore of the Truth and Sincerity
of my Grace, is to me the very bottom Stone in the Foundation of my Comfort;
and an experimental sense of the vital Influence, Presence and Power of that
indwelling Grace is the basis of this Assurance. This the Psalmist here does
make the nearest ground of his assuming to himself Comfort in God, ver. 17, 18.
Unless the Lord had been my help, my Soul had almost [or quickly] dwelt in
silence. This was an Experience in a Temporal Case, and plainly implies that in
his extreme peril, when there was no help or hope, visible in and from the
World; yet God did interpose in a peculiar remarkable manner, so that it could
not but be apparent, that his Deliverance was a special work of Providence. So
ver. 18. When I said my Foot slippeth thy Mercy, O Lord, held me up. I was in
such eminent danger, so near falling, that I could not see any possibility of
recovering my self, but Betwixt the Stirrup and the Ground,
Mercy I craved, and Mercy found.
A visible, palpable, observable, special Intervention of Mercy, sustained me,
when otherwise I was irrecoverably gone. These were possibly some uncommon
undertakings of Grace and Providence for him, 1 Samuel 23.6, 27. and chap. 25.
like that in diverting Saul from the pursuit, when he had hunted him to a
view; and the other in preventing his revenge upon Nabal, or such as Hozekiah
begged, Isa. 38.14.

I know Experiences are things of late more derided than understood by some
Admirers of a Rational Religion, but whose pretended Reason is indeed too hard
for their Religion, overturning its Basis, that Lowliness, which would instruct
them to think there are other Men and Christians beside, that understand
themselves, though not understood by these, and no more dote on an Animal
Religion than their Accusers, who are prejudiced and prepossest against them,
by other things than either Religion, or Reason, or common Sense. But these I
refer to the afterthoughts of one of the great Propugnators of that way, the
Author of Anti-Sadducism, Page 39, 40, in 4o, in one point of the highest
Experience, and sometimes most of all scoft at, viz. Communion with God. His
Reason at length was reconciled to the Thing, yet so will not his Charity to
the Persons of those that always owned it, they must be still Melancholists, and
any thing ill enough, which a stout Reasoner ex Particulari, can make them. But
possibly their Reason as in that, so in other particulars, that have undergone
the same fate, may in like manner approve it self, when it has the happiness to
be thus an Aborigin in the Rational World, for it is below the grandeur thereof
to receive it from the poor despised Animal.

Well, blessed be God, that Heaven is an Experimental as well as Rational
State; although, I doubt, the Religion thereof will on that account proceed and
commence animal, in the Schools of Reasons Idolizers. It Is no matter, I shall
still commend three things, as necessary Antecedents to Sincerity, in the
practice of true Religiousness, 1st. Reason the lowest, the Handmaid, which
must submit and veil to the 2d. Faith, the Chamberlain, of which is begotten
the 3d. Experience, the Treasurer, the Heir of Faith, which has the honor to
abide, live and inherit when Faith ceases and dies, yet it is not posthumous,
but brought up under it, till it arrive at maturity in Paradise. When I speak
of Faith, I am not so fond as to postpone a credence to Divine Revelations in
the Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments. I build all Christian Faith upon
that bottom solely, and exclusively to all Unwritten Traditions, or pretended
Revelations which can never found a Divine Faith, of which alone I discourse.
Neither am I so stark drunk as to think that those Scripture Revelations are
not most highly rational, in the matter of them, as well as the motives to
believe them; nor yet so frantic as to advance any Experiences unconform to
Scripture. Let the Antinomians and Papists see to the first; the promoters of
Reason in contradistinction (not to say contradiction) to Scripture, look to
the second; and Enthusiasts to the last. Experience with me is nothing but a
sensible (yet rational) feeling of the performance of Promises, to a Man's self
in particular. When my inward sense assures me, that the spiritual Covenant
Mercies, are really bestowed upon me, and my outward Circumstances demonstrate
that God owns me with the Temporal, I do not place these in Opposition but
Conjunction, for without the inward Experiments, the outward signify nothing.
They may be and are Providential, but not Federal. Both are called Tastes of
God's Goodness and Graciousness, or of his Word, Psalm. 34.8. 1 Pet. 2.3. Psalm.
119.103, etc. Now when an Experience of the performance of any Promise
superadds as it were a Seal to that Faith which received it as true, it gives a
more full confirmation to a Man's title to the Covenant, and all the Blessings
and Comforts of it, and a further ground of quieting the Heart, and therefore
is completive of Comfort, as Faith is inchoative. For if I do but weakly and
doubtingly apprehend and apply the Comforts that are in God; yet when he
bestows upon me some special token of his Favor, it is an emboldning,
encouraging, pledge of his willingness to grant more, and a testimony of his
owning my right to all. As in case of litigious Titles, when all stands upon
the same bottom, if the Occupant freely yield up part to the Claimer, it is a
vertual acknowledgement of his right to all, and therefore exceedingly animates
him in his future proceedings for its recovery. Oh Divine Experience! the
blessed earnest of everlasting Consolation, how sweet, how satisfying art thou?
When a disconsolate Heart is sick of its own wants and woes, weary of it self
and the World as insufficient to yield the least dram of solid Contentation,
it is necessitated at last to send out Faith as a Harbinger to seek for Peace
and Rest, which it can no where find but in God, and no way deduce from God,
but through those free Engagements which his boundless Goodness has exhibited
in the Covenant of Grace. These Blessings are as a Honeycomb in the promise,
but Heaven in the performance. Indeed Heaven is no more nor less than the full
and universal accomplishment of Promises; and that partial, incomplete
fulfilling them in this Life, wherein consists the happiness of Experience, is
no other than an Antepast or foretast of those eternal Felicities which
constitute that immortal state.

And now am I got to the foot of that Ladder whose top is Heaven. Comfort is
the Offspring of God, and thus descends to Man. The matter and substance of
it, or the thing comforting, is originally something of or from the Divine
Nature it self. Which when we had forfeited by Sin, the ever-blessed Jesus,
God's Eternal Son, did interpose to regain and purchase for us, and remove all
impediments to the conferring it on God's part. Whence he is called the
Consolation of Israel, Luke 2.25. And our Consolations are said to abound by
Christ, 2 Cor. 1.5. If there be any Consolations in Christ, is the Hypothesis
of a very powerful Argument, Phil. 2.1. And that Prayer, 2 These. 2.16, 17. is
very considerable, Now our LORD Jesus Christ himself, and GOD even our Father,
who has loved us, and given us everlasting Consolation through Grace: Comfort
your Hearts, and establish you in every good Word and Work. Hence the Father
who is the principal Author, and Efficient has obliged himself to bestow it,
and therefore is called the God of all Comfort, 2 Cor. 1.3. God that comfort
those that are cast down, 2 Cor. 7.6. See Isa. 51.11, 12. Hos. 2.14. Isa.
66.13. Especially that remarkable place forementioned Heb. 6.16, 17, 18. The
Holy Ghost has his part also, as removing the Impediments of Comfort on Man's
part, preparing for it, and in the use of the means of Grace and Peace the Word
and Ordinances, applying it actually to us; whence if our Translation be of any
Authority, he has the Name of Comforter given and appropriated to him, Joh.
14.16, etc. I mention the Word and Ordinances of God, as the means of Comfort,
and not without warrant. Psalm. 119.82. Mine Eyes fail for thy Word, saying when
will thou Comfort me. Romans 15.4. Whatever things were written aforetime, were
written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the
Scriptures might have hope. And to this purpose is it said of the Comforter,
Joh. 14.26. He shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your
remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you. And Joh. 15.26. He shall testify
of me; all this in pursuance of his Office as Comforter.

Now by these means 1. He reveals Comfort to us in the Covenant and Promise. 2.
Declares to us the terms and conditions upon which Comfort may be assuredly
obtained, and 3. Works those Conditions in us: 1. Repentance, to qualify and
prepare for it. 2. Faith, to apprehend and apply it; which
4. Experience feels, with all other connex Graces, operating effectually in
our Hearts. Wherefrom, Lastly, A full Assurance arises, 1. That our Graces are
sound and sincere, 2. That the Promises are our Portion, the Lord our God,
Christ our Savior, the Holy Spirit our Sanctifier, Comfort, Joy, and Heaven
our Inheritance, by special Covenant-right, and from all these together
necessarily grows actual Peace of Conscience, and true spiritual Consolation;
but then it is only as far as we have the first Assurance, for without this we
cannot assume to our selves any true Joy and Comfort; as far as the rest issue
in Assurance, but no farther, have we solace in and from them. Let there be as
firm a Foundation laid, both without me, and within me, as is possible; yet if
I know nothing of it, my Heart is uneasy and unsettled, I am no better for it.
But knowing that Sincerity gives right to all in God; as soon as ever I attain
true Faith of Evidence, all is composed into a quiet Settlement and Peace. And
so certain is this, that even the false and fallacious Joys of both Hypocrites
and profane Persons, must have an answerable persuasion in the Mind of a right
to them. For no Man can take comfort in that which he knows he has nothing to
do with. Indeed their Assurance is as groundless (though they do not know so
much) as their Comfort is illuding and impostorous; and always the nature of the
Comfort does perfectly answer the quality of the Assurance; if this be sound
and good, that is so also, if otherwise we gull our selves into real woe, under
a delusory dream of merely fantastical Consolation.


Hence there is an absolute necessity of abundance of Experience, and diligent
trial, whether our Experience be conform to the Word of God; if we desire that
our Assurance may stand upon a secure basis. For if we feel not the real
effects of Divine Power and Goodness fulfilling to us in truth the Promise and
Covenant of Grace, in writing the Divine Laws in our Hearts, and enabling and
exercising us to observe and obey them; we can have no Assurance, that any
thing is right within us, or gives right to any thing without us. We must
experience a sound Work, that without fallacy may be ascribed to God himself.
For no Grace is true which is not of God's creating, to him does the Scripture
every where ascribe it. One full place for all. Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. A new Heart
also will I give you, and a new Spirit will I put within you, and I will take
the stony Heart out of your Flesh, and I will give you an Heart of Flesh; and I
will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes, and ye
shall keep my Satutes and do them -- Then shall ye remember your own evil ways,
and your doings that were not good, and shall loath your selves in your own
sight, for your Iniquities, and for your Abominations, etc. First the Principle
and Power must be conferred by God, then and not till then the practice by Man
will commence and begin, but all under the influence of Divine Grace. It Is
first I will, I will, then you shall; and again to show that the very [you
shall] though Man's act, yet is not of and from Man, it follows, not for your
sake do I this, [do I] therefore not you without me, nor so by my aid neither,
as that the doing it can more justly and truly be ascribed to you than me, yet
will not I do it without you, for ye shall loath your selves, i. e. by my
Power; nor will I do it without your asking, for Ver. 37. Yet for this will I
be enquired of by the House of Israel, to do it for them.

We must then have good experience, especially of the Work of Divine Grace, in
making the soundness of our Actings of Repentance and Faith apparent, and the
fruits of both must concur to give a clear Testimony, that they are right and
genuine, such a full and through spiritual sense and feeling must we have of
them, and their agreeableness to the Rules and Laws of Scripture that require
them; as to be able to satisfy our selves, and approve our Consciences to God,
that we do not play the Hypocrites, and cheat our selves and the World with
Counterfeits instead of unsophisticate sincere Graces, else we can never be
blessed with any certainty, that God is ours, and his Comforts ours, and
therefore cannot groundedly take comfort in him. It Is then demonstratively
clear, that all the boundless Treasures of Soul-satisfying Contents, which are
laid up in God, Christ, the Holy Spirit, Heaven, the Covenant and Promises, are
no actual Comfort to us, but only by the mediation of Grace within us; nor
Grace it self except its Integrity and Truth be evidenced plainly to us. So
that in short, all Comfort does immediately spring from Assurance. A Man has
so much Peace as he has of this, and not a jot more. This is the nearest
matter and ground thereof, yet not absolutely and in it self considered merely
but relatively to Grace, but neither Grace absolutely, no, it is relatively to
God, that it introduces real Consolation, viz. as an evidence that God is ours,
and as it carries out our Souls to him, to place their whole Felicity in him.
This therefore is the Genealogy or Pedigree of Comfort, it is the immediate
Offspring of Assurance, which is the Offspring of Grace, which is the
Offspring of God. Assurance comforts, as it refers to Grace; Grace comforts as
it leads to God; God comforts Architectonically, Originally, Eminently, as the
principal Efficient and Matter of all Legitimate Consolation. Thus have I
finished all I conceive necessary to explain the Nature, Origin, Matter and
Method of deriving Comfort into the Soul.

CHAP. XV. Inferences.
I. Doctrinal.
WHat remains, is only to deduce some profitable Inferences, Doctrinal and
Practical, immediately from the Text in its Coherence and Scope, and such only
as are clearly included in the Bowels of it. To direct wherein, I shall make 2 Timothy 3.16. my Card and Compass. All Scripture is Divinely inspired, and
profitable, for Doctrine, for Evidence, for Conviction, for Reproof, for
Correction, for Rectification, for Reformation, for Instruction, for Discipline,
which is even that in Righteousness.

My Doctrinal Inferences are Three.

1. Hence see that it is a very lamentable thing for a Man to be left by God,
to be worried by his own Thoughts. In what deplorable Circumstances would David
have been, had there been no Divine Comforts, to moderate and assuage the
violence of his turbulent Cogitations? There Is nothing in Man better or worse
than Thoughts. If a Good Angel act them, they are Birds of Paradise. They are
the furest Guides, the sweetest Companions, the soundest Comforts, the First
Movers in the Heaven of Virtue and Goodness, the last alive to God, the most
delightful Anticipations of Everlasting Blessedness, which realize those
Pleasures and Joys, that are unutterable, the bright and fair Idea of the
Invisible Majesty and Glory of God Himself. Contrarily, if acted by an Evil
Genius, they are the very Beelzebub of the lesser World, the Ignis Fatuus, that
leads us into the Pits and Precipices of Error, Wickedness, and Woe: They are
the Locusts and Smoke of the Bottomless Pit, that darken the Heavens of Peace
and Contentation, devour and blast every living thing in us, the dreadful Image
and Representation of the black Horrors, and Confusions of Hell. A Man is a
Brute, a Fool, a Madman, or a Devil, as his Thoughts are; and his Thoughts will
be as bad as Hell can make them, if Heaven do not supervise, govern, and direct
them; and yet there needs no other Fiend to debauch them, than that Corruption
that first entered into us by them, and does perpetually dog and haunt them.
How many by them have been hurried into Hospitals, Halters, Bridewel, Bedlam,
and the dismal Regions of eternal Darkness? How do they act all the Parts,
appear in all the Forms, advance to all the degrees of Malignity and Misery?
But in none more than the Melancholic. Here Satan rides as in a triumphant
Chariot, the Wheels are Thoughts, which by presenting Objects, and exciting
Corruptions, he sets a going, sometimes with Consent, sometimes without. Hence
proceed Atheistical, Blasphemous, etc. Injections, which ravish the Mind, in
the greatest abhorrence of the Will: Hence despairing Reflections, which
realize and antedate those intolerable Cruciations of outer Darkness; Hence
terrifying Motions, which deaden and betray the Aids and Supports of Reason and
Religion, and finds a Devil in every Corner. Any one Thought, armed by Justice,
and acted by Satan, is sufficient to embitter all the Joys of Life, and render
a Man as miserable, as is possible on this side, never ending Miseries. Who
then can bear up against a Multitude? Guarde me Dieu de moy, was my
Schoolmasters Motto. No Man can have a greater finite Enemy than his own
Thoughts: A Multitude of these Tormentors within, is worse, than all the
ravenous Lions, and Bears, and Tigers, and Wolves, in the Universe; which by
Power, or Industry, or Policy, Art, and Wit, a Man may avoid, but how shall he
escape from himself; and that which is nearest himself, his wild, mad,
untutour'd, ungovernable Cogitations? 'Twas then no improper Litany, From my
self, good God, guard and deliver me.

2. See here, that the best of Men, may fall into such Perplexities, that all
natural Aids may be insufficient for their Relief. Not [my Carnal Contents, and
the Pleasures of Sense]; not [my Worldly Grandeur, and the Hopes, or Fruition
of a Kingdom]; not [my Invincible Spirit, Valor, Conduct, Victories, and
Military Glory]; not [my Rational Considerations, and Philosophy,] but [thy
Comforts] are the Sanctuary of his persecuted, and persecuting Thoughts: Here,
and here alone, does he find repose and rest. Indeed, if it were not thus, we
could not be our selves. Did we enjoy all at home, we should not be Men, but
Gods. Self-sufficiency is an incommunicable Perfection of the Deity. He that
can be without all other Persons and Things, is all. Sociableness is the
Property and Felicity of Humane Nature; and therefore declares its Dependency.
Man cannot be without Man, much less without God. But if the Constitution of
our Natures had been such, that in all Exorbitances of Thoughts, we could
readily compose our selves, into a serene and sober Calm of Rest: Such is our
Native Pride and Self-fullness, since we were debased, and emptied of all good,
by the Fall, that we should never be induced to pay our due Tribute of Honor,
and Homage unto God, to which not so much Ingenuity leads us, as necessity
drives us. It Is true, in the State of Integrity, Man was endowed with an
Ability (not to recompose and redintegrate the Disorders and Ruins in his Mind
and Conscience, introduced by irregular, pestilent, and intemperate
Cogitations, which suppose Loss of Integrity, but) to maintain in his Soul, a
constant and durable Peace and Rest; but then 'twas, because he was possessed of
a Sufficiency of Wisdom and Goodness to govern his Thoughts with that Balance,
as to secure himself from all their Inordinacies. But in lapsed Nature, the
Case is otherwise: An unresistible Impetus of Thoughts, is sometimes
inevitable; for there are two Principles in degenerate Man, of a contrary
Genius, which possess his Principal Faculties, Reason (but this much
debilitated) in his Mind, Corruption (though not without some Alloy) in his Will.
In all Moral Essays of Reason, it is very much thwarted by Corruption, and even
in its Speculations infinitely weakened and debased. The Will possesses a kind
of Empire over the Mind, to excite, divert, direct, or determine Thoughts, and
vary all their Circumstances, by proposal of Objects, etc. and sometimes to
give a Supersedeas to some kind of Thoughts, though not all; but often it raises
up such Spirits, as it cannot conjure down, and very seldom has Dominion over
the Matter or Subject of our Thoughts, to biass the Mind into such Conceptions
of Things, as it pleases, difform, and dissonant, from the Nature of the Things
themselves, except where there is a more than ordinary Debauch, upon both Mind
and Will. For the Reason of the Subject, must necessarily accord with the
Reason of the Object, if there be any Truth in our Conceptions. Thoughts
disagreeing from Things, are Errors, and Delusions. The Remainders therefore
of Corruption in the Will, after its Renewal by Grace, together with a subtle
Tempter, and sometimes the Holy Spirit of God himself (as under Convictions of
Sin) do excite such Cogitations as are too hard for us, and bear down all the
Supports of Nature, raising such Tumults, and turbulent Affections, that our
Spirits are ready to succumb and sink under them, into the most pensive
Dumpishness, Dolor, Despair, Horror, and Confusion. He is a Stranger to
Himself, the World, the Scriptures, Christianity, the Church, and particular
Souls that know not this. If any will not yet believe it, I remit him to
Bedlam, where his Sense will convince him, what doleful Tragedies of this
nature, have been, and are acted by Amorous, Envious, Studious, Dolorous, and
Religious Melancholy, to omit other kinds. And what Man is there, that with any
Sense and Seriousness, reflects upon his own particular Sins, against the Holy
Majesty of Heaven, in their odious Aggravations, together with the declared
Displeasure and Indignation, the menaced Wrath and Curse of Almighty Vengeance
against them, and his Person for their sake; but will sometimes find so great
and oppressive Perturbations in his Mind and Conscience, as to be utterly at a
Nonplus, and scarce able to secure himself from Despondency? Who is there,
that in some, either common or uncommon Calamity, or imminent Danger thereof,
does not sometimes find the Passions excited by his Thoughts, to be an
Over-match for his Reason? Who but a senseless stupid Log, does not a little
sometimes pass the bounds of Decorum, in the Internal Workings of Sorrow, upon
the I oss or Death natural, but especially sudden and violent of, or any
considerable Crosses in, and by dearest and nearest Relations, and yet more
especially when their immortal Souls are apparently hazzarded, if not finally
lost and sunk into Eternal Damnation.

Now, no inward Affections are Self-movers, they neither do, nor can act, but
upon the apprehension of Sense, or Motion of Thoughts, or Influence of some
exterior very powerful Agent, that can make immediate Impressions upon the
Blood and Spirits, as neither are our Thoughts, (no, nor can be) any
Molestation or Affliction, but only as irritating our Passions. And I would
gladly see the Man, who by Rational or Religious Considerations, has reduced
his Thoughts and Passions to that equable Temperament, and Balance, that they
neither are nor can be induced or impelled, won, or wrested into any
Irregularity, or Excess, by the single or united Powers of Earth, Hell, and
Heaven; which last never depraves them, though it often punishes us by them.
Surely Job was a very good Man, yet the Extremity of his Afflictions provoked
him to talk, and therefore think extravagantly. And if God Almighty cast away
the Reins out of his hands, and let loose a Man's Thoughts upon him, (and who
is there that gives him not a world of Provocation) I know not whither, even
the most mere Man's Thoughts may not hurry him on this side Hell. If any desire
a full Conviction, what a wicked Man's Thoughts can do, let them a little
survey those dismal Regions of Everlasting Horror (not in Person, as the poor
Prisoner in Alex. ab Alexandro, Genial. Dier.
L. 6. C. 21. but) in Thought and Meditation; and I hope it will do him this
Good, viz. engage him to implore Omnipotent Grace, to Restrain and Govern his
Thoughts, that they may not be an Introduction, and Earnest, of those easeless,
endless, remediless Woes; and if his Thoughts thereof, will permit him to sleep
or rest, before he has done this, he thinks to little purpose.

Lastly, Behold the infinite Condescension and Care of Heaven, toward impotent
degenerous Man, in the Provision made, not only for his Necessity, but
Consolation. Rather than our Thoughts should be too many, and so an Over-match
for us, the Divine Goodness will interpose and relieve us, and has exhibited
such a full Treasury of Comforts, that no Distress can befall us so uncouth, so
uncommon, so inextricable, as to be out of the reach and road of the Relief
therein tendered us. That so inconsiderable a Piece, as a Sinner, a
Pourtraicture of Hell, limn'd after the Image of Satan, (the Father of all
Wickedness) an Enemy through natural depravement, to God and Goodness, should
engage the Solicitude and Providence of Heaven, in such admirable instances, to
retrieve its lost Happiness, and recover it out of the Sink and Abyss of Filth
and Wretchedness, that it may be set aloft in the Galleries of Glory, and be
beautified in, rather than beautify, the Presence Chamber of the King of
Kings: This, this is a wonder beyond the Dimension of all other Miracles, to be
ascribed to the Benignity and Efficiency of nothing Inferior to Infiniteness.
Men may flatter themselves in their sweet Harangues concerning the Celsitude,
Dignity, and Nobleness of Humane Nature, let it in its positive State as the
effect of a most excellent Cause, be advanced, and admired as much as it can,
by Words or Thoughts, yet what is it comparatively to God? What is it under the
debasements of Sin? Which is infinitely more odious to God, than any thing
short of Himself, can be pleasing; so that nothing less than Divinity, could
give Satisfaction for the Wrong it did to the Supreme Majesty of Heaven; not
all the natural Excellencies of the whole Creation, not all the Moral
Perfections and Performances of Men and Angels; and what Account is to be made
of a drop of Honey, intermingled with an Ocean of Gall? The ever Adoreable Son
of God, who was much more a Man, in respect of all eximious humane Endowments,
than ever any born of Woman (besides his Sinlessness) yet in the Person of
David says of himself, Psalm. 22.6.4. I am a Worm and no Man, (if that be not
to be understood estimatively, that he was no better in the account of his
Reproachers, that shaked the Head at him, saying be trusted in the Lord, etc.
compare this with Matthew. 27.39.43. See also Psalm. 8.4, 5, 6. Heb. 2.6, etc. In
Job 25.6. Man is considered with respect to that which does most of all
ennoble, viz. Goodness and Righteousness: Yet (because it is allayed with the
Mixture of many Imperfections, and Miscarriages, and Pollutions, by reason
whereof he stands in need of Pardon and Justification, that he cannot insist
upon it, as capable of rendering his Person and Actions in strict Justice
acceptable to, or allowable by the Righteous Judge of Quick and Dead) Bildad
there will admit him to stand in no higher Rank than that of a Worm, when any
thing in him aspires to a Competition with God; as indeed, there is no
Proportion betwixt Finite and Insinite. And that the High and Lofty One that
inhabits Eternity, should humble and debase Himself, to engage so admirably for
so minute a Being, make Provision so incomparably rich and glorious for a vile
Worm, is a Work of unparalleled Bounty, and Magnificence, congruous and
answerable to the immense Perfection of God, but infinitely above the Merit and
Meanness of Man.

Comfort! It Is a comprehensive, an incomprehensible Blessing, like Him who
Gives it, who Is it. All that God has done, still does, and intends to do, is
implied in it, or may be inferred from it. All the eternal good Purposes of the
Divine Majesty, for the Benefit of Man, the whole Undertaking and Purchase of
His Well-beloved Son, every of the Gifts, Graces, and Workings of the Holy
Spirit, are summed up here. For a Man is not capable of actual Comfort, till he
enjoy Assurance, as has been evinced, nor of assurance, till he be Justified
and Sanctified; nor of these, without the Spirit of Grace, nor of that without
the Mediation of Christ; nor is he capable of Eternal Comfort, till he enjoy
all these in their Fullness. This one Mercy therefore is All; because where It
is given, All are given before or with it, and it is given as the Fruit of All;
the Bestowal of it, being the consummate Act of Divine Munificence. In Sum,
Comfort in part, is part of Heaven; perfect Comfort, is perfect Heaven. Oh
astonishing Grace! Oh unimitable Goodness in the Donor! Oh unlimitable
Blessedness in the Possessor! Oh what is man, Lord, that thou art thus mindful
of him, or the son of man, that thou do thus visit him! Erect thy self, Oh my
Soul, into an admiring Contemplation, of this Descent of Majesty, so
stupendous, so benign, so beneficial. Refresh thy Thoughts with it daily: Let
it dwell with thee: Resolve, and endeavor to endear to thy self, that infinite
Goodness, which so incredibly humbles it self, for thy advantage. Improve it
for that end; for if this Meditation do not Better thee, thou will be worse for
it to all Eternity.

CHAP. XVI. Elenctical Inferences.
NExt I have Deductions of Two Sorts, according to the Signification of the
Word [(...)] Convictive and Reprehensive. The Convictive, are either
Theoretical, or Practical, concerning Faith or Conscience.

This First confutes and condemns the Doctrine of Incertitude; or the Impugners
of Assurance: For if in this Life there be Comfort, there must be Assurance.
The Latter is neither Possible, nor Rational, without the former: Which is thus
proved.

Divine Actual Comfort, being that Satisfaction, Ease, Quiet, and Peace of Mind
and Conscience, which settles our discomposed, discomposing, troublesome
Thoughts and Affections, into a sweet Harmony and Rest, cannot possibly be a
brutish stupidity of Conscience, but must proceed upon Light and Evidence: For
God does not act upon us as Blocks and Stones, which have no Faculties or Sense
to guide them, but only an Obediential Power in a passive way, to yield to the
Conduct of His Wisdom and Omnipotence. He does not still and becalm our
tempestuous Hearts, as the Sea, which knows not what it does, when it submits
to the uncontrollable Violence of His Commands. No, He leads our Rational
Powers in the sweet Method of their spontaneous natural activity into the Paths
of Righteousness, which issue in Peace, Jam. 3.18. Which is therefore called
Guiding, Luke 1.77, 78, 79. To give the Knowledge of Salvation to his People,
[(...)] in the taking away of their Sins, (whether by Remission or
Sanctification, or both) 78. [(...)] By [or through] the Bowels of Mercy of our
God, [(...)] in which, the Dayspring, [ Sunrise, Mal. 4.2. (...), East, Mat.
2.1, 2. (...)] from on high has visited us. 79. (...) [to make an Epiphany, to
shine forth;] To give Light to them that sit in Darkness, and the shadow of
Death, [(...), to streighten,] to guide, straight, our feet into the way of
Peace. A pregnant Scripture for my Purpose. Peace, then there can be none
that is Solid and Divine, (of which alone we enquire) out of the way of Peace.
We cannot, when sitting in darkness and the shadow of Death, stumble, or hit
into that way, without a Guide. No other Guide can there be, but the Sun of
Righteousness, the Dayspring visiting us. Without Light, He neither can nor
will be our Guide. This Light from the Dayspring, is no other than the
Knowledge of Salvation, in the taking away of Sins, which when particularly
applied to my self, is only this, I know that I shall obtain Salvation, by
this, viz. the taking away of my Sins, and that is neither more nor less, than
Assurance; all which Blessings accrue to us, through the Bowels of Mercy of our
God.

It Is not possible that a Man's Conscience should be truly comforted, except he
know that Comfort appertains to him, is his right. For though the Contemplation
of Golden Mountains may gratify the Imagination of a Fool, yet no wise Man
counts himself richer for a dream of the Spanish Silver Mines in Potosi, etc.
or the Golden Tagus, or Rio de Plata. That Athenian is upon Record for no
Philosopher, who solac'd himself with a conceit that all the Ships arriving at
the Port were his own. Sound Peace of Mind is always founded upon good Evidence
of an undoubted Right to Peace. For if I doubt that I deceive mine own Soul, in
speaking Peace to my self, where there is no Peace; that very dubiousness will
rack and torture me, as much as (possibly more than) I should have been, bad I
never claimed Peace; since an usurpation of what I have no title to, is a new
sin superadded to the old sore of Soul-disquieters, and the very fear that I am
guilty of it has Torment. Now I cannot possibly be assured that Comfort
belongs to me of right, unless I find within my self the dispositions that
qualify for Comfort; that is, except I be consolable, I cannot be comforted.
If I be not agreeable to Comfort, it is not agreeable to me. For the right to
Comfort is not Absolute but Conditional. It Is not Nature that entitles to it
but Grace; therefore in all the Epistolary Salutations, it is first Grace, then
Peace. Whence a Man can be no more assured that he has right to Comfort, than
he is assured he has true Grace. And Experience demonstrates, that a Person,
if he understand himself, to be absolutely inconsolable, who cannot be
satisfied, that he has really performed the Conditions of the Covenant of
Grace, as far as is necessary to found a present right to the Blessings of that
Covenant. Doubt of this, and doubt of all. I must have good and sound Evidence
of this, or I build upon Sand. Imaginary Grace will only introduce imaginary
Right, therefore none but an imaginary Peace. The Superstructure can be no more
firm and stable than the Foundation. Whence it being impossible to be really
Comforted, without a sound persuasion of Right, and impossible to be certain of
right without certainty of the truth of Grace, it follows that Comfort is not
possible without Assurance. Therefore not rational. It Is a very imprudent part
in a Man to speak Peace to himself, when God does proclaim open War; absolute
madness to arrest Divine Consolations, when it is Indispensible Duty, to apply
and meditate Terror, to bless himself with appropriating Promises, when his
Condition is palpably under the Threatening, and he either knows it or has just
reason to suspect it. There Is no middle state between Sanctified and
Unsanctified, Pardoned and Unpardoned. If a Man know that he is Unjustified,
yet assume to himself the Comfort of the Promises, he presumes senslessly and
sottishly to give the lie to God. Let such read and consider Deuteronomy. 29.18, 19,
20, etc. If any doubt of his Pardon, yet apply Comfort, he gives his Conscience
the go-by, and makes fair weather in despite of Heaven. In short, Peace of
Conscience cannot possibly arise from any other scource, than Conscience of a
State Frame and Way acceptable to God. If I have no motives to conciliate a
Credibility to this, and yet will solace my self, and cast off all trouble,
care and fear, hush the storm within, compose the rouling Waves, and settle;
it is but upon the Lees, the Mire and Dirt, and too much a Token and Testimony
of Madness, Drunkenness or Searedness of Conscience.

The 2d. Part of the Conviction concerns Conscience, which it is as necessary to
establish as the Mind. Truth and Sincerity in the Heart being as momentous and
considerable as Truth in the Head or Understanding.

Humane (nay all sublunary) Nature is fond of Ease and Rest, and entertains all
Perturbations with reluctance and dolor; but above all trouble of Mind and
Conscience is most uneasy, Comfort and Peace most natural, agreeable, and
grateful. Prove. 18.14. and 17.22. and 12.25. and 15.13. Hence every one would
and will, (if it be possible) live in some kind of Peace. But it is the
unhappiness of the Generality through ignorance, inconsideration and greediness
of Rest, to snatch at the mere shadow, and so that they may but be free from
Pain, and the dreadful Convulsions and Cramps of Conscience, matter not whether
it be through Sleep, Numbness, Stupefaction, or Death. But this is not to be
accounted Peace, any more than a Swoon is Rest. It Is really a Disease the
Lethargy of Conscience; out of which when it awakes in this or another World,
it is tortured with the cruelest Pangs, stung and racked with the most direful
Anguish and Agonies imaginable. It therefore is of no little consequence to
know, whether our Comfort be genuine, that we dream not our selves into deeper
Woes, in the embraces of false and fallacious Joys. Let our Consciences
therefore see to it that they be not put off with Phantasms and Illusions,
instead of solid Consolations. Seeing then there is a World of adulterine
cozening Peace, what may be the Criteria, the distinctive Characteristicks of
true and false Comfort.

They differ, 1. In their Origin, or Rise and Antecedents, 2. In their
Attendants or Company, 3. In their Subject, and the condition of the Persons.
4. In their Effects and Tendency.

1. Carnal Comfort springs out of Security, Spiritual out of Sense. An
impenitent Sinner is at quiet in his Mind, either because he never knew the
deplorable Wretchedness and Wickedness of his Natural State, or never would
know it, or because knowing it and being frighted therewith, he takes a
sinister method to conjure down the sense and terror of it; either murdering
Convictions by diverting his Thoughts, Cares, Course and Conduct, as the
Profane; or stopping the Mouth of Conscience by entering into the road of
Religion, as do the Hypocrites, when yet there is something that passes Judgment
underneath, and whispers to them that all is not right, and justifiable before
God, whatever their shows may be before Men. Or if through blindness of Mind or
Self-flattery they have arrived to that depth of Delusion, as to deceive their
own Souls, and being accustomed to collogue with God, are left by him to
believe a lie, (as it is just for those that mock God with shadows, to be
permitted to feed thereon themselves, and to be imposed upon by that whereby
they attempt to impose upon their Maker) they live in a Calm, and die in a
Mist, not knowing where they are till they feel themselves in Hell.

But these are perverse, preposterous Methods to Peace, which will issue in a
more destructive War and Confusion. True Comfort grows out of, and in the midst
of Thoughts, multitude of Thoughts, which affect the Heart with godly Sorrow:
Such I scruple not to call that of the Psalmist's, which the Context exhibits,
and the Text implies under the notion of Branchings, here rendered Thoughts, but
which no less includes the Affections, and every thing which issues from the
Soul as the Bough from the Tree; beside that his Trouble, and therefore Grief,
did mainly respect the public Interest of the Church, Religion and God. This
was the Harbinger of his Joy. And that Comfort is of this Lineage, appears by
many Scriptures, as Psalm. 112.4. Unto the upright there arises Light in
Darkness. Only those that sow in Tears, shall reap in Joy, Psalm. 126.5, 6. Ye
shall weep and lament, but the World shall rejoice, and ye shall be sorrowful,
but your sorrow shall be turned into joy, Joh. 16.20. See also Isa. 57.18. and
61.2, 3. Matthew. 5.4. If there be not first troubled Thoughts, Comfort will
neither be sought, given nor valued. The most take no thought about their
Condition and Comfort, yet are at ease, because they never engage their
thinking Powers; so the senseless, careless, wicked ones; the rest of Men who
sleep in the soft Bed of patched formal Religion, and dream themselves into
carnal Security, (as the Pharisaical) never think thoroughly. Their Thoughts are
a lively Emblem of their Devotions, or these of them; all superficial, nothing
solid and to good purpose.

A Man is only that in Religion, which his Thoughts are. Home Thoughts, that go
to the bottom of things, and represent them as they are, and go to the bottom
of the Heart, and touch it to the quick; make a Man sound and serious in Soul
concerns. But overly Cogitations only paint the outside, and form a pretty
Picture of a Saint, do not renew and reform within, where the Eye of God looks
for a more eminent Comelyness and Glory, Psalm. 45. (...). Such Thoughts may
possibly lick and sleek over the Affections, and give them a Face, but cannot
give them Life; and where our Sorrows are not a living Spring, they will never
issue in other than dead Contents and Joys. Those Thoughts that never warm and
melt the Heart, do but terminate in cold Comfort. If they do not mould, and
fashion, and frame our Souls aright, as the Potter does his Clay, we shall
never be Vessels of Honor to be replenished with divine Consolations.

Oh then, my Soul, where are thy piercing heart-wounding Reflections? Will the
All-wise God be so profuse of his medicinal healing Balms, as to apply them
wast where there are no Sores? Can the all-knowing Physician of Souls be so
indiscreet, as prodigally to consume and spend his reviving Cordials, where
neither the Head is sick, nor the Heart faint? Do no mollifying Considerations
distill down as the dew upon the Reck beneath, to supple it into a repenting
tenderness? Do thou never ascend in thy Meditations to the third Heaven, and
take a deliberate view of those yerning Bowels of Commiseration which did
compass thee about, when in thy Blood, with the rest of Mankind, devoted to
everlasting Destruction, upon account of thy violation (in Adam) of the
Covenant of Nature? Does not God's Eternal Love, which was its own motive to
establish that Heaven and Earth-astonishing Occonomy of Grace, for thy
restitution to a condition of Hope and Happiness, sometimes solicit and invite
thy serious Cogitations to dwell upon it till it thoroughly insinuate it self
into thy inmost Recesses, and with a gentle fervor thaw thy frozen Affections,
and soften thee into godly Sorrow. Art thou hardened against the powerful
impressions of that admirable Grace? Behold then further in Golgotha, a
spectacle that would regele and dissolve even Eyes of Flint, and intenerate a
Heart all Rock of Adamant. Oh behold thy panting, groaning, bleeding, dying,
Redeemer, the ever-blessed Son of God, breathing out his oppressed Soul, under
the burden of thy Curse, to procure for thee an Inheritance of everlasting
Blessedness. This, O this is a melting sight indeed. Did the very Rocks relent,
and rent asunder, the palsied Earth divest its obstinate natural stableness,
and as if there had been a luxation of all its Ligaments, compose it self into
a tremulous Palpitation; and the very face of Nature it self put on
Sackcloth, gather Blackness, enwrap it self in a Mourning dress, and envelop
all its Glories in a noonday night, upon that fatal Eclipse of the Glory of
both the visible and invisible World, the Sun of Righteousness, that the
Philosopher did not without good reason infer, upon the Contemplation thereof,
that it imported either the God of Natures Passion, or its verging toward a
Dissolution? And shall that which overcomes all the repugnances of Nature, find
and leave thee a piece of the nether Millstone, with a pervicacious stubbornness
hardening thy self against Sorrow? In a compassionate regard of thy
wretchedness, he did then by strength of Love how the Heavens, Psalm 144.5. Isa
64.1.
that he might come down, humbling his Deity to embrace thy beggarly Humanity;
but Oh! Whither will thou fly for Sanctuary, when he shall break and burn down
all, at his return in the flaming Severity and Vengeance of an impartial Judge,
to render Recompenses even to thee amongst the rest of impenitent Rebels? If he
find thee such, what Rock (more impenetrable than thy self) will thou search
out to cover thee? 2 Pet. 3.
When the Heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the Elements shall melt
with fervent heat, What shelter can thou meet with as indissoluble as thy
brawny Heart, that in a contumacious pertinacy has so long stood out against
all the choicest methods of Divine Goodness to dissolve thee, to reclaim thee?
Will thou consider, or will thou not? Shall thy thoughts draw out those
penitential Waters that will return in a tide of Joys? Have thou ever been
oppressed with the thoughts of thy Sins, thy Ungodliness, thy Worldly Lusts, thy
Pride, Passion, Selfishness, Earthliness, Unbelief, Lukewarmness, Hypocrisy,
Customariness of Spirit in holy Performances, or omission of them, etc. and
perseverance in these Evils, and the like against the Dictates of Conscience,
Convictions of the Spirit, Warnings of Providence, by a hard and impenitent
Heart, treasuring up Wrath, against the day of Wrath, Romans 2.5.
and Revelation of the Righteous Judgment of God? Will neither the thoughts of
Love and Heaven engage thee, nor of Wrath and Hell affright thee into
Seriousness? Oh the damnable obduracy and unconcernedness of an unrenewed
Heart, that neither Life nor Death, though Eternal, neither Felicity nor
Misery, though Unfathomable, can prevail upon, not to be willing, and take the
ready method, to be unutterably miserable, till the lamentable experience and
feeling of the one eternally, do utterly extinguish all hopes of the other,
except Almighty Power, to introduce Repentance, create such bitter and sensible
foretasts, that with Heman, Psalm. 88.15. it is ready to groan out, suffering thy
Terrors, I am distracted, thy fierce wrath goes over me, thy terrors have cut
me off. For 'twill be a wonder if any thing less prevail with it to fly from
the Wrath to come, Matthew. 3.7.

Did thy thoughts, Oh my Soul, never affect thee with these and the like
things, as the greatest Realities, matters of Sense not of mere Speculation?
Have thou never been sick and sore through the plague of thine Heart? Art thou
whole without a Physician? Have thou never a Spiritual Wound, or want, to force
and drive thee out of thy self? See thou never a divine lovely Perfection, a
suitable attractive Excellency in Christ to draw thee? In short, have thou
never entertained any feeling Considerations of the true way to Comfort? Never
studied that course and procedure of Divine Goodness, whereby he leads to it?
Never entered in at the strait Gate of Repentance, which alone admits into the
Mansion of those unfading Joys? Have thou never got thy native Blindness of
Mind, in some good degree healed by the Spiritual Eye Salve of Heaven? The
digusts of thy Spiritual Palate remedied by a savoury relishing taste of the
sweetness of the Truth as it is in Jesus? Thy connatural rockiness dissolved,
by the softening influences of the Spirit of Conviction and Contrition? If not
thus, I like it not, thy Peace I fear is naught, away with it, 'twill end in
Confusion. But if thy thoughts be deep and powerful, and have thy Heart at
command: If thou weigh and consider with all seriousness and deliberation the
necessity of being qualified aright for Peace, and the danger of presuming thy
Conscience into a calm cessation, under a state of Enmity to God; that for thy
life thou dare not entertain a jot of Comfort, further than thy Light,
Spirit, and Condition can be fully reconciled to it, and freely admit it, upon
a full and through pondering all Circumstances, and examining thy Heart,
searching thy Conscience to the bottom; because as much afraid of being abused
by Satan, and Self-flattery into a false Peace, as ambitious of, and in love
with a true: If thou reflect upon those Sorrows which are introductory to
Spiritual Joys, to enquire whether they be of the right Model, what Image and
Superscription of God there is upon them, and with infinite care and endeavor
strive to rectify whatever is amiss therein, whether respecting their Object,
Motive, or End, that thou may not take the left Hand way, but the right, by
weeping Cross to Comfort, still renewing thy Griefs for their own failures,
till the real Effects demonstrate them to be indeed according to God: 2 Cor.
7.9, 10, 11.
If thou can not be satisfied till Sin, as Sin, an offense against God, truly
break thy very Heart, and work it into an ingenuous tenderness, that the warm
Bosom of everlasting Love thaw thy frozen Affections, and with its sweet and
gentle Impulse and Influence, melt the flinty Rock within, and pour it down in
Penitential Showrs, that not mere Self-love, which engages Grief in a fear of
Wrath, and desire of Indemnity; nor mere Natural Conscience, acting upon
Rational Principles without respect to God, may draw out thy Sorrows; but thy
disingenuous, unworthy, base carriage, to so kind, tender, affectionate, every
way amiable and obliging a Father, may dissolve thee into repentant Groans and
Dolours; if thou take as much pains, that thy Penitence may be sincere, as thou
cherishest desire, that thy Peace may be sweet, and sure, and under the conduct
of this endeavor feel any Revivings; these are the Comforts of God.

2. True and false Comforts differ in their Attendants, or Company. Sound Peace
is always attended with War and watchfulness against Sin, and a sincere delight
in God and Goodness. As in the Psalmist, How afraid was he of slipping? What a
singular respect did he bear to God, whom he owns in every thing, and to all
intents and purposes, as his God, his Defense, his Rock of Refuge, his
upholder, etc. Verse. 22. Verse. 18.
Contrarily false Joys are at Peace with Sin, and have little or no respect for
God or Holiness: However there is nothing cordial there, all is but pretense and
Phantastry. A settled course of Sin; Love to any one Omission or Commission;
Servitude to Sin, are utterly inconsistent with the Peace of God, which passes
all understanding. For this keeps watchfully both Mind and Heart, as with a
guard and Garrison, Phil. 4.7. Therefore true Peace always lives in a state of
War; there is an Enemy in prospect, What need of a Guard where no danger? The
Foes that immediately assault the Mind and Heart, are Error and Sin; these are
the Sting the Strength of the old Dragon, who can harm us by nothing else;
these batter down our Defenses, make breaches in our Walls, bury our Peace in
Rubbish and Ruins: Which therefore only lives, when it fortifies and secures
against these; but if they prevail it certainly and inevitably dies, and is
incapable of a Resurrection, till Sovereign Grace renew us to Repentance;
beating down our Corruptions, and reviving our decayed Graces, that we begin
with new Life and liveliness, to strive against Evil, and to do good; which the
Scripture enjoins under the Metaphor of entering into, and in at the little
pressed, narrow, or strait way and Gate.

God will not lose this precious Seed of Peace, by sowing it among Weeds or
Thorns, or Rocks, or common Roads: A good and honest Heart only receives it,
keeps it, and is kept by it. He that has really felt the bitterness of enmity
with God, as every one must ere he be solac'd with a sense of his Love; cannot
easily be reconciled to his own woe, or return to the silthy Vomit that brings
it. For War with Heaven is Hell; where pure unmixed Justice acts against
Sinners, according to the demerit of their Sins, and without Intermission or
Mitigation; and Sinners act against God, with the full and unrestrained bent
for their Wills, without regret or rebuke of Conscience, for the Sins there
committed; though under the deepest Agonies, and most dismal Remordencies of
Conscience for the Sins committed here. And if the highest degree of this
Enmity be the lowest Abyss of Misery, all inferior degrees must necessarily in
the same proportion, partake of the same Nature, and retain as much of the
latter, as they do of the former; and an Ounce of Mercury is Poison as well as
a Pound. I know there are Mountebanks in Religion, that dare adventure to drink
down a Toad, in confidence of an Orvietan or Antidote; but that had need be
sure (which yet is impossible) that this Preservative be not in the Power of an
Enemy, who has liberty and authority to withhold it at pleasure, even in their
extremest Necessity, else they certainly swallow their own (as to themselves)
remediless Damnation. If Men take the boldness to sin upon presumption, that
Repentance and the Merit of Christ will secure them; who yet may be fully
assured, that both are solely the gift of God, whom by their confident and
daring impudence herein, they infinitely disoblige and irritate; they for a
while after this sweet Figg, may enjoy the content of a little rotting ease,
but the Poison is secretly insinuating it self into their Vitals, and
corrupting them with so malignant a Contagion, as renders their Disease the
more incurable, and their eternal Perdition inevitable. He that is in love with
such Comfort as this, may take it, much good may it do him, if it can; but I
fear he will never have Joy of it in another World.

We dread that which has once burnt us. Ask a wounded Spirit, what ease there
is in rebelling against Heaven, and what Satisfaction it can hope for in that
state of War, and how in its present circumstances it can relish all those
sensual Joys, where-from it once received so much seeming Contentation? Oh now,
they are Wormwood and Gall, and create in Reflection as much anguish and
torment, as ever they did comfort in Fruition. The Honey is gone, the Sting
remains; the Pleasure is vanished, Romans 6.21.
the Pain emerges, and will endure till a through Penitence, and unfeigned
Faith, introduce a sense of Reconciliation with God, that it becomes as clear
and evident, that the Enmity in our minds against God, and God's Enmity against
us is abolished, as before it was plain, that there had been no good
understanding betwixt us. For, how can an enlightened Conscience be quiet till
it be satisfied, that it stands upon good terms with its Sovereign Lord? If its
fears build upon the old bottom, viz. a persuasion that omnipotent Wrath is
arming against it; how can it be at rest? To be patient under this, much more
to be content, most of all to be pleased and Jovial, is brutish stupidity and
senselesness, or desperate foolhardiness and madness; which can issue in
nothing but the everlasting torturous Sense, and Plagues of Hell, if boundless
Mercy prevent not, by a sound awakening, and Conversion. There cannot then be
any Divine Comfort, if there be not a sweet Composure and Harmony betwixt Earth
and Heaven; and this can never be where a Man is at peace with his Sins:
Therefore whatever quiet may seem to be in such a Soul, it is only personated
and illusive; it reaches not to the real bottom of the trouble, takes not out
the Core.

But on the other hand, when a Man makes Repentance, and Mortification, Faith,
and a good Life the main employ, which drinks up his Spirits, and Strength, and
Time; industriously contending, in all things to approve the sincerity and
heartiness of his Affections, Designs, and Aims, and whole Deportment in the
sight of God; and whilst he is thus doing, finds any quietude Rest and
Satisfaction of Mind to sweeten his Work, and settle his Conscience; he may be
confident that this is the true Comfort of the Holy Ghost. For as it is
impossible to enjoy true Peace under reigning Sin, so it is inconsistent with
Divine Goodness, and Federal Love to permit a true Heart, entirely devoted to
him, to delude it self into true Miseries, under the vizor of false Joys. I
confess, if a Man be too greedy of Comfort, and too hasty in his Applications,
without due consideration, and endeavor, and care to derive his Satisfactions
from solid Grounds, laying the stress upon things which will not bear it; in
such indeliberate precipitation of Judgment, concerning a Man's state, and the
true root of Comfort, when he founds it upon any thing less than substantial
Piety, Righteousness and Sobriety, as the evidence of his Right; he may abuse
himself with an unsound, unsolid Peace. Therefore I always suppose that the
procedure, in order to Comfort be justifiable, and the Grounds upon which a Man
bottoms his Evidence be genuine, and that his reason and judgment lead him
leisurely in the Scripture way, to Heart-ease and Rest; else all may issue in
greater inquietude and trouble, whatever fair Weather may at present flatter
his conscience. But if Spiritual sense, light and a serious Preponderation of
all circumstances, according to the preceding particular, direct our motions
hither, and true Religiousness confirm them; we may be secure, that mere Shows
and Pageantry do not now delude us into a Fairy Paradise. A weak Head, it is
true, may lead an honest Heart into a deceitful Peace. And it is not the design
of Grace to abolish or reform the natural Depravations and Deformities of our
Faculties so much as the Moral: But that which is defective must not be made a
Standard. A good Soul that understands it self and observes solid Rules, in
comforting it self, cannot be deceived in that Peace which it possesses, whilst
it loves God and keeps his way. Such as a Man's goodness is, will his
Consolation be. If that be but External and Hypocritical, this will be
insincere and delusory; but a true intelligent, honest Heart, proceeding with a
just caution, shall never be gulled with a Mock-Peace. For, Psalm. 97.11, 12.
Light is sown for the Righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart. Rejoice
in the Lord, ye Righteous. What God sows, they shall reap. Psalm. 85.8, 10. I
will hear what God the Lord will speak, for he will speak peace unto his
people, and to his Saints, etc. Mercy and Truth have met together,
Righteousness and Peace have kissed each other. Their embrace is strict and
indissoluble; God has espoused them, they cannot be divorced. What he has
joined together, none shall finally separate and part asunder. They give mutual
testimony each to others integrity and soundness. In Life they are lovely, in
Death they cannot be divided, but will cohabit eternally.

Where then, Oh my Soul, is thy Righteousness, not particular merely, but
universal? Show me thy comfort by thy Works, for it is dead being alone. As the
Body without the Spirit is dead, so is Peace without Holiness, which is its
very Life and Soul. If thou be not God-like, thy Joys are not Heaven-like. All
true pleasures are drops of those Rivers at God's Right Hand, Psalm. 36.8. and
46.4. and 16. ult. If the Waters of Life have never quickened and cleansed thee,
those Streams of Divine Comfort never yet did refresh thee; thou have only
drunk of the Abana and Pharphar of muddy, carnal Contentments, not of the pure
Fountain of Celestial Consolations. Wherein then can thy uprightness, and real
honesty of heart approve it self to God? Is this thy rejoicing, 2 Cor. 1.12.
viz. the Testimony of thy conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity,
not with fleshly Wisdom, but by the grace of God, thou have had thy
Conversation in the World. What have thou to show more than an Hypocrite?
Wherein does thy Righteousness excel that of Scribes and Pharisees? What are
thy Principles, Motives, manner of acting, Aims and Ends, in thy whole course
of Life? Do thou really act, 1. From God, a Spirit of new Life, breathed
into thee by God. 2. Through Christ, as the Foundation of thy hopes of
acceptance. 3. By the Spirit, as thy immediate aid in every Holy performance.
4. Unto God, as thy ultimate end. Have thou no secret reserved Dalilahs? No one
thing in which thou would have liberty, and presume upon Pardon: Do thou
not run upon a biass in Religion, and twine aside in some sinister respect to
self, or the popular Vogue, in which thou would be somebody? Is it thy great
and uppermost care and study to be true to him that sees in secret, rather than
applauded by those who only see the Outside; that thy inward gracious
Dispositions may go no less than thy outward Semblances? Art thou above all
things jealous of thy deceitful Heart, afraid of Hypocrisy; willing to do any
thing that may tend to a full discovery of thy self, to thy self? And if all be
not right within, or suspected not to be, Art thou unspeakably troubled till it
be righted? Thou art full of thoughts, but have thy Meditations been effectual
through Christ, to break thy heart from, as well as for sin, and bow thy Will
to a Conformity, and subjection to God's Will of Precept and Providence, and
bring thee to an intelligent, self-denying, humble, penitent, believing,
affectionate owning thy Baptismal Covenant, in its whole latitude, with sincere
and indeflexible Resolutions to stand by it for ever? And do thou expect thy
peace in no other way? Have thou been industriously and labouriously diligent,
to gain a true and through understanding of thy State, and Frame Godward,
searching all to the bottom; very solicitous to see in a clear light? What
Conditions and Qualifications are prerequisite to dispose thee for Comfort, and
to be clear, that in reality they are in thee, and that thou do not build
thy Evidence hereof upon self-flattering, deceitful Grounds, but do in truth
find, that the interest of God is Sovereign and Supreme in, and nearest thy
Heart, has the universal Regiment and command over all, being thy singular
delight; and whatever thou feel'st to oppose, becomes on that account an
intolerable burden, thy daily lamentation? Thou dare not assume to thy self
any comfort, nor be at rest in thy Spirit, till thou be in some good degree
safied, that God and goodness have (as far as Humane Infirmity, and this
present state will permit) the all of thy Heart, Mind, Soul and Strength, or
thy most earnest, pressing, active, industrious, persevering desires hereof;
which not to feel is a grief and torment insupportable, and drives thee to new
exercises of Repentance and Faith in Christ for Pardon and Aid, that thy second
endeavors may be more upright, thy after thoughts more efficacious: And do
thou seek and find ease and rest for thy self in no other method, than looking
and coming to Jesus, with a weary, laboring, heavy-laden Heart, entirely
devoted to him, and therefore sincerely willing and desirous to learn of him
meekness and lowliness of Heart, and to take his Yoke upon thee, which is
easy, and his Burden which is light, Matt. 11.29, 30. If this be thy frame,
practice, and way, and thou can not, wilt not comfort thy self, till thy
sense and real feeling of these things, and a full insight into thy self, make
thy way very plain, as infinitely afraid of being cheated by Satan, or choused
by thine own deceitful Heart, under a shadow of Spiritual Joys, into
substantial Woes. If thy Feet being first guided into the paths of
Righteousness, be guided also with this caution and wariness, into the way of
Peace, and settled in a quiet and comfortable Repose; this doubt not is real
Divine Consolation.

3. The differences of true and false Comforts, which are derived from the
Subject, or Persons feeling their reviving Influence, or rather indeed the
adjuncts of those Persons considered in their absolute or relative State, are
as palpable as any. The soundest Joys, being only the Possession of a truly
Regenerate Godly Soul. The unsound lodging in the wicked Hypocritical, for the
most part as their proper Habitation: So that if it can be known to a Man's
self, whether he be really good or bad, it may ordinarily be known whether his
Peace be right or wrong. But for this, I refer to the Characters of the
Psalmist in the beginning of this Discourse.

I only add, That where there is no Life, there can be no true Comfort. It Is My
God, verse. 22. Now he is not the God of the dead, but of the living, Matthew.
22.32. It Is no less true in a Spiritual sense, than a Natural. If My God in
natural Relation, argue the Life of Nature: My God in federal Relation does as
strongly infer the Life of Grace. For it is not any where affirmed of Cain,
Esau, Judas, etc. after their Death, that God was then their God, as of
Abraham, etc. although they be no less alive in Soul; the Immortality whereof
is a common Privilege, and admits of no degrees in one more than other. My God
then to Abraham, etc. is another thing, and to be taken in another sense, than
that wherein it may be applicable to Cain, etc. since it is used of the godly
after Death, in an appropriate incommunicable sense. It may truly be applied to
the very Devils and damned in any sense, not importing the Moral, Spiritual
Life of Purity and Peace; but in this it is the sole Prerogative of the godly,
that are born again, not of Blood, nor of the Will of the Flesh, nor of the
Will of Man, but of God, Joh. 1.13. When therefore our Psalmist owns the Divine
Majesty, under the Relation of My God, the meaning is, Mine to whom I am
confederated, united as a principle of new Divine Spiritual Life, as the Soul
of my Soul, in whose all I have a true federal Right, in his Being, his
Perfections, his Knowledge, Coodness, Love, Life, Peace, etc. whose Comforts
therefore benignly eye me, and invite my acceptance, because I, and all mine
are his, He himself, and all his through (not Creation merely, but) the
Covenant of Grace, are mine; I therefore possess living Comforts, because I
enjoy a living God as mine own, by Vital Union.

Indeed, Spiritual Joys only affect Spiritual living Souls. Cordials are never
administered to disanimated Carkases, nor Divine Comforts to the Dead in Sins
and Trespasses. First Resurrection, then Ascension into a Heaven of Rest.
Natural, Animal Life inherits no Spiritual Peace, 1 Cor. 15.44, 50, 51.
any more than a natural Body, Celestial Pleasures. All must be changed ere
they can be translated into this Paradise. As the corruptible part of us is
abolished at the Resurrection of the Body, else we cannot enter into Life: So
the corrupting part must be Crucified at the Resurrection of our Souls, or we
cannot enter into Peace. Isa. 57.2. He shall enter into Peace, they shall rest
upon their Beds, walking in uprightness. A Scripture something cloudy, which
the former clause being singular, this plural in the Hebrew, and both
Figurative renders yet more perplexed: But by a Transposition not unusual, and
taking the last word of the foregoing Verse as a Supplement to this (being it is
the Substantive to the Participle (...)) it may be read thus, (...) The
Righteous walking in his uprightness shall [ come go
] into Peace; they [ i. e. (...) sickly Men of Mercy or Holiness] shall quietly
rest upon their Beds. To complete the sentence and sense, understand and insert
here (...) [walking in uprightness] for although the number disagree, yet the
matter requires it.
An exceeding proper allusion to the Signification of [(...)] Enosh, A Bed for
the sick. The Bed is either, 1. The Grave for the Body, a common Metaphor, 2 Chronicles. 16.14, etc. (as it is to style Death a sleep) yet this would but be a
jejune Interpretation, improper to the place, for even to the wicked it is so.
2. Therefore the Bed imports the state of everlasting repose and rest for the
Soul in Heaven. Though righteous and merciful Men, of infirm Bodies and Souls,
be taken away from approaching Evils, yet living and dying in uprightness, they
enter into never ending Rest and Peace. That is their Portion after Death, and
the first Fruits thereof their present Possession.

That of Solomon, Eccles. 2.2. is every way verified of the wicked. I said, of
laughter it is mad, and of mirth, what does it? For what greater frenzy, than
to laugh in the face of incensed condemning Justice. And, Oh mirth, what did
thou? In the midst of the devouring Fire and everlasting Burnings; which are
already kindled in a cauterized Conscience, though for a little while raked up
and smothered. But whether so or no, I am sure there is just reason, that even
in laughter their hearts should be mavelous sorrowful, because the end of
that mirth will be doleful heaviness, Prove. 14.13. For the wicked are like the
troubled Sea, when it cannot rest, whose Waters cast up mire and dirt. There is
no peace says my God to the wicked, Isa. 57.20, 21. But when the Lord Heals
and Leads, he will restore comforts to Mourners, Verse. 18.

Art thou then Spiritually alive, O my Soul, or dead? Dead thou art if
destitute of Soul. Thy Soul is God: Christ is thy Life, Col. 3.4. The Life thou
live in the Flesh ought to be by the Faith of the Son of God, Gal. 2.20. And
he also is thy Peace, Mic. 5.5. Ephesians. 2.14. If thou live in God, and God in
thee by Faith and Love, thy Peace is solid and genuine; but in Disunion, and
Separation from God and Christ, there is neither true Life nor Peace. Enjoyest
thou a Christ within thee? He is then thy hope of Glory; therefore thy Haven of
Rest, Joy, and Consolation. Do thou experience any Communion of Life betwixt
thy self and Holy Jesus? Do thou feel any thing of his powerful, gracious
Influence? Holy Souls are Spiritually moved by the Holy Ghost, which is the
bond of Union betwixt them and God. By him Christ dwells in us, 1 John 3.24.
Romans 8.9, 10, 11, 15. Has this quickening Spirit enlivened thee? Thou may
know that the Spirit of Grace has quickened thee, by his Fruits, Gal. 5.22,
23. For if thou live in the Spirit, thou will walk also in the Spirit, Verse.
25. And the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, will free thee from the
Law of Sin and Death, Romans 8.2. (which naturally thou walk by) that thou will [ affectionately savor (so is (...) translated Matthew. 16.23. Col. 3.2.)]
mind, relish the things of the Spirit, not of the Flesh, Verse. 5. If thou art
(or have a Spiritual Being) according to the Spirit, Verse. 5. or in the Spirit,
Verse. 9. he houses [(...)] in thee, and makes thee Spiritually minded, which is
Life and Peace, Verse. 6. and by degrees destroys out of thee the minding or
savor of the Flesh, which is Death or Enmity against God, Verse. 7. Have thou
studied these things to know them, and thy self, whether thou do really feel
them, thoroughly considering, and fearching all within, to see what one thing
thou can pitch upon, that will be a sure Evidence, that thou live in the
Spirit, and he in thee; without which, thou can never groundedly say [My God]
as the Psalmist; for thou art none of his, Romans 8.9. therefore he none of
thine, that is, by federal Union. What then are thy (...)? These are the surest
Testimonies of a Life in God by his Spirit. It Is a very comprehensive Word,
full of sense, no one in our language can express it. For it includes the
noblest Actings of the whole Soul, in knowing, considering, minding, regarding,
thinking wisely, discreetly, prudently, powerfully, effectually; with
affection, savor, and a spiritual taste and sense of sweetness and delectable
goodness, with the result hereof, those stated Principles, which these actings
establish as a Law to our Consciences, Affections and Practices; not only the
(...) or agency of the mind, but the (...), or fruit of its Operation, the
thinking of the mind, and the thought formed by the mind. Upon what Objects
do thou fix thy Mindings and Willings of this Nature? And what kind of
things, of what Virtue and Efficacy are the savoury Cogitations that issue from
these mindings? When thou settlest these Workings of Soul upon the Flesh and
the World, thou make them thy gods, as the carnal heart does. Truly nothing
deserves, or can be worthy of this contention of Mind, but what is Spiritual
and Celestial. Wherever this is engaged, from thence is thy Life, and thy Peace
is Congenerous to thy Life. If the best things habitually and statedly enjoy
these endeavors and motions of thy superior Powers, and maintain an
inviolable Authority over them; thy Life is the best, and no other thy
Consolations.

Lastly, real and deceiving Comforts may be differenced by their tendency and
effects. They both end as they begin. The cheating Peace of the Profane and
Hypocritical, will never produce any conscionable persevering cares, and
endeavors, to please God and profit Men. But, the joy of the Lord, is the
Souls strength in his service, and evermore leads to him in Holiness of Heart
and Life; and to more lively actings of Faith, Love, and Gratitude, to growth
in Grace and Godliness; as is not obscurely intimated in the example of the
Psalmist. We will suppose the actings of his Grace to proceed in the same
tenor, with the Expressions thereof in the Psalm. For we have no other Evidence
thereof, and may Rationally judge this to be a Report of his inward Sensations,
in their Nature, Order, Progress, and Perfection, as we find in other Psalms.
Well, his Faith, which at the beginning appears something pendulous, weak, and
wavering as to that particular thing, about which it was first engaged, viz.
the Interposal of Divine Justice, to secure the Church from the rage of its
Enemies, and could only look for this in a Petitionary way, and view it in its
causes, Verse. 1, 2, 3, etc. does after this favorable Aspect of Divine
Comforts in this Verse, grow up to a prophetical confidence, in the certain
futurity of the event, Verse. 23. And as it had eyed the cause, Divine
Vengeance, in a Duplication of the Address to it, in the first weak act of
affiance, Verse. 1. So also, Verse. last, presents a double Testimony of the more
established and strong act of confident assurance, that the effect which he
expected, should undoubtedly be produced. What he only saw the possibility of,
in the first workings of his Faith, he foresees the Existence of in the last;
what he only begged that it might be, in the infancy of his Faith; he
peremptorily concludes, and promises himself, that it would be in this its
Maturity. Then his Faith only wishes, here it determines; there was his
Supposition, here is desinitive Sentence and Decision; that his Prayer, this
his Answer. The Victory of his Faith over all preceding fears and dubitations.
Hope triumphing over his Despondency.

And that Comfort has a special Influence, thus to heighten Faith, and perfect
its actings is apparent from the nature of the thing. For since it is the
quiet, and rest of the Mind, upon good Evidence of the Love of God, to a Man in
particular through Christ, it can do no other than embolden his Addresses, and
encourage his confidence. Even as when a tender Father receives into, and
cherishes in his bosom, a reconciled Child, and speaks to his Heart: This
removes fully all those Jealousies and Doubts, which the remembrance of former
unkindnesses and distances might create, and invites the Child to a more
inhesitant and free recumbence upon, and committing himself to this so amply
attested love and tenderness, of his now no more angry Father: So by the like
reason it introduces an additional fervor and flame to the Child's love, and
engages him to a more full and ingenuous Expression of his dutifulness and
filial observance. And no less may be gathered from the Psalmists process here:
For before the Text, though he have frequent occasion to make mention of God,
almost in every one of the foregoing Verses, viz. ten or eleven times; yet it is
with that seeming distance and strangeness, that we meet not with a word of
appropriation to himself in special: But upon the benign Aspect of the
Consolations of God, his Love will no longer stand off, but makes its nearest
approaches, and runs into his embraces, in a double affectionate claim of
Propriety, in the compass of four Verses following; as often as he mentions the
Lord, he follows it with a Relative, not permitting it to pass by, as before,
like an Alien. Verse. 22. The Lord is my defense, My God is the Rock of my
Refuge. I have now abundant reason to follow him with relation Love, as mine
own, since he love my Soul into Rest and Peace, becoming my Comforter. Oh sweet
reviving token of the singular Love of my God! How dearly do I love him for it?
Yet this is not all. Is this Honeycomb for my self alone? Do I arrogate sole
Propriety in these Riches? No, my Charity obliges me to Judge, that my Brethren
in Affliction are not destitute of the same Consolation through interest in
God. I so love my Neighbor as to make account he is as good as my self, and
has an equal share with me in this infinite Treasure; therefore for my Brethren
and Companions sake, I say [OUR GOD] without restriction to my self. Verse. 23.
Yea, our God shall out them off. He is a common good; yours as well as mine,
and brings a common benefit to us all, in saving us from our Adversaries. And
herein he shows, not only his love to Man, and thereby consequentially that it
did respect a higher object, 1 John 4.20, 21. but directly and immediately
demonstrates, that he grew in love to God himself, in that, he glorifies the
Communicativeness of Divine Goodness, by an acknowledgment of its
extensiveness, in a peculiar manner to Multitudes besides himself; even all
included in the relative [OUR] as if it had been said, I love him, because he
loves me, so as to be mine: I love him yet more, because he together with me
loves mine; condescending to be theirs also. I love that goodness that flows to
me; I further love that goodness that overflows to all with me; my Friends, my
People. For my own sake, for their sake, for its own sake: I love it above all.

Thus as the Work of Righteousness is Peace, and the effect of Righteousness,
quietness and assurance for ever, Isa. 32.17. So on the other hand, the Work of
Peace is Righteousness. Psalm. 85.8. I will hear what [(...)] the strong God
Jehovah will speak, because he will speak peace to his people, and to [(...)]
his merciful ones [(...) Indicatively, not Imperatively] and they shall not
return to folly. This Peace will be a preservative against Sin; whence it is
said to Engarrison our Minds and Hearts, in that so often mentioned, Phil. 4.7.
so promotes it, that Holiness, which some call Negative; but it is no less
productive of Positive Holiness, Isa. 61.2, 3. Christ is anointed and endowed
with the Holy Spirit, to Preach good tidings, etc. To comfort all that mourn:
To appoint unto them that mourn in Sion, to give unto them beauty for Ashes,
the Oil of joy for mourning, the Garment of Praise, for the Spirit of
heaviness. But wherefore all this? It follows, That they might be called ( i.
e. might be as before, Isa. 4.3. and 35.8. and 56.7. compared with Luke 19.46.
Matthew. 5.9, 19.) Trees of Righteousness the planting of the Lord that he might
be glorified. To this purpose also is that Prayer of the Apostle, 2 These. 2.16,
17. God who loves and gives everlasting Consolation through Grace, comfort your
Hearts and stablish you in every good Word and Work. Grace begets Consolation,
and this begets good Conversation. He that through Grace comforts, does also
through Comfort establish in every good Word and Work.

Show then, Oh my Soul, the soundness of thy Comforts by their Fruits. That
Peace which is imprignant is impostorous. In what further degree do thy inward
Joys empower thee to Love the Lord, the giver, or thy Neighbor, thy Partaker.
Can thou pretend Peace in thy Conscience, and live in contention or
uncharitableness with thy Brother? Does not thy inward Comfort calm thy
passions, meeken thy converses, render thee profitable, useful to Men, in the
best endeavors to induce them to love God and Virtue, and abhor Immorality,
Viciousness and Hypocrisy, that by thy means they may be also led in this
method, into the way of Peace, and through it again into the way of Purity. If
thy Comforts be solid and sincere, thou will by them be enabled to use the
utmost diligence in propagating them; since that is one of Gods great Designs
in communicating them. 2 Cor. 1.3, 4. Blessed be God, even the Father of Our
Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of Mercies, and the God of all Comfort, who
comfort us in all our Tribulation; (for what end?) That we may be able to
comfort them which are in any trouble, by the Comfort wherewith we our selves
are comforted of God. And if God make thee able, thou ought to be willing.
They are only fallacious Joys that are envious. A corrupt Heart, so that it
self do but enjoy rest, matters not though all the World be in trouble; nay,
grudges others the quiet it enjoys, and triumphs, or secretly rejoices at, or
at least is not afflicted in their Afflictions. Haman will drink and be jolly,
when the whole City is in perplexity. A wicked Soul is not concerned for the
content of any beside it self, will rather add Affliction to the afflicted,
than endeavor or rejoice in their Consolation. Thy Comfort is not good, if not
conformable to the Fountain of Goodness in Communicativeness: As far as
confined it is corrupt. In the Harvest of true Joys, thy Jordan will overflow
the Banks. Uncharritable, illiberal, unbountiful Consolations are Illusions. If
thy light and gladness diffuse not its beneficial rays abroad, to revive and
refresh the Disconsolate Heart, it is but a glimmering Meteor, not a Beam from
the Sun of Righteousness; and thus does it not extend it self, if a Vital Heat
and Influence do not accompany it; as it is but a flashy, wild, deceitful Spark,
Isa. 50.11. which will vanish into Smoke and darkness, if it be not kindled by
a flame of true Love to God and Universal Righteousness. Wherefore thou can
never bless thy self in reflection upon thine own Peace, if it engage thee not
in serious cares, to propagate Holiness first, and thereby Peace. For an unholy
Soul is absolutely inconsolable for want of Right, therefore should be so for
want of Will; since a Will to apply Comforts, without Right, will certainly
reduce to that woeful plight, which the Apostle, with so much concern, reports,
1 These. 5.3. When they shall say peace and safety; then sudden Destruction
comes upon them, as Travail upon a Woman With-child, and they shall not
escape. Be ready to speak a word in due season to the weary, but be cautious in
solacing such as the Apostle describes and reproves. Romans 3.17, 18. Who have
not known the way of Peace: Why? There is no fear of God before their eyes;
least the terror of that threatening arrest thee, Ezekiel. 33. For by publishing
Peace to those against whom thou should proclaim War from Heaven, thou will
delude them into everlasting Death in their Sins, under the mask of Life and
Comfort; but their Blood shall be required at thy hands. God's Tenders of
Peace, are only conditional, and so must thine.

Look to it then, O my Soul, as the one thing needful, in the first place, that
the Grace of God bringing Salvation, and therefore everlasting Consolation to
thee, do efficaciously teach thee this Righteousness, to be very industrious to
lead others, (whose Concern God sometimes seems to prefer before his own,
Matthew. 5.23, 24. and Chap. 12.1, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.) especially thy Relations, in
the right way to Peace, informing their Judgments, rousing their Consciences,
reproving their Sins, directing their Practice, counselling, commanding,
restraining, and constraining them, as far as possible, to be good, and do good
freely, with an ingenuous spontaneity and readiness of mind. But as thou must
learn others, so under the influence of that beneficial Grace, thou thy self
must be learnt to deny, so as to crucify, all Ungodliness, spiritual Evil, and
worldly Lusts, carnal Wickedness, and live soberly, in a just temper and
moderation of thine own Spirit, Affections, Passions, Appetite; and godlily, in
a religious assiduity of Endeavor to please the Lord, and approve thy self to
him through Christ, in all things. This is both the true undeceiving Mean to
attain Comfort, and also the certain and inseparable Fruit of it: The more thou
growest herein, the more redundant will be thy satisfaction; and if, on the
other hand, thy Peace be as a River, thy Righteousness will be as the waves of
the Sea, Isai. 48.18.

Try then thy Comfort by its Productions: If it will permit thee to dishonor
God and defile thy Conscience, to be vain in thy Spirit, and vile in thy
Communication and Conversation, to debauch others, and damn thy self, neither
fearing God, nor regarding Man, nor valuing and taking care for thine own self,
it is no better than its Progeny, and will but only lead thee hood-winked, in a
pleasing dream of Paradise, into the depth of Hell: But contrarily, if thy
Peace be procreative, and bring forth Twins, a heavenly Spirit, and a holy
Life: If it be as the Dew to thy Graces, and cause them to flourish, and yield
their Fruit in due season: If it enlarge thy heart Godward, and carry thee as
upon Eagles Wings to thy Redeemer, in a more entire, affectionate, cordial
subjection to his Authority and Government, its Origin is Heaven, and in those
everlasting Pleasures and Joys will it finally terminate. Leading thee to sound
and real Goodness, it will undoubtedly issue in that far more exceeding and
eternal weight of Glory.

The Reprehensive part of this kind of Inferences, cannot be omitted; happy we
if there were no reason for it. I only will prosecute it in one Instance.

Therefore just Matter of Challenge and Rebuke will arise upon this Doctrine,
for sitting down under the Perplexities of our own mad Thoughts; without a due
care to prepare for, and possess our selves of the Comforts of God. I confess
the generality of Men are presumptuously bold in dividing these, and with a
daring Impudence will rashly arrest the Promises, with a heady Violence rack
and torture them, or cut and mangle them, (as Sciron and Procrustes did all
Passengers) till they seem to be made fit for their own Beds, and become
unwillingly willing to lie down with them. Comfort must conform to them, they
will not to it. But these will certainly inherit Confusion, when those ravished
Comforts relinquish their too sat awakened Souls at Death; or lie down in the
most grievous Horrors, if before that dismal hour they be ever roused into
Repentance. And often it falls out that those who most audaciously usurped Divine
Consolations in their impenitent Estate, become most shy of them after their
real awakenings; they dare not be deluded again, by an over-forwardness; their
assuming to themselves Peace without Right before, cost them so dear, that it
makes them more jealous, suspicious, and cantious in bottoming it, ere they can
adventure again to apply the Promises. But as Presumption leads some blindfold
into a false Peace, so Despair causes many to reject a true. Some receive this
at the hands of Justice, as a merited Punishment for aggravated Sins, and
procrastination of Repentance, to be judicially given up by the Lord to Horrors
of Conscience, so deep, so durable, as not to be able to see any thing but
Terror in the whole Book of God, till he remit this Punishment, and lighten his
hand. Others are knocked off from the Promises by the Spirit of Bondage, in a
smart and home-conviction of Sin and divine indignation because of it; God
hereby designing to make them more meet for it. And indeed none are more afraid
of receiving Comfort than those, that being thoroughly startled with the
discoveries of their Corruptions and God's just Anger, do really stand in most
need of it, and are under the divine Methods of Preparation for it. Such stand
off, and dispute their own Title, either, 1. through Ignorance or Inadvertency,
not understanding or considering themselves, and the Work of God within them:
Or, 2. through Humility and Tenderness, as afraid of presuming: Or, 3. through
a Spice of Pride and Haughtiness, as resolved to bring their Penny to the
Promise, ('it is Mr. Hooker's Phrase); not content with such Qualifications as
God limits in the Word, in order to Peace, they must super-errogate in their
Preparations, and be better than they can be, still complaining of
Unworthiness, Unworthiness, (which in one sense is true) as if they would not
receive Comfort, gratis, nor accept of the Gift upon God's Terms, making them
need it, and meet for it; except they be, (which none possibly can be) worthy
of it, merit and deserve it. Or, lastly, through a kind of obstinacy and
stubbornness of Spirit, and the predominancy of Melancholy, (to which every
thing that is saddening and dejecting, has too much of agreeableness and
sweetness,) as if they were in love with their Griefs and Woes; will not attend
to any rational or religious Arguments, that might relieve them, Rachel-like
refusing to be comforted, although they can give no just and satisfying reason,
for that Recusancy. It may be they are pleased with the Sensuality of Sorrow,
because it hits their Humor, harmonizes with their Dumpishness, and gives them
a little ease, by cherishing their Disease as Water in a Dropsy. Neither can I
render any other reason, why others who pretend higher, should imagine they can
never be excessive enough in their grief for Sin, but are still ambitions to
find their Head become Waters, and theirs Eyes a Fountain of Tears, that they
may weep day and night; which if they experience in any desired measure, then
are they well satisfied, and at ease, making this an Ingredient of their
Comfort, stiling it melting and being affected; which when they feel not, they
are all upon the whine, and cannot be reconciled to their more deep, solid, and
less superficial Repentings and Dolors. But this womanish part of Repentance in
God's Whinls (as one used to call them), though in its due degree and place
desirable and commendable, yet is the least considerable and lowest thing in
it; as every judicious Divine and Christian very well knows, being only
sensitive, not deliberative or spiritual in its rise and acting, and real
nature; and the former, viz. melancholic Pensiveness, and delight therein, is
no part of Repentance at all, but only an effort of natural Constitution, or a
gratification thereof, including nothing reasonable and humane, nor divine and
spiritual. No more is any thing in that Person, who cannot satisfactorily
resolve that Quaere of the Psalmist, Why art thou cast down, ob my Soul? And
why art thou disquieted within me? Psalm. 42. ult. For this is distinctive of
sound trouble and unsound; the former has some special and particular Matter,
as a reason and ground to allege for it self; the latter either can give no
reason at all, or hovers in the wild confusion of generals; whence it springs,
and how it rises, and for what it is, lies in the dark. Let not that pass then
for right trouble, which cannot give a just account of it self at the bar of
Reason, guided by the Word of God: and if it cannot stand there, how will it
plead before the Tribunal of Christ? Where we must render a reason of all
things done in the Flesh, whether good or evil, 2 Cor. 5.10. the very Thoughts
of the heart being there to be judged, Romans 2.15, 16. troubled and troubling
thoughts as well as others. As then those are infinitely blameworthy, who
maintain an ungrounded Peace in their minds, although their hearts have never
been sensible, and sick of their native habitual enmity against God and
Holiness, and will not be beaten out of their presumptuous confidence in the
Goodness and Covenant of God, although altogether unqualified; and those also
who being a little chastized with the Whips and Scorpions of the Law, in a tart
Conviction, and Terror of Conscience, soon grow weary of the burden and pain;
and being more sick of their Corrosives, than their Corruptions, begin Dog-like
to lick whole their Sores, and will have the Promises right or wrong, as a
lenitive or stupefactive rather, to ease their pains, or destroy their sense;
(though the Core abide within) and being well-pleased, and satisfied with the
palliate Cure, trail on a little while 'till the more deep lancings of a
thorough Conviction discover the deceit; or the incurable gangrene break out at
Death and Judgment, to their ineffable Horror: So likewise are they worthy to
be greatly blamed, on the other hand, who are really sick, but afraid of Balm,
and the Physician; and though every Sin be made grievous, and pain them at the
very heart, and nothing in the World would be more acceptable than a Savior,
whom to subject themselves to they appear heartily resolved, and willing to
embrace every one of his Laws; yet make danger of applying to themselves, and
taking encouragement from his Promises of Mercy (that in Him are Yea, and in
Him, Amen) because, forsooth, they are not so and so humbled, holy,
affectionate, etc. As if 'twas not Evangelical New Covenant-Perfection, i. e.
Vprightness, but Legal, Personal, Universal, and Perpetual Obedience, which God
required as the Condition of the Covenant of Grace, and they must not dare to
accept of Christ and his Benefits, except they were so good beforehand as to
stand in no need of them. But why I beseech you thus in love with your own
Torture, and desirous still to abide upon the Rack of Anxiety and Dolor?
Trouble is not its own end. God does not wound our Consciences, or crucify our
Comfort in carnal Things, merely because he loves to torment us, or that we may
be Devils to ourselves, by protracting our own Woes beyond the bounds of
Decorum and Necessity. He only designs by the Antiperistasis of our Sorrows,
more to sweeten the Joys of his Salvation, which he has prepared for us; and
by mingling Gall and Wormwood with our delicious Sins, to embitter that, which
only prepares us for, and assigns us over unto the direful Miseries of
everlasting Damnation.

In brief, one would not think that the reason of any could be reconciled to
their own Woes, much less their Sense: Yet common Experience tells us, that
some will every moment be conjuring up new Fiends to torture themselves; and
seem to study nothing else, but by fetching in all the Fuel they can possibly
reach, and all the Fire that divine Vengeance breaths out in the Scriptures, to
kindle a Hell in their own Consciences; as though Misery were their proper
Element, and infinitely more desirable than divine Mercy, which they
solicitously fly from, and with all imaginable Artifice and Industry fence
against, as if in a pernicious Malice against themselves, they were sure
'twould be their utter undoing to be happy. Corruption, Temptation, and a dark
cloudy Complexion, with confederate strength and stratagems, besiege and storm
their Imaginations; which having invested, from thence, as a strong Citadel,
they batter down their Reason, so that nothing can be heard or regarded, but
what will take the stronger side, to war against Comfort and God. Display
before them all the amiable Beauties of Infinite Goodness and Love, in its
wonderful descents to the Chief of Sinners, with whose Transgressions their
sober Considerations cannot dare to equal their own: Represent to their view in
a clear Heaven of Light, the incomprehensible Glories and Condescensions of the
ever to be admired and adored Son of Righteousness; whose astonishing Free
Grace induced him to be willing for the sake of lost Mankind, to suffer an
Eclipse under that thick Cloud of divine Vengeance, which was due for the Sins,
not of one particular Sinner only, but of the whole World; and the Merit of
whose Passion was sufficient to expiate the Sins of infinite Worlds; yet will
they scarce allow this to be a balance for their own. Lay open before their
Eyes the rich and glorious Treasury of the divine Promises, and gracious
Invitations to such as are under like Circumstances with theirs; and therefore
to them as fully and clearly, as if their Names were engraven in the Front of
every one of those Bonds upon God's Fidelity, or these written upon their own
Foreheads, or proclaimed to them by name from Heaven. Discover to them with the
brightest Evidence, that their Spirit, Condition, Frame, and Preparations, are
really such as God has described and required, as the sole Conditions of his
Grace and Mercy; and that there is as perfect an Agreement betwixt their inward
Sensations and State, and those God will certainly own and embrace with his
Love, as can reasonably be expected and desired: Yet will they find some
subtle, cunning, studied evasions and shifts to persuade themselves and others,
that they have some reason to be mad, in rejecting all; and will stiffly argue
against their own inward sense and feeling, and lie against their own
Experience, rather than by receiving these Comforts, comply with the Bounty and
Kindness of Heaven, that so freely and graciously tenders them.

Why then do thou contend against thy self, oh my Soul! and quarrel with the
admirable Condescensions, the most bountiful Tenders, Largess, and Munificence
of Heaven? Art thou weary of thy Sins, and under a practical Conviction of
their abominable offensiveness to God, heartily willing to relinquish all;
following thy desires and resolutions hereof with serious Cares and Endeavors,
not abiding the very thoughts or hankerings of thy heart that lean toward
them, carefully avoiding all Occasions, Temptations, Motions, which might
irritate thee to commit them, in indignation and revenge against thy self for
indulging thy self in them; now resolutely bent with the Aid of God to mortify
them, and not to spare hands, feet, or eyes, the most sweet and endearing
Dalilahs, thy Master-reigning Sins, constitutional, customary, pleasing,
profitable Corruptions, recommended by Age, Calling, public Allowance,
Practice, which to forbear may expose to Scoffs, Scorns, Sufferings, Death it
self, as in Times of Persecution. Art thou daily in bitterness of Soul for
them? Are they evermore in their odious Nature and Aggravations before thee?
Art thou watchful against them, and unto the contrary Duties, Graces, and holy
Exercises, that there is not one Law of God, which it is not thy earnest desire
and labor to observe, heartily imploring the strength of Heaven to engage in
all for thee, and manifest its Might in thy Weakness? And when thou have done
thy best, have thou learnt to deny thy self as an unprofitable Servant, having
only done what (nay far less than) thou ought? Not daring to omit any part
of thy Work, nor when done most exactly, to make a Christ of it: but committing
thy Person and Performances, by Faith into his gracious hands, to be presented
to his Father, sprinkled with his Blood of Satisfaction, perfumed with his
Incense of Intercession; nothing but divine Free Grace, through Christ's
Mediation, becomes the sole Support and Stay of thy Hopes, as well as the
Foundation of thy Faith; maintaining in all a never-ceasing Jealousy over thy
slippery, treacherous heart, lest it stain all thy Actions with Impurity, or
corrupt all thy Intentions by Hypocrisy; a Sin to be feared and wrestled
against, above all other, thy perpetual dread and hate? Is this thy state,
frame, and deportment? And yet do thou boggle at the Promises, and start
aside in aversation from, or a rejection of their refreshing Consolations, upon
I know not what frivolous Pretenses? Oh thy Folly! Oh thy Fury! For beside the
infinite wrong to thy self, both as a knocking of the Wheels, that thou do
but drive heavily in God's Service, and a living in the confines or a corner of
Hell, when Heaven is opening to thee its everlasting Gates; thou also
blasphemest the unconfinable Goodness and Love of thy heavenly Father, the
affectionate Bowels and Grace of thy compassionate Redeemer; thou grievest the
Holy sealing Spirit of Grace and Peace, and give the lie to the Promises;
Sins as Hellish, as any thou have already renounced and forsaken. Has Almighty
Love and Grace checked the exorbitancies of thy dissolute licentious Will and
Affections, bounded the raging Sea of thy Lusts, insomuch that thou dare not,
wilt'st not pass the limits he has confined thee to by his Laws? Has God
enabled thee with a free undissembled Consent to embrace the Conditions of the
Covenant, in repenting, and cheerfully giving up thy self to be governed in all
things by the ever-blessed Son of God, which is a performance of thy part of
the Covenant? And can thou conceit that infinite Fidelity, which gives thee
the power to do all this, and works in thee to observe thy part, will not be
real and faithful, in perfecting what concerns himself on his part, but that
his Covenant is mere Collusion; that he has only brought thee into a Fool's
Paradise, and all his great and precious Promises, are only great and pompous
Nothings, not worthy to be relied on? That he has done all this for thee,
carried thee thorough the burden and heat of the day, and tenders thee thine
Hire, yet will be angry if thou accept it. For why do thou not receive and
enjoy the Comforts of the Promises and Perfections of God, so liberally
presented to thy embracement, so sweetly by their amiable Aspect inviting thee?
Is it because they do not suit thee, are not proper and sufficient to revive
thee? Is it because thou need them not, desire them not? No, nothing of
this Nature. What then is the matter, oh my Soul? They are fit for thee, but
thou art not fit for them, not duly prepared. That Is something, if true. But
who told thee so, God or the Devil? If God, show the Scripture. Out of the Law
and Testimony must thou produce something more than I have described, that God
requires to qualify thee for his Mercy. Something more than an unfergned
owning his Covenant, in serious resolution, care, endeavor, and industrious,
laborious diligence to go through with thy part of it, under the influence of
his Power and Grace, and Holy Spirit. Does Satan tell thee that this is not due
Preparation? And do thou, dare thou believe him rather than God? God forbid.

Where then do thou stick? What art thou afraid of? Is there any thing to be
feared but Sin? There it is: Thou art afraid of sinning by too hasty applying
the Promises for thy revival. A very laudable Fear. It Is well that Sin is
dreadful. Stand to that. Be then also afraid to sin, by refusing to apply them,
thereby continuing thy perplexities. For it is very certain, 1. That it is a Sin
not to serve God cheerfully, with Love; especially when he has done for us
whatever is necessary to engage us thereto. If he have in reality prepared thee
for those Comforts, which he has prepared for thee, he has done that, upon
account whereof he will expect thy ready, ingenuous, affectionate Obedience,
whether thou be satisfied as to thy Preparations or no. But if thou still
refusest his Comforts, and protractest thy Troubles, thou eludest the highest
Engagement to love him, and in despite of his Goodness perseverest to do his
work as a Slave only, wilt not as a Child, which is a high Affront to thy
Father. 2. It Is a Sin to reject God's Offers, a Scorn put upon his Goodness to
refuse his Free Gifts. When he creates a Storm in our Thoughts, and drives us
before the blast of his Indignation, into the Port of real Holiness, then does
he generously tender us those needful refreshments, which will revive our
weather-beaten Souls; can we now spurn them away from us, and be innocent? Here
therefore is Sin on both hands. How shall we cast the balance? We must not sin
our selves into Comfort, neither must we sin it away. Cut the hair. Well then,
all depends upon this, the determination, what is too hasty, what too slow
application of Promises? And this upon the preceding Quaere, what is due
Preparation? For to apply Promises, when rightly qualified, is no Sin, but
Duty; therefore to neglect it is Sin. Then are we too hasty, when we run before
we are bidden, not otherwise. God by creating in us the pre-required
Promise-dispositions, bids us take all the Blessings in the Promise which they
dispose for. When the Condition is performed, the Covenant is a Command to
accept its Merey, which cannot be refused without disobedience to God. 'Twould
be strange petulancy, when Christ says, Come ye Blessed of my Father, inher it
the Kingdom, etc. to reply, no, I dare not, I am not qualified. Such is the
refusal to inherit his Comforts, when he has wrought in us their Conditions.
And if the forementioned be not, where are they? Remember, Oh my Soul, thou
live not under the Covenant of Works, but of Grace: And if thou doubtest of
thy Preparations, resume thy Work, try them better, make them sounder, that thy
second and renewed Essays may be unquestionable. Yet remember also, that it is a
grievous Sin to belie thy self, and deny God's Work; he expects thou should
consider, and own the Operation of his Hands, and give him the Glory of the
Fruits of his Love in thy Regeneration. Take heed of detaining the Truth in the
Prison of Unrighteousness: Be just to God and thy self. Do not dare to
blaspheme his Grace, by attributing it to other Causes. As thou must not
flatter thy self, so neither forswear the Grace of God.


If thou yet allege, that it is God's Work to comfort by his Spirit, who does
it by inclining the heart to accept of his Tenders, which thou do not
experience; but rather he renews thy Troubles and Disquiets, by presenting new
Matter, or setting on the old; therefore should thou assume to thy self the
Solace of the Promises; 'twould not be a Comfort of God's making, but thine
own, and so a mere Fallacy put upon thy Conscience.

I answer, 1. by Retort: If God do his part to incline thy heart to accept of
Peace, but thou resistest him, and against his Will resumest thy Troubles, and
quenchest those Motions of his Spirit, that were intended to allay thy
Disquiets, and create Peace, whose is the Fault now? That this may be cleared,

I answer, 2. That God's moral Motion is antecedent to, and leads all Physical,
his or ours. For since he inclines in a way suitable to our Nature, as he
himself, as we, and all rational Natures act, where the Mind and Reason leads
the Will, and inclines it; therefore by presenting Objects and Reasons, urging
and enforcing them by sense and feeling of misery, disquiet of heart, and woe,
God strives with thy Will to move it freely, to embrace those freely-offer'd
Comforts, without which thou perceivest thy self plainly to be ready to sink
into Horror and Despair. But thou against both divine Reason, and thine own
Sense, stiffly, irrationally, and malapartly refusest to yield to either; and
yet art so sottish as to impute thy Frenzy to God. Avaunt Blasphemy. If the
mighty important Perswasives of Heaven cannot prevail upon thee as a Man, never
imagine that the Almightiness of God will miraculously drag thee as a Beast, or
a Block, into that Paradise of Rest and Satisfaction, which now thou startlest
and tremblest at. And understand that if thou be'st a Rebel against the Reason
of God, thou will also be a Fighter against the Power of God. If a rational
Mind act in repugnancy to his Wisdom, much more will an irrational, brutish
Will against his Omnipotence; there being less aversation in any Man to be
subdued by the Golden Liberty of forcible Arguments, than the Iron-necessity of
Club-Law.

The result is, that to refuse divine Comforts when qualified for them, is an
evident fighting against God, and to deny our Qualifications, when heartily
grieved for, and undissembledly willing and active to divorce from, and never
return to any thing displeasing to God, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and
unfeignedly desirous, and diligent to espouse the Divine Interest in all
things, without tergiversation or delay: This is an apparent Rebellion and Lie
against the Holy Ghost, and our own Souls; which, Oh my Soul, there is an
absolute necessity, that thou should be much more afraid of, than thy mere
imaginary Presumption in accepting that which is so clearly and freely tendered
to thee by God. And what do thou mean herein, oh foolish and unkind to thy
self, oh ungrateful, and impious against God, that the wise, and rich, and
sweet Provisions of Heaven, in boundless Compassions to thy Necessity and
Misery, laid at thy Feet, should be trod in the Dirt? That thou will not
vouchsafe to be so merciful to thy self, and respectful to God, as to permit
his healing Balms to be poured into thy bleeding Wounds; but in a blind Zeal
against thy unworthy self, or an over-righteous Revenge against thy abhorred
Sins, or an humorous Peevishness, or Pertinacy of Spirit, or I know not what,
woundest those gracious Hands, which, in infinite Tenderness and Commiseration,
offer so benignly, by these most effectual Medicines against all Anxiety and
Woe, to deliver thee out of thy wearisome Hospital, into an everlasting Heaven
of Pleasure, Joy, Peace, Soundness, Safety, Rest, and Consolation? Oh thy
Madness! to choose thy Miseries and Vexations, rather than so blessed an hope,
so unutterable Happiness. What! be fond of Hell, and dote on thy Torment, and
prefer thy Prelibations of eternal Plagues and Horrors, before these Earnests
of those unspeakably glorious, future Recompenses? Is it not even so? This is
and well may it be for a Lamentation.

CHAP. XVII. Instructive Inferences.
VVAving the Corrective Deductions, because in part coincident with the
Elenctical, as I have managed them, I shall close all with the Instructive. And
here, as all along I have done, I shall especially direct about Spiritual
Comfort, as the foundation of, and introductive to all other that is worthy of
Name.

Every disquieted Heart is melted into a passionate longing after Peace. If it
can but see any dawnings of a lightsom day of Joy, after the gloomy night of
its Troubles: If after all its tremulous Palpitations, and Passions, and
Horrors, it may be supported with the Revivings of the least glimmering Hope,
that God will entertain any Thoughts of Reconciliation; it seems to glory in a
willingness to be, or do any thing; to submit to any Terms whatever, that may
be conducible to this happy and amicable Closure. To promote this blessed End,
and compromise of differences betwixt incensed Heaven, and trembling, afflicted
Souls, the Son of God has done his part in the way of Mediation, as the Father
has done his, by revealing his Covenant and Promise, with the Terms upon which
he will be at Peace, and his readiness to embrace every one that submits to
them; both the Father and the Son have farther contributed toward this, by the
Mission of the Holy Ghost, the Comforter, who waits in the Ministry of God's
Word, and other Ordinances, to be gracious to unworthy Sinners, in illuminating
their Minds, and bowing their Hearts and Wills, to comply with the Will of God,
and entertain Conditions of Peace, and accept of their own Mercy. God's
Ministers also, under these divine Influences, take their Task in hand, as
Instruments by way of Proposal, in explicating, and directing about these
Terms; in propounding, offering, urging, counselling, persuading, exhorting to
yield to them: And unworthy I, amongst the rest, would here contribute my Mite,
to promote the Establishment of true and solid Consolation, in an endeavor to
guide (doctrinally, as my Lord and Master does physically and efficaciously)
poor wandering Feet into the Psalmist's experimented way to Peace, as far as
there are any Lineaments and Footsteps thereof in the Psalm; and this with all
convenient brevity, because some of the Rules have upon other Occasions offered
themselves to Consideration.

1. Be Men of Thoughts. Exercise your selves in Meditation. As there can be no
Discomfort, so neither Comfort, without a multitude of Thoughts. For if they
only swim upon the Surface of the Mind, they will but introduce a superficial
Trouble or Rest. Thoughts that sink, and soak in, go to the bottom, and reach
the most intimate Recesses of the Soul (as the Psalmist's, in intimo meo)
Thoughts that stick by us, and are not easily shak'd off, but follow us night
and day, these are most cumbersome or comfortable. Men of desultory Minds, that
cannot settle their Cogitations, but rove, and ramble, and skip like a Squirrel
from Bough to Bough, from Tree to Tree, are here, and there, and every where,
throughout all the Ramifications of Thoughts, yet no where fixed; as a
Weathercock may now face a blustering Storm, and in a moment the sweet and
refreshing Sun, but never feel any thing, never taste any durable Disquiets or
Joys. Lay up therefore a good Stock beforehand of heart-relieving
Considerations, as an Antidote to all sadning, molesting Passions. This no
doubt was the Psalmist's Practice. Those reviving Meditations, which he
afterward digested into this Psalm, did dwell in his mind before, in, and upon
the first Assaults of his Trouble, and did their Work within him before he
committed this Narrative to Writing. What he felt then, he here discovers.
'Twould be nauseous to recollect and repeat here those Cogitations, which I
have all this while been observing out of the Psalm, that influenced his
troubled heart, and established it in Peace; tedious to make new Observations
throughout the Psalm, where they very plentifully occur. I shall only therefore
take notice of a few Verses, and I cannot furnish you with a richer Treasury of
pertinent, calming, comforting Thoughts, than are presented in Ver. 12, etc.
Take it according to the Translation. Blessed is the Man whom thou chast'nest,
O Lord, and teach out of thy Law. 13. That thou may give him Rest from
the days of Adversity, until the Pit be dug for the Wicked. 14. For the Lord
will not cast off his People, neither will be forsake his Inheritance. 15. But
Judgment shall return unto Righteousness, and all the Upright in heart shall
follow it. Here we behold the Condition of Man, troublous under chast'ning:
But, 1. It Is comfortable in that it is only Child-like Discipline, as the Word
both in Hebrew and Greek imports, and therefore proceeds from the Wisdom,
Heart, Love, and compassionate Bowels of a Father. There cannot be more smart
in the Rod, which is at the worst but a finite Evil, than there is sweet in the
Love that manages it, and is of an infinite Virtue and Satisfactoriness. Then
sense and feeling of that, is bitter and grievous, but the importance most
pleasing and delectable. How lamentable would thy Case be, should the Lord
spare the Rod, and leave thee to harden thy self in thy evil Manners; that is,
forbear all Designings for thy good, that thy Damnation may become more
inevitable, and supersede his Corrections preventive of thy Sins and Woes, that
Hell may the more certainly devour and consume thee? Happy Cross, that is an
Index of the good Will of God, that is a demonstration that thou art a Child of
God, Heb. 12.5, 6, 7, 8, 9. 2. It Is a blessed thing to be chastized, the
greatest Curse to be forborne, as a Token of being devoted to everlasting
Curses. God has not pardoned those he does not punish; no, their Guilt escapes
a present Reckoning, because the Righteous Judge intends to pay them home in
another World. If thy Father in Heaven forbear thee not, it is because he has
forgiven thee the eternal Penalty; and that is a blessed thing indeed, Psalm.
32.1, 2. Sin must smart; if thou be'st made to feel its Evil by Corrections
now, it is to prevent the more grievous Pains of another Life. God designs thy
good by bringing upon thee these Evils, Heb. 12.10. and his Purposes can never
admit of a frustration. 3. These Chastenings are only a burden laid upon one,
who by Grace is, or shall be made strong, or mighty, to bear and improve them.
It Is not Adam Earthly Man, nor Enosh sickly, weak Man, but [Haggeber] the
strong, (...) from (...) Emphat. and (...) praevaluit, robustut fuit.
mighty Man, with an Emphasis, whom God picks out to bless with his
Chastenings. If they do not find him so, they shall be Means of Grace to make
him so; God who is Faithful (and that supposes a Promise) will not suffer to be
tempted above ability, but with the Temptation will also make a way to escape,
that he may be able to bear it, 1 Cor. 10.13. Be thou never so weak, diffident,
desponding in thy self; yet if God call thee out to Affliction, thou art
strong, not in thy self. but in him; he is with thee, Psalm. 23.4. Yea, though I
walk through the Valley of the shadow of Death, I will fear no Evil, for thou
art with me: Thy Rod and thy Staff they comfort me. Here Is strong Confidence,
strong Support, and it had a strong Foundation, Ver. 3. He restores my Soul,
he leads me in the Paths of Righteousness, for his Names sake, Restoring,
turning again, Psalm. 60.1. bringing back ( Ezekiel. 38.8.) the Soul, and leading
it. strengthens it to do or suffer any thing. Isai. 41.9, 10, 13. Thou art my
Servant, I have chosen thee, and not cast thee away; which being laid as a
Foundation, then, 10. Fear thou not, for I am with thee; be not dismayed, for I
am thy God, I will strengthen thee, yea, I will help thee, yea, I will uphold
thee with the right hand of my Righteousness. 13. I, the Lord thy God will hold
thy right hand, saying unto thee, Fear not, I will help thee, etc. Deuteronomy. 33.26.
There is none like unto the God of Jesurun, who rides upon the Heaven in thy
help, and in his Excellency on the Sky. The Eternal God is thy Refuge, and
underneath are the Everlasting Arms. He is a mighty Man indeed who thus, under
chastening, is supported by the Almighty Power of God. 4. It Is Jehovah, the
Performer of Promises, that chastizes; and therefore his chastening it self, is
not the Execution of the Old-Covenant Threatening to a Child of God, but a
fulfilling of a New Covenant Promise. Psalm. 89. If the Children of him whom God
makes his Firstborn, Ver. 27. and his Throne as the days of Heaven, Ver. 29.
do forsake my Law, etc. Ver. 30. Then will I visit their Transgression with the
Rod, and their Iniquity with Stripes. I call this a Promise, not a Threat, nor
a bare Asseveration (because inserted as Matter of Privilege, amidst a Cluster
of Promises, true in a sense of David, but redounding to Christ and his
Children and Seed, Heb. 2.13. Is. 53.10.) But (as to Israel in Egypt, so) to
all his spiritual Israel, when in their most grievous Agonies and Oppressions,
he reveals himself by his Name Jehovah, in a peculiar manner: For to no
Condition are more Promises made, to none more fulfilled. It Is a blessed thing
indeed, under all the most doleful Circumstances of Providence, to inherit in
Jehovah all the Promises. In this art thou richer under the very depth of
Poverty and Distress, than in the Gain of infinite Worlds. 5. God's Corrections
are Instructions; the Word signifies both; and however to the Children of God,
they are inseparable. If God thus teach, with a strong Hand, he will also teach
out of his Law. Job 34.31, 32. Elihu there accounts it a very proper Petition,
Surely it is meet to be said to God, I have born Chastisement, I will not
offend any more; what I see not, teach thou me: If I have done Iniquity, I will
do no more. Therefore David, Psalm. 119.71. professes, It is good for me that I
have been afflicted, that I might learn thy Statutes. Our blessed Redeemer was
in this an excellent Pattern, Heb. 5.8. Though he were a Son, yet learned he
Obedience by the things which he suffered. And God Almighty declares his
consident expectation of this from his People, Zeph. 3.7. I said, surely thou will fear me, thou will receive Instruction, (which supposes some to give it)
so their dwelling should not be cut off, howsoever I punished them. Indeed if
then our Ears be not opened to Discipline, and our Instruction sealed, when God
sets on his teachings with Blows, we are very bad Scholars. But Mic. 6.9. The
Lords Voice (the voice of his Rod) cries unto the City, and Wisdom shall see
thy Name, hear ye the Rod, (the Lord's voice in it) and him that has appointed
it. 6. God chastens in order to Rest. Rest from Adversity, and the Days of
Adversity. Rest not merited, but given, and given by Jehovah, that can command
it, who is a self-mover, and free in his Communications, and when in thee
there is nothing to be a motive to his Bounty, can and does take Arguments from
himself. Thy Miseries shall have an end, and a happy end. They shall issue in
that which is an earnest and pledge of the highest Happiness, Rest, Everlasting
Rest. Thy Weekday Labors, and Sorrows, and Sufferings, shall terminate in a
blessed Sabbatism; even in this Life if God see it good, however in the Life to
come, God will give it, and then who can withhold it? 7. All the while thou art
in Misery thou live under distinguishing Mercy. Thou art not ranked with the
Wicked, nor reserved for their Woes. In chastening thee God differences thee
from them, who though they live in a Paradise of Prosperity, yet even there (as
Adam) are digging their own Graves, and burying all their good Fortunes. Whilst
the Lord chastens thee out of thy Sins they are sinning themselves into
Plagues, beyond the dimension of Chastenings. Thou art only carried through a
blessed Purgatory, they into and left in the Pit of Perdition, which their own
Sins and God's Justice are preparing for them; and thy Sufferings shall last no
longer, than till their Iniquities be full, and the Pit made ready to receive
them, in which work both their own Wickedness, and Divine Vengeance make have.
Their Foot shall slide in due time, for the day of their Calamity is at hand,
and the things that shall come upon them make have. For the Lord shall judge
his People, and repent himself for his Servants, when he sees that their Power
is gone, and there is none shut up or left, Deuteronomy. 32.35, 36. Rejoice, Ob ye
Nations therefore with his People, Ver. 43. Therefore thus says the Lord God
of Hosts, Ob my People that dwell in Zion, be not afraid of the Assyrian, He
shall smite thee with a Rod, and shall lift up his Staff against thee after the
manner of Egypt. For yet a very little while and the Indignation shall cease
and mine Anger in their Destruction, Isa. 10.24, 25. 8. Thy Affliction is not
unto Rejection and Desertion, as in the Wicked. The Lord will not cast off and
forsake, though he chasten, ver. 14. no, but own and return unto his Servants.
Although he may sometimes seem to depart, yet it is with yerning Bowels, and a
returning Heart, and the reason of this is that 9. He owns his Propriety, even
when he corrects. They are his People, his Inheritance, an Inheritance that
cannot, that shall not be alienated. The Devil and Wicked Men may by God's
Permission usurp and make a forcible Intrusion and Entry, but the legal Right
abides with God, and he will infallibly recover it, in his own way and time.
Joh. 10.27, 28, 29. My Sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow
me, and I give unto them Eternal Life, and they shall never perish, neither
shall any pluck them out of my hand. My Father which gave them me is greater
than all, and no Man is able to pluck them out of my Fathers hand. 10. The Lord
will be thy Patron and Advocate, to plead thy Righteous cause, that although
Judgment be departed from Righteousness, i. e. Unrighteous Judgment be past
against thee, yet God will turn the Scales, and cause Judgment at length to
weigh thee in a right Balance, and sentence shall be given on thy side. 11. Thy
Affliction shall issue in Honor and Advancement. When God exalts Righteousness
thou shall be with it, follow after it, have like fare with it; whether it be
done in this World or the future. If in this Life you continue under these
Depressions, yet the honor of a glorious Kingdom is reserved for you at that
day, when Judgment shall infallibly return to Righteousness. Lastly, Hence it
highly concerns you to consider, and search into your Hearts, that you may know
your own Vprightness and Righteousness, for upon this depends all. None of
these Privileges appertain to Hypocrites, or wicked Persons in State. But no
sincere Soul shall fail of obtaining them, in one kind or other. Let your
thoughts therefore be much employed within. Reflect upon your selves and see
what title you have to so rich Blessings. If you can approve your selves in
Integrity to God, you shall have Comfort and Joy unspeakable and full of Glory,
(even in and under your sorest Trials) from the experience of Divine Goodness
in all these Particulars. Busy therefore your Meditations mainly about this.
Dive into the bottom of your own Hearts, to see whether any hid Treasure lie
there. Never give your Thoughts rest till they either find it, or bring it. You
are undone, if Afflictions meet you rotten at Heart. Take no content in any
thing, lay out your Thoughts about nothing else, till thy bring you in the
assurance that there is a sound root of Grace planted in your Souls. Let your
Minds perpetually work this way. All thoughts will be, cannot but be troubling,
perplexing, till they be sanctified by a Principle of Divine Life. Therefore,
2. Endeavor to gain Ability to give Law to your Thoughts, and duly to govern
them. A Man can never enjoy Peace till he can command at home. Unruly Rebel
Thoughts will ever be creating new Broyls. Master your Thoughts by Thoughts.
Nothing is more imperious or impotent. Masculine generous Cogitations possess a
kind of Omnipotency, nothing can resist them. Engage your Minds about important
matters, and engage them thoroughly, and those Meditations will obtain the
Empire. To think seriously of God, his Attributes and Providence, and dwell
thereon; to take a full view of the Love and Bloodshed of the Son of God, his
Covenant and the Provisions of it, to consider and weigh thoroughly the
Cursedness and Offensiveness of Sin, the Glory of a virtuous Heart and Life; to
take a due prospect of the Terror of Death, Judgment and Hell, and the
Blessedness and everlasting Joys of Heaven is the beginning of that Wisdom,
which alone will overruled your Hearts for God. Reflections upon these things
will break in with such an Emphasis, Energy, and Awe upon your Consciences,
that vain and evil Cogitations cannot bear up against them, but will be
suppressed and dashed out of Countenance. The Psalmist with one of these
Considerations, viz. that of the Divine, allpenetrating Eye of Providence,
supposed himself an overmatch for, and able as with a smooth Stone out of the
Brook, to strike dead the barbarous profligate Goliahs, that raged in the
devastation and slaughter of the Heritage of the Lord, Ver. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10,
11. And what will not a multitude of such Thoughts effect upon an attentive and
inclinable Mind and Conscience, where they are made Familiar, Domestic, and
Perpetual Companions? If hereby thou attainest to victory over frothy, vile,
corrupt Thoughts, that they dare no more make Insurrections; a foundation is
laid for an entire conquest over disconsolate Thoughts, which are their
Offspring, acknowledging none other Original, but live, move and have their
being in them. For nothing has power to discompose us, till it first corrupt
us. Sin first pollutes, then pains us. Till our Consciences be wounded by it,
they do not, cannot rationally worry us. Prevent the offense against God and
you bind Conscience to the Good-behaviour, and so to the Peace. Remove the
Provocation to Heaven by true Repentance, and you put an end to, and nonsuit
the quarrels of Conscience. Now this is done by nothing more effectually than
by Thoughts. Indeed nothing can do it but by the instrumentality of Thoughts.
When good Thoughts counterwork evil, then will refreshing, solacing Thoughts
overcome and eject disquieting.
Make this then, Oh my Soul, thy first care, to set up God in thy Thoughts, to
overruled and guide them. Erect a Throne in thy Mind for the Son of God, give
him there the sole power of the Militia of Peace and War, and then amongst
other Opposers every thought will be brought into captivity to the obedience of
Christ, 2 Cor. 10.5. If thy Thoughts acknowledge no external Sovereign, they
will be ungovernable; without foreign aid too hard for thee. There is a Prince,
the Prince of the Power of the Air, who has already usurpt and rules in the
corrupt part of thy Mind, and leads thy Thoughts into rebellion against, and
disobedience to that which is the true Law of thy Mind, the remaining
Principles of the Light and Law of Nature within thee, and also the Light and
Law of the Spirit of Life in the Scriptures. And these two Satan and the
corruption of thy Mind, are odds to the relics of the Divine Image in thee.
It Is therefore of absolute necessity, that a higher Prince be admitted, The
King of Glory, The Prince of Peace, to expel that strong One, and keep thy Mind
stayed in himself, that it may be kept in perfect Peace, Isa 26.3. Let God have
a Primacy of order, as well as Supremacy in thy Thoughts. Thus the Psalmist
here, the first thing in his Mind and Mouth is God. Let him so be in all thy
Thoughts. Season and Sanctify, sweeten all thy other Meditations with thoughts
of God. So He, likewise in this Psalm, [viz. God] fills up all, and is at every
end and turn, in the Holy Man's Memory and Contemplations. That Thought which
forgets and leaves out God, may let in Satan. Begin then, proceed, and end with
God. This all prescribe, even Heathens.

In one thing delight and quiet thy self, viz. to pass from one public Action
to another, with remembrance of God.

Mark. Ant. (...),

Marc. Antonin. Lib. 6.. 7. (...), etc. (...), etc.

Arrian. Lib. 2. Cap. 18. (...).

Theocr. Idyl. 17. Ab Jove Principium,

Virg. Eccl. 3 (...).

Gr. Naz. in Acrostic. The conflict is great, the work divine, it concerns a
Kingdom, it concerns Liberty, etc. Be mindful of God, etc. Epictet. Nazianzen
more Christianly gives the sense of Theocritus and Virgil.

Make God the beginning and end of all things.

I need no more.

Consideration then is the beginning of Consolation. Meditation is the Medicine
of the Mind, to heal its sickly, because disorderly, turbulent, unruly
Passions. If thou will not, O my Soul, oblige thy self to it, thou stiflest thy
Peace in the Birth, or stranglest it in the Cradle, and adoptest thy Disquiets
a new, as if in Love with thine own Woe. But then if thou can not guide and
rule thy Thoughts, if thou can not direct them to proper Subjects, and call
them off from such as are unsuitable, if they will be Lords and Masters, and
run without bidding in a licentious Imperiousness, Primum argumentum compositae
mentis existirpor, posse consistere, and secum morari. Seneca, Ep. 2.
from one thing to another; and be no where fixed, they will get advantage by
nothing; according to the Proverb of the Rolling Stone. Therefore

Command thy self in chief, is a good Monition of Mr. Herbert. If thou losest
the regiment of thine own Mind, and can not bridle the exorbitances of thy
Thoughts, bring them to a beck, like one in Authority keeping them under
control; and if thou have not a good stock of profitable matter, treasured up
in thy Memory, to entertain them with at all times, maintaining thy
Jurisdiction and Dominion over them, to be able to divorce and divert them from
any thing, to any thing, thou can never live in Tranquillity and Peace. Those
Cogitations that break the pale, and run out of course, will still be creating
Civil Wars, and Combustions among thy Passions, and interrupt the Serenity of
thy Conscience.

Hence it is that Meditation is not the immediate duty of, nor proper for the
constitutionally Melancholic, whose temper it is to be too cogitabund, and
their Disease to be altogether unable to biass their Thoughts, and to be too
willing to lay out those Cogitations rather upon any thing than what is Joyous
and Comforting. Let such make use of other Men's Thoughts, rather that their
own, and be more in Company and Conference, than Solitude and Soliloquies. Neme
est ex imprudentioribus qui relinqui sibi debeat. Seneea Ep. 10.
It Is dangerous riding in that Chariot, where there will be no other Company
than the Prince of Darkness; and Melancholy by some is called the Devil's
Chariot. It Is oftener managed by an Evil Spirit than a Good, therefore it is no
Wisdom for a Man to trust himself with it alone. And if trouble of Heart for
Sin degenerate into it, as sometimes it does, it is good to set a guard upon it,
to live under Inspection. A Man can never keep himself secure from Sins or
Sorrows, that has none to keep his House but a dumpish Mind. Think thou, but
not too much, that thy Thoughts do not swallow thee up, as they will if that
black humor prevail within. Get a guide for thy Thoughts, least they misguide
thee into Darkness. And for that end,

3. Get a clear practical notion of God. This was the Psalmist's great relief.
In every Distress he could find an accommodate suitable Satisfaction and Solace
in God. Did the Wicked rage and revel in the Blood of Innocents? His Faith
beholds a revenging Hand ready to execute Judgment for them. Did those
presumptuous Deists, encourage themselves in Cruelty by renouncing Divine
Providence? He understands and convinces them, that it supervises all, even to
the very thoughts of the Heart. Did he feel the treachery and failure of
Friends on Earth? He both knew and found a never failing Friend and Helper in
Heaven, etc. In every Trouble and Exigence he meets with God. Now had he been
unacquainted with his Nature and Perfections we should have seen nothing of all
this; and then in what deplorable Circumstances would he have found himself,
under those surrounding Calamities? Whence could he have taken any
Encouragement? Let us take a view of Men making no such Reflections, and
therefore its likely but little acquainted with such Notions. And the Instance
shall be in his own Companions, 1 Samuel 30.3. David and his Men return to
Ziklag, find it burnt with Fire, their Sons and Daughters taken Captives;
wherefore, ver. 4. They lifted up their Voice and wept, till they had no more
power to weep. Ver. 6. And David was in great distress, for the People spoke of
stoning him, because the Soul of the People was bitter, every Man for his Sons
and for his Daughters. Here was wild work. What fury of Passion, first in
Grief, next in Rage; first they swelt in Tears, then would swim in Blood; and
what would they have been the nearer? To such Excesses will the frenzy of a
drunken Appetite lead Men, that are ignorant of God, or entertain no serious
Considerations of his Excellencies, and their concern in the Government of the
World. Now behold, did not an other Spirit rule in David, a Man acquainted with
God? Yes, a brave Heroical Spirit, Ver. 6. David encouraged [fortified,
garrison'd] himself in the Lord his God. Mark, His knowledge of God, and
Interest in God, now mightily bore up his Heart, and stood him in very good
stead, else might his Spirits have sunk with theirs. But whilst they were
impotent through effeminate or diabolical Passion, he was strong in God. Their
puling and peevishness, did emasculate their Hearts, and melt them into
Pusillanimity and Cowardice, that they did not dare to confront and face this
present hardship: but he became Courageous and Valiant in God, so as with an
undaunted, masculine Fortitude, and greatness of Mind, to triumph over, and
outface the imminent Storm, and work his way through it, though with redoubled
Violence, from both Enemies and Friends, it rushed upon him.

And truly since all our Comfort is originally, and eminently, and consummately
in God, it is impossible to enjoy any sound Quiet, and Heartease, under
ignorance of him. For how should a Man be able to draw and derive Comfort from
he knows not what? But if he see that fullness of all delectable Joys in God,
which are all-sufficient to relieve his Mind, and compensate his sorest
Troubles, (as the Love of God in Christ will) and contemplate, study, and dwell
upon that infiniteness of Soul-satisfying Good, till the inviting amiableness
ravish his Desires, command his Delight, engage his Soul in the most vigorous
pursuit and endeavors to gain an Interest therein; he shall not fail to obtain
that sweet reviving Solace and Peace, in the most acceptable season, which will
place him as in a corner of Heaven. Our Sorrows are more than half removed,
when we gain a sight of their most efficacious Remedies. If a Man at unawares
have drunk Poison, it is no small satisfaction to see and be sure of a prevalent
Antidote. Despair is the sting of Miseries. Be the Storms and Surges never so
high, and beat upon us with seemingly the most fatal Violence, yet if our Hope
can but meet with any Anchor-hold, if we can gain a sight of Land, if we behold
a sufficiency of Help and Security there, our Despondencies only are
Shipwrack'd, we escape. Those Hopes can never perish that steer toward Heaven.
If our Course be guided with an Eye upon the Star, it is safe. But if the very
Heart despair, Psalm. 73.26.
and Hope be sunk, yet that case cannot be desperate, that is under-taken by
God. Almighty Love is never at a loss, either in Ability or Will, to succor
those whom it once Embraces; which if we understand, neither our Help, nor our
Hope, can perish from the Lord. Fix therefore thine Eye here.

In sum, God is all in all, in him (if we will but oblige our selves thereto)
may we behold infinitely more than enough to still the raging of our troubled
Minds, and all engaged in Covenant to meet us more than half way. Pardon of
Sin, Propriety in God, are there promised, and least we should object
incapacity to enjoy and be happy in so rich and glorious Blessings, it is added
as the Crown of all that he will dispose and prepare our Hearts for it, by
engraving thereon his Holy Laws, by that means perfectly removing all
obstructions to our Hopes, and occasions of our Fears, that with a full
assurance we may enter upon our Inheritance, of his Everlasting Consolations.
This he has most plainly revealed, this he does most fully accomplish to his
chosen Servants. If we be partakers of his Nature and Image, through the Law of
the Spirit of Life in our Hearts, setting us free from the Law of Sin and
Death, all is our own; and how is it possible for him that knows all this, that
really believes and feels it, by any scruples and jealousies to make his Life
miserable.

Dispel then, Oh my Soul, those Clouds and Mists that benight thy
Understanding, thereby turning the Day in thy Will and Affections into
Darkness. Endeavor to open the Windows, that the Glory of God, in the Face of
Christ, may shine upon thee with a powerful Ray, to warm, impregnate and spirit
thee, with a new divine Fervor, Strength and Life. Study the Scriptures which
are a bright Beam of the Sun of Righteousness, a fair Pourtraicture of that
Eternal, Essential Word of God, who is the Brightness of his Father's Glory,
the express Image of his Person. Let thy Mind in its Meditation dwell
continually here with delight. To ruminate hereupon Day and Night, is the true
method to attain the soundest Wisdom, even that which is Eternal Life,
consisting in the saving, effectual, transforming, experimental, practical,
fruitional knowledge of the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom be has sent.
Joh. 17.3. 2 Timothy 3.15.
This is Wisdom unto Salvation, through Faith in Christ Jesus. Be thy
Intellectuals as bright as those of an Angel of Light in other things, so as to
understand all Mysteries, Philosophical, Political, Theological, yet if thou
here be in the dark, thou art but a Hell, which though in its Physical being
surrounded with Heaven, yet is at the greatest moral distance from it, and
therefore no wonder if thou never see the day break of Joy, and Rest, and
Peace. Ignorance which some account the Mother of Devotion (but is indeed of
Damnation) is always pregnant with Disquiets, Troubles, Fears. The Night is full
of Terrors, Cant. 3.8. Lucretius adds, As Children by Night, so Men fear in the
Light. Omnia nobis fecimus tenebras; nihil videmus, etc. Sen Ep. 110.
But Seneca corrects him, We make all things darkness to our selves; we see
nothing, neither what is hurtful, nor what is profitable, yet ramble on without
Pause or Prudence. What a mad thing is Impetuousness in the dark. -- But if we
will the Day may dawn: And thus, If a Man will let in the knowledge of things
Humane and Divine, not merely to be dashed, but dyed with it again and again,
recognizing, recollecting what he knows; if he examine what is truly good and
evil, what falsely, if he enquire what is Honest, what is Filthy, and what is
Providence. What can be spoke more wisely, more truly. This he prescribes as a
Remedy against Fear, which he makes the Daughter of Tradition rather than
Truth. A wise Man (and then he must be good, for Wickedness is Madness and
Folly) fears nothing slavishly. Nemo nostrum quid very esset excussit and metum
alter alteri tradidit, ib.
For nothing is formidable but to Ignorance, false Opinion, Improvidence and
Wickedness.

Fix thy self therefore, Oh my Soul, upon the right Basis of Truth, leading to
Goodness, and thou art above Gunshot. Nothing can hurt thee, if it do not
first debauch thee, thy Mind with undue Sentiments, and thy Heart thereby with
corrupt Notions, nothing can disquiet thee, till it debase and abuse first thy
Judgment, and thy Conscience by it. Good Intellectuals will promote good
Morals. Entertain high, noble and worthy Conceptions of God, and every thing
that guides to God, and this will singularly conduce to thy security against
Vice, and to thy establishment in Virtue, and thereby in tranquillity of Mind.
For two things concur to solid Consolation, clearness of Apprehensions, and
calmness of Conscience: Serenity above, Tranquillity below. The worst of Men may
have the one, none but the godly wise have both. The Devil has Light enough in
his Understanding, though he be the Prince of Darkness, his Notions are
sublime, but Peace has he none. A dreadful Storm may rage in the Conscience,
when the Sun shines clear in the Mind; Men of great Parts and Gifts, and deep
Heads, have not always the quietest Hearts. The simple Unlearned, says one,
rise up and take Heaven by Violence, whilst we with all our Learning drop down
into Hell. It Is well if more Scholars be not found in Hell than Heaven. It Is
not how much, but how well a Man knows that is conducible to Peace. On the
other hand the Tempest may be hushed, and Conscience charmed to a stilness, but
then the Heavens above are dark and cloudy, and a new Storm sleeps in its
causes, if thou be an Enemy to God. The Witness within may be gagged a while
that it cannot speak out, The Lion chained and muzzled in his Den, that it
cannot worry thee, but afterward it will be let loose upon thee, armed with the
greater fury, perhaps even in this Life; and it is more tolerable to be lug'd
into Goodness, by a snarling, snatching, tearing Conscience now, than have all
thy Bones broke and devoured by it, and the roaring Lion of Hell in his den of
everlasting Darkness. Woe, woe be to that Man that never wanted, or was without
rest and quiet in his Mind. A dumb Conscience is a dark one, and If the Light
that is in thee be Darkness, how great is that Darkness? If nothing within thee
did ever proclaim War, nothing has right to speak Peace. He that never saw God
as an Enemy, never yet saw Him as a Friend. If thou be ignorant of thy own
State, thou are ignorant of God, unacquainted with his Peace, with his Joy.
Thus, Oh my Soul, if thou be'st ambitious to enjoy any real approvable
quietness in thy Mind, thou must maintain in it clearness of Notion concerning
God. But although there be Light in the Heavens, it may suffer an Eclipse (or
rather thou do, for the Light leaves not the Sun, but the Earth) if thy
Corruptions, as an opaque Body interpose. Wickedness in the Heart opposes the
efficacy of our Notions of God, that although we retain them, we are no better
for them, therefore 'twould be better for us were we without them. None lie
deeper in outer Darkness, than those that ascend highest in Light and Knowledge
in this Life, but improve it not. He that knows his Master's Will, and does it
not, (and so his Master and loves him not) shall be beaten with many stripes.
Our Passions are proportionable to our Sensations. The more enlarged our Minds
are, the more enlarged are our Hearts to receive Comfort from our raised
Speculations, if we conscionably improve them; but if not, so much the more
Anguish, Vexation and Torment. He that knows most of God, knows most to torture
and rack his Conscience for ever, if like a Devil, he notwithstanding it, rebel
against God. If thy Illuminations do not warm thy Affections of Desire and
Love, they will awaken those bitter Passions of Fear, Grief, Horror, and
Despair, as anticipations and earnests of Everlasting Woes.

Labor therefore to superadd to thy knowledge of God a true Notion of thy
self, and thine own estate, absolute and relative, of the latter by the former.
For by what thou feel thy self to be in thy self, must thou judge what thou
art in relation to God; and thus thy inward sense must bottom thy Faith, i. e.
thou may have good ground to believe that God has justified, pardoned,
accepted, adopted thee, and will save thee, if thou feel by inward sense,
that he has Regenerated and Sanctified thee. Thus the Psalmist ere he claim
Propriety in God, ver. 22. lays the Foundation of that Assurance in Conscience
of Innocence and Righteousness, ver. 21. Admit this to be meant of particular
limited doing harm to none, good to all, or only to the Concerned, viz. his
Enemies, that sought his Life: Yet since 'twas such as could approve it self to
God, 'twill infer universal. For particular Justice, etc. is not to be pleaded
before God, if it be but Hypocritical; and such it is, if its Principles,
Motives, Ends, be unsound. But if these be sound, they will certainly be
Introductive of, nay they are Universal Righteousness: That is, if Love to God
and Goodness, respect to his Will and Command, and an Eye to his Glory, lead
and induce thee to Act, and regulate thee in harmlessness, and just dealing
with Men; they will not permit thee to rest there, but with the same Efficacy
and generous Violence urge and command thee into Sobriety and Godlyness: Yea
Love to God and Goodness, is eminently both. Particular Justice then without
Universal is mere Hypocrisy, and upon a bottom so base, so weak, so sandy, no
wise Man dare build the confidence to say, My God, no nor arrogate to himself a
privilege of so noble and eminent a Nature, no nor lastly would a serious
Considerer so much as dare to mention Innocence and Righteousness toward Man,
in a solemn Address to God, without a secret check from his own Conscience for,
and a serious deprecation anent his own Injustice, and Nocency before the
Divine Majesty; had he not some inward Testimony of his Uprightness. We will
then adventure to suppose, this carriage toward Man to be only an instance of
that Catholic Sincerity, whereof the Psalmist was an excellent Pattern, and
mentioned as an aggravating Circumstance, inhancing the guilt of these
Persecutors that brake in Pieces God's People, ver. 3. Viz. That they did this
without any manner of Provocation, merely out of Malice against their Goodness
and Relation to God, and him in particular, only upon false and ungrounded
surmises.

However this be it is certain, that if a Man do not partake of the Divine
Nature, in Holiness, in Faith, Virtue, Knowledge, Temperance, Patience,
Godliness, Brotherly Kindness, Love, he can never make his Calling and Election
sure, 2 Pet. 1.4, 5, 6, 7, 10. i. e. except a Man know God experimentally in
having his Image renewed upon his Soul, he can never know God comfortably in
any true assurance of his Love and Favor, and pardoning Grace; therefore never
solace himself with the being, much less abundance of Peace. Thus then if thou
know not God, thou know not thy self; if thou know not thy self, thou
know not God. Here therefore, Oh my Soul, lay out thine endeavors and
cares, to get a true understanding of thy state, whether truly Sanctified. Thou
have no true peace if not born again to it. Get a distinct notion concerning
the New Birth in general, and thine own in particular: For thou have nothing to
do with any thing in God, if thou be'st not again begotten of God.

Lastly, Endeavor to attain a clear notion of the Covenant of Grace, its
Nature, terms, and Obligation. For, be there never so much Comfort in God, and
never so much need, and disposedness in thee for it; yet what can make God so
far a Debtor to thee, as to necessitate him to bestow it on thee, if he do not
oblige himself thereto? To that Covenant then do thou owe all thy right
unto, and hopes of enjoying God, and his Consolations. If thou found not thy
confidence there, it is lost, and thy self also. No wise Man will neglect the
perusal of those Deeds, by which he holds his Inheritance. Thy Comforts are
indeed but only Copy-bold, look to it.

4. I advised to endeavor a clear understanding of thine absolute state of
Sanctification, under the preceding Particular, upon Supposition of such a
state in Being. But, what if it be not? Non entis nulla est scientia. We know
not that which is not. Least therefore an error be found in the very Foundation
of all, in that which above all things is most essential to, and differential
of true Comfort, my next Rule is about that.

Make sure that thou be converted from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of
Satan to God. Lay the Ground Work of thy Peace in true Penitence. For as
Seneca, Fidelissimus ad honesta, ex Poenitentia transitus. I subjoyn, ad
solantia. Not. quaest 1.3. init.
Repentance most undeceivingly leads to honesty and peace. Thou can never
pass by Land to Paradise, but by Water, the Sea of godly Sorrow. The Laver must
stand betwixt the Tent and the Altar; wash thou must, ere thou can make
Atonement with the Psalmist; thou must be righteous and innocent ere God revive
thee. The Wisdom that descends from above, is first pure, then peaceable, Jam.
3.17. None but the Eagle can face the Sun. A Salamander cannot subsist in
Water, nor a Fish in Fire: Nothing that is unholy can live in the Element of
everlasting Light, Joy, and Rest: None but a true and honest Heart must be
blessed with a Heaven of unperishable Consolation: God will not justify and
encourage Wickedness, by the entail of true Contentation; nor appropriate the
Portion of his Friends to his Enemies. Give the Childrens Bread to Dogs;
neither deny Celestial Manna to his Israel, though in the Wilderness. Even
Rocks shall yield Honey to his People that hearken to his voice, and walk in
his ways, Psalm. 81.13, 16. And he speaks peace only to his People, and holy (or
merciful) ones, Psalm. 85.8. and none are ever made such except only by
Regeneration. The single Eye sees farthest; none but pure Hearts can look into
Heaven, and there see Visions of Peace. If old Simeon wait and hope to see the
Consolations of Israel, he must be [(...)] just and devout, Luke 2.25. which no
Man is by Nature, but only by converting Grace. God alone enjoys himself in
perfect Rest, nor can any thing partake of this Moral Rest, further than it is
happy in a Participation of the nature of God. Whatever is in God, is
necessarily in him, and the Combination of all his Excellencies, is as
necessary as their Existence; it is impossible that any one should be without
all the rest, and the rest without any one. Indeed, they are all but one
Essence, and that one Nature is all undividedly. They are also inseparable in
all their Emanations and Outgoings to his Servants. If any be communicated to
Man, all other that are communicable accompany it. Wherever then the Divine
Life in Holiness diffuses it self, it is seconded with its Individual Companion
Happiness: If a Man have no feeling of this, it is because be has none of the
other.

See to it then, Oh my Soul, that thou be formed after the Similitude of God,
as ever thou hopest for Satisfaction, in and from him. Conformity to the Divine
Will in its Precepts, is indispensibly required in order to inheriting the
Promises. God himself neither will nor can comfort thee, if Ungodlike, but only
by first making thee Godlike; till thou communicate in his Sanctity, thou can
not communicate in his Love; it is impossible to be happy in his Peace, when
thou art miserable in his Enmity; or rationally to conclude that he loves thee,
when thou know he hates thy Lusts, which yet are unseparated from thee, and
therefore have all the reason in the World, to believe that for their sake he
hates thy Person; it is not possible to know, that he respects thee, when thou
know that thou hate Him. To thy Work then, or take thy doom; converted
thou must be, or comforted thou can not be. Oh! as thou iovest thy Life, thy
Peace, and an everlasting state of Glory and Felicity in Heaven, retire into
thy self, Survey all thy inward Recesses, dive into the bottom of that Sea of
filthiness, in which thou art naturally drenched, and at the point of Drowning,
and which casts up all that abominable Mire, and Filth, and Poison, that
renders thee infinitely hateful to God, and rages as a secret Plague, and
Pestilence in thy Heart and Bowels, to gripe and gnaw thee to Death
everlasting. Oh behold, how nasty, odious, detestable, execrable it has made
thee, the very scum and offscouring of the Creation, fit for nothing but the
Dunghill and Dungeon of everlasting darkness, to be consumed in the
ever-burning, unquenchable Tophet of Divine Indignation. Oh look into that foul
loathsome Sty of ordure and rottenness, thy wicked Heart, what Toads, what
Vipers are thence crawling out continually by Legions? Sins of Complexion, Age,
Calling, Customary, Beloved, Master Sins, thy own, thy other Men's, appropriated
by thy Consent, Counsel, Connivence, if not Compulsion. Oh how numerous! Oh how
heinous! How soon did thou begin like a bloody Butcher, thus mortally to
Wound thy self? How long have thou continued with a never ceasing frenzy and
fury, to gore and torture thy self, in every Limb, every Faculty, every Place,
Time, Company, as if thou could never be barbarously enough truculent in
thine own Execution, except thou could create a raging Hell in every
distinct atom of Body and Soul; and by infinite Tormentors, Devils, rack and
rend, and tear thy self, with the most intensive Cruciations. O what a World of
Light, of Love, of Means, of Calls, of Motions, of Motives, of Blessings, of
Prayers, of Vows, Promises, Covenant Engagements, Resolutions, Professions,
Convictions, Corrections, etc. have thou with a shameless sauciness, dared to
tread in the Dirt, and have broke through all the Rampires that Conscience,
Education, Awe, Providence, Law Divine, Humane, and their severest Sanctions
have set up against thee; that in a desperate madness of foolhardy impudence,
thou might spew thy stinking Vomits in the very face of boundless Goodness
and Righteousness. Oh the beastlyness of thy Fleshly Lusts! Oh the
heathenishness of thy Worldly Lusts! Oh the devilishness of thy Spiritual
Wickedness! Could thou but command a view of them in their malignant,
venomous, hellish Nature, all those Infernal Fiends that inhabit the black
Recesses of everlasting Darkness, all the dismal Plagues and Horrors of that
doleful Region of Fire and Brimstone, could not make or present a Spectacle of
greater Formidableness and Deformity: Yet all this is intimately within thee,
cleaving as close to thee as thy very Nature, as inseparable, as thy desire of
it, and delight in it can possibly make it; a sight that would make thee
quiver, be sick, and swoon, and die, should the Lord fully open thine Eyes. Oh
wretched Soul! who shall deliver thee, who shall relieve thee? Thou art as
black as Hell, as foul a sink of Contagious Filth and Putrefaction, as infects
the World, the chief of Sinners, not knowing so much of aggravation in the sin
of Devils themselves, as thou do of thine own, yet do not know the one
half. Oh accursed of God by Nature and Practice! What will thou do? What! will thou plead with thy Maker? Where do thou think to appear? What Mountains and
Rocks will thou call to cover thee, from the face of him that sits upon the
Throne, and from the Wrath of the Lamb? How will thou stand at that dreadful
Tribunal? How dare thou look at God, or into thy self, where thou will find
Creatures of thine own, (Sins I mean) of a more prodigious, frightful hue than
Beelzebub himself. Oh look upon them and tremble, look till thy Heart ache, and
break, and sink, and sweat in an agony of Blood and Woe; look and be in Pangs,
like those of a Woman in Travail; look till the Sluices break open, till thou
can pour out thy strength in a flood of godly Sorrow.

Ah wretch! What have thou done? Whom have thou Wronged, Dishonored,
Crucified, Murdered? First, by thy ungodliness and worldly Lusts, next afresh,
by thy Impenitence, Unbelief, and neglect of the healing Balsam, which he
tenders in his own Blood? Ah Beast, Bedlam, Blood-sucker, Murderer! Have thou
bathed thine Hands in thine own, and the Heart-blood of God? And does it not
cut thee to the Heart? Art thou still offering the most vile, horrid, cruel
Affronts, Indignities, Injuries, to the Eternal Father of Heaven, the Blessed
Jesus, his only begotten, dearly beloved Son, to the Holy Spirit of Promise;
and yet rock and adamant, untouched, undissolved, unaffected? Oh Savage
Monster! Oh barbarous Homicide, Deicide! again to rake in the Heart, and tear
the Flesh, and bore the Hands and Feet, and spit in the Face of infinite Love,
that bleeds over thee in thy Blood, and melts into the tenderest
Commiserations, when thou art drowning thy self in the deepest pit of
Perdition. Did he suffer such dolorous Torturings in his Body, but an
infinitely more intolerable Hell in his Soul, for thy sake, to quicken thee,
even when thou art killing him anew by thy Sin? And does he with such yerning
Bowels of compassion strive with thee, if it be possible to exalt and love thee
into Heaven, when thou debasest and hate, and would sin him if it were
possible into Hell? And yet does not thy Heart relent, and smite, and gall
thee? Oh is this thy kindness to thy Friend, to thy Redeemer, to thy self? Oh!
What do thou deserve for these foul Villainies committed against a Person, of
thee the best deserving in the World? How many Hells? How many tormenting
Devils are thy just reward, for so horrible Affronts, Despites, Scorns put upon
the Majesty and Mercy of Heaven? Oh! What can thou do, or think, or hope in
this lamentable case? Wherewithal will thou come before the Lord? What have
thou to tender as a just Reparation? Or can thou bear up against the fiery
tempest of his devouring Indignation? Oh woe unto thee that ever thou wast
brought out of the Womb of Nothing, to behold thy self in Circumstances so
deplorable, and so little affected, afflicted. This, this is the most miserable
scene of all thy Miseries: To be ready to be spewed out of the Mouth of Jesus,
into the very jaws of the roaring Lion; to be tumbled down out of the bosom of
God, into the everlasting Burnings of the bottomless Pit, and yet be senseless,
secure, fearless, careless, remorseless. Oh astonishment! Oh horror!

Awake, awake, Oh my sense, Oh my stupid, benumbed, brawny Heart; and melt in
the fiery Oven of Wrath, or the warm refreshing Sunshine of Love! Oh Grief and
Anguish! Where do ye inhabit? Whither are ye retired? Oh come and dwell in a
sinful Soul, and pour it out in a penitential Deluge. Oh Almighty Love, shed
abroad thy heart-dissolving Influences, and make the Floods overflow! Oh, in
what bitterness of woe am I, that I have undervalued and trod thee under my
profane Feet, that I have kicked at those Bowels, and even torn out that Heart,
that has yearned over me in the most affectionate degree of Pity and Clemency.
My Bowels, my Bowels, I am pained at my very heart, for the sordid
disingenuousness as well as the bloody barbarousness of my Deportment toward
thee. Oh beloved and blessed Son of God, whom with accursed, cruel, wicked
hands I have crucified, and slain: Whoever were the Instruments yet, 'twas I,
as a principal, meritorious Cause, by my Sin, that was the Judas, the betrayer,
the Jew, the Murderer: I drive the Nails, I pushed forward the Spear, I tore
open thy very Heart to let out that blessed Spring of Water and Blood. 'Twas my
guilt that first made my own, then thy unpolluted Body passible and mortal.
'Twas I that armed the more formidable vengeance of thy Father against thy
innocent Soul: I that set open the floodgates of Divine Wrath, and let in that
terrible Inundation of Miseries upon it, which overwhelmed it, destroyed,
killed it, (as far as was possible for that which was Immortal) and thy Body in
its Ruins. Oh 'twas sinful, I that poured out all those scalding Hells, into
that blessed Soul of the Holy One of God, which melted his Body into a shower
of Blood, that I became as far as possible the Author of the Death of God.
Bleed, Oh my Soul, bleed a deluge over those bleeding Wounds, that dying Heart,
that cruciated Soul of the Crucified Son of God. Oh grieve and mourn bitterly
for thy vexing, rebelling against, and grieving the Spirit of Grace, whom thou
have so often thrust away by quenching his Motions, strangling his Convictions,
resisting his Operations, as if 'twas thy design to frustrate all the methods
of infinite Love for thy Salvation. Oh hateful to God and Man! Will thou not be
stung to the Heart with all, wherewith thou have despited all the kindness, and
goodness, and tenderness of Heaven? Oh my vileness! Oh my baseness! it is
unutterable, it is unsufferable; where can a Parallel be found throughout the
whole Creation? Oh what am I? What have I made my self? An abhorrence to all
Flesh, to all Spirits; and shall I not be so to my self? Is there a poisonful
Serpent on Earth, a squalid Fury in Hell, more virulent and abominable? The
Heart of God, Christ, the Spirit, Angels, Blessed Saints, rise against me; as
the viperous-Brood, the filthy Vomit of Satan, spit out of his Mouth, as like
him in form (or deformity rather, and ugliness) as Hell to Hell. And what now
is thy Portion, Oh miserable Soul! What thy doom? See it, dread it, yet expect
it; for how can thou avoid it? Ah! the bottom of the bottomless abyss of Woe,
the hottest Mansion in the raging Furnace of Divine Wrath; how can thou abide
it? I am tottering upon the very brinks of Hell: Down I fall, I sink, I perish;
What can save me? Who can redeem my Soul from Destruction everlasting? I my
self cannot; no, nor all the created Powers of Heaven and Earth: And have I not
abundant reason to fear, that the blessed Trinunity will not? Oh woeful Soul!
Whither have thou suffered thy Wickedness to hurry thee? What will thou do in
the day of God's fierce Anger, which in a moment may arrest thee, and swallow
thee up? And what Remedy? Where will thou seek, where can thou find security
against that Omnipotent Vengeance, that is ready to Arraign thee? Oh! What will thou do to be saved? Is there any possibility? Is there no Balm in Gilead? Is
there no Physician there? Oh there, there alone is thy Succor; will thou
reject it? In this Perplexity, will thou despise it? Will thou defer and delay
applying thy self to a serious Care, to make use of it? Oh! Be willing, be
forward, be eager to do; nay, to suffer any thing, but the loss of Holiness and
God, that thou may be healed.

I come, Lord, now I come, a poor Prodigal returning to my wits, my self, that
I may return to thee, and with a groaning, oppressed, pained Heart, weary of
Sin the Cause, sick of self, dead to all mine own Righteousness, and every
thing: I thus under the Influence and Conduct of thy Holy Spirit, present my
self at the lowest step of thy Throne, as unfit, unworthy, to lift up mine Eyes
to look thee in the face; and being in a grievous Agony of Woe, because I have
offended thee so hainously, so frequently, so perseveringly, by a Deportment so
dishonest, vile, sordid; I loath my self, and all my fore-past evil ways of
Spiritual and Carnal Wickedness, Omissions, Commissions, Sins of Nature, Heart,
and Life, in Word, or Deed, or Thought; they wound me to the very Soul; I faint
under them; I cannot with patience reflect upon my unuttereble Folly, in living
unto, and under them; I abhor my self, in dust and ashes; I utterly and
eternally abandon them, resolve against, promise, vow, covenant, to be an utter
and implacable Enemy to them. Down all ye Idols of my Heart, Lusts of the Eyes,
Lusts of the Flesh, Pride of Life, Filthiness of Spirit, as well as Flesh. In
good earnest, I now purpose, through thy Aid and Grace, never to return to any
of these Follies more, never, never more; and under the Assistance of thy
Power, I engage my self to the use of all possible means of thy appointment, to
suppress all Motions to Sin, to strengthen and renew my Resolutions daily, to
establish me against Temptations, and carry me on in an assiduous Exercise of
Repentance, till I have no more Sin to repent of, and yet will not account this
any Amends for the Wrong I have done thee, but in an absolute Renunciation of
all that I am, can be, or do, my repenting it self, my holy Duties, my striving
against Sin, the World, the Devil, and my Religious Performances, as altogether
insufficient and unavailable, to give Compensation, or secure me from Justice;
I come despairing of my self, and all the stock I can be furnished with at
home, hopeless and helpless by the whole world, and in an humble and hearty
Prostration of Soul, throw down my self at thy feet, seeking Relief, where
alone it is to be found, and that is in thy self, Oh Lord, thy Son and Spirit;
and therefore with my whole mind, will, desire, delight, and strength, I
freely, heartily, fully give up my self, all my Powers and Possibilities, unto
thee alone, avouching Thee only to be my God, and All-sufficient Goodness, and
Happiness; and therefore, with a lowly Reverence and Submission, I cast my self
as thy sworn Vassal, at thy gracious Footstool, in a sincere and absolute
Choice and Acceptance of Thee, O blessed Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
for my sole Portion and Rest, dedicating my self from my very inmost Soul to
Thee, O Heavenly Father, as my Sovereign Creator, Owner, and Governor, to be
wholly, and unreservedly Thine, entirely at thy Disposal, from the very bottom
of my Heart, devoting the Remainder of my Spirits, Strength, and Life
universally to thy Fear, Love, Honor, Worship, and Service in the Works of
Repentance, and Mortification of my Sin, watchfulness against and resistance of
Temptation, and over my Heart and Way, and diligence in exercising my self unto
Godliness, Righteousness, and Sobriety. And to this purpose as one utterly lost
and undone in my self, with a renewed humble Veneration, I offer up my self
wholly to thee O blessed Redeemer of the World, the only begotten Son of the
Eternal Father, and with a bleeding broken Heart, that has no other relief but
only in and through thee, being in my self a very Hell of Wickedness and Woe,
condemned by thy Law, condemned by mine own Conscience, I lift up mine Eyes,
look unto, and long for thee, O dear Lord Jesus, as my only Savior, Joy, and
Crown; thee I earnestly press after, I value above my Life, my Hopes, my Soul,
heartily approving of pleasing my self in, and closing with that Method of
Salvation, ordained through thee, as the only Mean and Help into the Favor and
Love of God. Therefore, with the All of my Understanding, and Will, and Might,
I choose, and embrace, and honor, and love, and delight, and rejoice in, and
venture my self, my hopes, my happiness, my All upon thee, for ever, and ever,
trusting solely to thy Merit and Mediation, accepting Thee in all thy Offices
and Relations, as Prophet, Priest, King, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification,
Redemption; as my Sovereign Lord and Master, the only Espoused Bridegroom of my
Soul, resolving through thy Grace, to betake my self only to Thee, to be Thine
alone, abrenunciating and disclaiming all that stands in competition with Thee,
and receiving cordially all thy Holy Counsels and Laws, as the only Guide and
Rule of my Thoughts, Affections, Words, and Actions; with a through purpose and
endeavor to take the highest Care, under the Aids of thy Grace, both to
conform in every thing thereto, and boggle at no difficulties, dangers, or
sufferings, which I may expect, or meet with, in these thy ways, but persevere
therein to the end; neither shall any Corruption within, or Temptation from
without, have my heart, or liking, or allowance, so as to withdraw my Soul from
these Holy Resolves. For which end, I cast my self whole and entire upon thy
Free Grace, and Almighty Power, and Holy Spirit, to work in me, both to will,
and to do all, according to thy good pleasure, being firmly engaged to be
Thine, and to take Thee to be Mine, without a Moments farther Procrastination.
Come Holy Ghost, Eternal God, and breathe into my Soul, infuse thy Gifts and
Graces, communicating thy Power, to a poor impotent succourless Sinner, that
here, lo! consecrates himself to Thee, and with a self-resigning Spirit,
resolves to venture all upon thy Conduct and Influence, to be at thy Beck and
Command in all things, not knowing, nor being able, nor therefore willing to do
any thing without thee. Inspire my Mind, direct my Heart, awe my Conscience,
regulate my Life, strengthen and uphold my goings, that notwithstanding mine
own insufficiency, I may by Thee be enlarged in heart, to run in the ways of
thy Commandments. And now, Merciful God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, (through
that All-sufficient Merit, that has procured all Blessings) accept of me, and
own me, as none of mine own, but thy Portion and Inheritance, who have taken
Thee to be mine.

This, this, O my Soul, is the One thing needful to be done in good earnest,
speedily, with an uncontrollable Bent and Steadiness of Will, and never to be
repented of. I am pained in my very Soul for, and heartily bewail my Neglects,
Deferrings, and Aversations. And here I am, blessed Lord, setting to my Seal,
and firmly binding my self in this my Baptismal Covenant, with an irreversible
purpose to act all the remainder of my Life, through thy Mercy and Assistance,
only according to the Tenor of it.

Be serious then here, O my Soul, or thou abjurest all solid Consolation. Thou
can never enjoy good Hopes without a good Conscience: If thou desire to
build high in thy Comforts, be sure thou lay a good Foundation. If thou never
enterest into such Meditations and Resolutions as these, bid everlastingly
adieu to all true Contentation. If thou do not really turn to God, thou turnest
away thy Peace. The Holy Ghost will never be a Comforter, where He is not a
Converter. Except thou be born again of Water, and the Spirit, thou can not
enter into the Kingdom of God, the Kingdom of Peace. See to it therefore, that
thou be raised from thy Death in Trespasses and Sins, as ever thou desire a
Resurrection of thy Joys. No Purity, no Peace.

5. Having thus begun, go on: Make Repentance Mortification, Watchfulness,
Faith, Love, Resignation to the Will of God, thy daily uninterrupted Exercise;
and endeavor to grow in all, and be upright in all, else all is nothing. Make
Sincerity thy great Aim and Endeavor. Hypocrisy is Heritor no where but in
the Land of Darkness, and dismal Woe. Thy Joys will resemble their Parents. If
they be a Cheat, so will they also. Be really good, and eminently so too. Aut
Caesar, aut nullus. Lean Graces do but devour fat Comforts, never enjoy them.
The sweetest promises yield no lasting Refreshment, to fickle hearts
unestablished with Grace. If thy Spiritual Strength be small, when thy standing
in Christianity is great, some secret Disease keeps thee down. Thy Stomach is
foul, makes no good Digestion, some underground Corruption draws in that
Nutriment, those Spirits that should invigorate and increase thy Graces, like a
Worm in the Paunch or Bowels, feeding upon that, which should feed thee, and so
defrauding thee.

Kill then thou must, or be killed: Repentance and Faith, and Mortification,
and Watchfulness, alone must sublevate thee. Engage thy self herein, and make
these a daily Task. Let not thy Sloth, the World, or any sweet Lust, ravish
thy Heart into an hours Neglect, no not a Moments, Resolve and act with the
first, and to the uttermost. Thou art upon the Pits Brink, ready to drop down
into everlasting Horrors, and till thou repentest, have no Foot-hold; nay, thy
Foot is already slipped, thou art tumbling down headlong, and no Mercy can or
will hold thee up, but only as far as it engages thee in Repentance. This is
the sole Relief that thou eanst have from Heaven; nothing else can bring thee
back, raise thee out of the Ditch, return thee into a state of Safety, but only
thy returning this way to God. It Is absolutely impossible, under the present
Economy of Divine Grace, for Mercy it self to save thee, to satisfy thee with
Peace, without Repentance: And no less impossible for thee to satisfy thy
self, in the soundness of thy first Repentance, without Cordial Resolutions,
Cares, Endeavors, in a second daily life-long Repentance and Mortification.

Go over again then with this Work, never present thy self to the Lord without
this Sacrifice, of a broken contrite Heart: As thou renewest thy falls, renew
thy rising by Repentance. That day upon which thou sinnest not, repent not; but
be sure thou omit this Duty upon none other. If there be any failures in thy
first Work, a recognition and renewal of it may redintegrate and rectify thee.
No Man is hearty in that Work, which he is loath to reiterate. Suspect that
Repentance which stands all alone in a single act, and has no Seconds. Be
daily therefore searching thy Heart, and examining thy Life, cast up thy
Accounts at even, reckon with God, and thine own conscience, for the day and
all thy Life past, that thou may not lie down a Debtor to Justice, least it
be required of thee ere the Morning. This is safe, and use will make it sweet.
Should a Traitor to God and thine own Soul lodge with thee in peace but for a
Night, with what face could thou present thy self before thy Judge, should
he arraign thee, and tell thee this Night shall thy Soul be required of thee.
It Is dangerous to dally with Sin, desperate to irritate God. The Curse of any
one Sin unrepented of, and the Wrath and Fiery Indignation of God, are no easy
Pillows to lay thy head upon. Thy sleep will then be sweetest when thy Sin is
sourest; and thy Rest will be most refreshing and comfortable, upon the soft
Downy Bed of a good and pure conscience, purged by Repentance, purifyed by
Faith.

But it is not enough to forsake thy Sin and turn to goodness, with a broken,
bleeding Heart; but the root of Sin must be bound about with a Hoop of Iron,
that it may be deaden'd and spring out no more. Crucify then the Flesh and the
World, and be Crucified to them, and deny so as to mortify Ungodliness, as
well as Worldly Lusts, else thou art not taught by the Grace of God that brings
Salvation, Tit. 2.11. Repentance cuts off the Branches (the acts of Sin) that
are already sprouted out; but thy cares must not only respect what is past or
present, but what may be in future. Therefore must thou engage thy preventive
cares and endeavors in Mortification. Draw out the Heart-Blood of thy Lusts by
cutting them off entirely from thy Heart and Affections. That accounted so
truculent a Word of Caesar to his Soldiers at Pharsalia, strike at the face,
which gave him the Victory, is no cruelty, but good policy here, and mercy to
thy self, and will be Crowned with like Success. That which is most lovely in
thy Corruptions, most pleasing to thy sense; must be first laid at, strike at
their Beauty, turn that into deformity, and thou winnest the Day. They live
only in thy love, as far as approving themselves to thy carnal Affections,
whence they are called Lusts. Set up a Cherub with a flaming Sword turning
every way, to keep them out of that their Paradise, and to guard thy Heart that
Tree of Life, and thou effectually condemnest them to an irremediable
Mortality; thou really executest and destroyest them.

Especially if hereto thou superadd the Exercises of Faith, and its social
Graces. For to crucify Sin without Faith, deriving virtue and strength from
the Cross, i. e. the merit of Christ, or that Holy Spirit and his Aid, which
Christ by his merit purchased, is not at all to be hoped. It would never have
had its Christian Name from the Cross, if this had no Influence upon
Mortification. The Moral is pretty, but short of that Perfection of the
Spiritual, to which we are directed and enabled as Christians. It Is (not if ye
by Reason and Philosophy, but) if ye through the Spirit, do mortify the deeds
of the Body, ye shall live, Romans 8.13. What Spirit he speaks of, the next verse
declares: For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, are the Sons of God.
This certainly imports something more than mere Nature, and natural
Improvements. I love the Platonical and Stoical (...), and am pleased to read
those Precepts whereby they direct it. But the Philosophical Death in
voluntarily loosing the Soul from the Body, and bodily Life, Porphyr. (...).
7.9.
and Passions to which it was tied, by converting it self to the service of
bodily Affections, will only introduce a Philosophical Peace, i. e. not to
grieve, or be angry, to be necessitated to nothing, to be unconcerned about
Extrinsecals, untouched, and free: Arrian, l. 3. c. 13.
as they describe it, Christian Mortification is a higher thing. It Is the Work
of Grace, subduing the Sins that are contrary to it; especially the Corruption
of Nature. The Work of Grace influenced by the Holy Ghost. The Spirits work by
Grace, in relation to Christ and his Crucifixion; wherein the grace of Faith in
special has a peculiar Province. I mean not Christianity in general, which
sometimes is entitled Faith; but that particular Grace which the Old Testament
often calls Trust, the New, committing our Souls to God. When in a sense of Sin,
Impotency, and Emptiness, we give up our selves to God in Christ, entrusting
our Souls with him, and expecting all from him alone, in the way of his
Covenant and Promises; which hope is an inseparable fruit of Faith, and
therefore included with it in the same title of Trust, which is indeed both.
Thus then do Christians mortify Sin: Being sensible that they are insufficient
by the power of their own reason and moral Virtue, to get the Victory over
Original Corruption, and evil Habits, they apply themselves to God in the Name
of Christ; not only owning all Christian Doctrine, and obeying all Christian
Precepts, which are remote conditions and helps of Mortification; but in
special considering that Christ by his merit procured power against Sin, as
well as Pardon, which both are given upon no other account, but only for the
sake of Christ; therefore they beg of God, that according to his promise, he
would subdue Iniquities, Mic. 7.19. He would graciously please to bestow upon
them, for Christ's sake, that strength, by his Spirit in their inner Man, which
may enable them to conquer, and keep under their Concupiscence, the Flesh, with
the Affections, and Lusts thereof, and upon the help of his Spirit, so begged,
they rely, and depend, and trust to it, in every assault and motion of Sin,
lifting up their Hearts to God in Christ, for renewed Power to resist and
suppress it, and keep themselves pure; distrusting themselves, that they may
put their whole trust in the living God, upon whom thus fixing their affiance,
they wait in patience and watchfulness, and the use of his Ordinances; for
Christ to be made their Sanctification and Redemption, from the Dominion, and
Tyranny, or Rebellion of Sin, which by degrees is granted them; and this
Exercise of Faith in Prayer, and Prayer means, is the immediate and next
condition of the grant of power against Sin; which is followed with the use
both of Rational and Scriptural Considerations, care to prevent all occasions,
or irritations of Concupiscence, and other evil Dispositions; an early
endeavor to suppress the first Motions and Lustings, etc. but the power of
these is not trusted to, as sufficient, but Gods alone, in the use of these
helps, to overcome and crucify the evil of their Natures, and all that are
rooted in it, and flow from it: Act then solely under God, look after such an
effectual Faith, that carrying thee above all Visibles to the invisible God;
will under his Influence purify thy Heart, work by Love, and reduce thy Will
into Subjection to God, and grow herein daily.

'Twas much that Philosophers should make it one of their (...), or Governing
Prenotions. [Will nothing but what God Wills;] and that decantate [(...)]
Follow God. Arrian l. 3. c. 26. p. 362. and l. 2. c. 16. p. 217. Marc. Anton.
l. 10.. 11. Seneca de vita beat. c. 15. Arrian l. 4. c. 12. p. 426. (...), etc.
Seneca subjoyns, In regno nati sumus, Deo parere libertas est. In a Kingdom
are we born, to obey God is liberty: Yea, it is Royal Liberty. Arrianus, I have
one to be subject to, to obey, even God, etc. Oh! let not Infidels rise up in
Judgment to condemn thee, for a Rebel against the Will of God, in his Precepts
or Providence. It Is an ugly thing for a Christian to have a Will, a Separate
Will. The Will of Man is a Bedlam, except in Conjunction with, and
Subordination to God. The liberty of the Will of Man consists in Servitude to
God. Excellently Arrianus: I am Gods freeman, (...), etc. Arr. l. 4. c 3. p.
380.
and friend, that I may voluntarily obey him, I must set nothing in
competition, not my Body, not my Possessions, not Principality, not Fame, no
nothing at all, etc.

In Sum, labor to form all thy Faculties, after the best Paterns, and imitate
such in thine Actions. Christianity is an Imitation of the Nature, Life, and
Actions of Christ. (...) Greg. Nys. M. Antonin. l. 10. 8. Cl Alex. Strom. l. 5.
Marc. Anton. could say, God wills, that all Rational Beings should be like
him, not flatter him. Clemens of Alexandria makes account, that Plato thought
similitude to God the end of Philosophy: This the Philosopher may propose, but
the true Christian only attains. The Exhortations to it in the Scriptures are
many. Ephesians. 5.1, 2. 1 Cor. 11 1. consequentially, 2 Cor. 3.18. Romans 8.29. Luke
6.36. 1 John 3.3, 17. 1 Pet. 1.16. Matthew. 5.48. A Christian unlike Christ is a
contradiction, as a godly Man not God-like. When Christ dwells in the Heart by
Faith, he will transform it, and the Life into the likeness of his own. Gal.
2.20. I am crucified with Christ, says Paul, nevertheless I live, yet not I,
but Christ lives in me; and the life which I now live in the Flesh, is by the
Faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me. This is that
living in the Spirit, and walking in the Spirit, he after mentions, Chap. 5.25.
Putting on the Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 13.14. 2 Cor. 3.18.

Will thou not then, Oh my Soul, aspire after this? It Is high, above thee, a
strange Mystery to thy carnal part, and so at first is every thing of God; yet
nothing is to be despaired of that is enjoined by God, whose Precepts are his
Power, whose Word his Work. And if God who commanded the Light to shine out of
darkness, and it obeyed, do also command the Light of the knowledge of the
Glory of God in the Face of Christ, to shine into thine Heart: 2 Cor. 4.6. That
will much more obey the voice of his Almighty Grace; and this Light is Life,
this Life Love, this Love universal Conformity to God. For, God is Love, and he
that dwells in Love, dwells in God, and God in him, 1 John 4.16. and Love
is the fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13.8.10. Gal. 5.14. Oh thou Blessed Spirit,
God of Love, descend into and shed abroad thy Nature in my Heart; kindle, Oh
thou ever adorable Breath of God, and blow up this Holy Ardour and Flame, that
as a Seraphim, I may ascend in a transport of Delight and Joy to thy Throne,
and perpetually burn upon thine Altar; and being like thee in Love, I shall
through Love be like thee in all things. Am I a Professor, am I a Believer; am
I a knowing, a weeping, a discoursing, a practicing, a just, a dispassionate, a
temperate, a bountiful and liberal, a condescending, a friendly Person: Yet if
I have not, if I am not Love, I have, I am nothing. The reason of 1 Cor. 13.1,
2, 3. will carry this and more. Neither extraordinary gifts of Tongues,
prophecy, abstruse Speculation, Miracles; nor extraordinary Practices, as
beggering my self to give to the Poor, receiving the Crown of Martyrdom under
the most cruel Tortures, voluntarily submitted to, are at all available without
Love; therefore much less things of a common and ordinary Nature. Love is all
in all. Thy Repentance, thy Faith, thy Hope, thy Prayers, thy Vows, thy
Obedience, are good and acceptable, if Spirited with Love, without it they (and
all beside, that thou can possibly be, and do) are but all as a Sacrifice of
Swines Blood, and blessing an Idol: there is nothing of Life in them, nothing of
Soul, because nothing of God, because nothing of Love. Oh love the Lord then,
Oh my Soul, with all thy mind, with all thy Heart, with all thy strength, and
thy Neighbor as thy self, for his sake; let him have thy whole desire, thy
whole delight at all times. Minus te amat, qui aliquid tecum amat, quod non
propter te amat. Idiotae contempl. de amore Dei c. 12.
He loves thee but little (Oh Lord) who loves any thing with thee which he
loves not for thee, says a devout Man. It Is but meet that the highest God
should have the Supremacy in my heart. If in the greater World he be King, must
he be a Subject in the less. I am worse than Hell, if God must not be
acknowledged Sovereign in my Soul. The Spirits there dare not, cannot but own
him as their Lord; this is the duty they pay, extorted indeed by their sense
and fear, which that it may not be thy dismal lot and fate. Oh my Soul, advance
thou him freely to the Crown within thy self, in a spontaneous, generous Ardour
of pure Incorrupt, Incorruptible Love: Which if thou do not thou art
accursed; if thou do, thou art blessed; for it is a Prayer upon record in
God's Word; 1 Cor. 16.22.
and therefore part of the matter of Christ's Intercession, Grace be with all
them that love our Lord Jesus Christ [(...)] in Incorruption or Immortality, i.
e. with a never-fading Love, Ephesians. 2.24. and that only is a sincere Love. Oh
Love the Lord on Earth as thou will love him in Heaven, with the same kind, and
press toward the same degree of Love, and be happy. Thus live in God, above the
tumult and hurry of external things, and be at rest. Marc. Antonin. l. 2. p. 5,
etc. Omnem creed diem tibi diluxisse Supremum.


Live every day as if it were thy last; and in every employment so act, Arrian,
l. 4. c. 10.
as one that can be free to be found therein by Death. p. 416. (...) etc. It.
l. 3. c. 5 p. 273. Antonin. l. 6.. 3^.
What would thou be found doing by Death, says Arrianus? I for my part,
doing some masculine, beneficial, public, useful, generous Work. But, if I
cannot be found in these, yet this is [(...)] unhinderable; this is given to
me, to amend my self, to elaborate that faculty which makes use of Fantasies,
to endeavor [apathy or] freeness from Passion, to give my Affections their
due; and (if I can be so happy) to gain soundness, certainty of Judgment. If
Death find me thus employed, 'twill be sufficient to engage me, with hands
stretched out to God, to say: I have not neglected those Powers thou gave me
to observe thy Government, and follow it: I have done my endeavor not to
disgrace thee: Behold how I have used my Senses, my Prenotions. Have I ever
blamed thee? Have I been displeased with any thing befalling, or wished it
otherwise? Have I misguided my Affections, because thou begattest me? I render
thee the praise of thy Gifts; in as much as I have well used thine, it
suffices me. Resume them now again, and where thou please dispose of me.
For, all were thine and thou gave them me. I the rather produce these
Testimonies out of Heathen Authors, to let Christians see how inexcusable it
will be in them, who have infinitely better Light, Means, Aids; to neglect what
even Nature and Reason taught Philosophers to practice: And withal to awaken
others with my self, to a more assiduous care in these Exercises, least it be
found more tolerable for Tire and Sidon, for Sodom and Gomorrah, than for us at
the great day.

Observe all the inward Workings of the Divine Spirit, both in calling out the
actings of Grace, and reviving thee with Peace, and keep them upon record for
after advantage. Time may come when all thy present Sensations may be so
cloudy, that thou can not see a peep of day; can not from any thing that
thou feel, conclude that thy state is right before God. But if at such a
season and hour of temptation, thou be'st able to call to mind, that upon due
trial, when in a sober and composed calm of Thoughts, the Lord satisfied thee
upon sure and indefeisible Evidence, that thy Heart was truly changed, and that
thou wast (as a New Creature) in Christ Jesus; and that thy Objections, and
misdoubtings, and temptations to the contrary were thoroughly answered. This will
be such an ease to thy mind, and a revival of thy hopes, that ere long the
mists and darkness will be driven away, and thou will again reascend into a
clear and serene Heaven of Light, and Peace, and Joy. Make sure in this manner
to lay up, and reserve a good stock and treasure of Experiences, if thou
desire Riches of Comfort, yet content not thy self with the old, but make
new. To remember what thou did enjoy, and feel in the days of the right Hand
of the Most High, may revive thee but to sense, and feel it at present much
more. Renew then those gracious Exercises over and over, that did once produce
Halcyon days in thy Soul, and they will recall them; the same effects will
issue from the same Causes. Amend what was amiss in former actings, which gave
Satan advantage to redintegrate thy Troubles, and this will establish thy Peace
upon a securer, and more unexceptionable basis. It Is not possible to refute the
Devils Objections against thy sincerity, by a method more effectual, than a
more serious care to act all over again sincerely, which he tempts thee to
suppose was done unsoundly. Renovated Acts of a sound Repentance and unfeigned
Faith, as sure Testimonies of thy Renovation after the Image of God, will dash
thine Accuser out of countenance. If thou can make any fresh Experiments of
the Power of Divine Grace, effecting this: If God take thee anew into his bosom
of Love, to melt thee: If a view of him whom thy Sins have pierced, cause thy
ebbing godly Sorrow again to flow over all the Banks: Lastly, if with a perfect
Heart thou returnest from all thy bypast follies, unto him from whom thou have
deeply revolted; this will again retrieve thy sinking Heart and hopes, as a new
taste of the Lord's graciousness, and evidence that he has not forsaken thee,
but that his Mercy and Godness follows thee, and shall all the days of thy life
even to Eternity.

Set about this, O my Soul, with a resolved obstinacy of endeavor, that will
not be conquerable by any assaults of Corruption or Temptation. For, thou can
never take a Heaven of Joy and Rest, except by violence and force. Weak
resolves do but only increase the Devils Triumphs. Strong cares are requisite
to possess thee of strong Consolations. Observe where, when, and how the Spirit
moves, and spread thy Sails before his sweet Spirations. He is the Comforter,
because the Conducter into the way of Peace. Thou can enjoy no more of his
Testimony to solace thee, than thou do of his Grace to quicken and sanctify
thee: And if thou comfortest thy self without the Spirits Witness concurring,
thou art a fond self-flattering fool, and wilt fantastically solace thy self
into confusion. Lay a sure Ground Work for his Sealings, in thy Sanctification;
but then thou must build upon it, endeavoring to grow in purity of Spirit, by
frequency in purifying Practices. Never build Comforts upon any Recognition of
former Comforts, except thou wast fully satisfied their Grounds were sure. But,
rather begin again and dig deeper, that thou may build stronglier. Labor to
be Heroically good, if thou desire to be eminently happy. Make thy way
through the Temple of Virtue, into the Temple of Honor and Peace, that thou
deceive not thy self, and embrace a Cloud instead of Juno.

Finally, having done all, renounce all as unproportionable. By thy Faith take
Sanctuary in the mercy of God, through the Merits of Jesus Christ. Make him thy
living guide and way, to the true Life of everlasting Joys and Consolations.

Lastly, Be fervent and constant in Prayer. Peace is not attainable but only by
Addresses to the God of Peace. It Is his Gift, and must be thy desire expressed in
Petition, ere thou receivest it. Use Prayer and engage Prayer, that both thine
own and others Interest in Heaven may prevail for thee; which last by the
Apostle, Jam. 5.16. called [(...)] inwrought, inworking Prayer of a Righteous
Man avails much. The (...) were such as being moved by a supernatural Power
or Agent, acted beyond themselves above Nature. And Righteous Souls are acted
by the Holy Ghost in Prayer, Romans 8.14, 15, 16. Not by extraordinary Influences
as the divinely inspired, but ordinary: Yet these not common to all, but
special and proper, which no wicked Man over Experiences; and this therefore
not so much with respect to the Gift which is common, as the Grace of Prayer,
which is peculiar to the Newborn Children of God. Indeed the Gift is but the
Body, Grace the Soul of Prayer; and the most Essential Grace of Prayer properly
so called, viz. Petition is Desire, the most efficacious is Faith. For I doubt
not to give the title of Grace to sincere Desire, notwithstand that it has
been exploded upon a reason something odd, viz. That desire of Grace, is no
more Grace, than desire of Health, Riches, etc. is Health; Riches, etc. A
ground doubly fallacious; for 1. It doubly misrepresents the contrary Opinion,
which 1. only pronounces concerning sincere Desires. 2. Means not, that the
Desire is formally the Grace, and every Grace desired. But if upright Desire be
not a Grace, though not the Grace desired, neither is upright Delight, nor
consequently upright Love, whereof these are the special and sole Ingredients;
Desire being as essential as Delight. And if some sincere desire of some
Graces, be not inchoatively the Graces desired, or an Effect or Act issuing
from them, (which amounts to the same thing, and will subserve to the same end,
for which that Proposition is used, viz. to satisfy the weak but sincere
Christians, that question their Grace,) I cannot tell how that of our Savior
is intelligible Matthew. 5.6. Blessed are they that hunger, etc. i. e. desire
sincerely as all agree. The Ungracious, Unrighteous are not Blessed, but
Cursed; now according to the supposition of the Text these have nothing to
entitle them to Blessedness, save this Hunger, etc. or Desire, therefore this
Desire constitutes them so far Righteous, as not to leave them liable to the
curse due to the Unrighteous. 2. It mistakes and misses the case, for sure
there is a World of difference betwixt Internal Dispositions of Mind, and
External Possessions. One more imperfect disposition of Mind, is capable of
being changed into, or growing up to a more perfect habit, and therefore may be
inchoatively that habit; and also it is very possible, that the first actings
of a Grace already received may be in a desire of that Grace, as well as the
more mature state of that Grace, may discover it self in strong desire after a
greater measure of it self. It Is certain that the more grown and vigorous our
Faith is, the more do we desire the increase of it, so Delight, Hope, Fear of
God, Humility; and in sum, no Man can sincerely desire any Grace, without
Grace, because without Grace there can be no Sincerity, that is the Adjunct
without the Subject: Sincerity being the Eucracy, or good Constitution, and
Form, and Beauty of Grace, which cannot be sound if it be not. Now to transfer
this to External Enjoyments, or bodily good things, is to leap over the Hedge
into a sophism of no very graceful Name. I think there are other more solid
Methods, to club down presumptuous Hypocritical Desires, than thus to break the
bruised Reed and rotten Stick with one and the same blow I do not say that
desires of Comfort are Comfort, I know very well that Desires, in no manner of
Gradation or Modification can be a species of Comfort, as Desires may be of
Grace; nor an inferior degree of Comfort neither. Yet though they cannot be
formally Comfort, they may be objectively Comfortable. That is sincere desires
upon reflection, will be matter of Comfort; 'twill be a rejoicing to a Man's
Heart, to find therein those hungring and thirsting desires, which the
forementioned Scripture recommends. I know not that any can ever have reason to
repent, of hearty Breathings and Pantings after the Living God, and that
plentitude of all desirable Joys, in fruition of his transcendent Perfections,
which is sufficient to replenish and answer all the cravings of the most
enlarged Appetite, even unto Satiety. And it is certain that without such
desires, Divine Bounty it self, infinite though it be, will not administer the
least drop of the Cup of Consolation, as it is called, Jer. 16.7. Indeed since
it is God which comfort those which are cast down, 2 Cor. 7.6. we have little
ground to expect his Comforts, if we never desire them, and little evidence can
we give of our true desires, if we convert them not into Prayers; nor can our
Prayers prevail if not made in Faith, Jam. 1.5, 6. For that is the Grace of
Graces, which must beat every end, or nothing can prosper. The Son of God
himself, the Lord, Owner, and Possessor of all, yet did not obtain the
Comforter for us without Prayer, Joh. 14.16. And it is no dishonor to be tied
to the same Conditions with our Redeemer, in things accommodate to our Nature
and State. If he procured the Cause of Comfort, he will bless our use of the
means, which if we neglect we (what in us lies) frustrate the Intercession of
Christ, and by omission of our Duty of Prayer, which is a part even of Natural
Religion, we cause, as to our selves, a denial and rejection of the Prayer of
Christ himself. And how can we expect that God should hear us Praying for our
selves afterward, when we see a necessity to change our Minds, and sue for that
Mercy for our selves, which once we would not receive, or so much as desire, as
an answer to the Petitions of our Mediator.

Be not a Stranger to thine own Heart, yet do not think to dig thy Peace out of
thine own Bowels. If it be a comforting reviving thing to find in thy self the
truth of Grace, yet that refreshing virtue of Grace it self is from God. Whence
we find some that although they be tolerably satisfied of their soundness, yet
through Ignorance, or Inadvertency, or Melancholy, or Temptation, etc. cannot
settle in a calm and quiet composure of Mind. For, as I said, the Assurance of
the truth of a Man's Grace, is only comforting, as it is the ground of his
Assurance of the Love of God, of which if a Man be not satisfied, i. e. that
true Grace is an infallible evidence, that God does embrace him with his
special Love, and is at peace with him through Christ, his Conscience will not
be at rest, for it cannot rest in discord with God, whose Deputy it is in Man.
Now some are so weak, as not to understand this; others so oppressed with
dumpishness of Spirit, as not to heed it; others so deluded by Satan as not to
believe it; which mists if not dispelled, damp the comfort of Grace. Look
therefore to the Sun of Righteousness to clear up thy Comforts, by expeling
this Darkness. Seek abroad for Peace. The Be finds not her Honey at home,
without the labor of her Wings. Let thy Supplications then, O my Soul, be
continually winging thy Affections toward Heaven, that they may there suck and
be satisfied, Isa. 66.
with the full Breasts of Divine Consolation, milk out and be delighted with the
abundance of its Glory. The Celestial Canaan is the Land that flows with the
Milk and Honey of Divine and Spiritual Joy, into which as at first thou passest
over the Jordan of Repentance, not upon dry ground, but wafted by the breath of
Prayer: So must thou take possession of it in Armor, fighting the good Fight
of Faith, with Heart and Hands (like Moses) lift up in earnest Supplications.
Exodus 17.11. Isa. 61.1, 3.
The Spirit of God is upon Christ, because the Lord has anointed him. To
appoint to them that mourn in Sion, to give them Beauty for Ashes, the Oil of
Joy for Mourning, etc. If it be his Gift, to him must we address for it. The
Tree from whence this Oil of Gladness flows, is planted in the Paradise of God;
descend to thee it shall not, unless thou ascend to it, and be ingrafted in the
same Stock. Oh transplant thy self from Earth to Heaven, and take root at the
Throne of Grace, fix thy self and grow at the Footstool of Mercy by Frayer, if
as a Tree of Righteousness thou would draw in, be nourished and refreshed by
those consolatory dews of Divine Love, which are the spring of that River of
the Waters of Life, which makes glad the City of God.

Be more above with the Father of Meries, and God of all Comfort, in these
Devout and Ardent Suspirations, than below glued to the Earth by Carnal
Affections, if thou desire to be a Barnabas, (may I thus transfer it from its
active to a passive Sense) a Son, an Heir, an Inheritor of Celestial
Consolations. If thou can but pray indeed thou art secure; the furious Waves
of these two meeting Seas, Sin and Suffering, may wrack thee, but cannot
swallow thee up: Sink perhaps thou may, but Drown thou can not; the gentle
Gales of the Spirit in this duty will most safely transport thee, to the Haven
of Everlasting Joy and Peace, even in the ruin of all thy Fortunes. Thy
Miseries, thy Corruptions shall perish, thou thy self shall not; so true is
that Saying of a Reverend Bishop, Fashionable Suppliants may talk to God, Bp.
Hall.
but be confident he that can truly pray can never be miserable. Of our selves
we lie open to all Evils, our rescue is from above, and what intercourse have
we with Heaven but by our Prayers? This is his Catholicon.

Seneca advises his Lucilius, to superadd new to his old Prayers, to ask a good
Soul, good Health of Mind, Epist. 10, Quidni t^ ista vota saepe facias?
audacter Deum roga.
then of Body, Why do not often renew these Requests? Beg of God boldly. -- So
live with Men, as if God saw, so speak to God as if Men heard. A good Precept;
to which adjoyn the like from the wisest of Men, Eccles. 5.1, 2. Keep thy Foot
when thou go into the House of God, etc. Be not rash with thy Mouth, and let
not thine Heart be hasty to utter any thing before God. For God is in Heaven,
and thou upon Earth, therefore let thy Words be few. It Is not much speaking but
hearty that God regards, not the Tongue of Men and Angels, but Truth in the
inward Parts. Broken Expressions from a broken Heart, are as sweet Eloquence in
the esteem of God, as the best in Tully or Demosthenes.

Oh then, pour out thy Prayers as a Flood, Isa. 26.16. If thou desire they
should return in a Tide of Peace. They can never reach Heaven, if they have not
a spring of Grace within, they will never be received there, if not the warm
Exhalations, Transpirations of a melting contrite Heart, drawn out, and drawn
up by the dissolving attractive Rays of the Son of Righteousness: If the
Divine Spirit infuse this Breath into thee, it will follow him to Heaven, and
through his Influence, who is the Comforter, possess thee of the fullness of the
Comforts of Elshaddai, God all-sufficient: If as a cloven Tongue of Fire, the
Holy Ghost descend and sit upon thee, and give thee utterance, Acts 2.3, 4. not
merely in conference with Men, but secret speech, Isa. 26.16. with God: If he
envigorate and heat thy Graces and Affections, that the Fire burn within, Psalm.
39.3. and give speech to thy Tongue: If he cast the pure Incense of Spiritual
Devotion, upon that flaming Altar, thy fervent, zealous Heart, that may ascend
in a sweet smelling Cloud, to the Throne of God: If Lastly, this Fire from
Heaven fall upon thy Sacrifice, as a testimony or the audience of thy Prayers,
then will thou shout for Joy, Levit, 9. ult. and triumph in his Salvation: If
thou would entertain any grounded hopes, that the Lord will speak
comfortably to thy Heart; oh do thy utmost by Premeditation, by Reading, by
Ejaculation, etc. [(...)] to blow up into a living Fire, those Divine Sparks of
the Grace of Prayer, which the Spirit does cast within thee, as a preparation
for thy solemn Exercise in the duty of Prayer it self; and let thy
Supplications be rather the inward workings of thy Heart in aversation from
Sin, and panting after God, by godly Sorrow, Repentance, Desire, Faith, Love,
Resignation, etc. than the labor of thy Lips, and a bodily Exercise, or the
Work of an enlarged invention, and fancy, or strong Head and Memory, which are
but dead things, mere Carcasses of Devotion, not to be insisted on in
Competiton with an enlarged Heart. Take with thee Words, and turn unto the
Lord. Lord at thy bidding I will take thy Words which thy self here prescribes,
Hosea 14.2, 3. They shall be my stinted Liturgy; none can tell which will be
acceptable to thee better than thy self. What are they? Take away Iniquity and
receive us graciously, so will we render the Calves of our Lips. What Is that?
The substance is Praise: But some Ancients thus descant upon it. Calves not of
our Stall, Mal. 4.2. but Lips.] When a Calf or other Beast was to be Sacrificed
(to which this is an allusion) God required the Blood, the Fat, and sometimes
the Flesh, but never the Skin and Hair; these were to be carried away and burnt
in another place. The Blood of these Calves of the Lips is Faith in the Blood
of Christ, which is the Life of Prayer and Praise. The Fat, pure, and holy
Affection, and Grace, Sorrow, Desire, Love, Delight, Hope, etc. The Flesh is
the matter, or thing prayed for, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification,
Redemption, etc. The Skin and Hairs, the Words, and Expressions, with the
Method, Mode, Order; which if alone, and not spirited with the former, are of
no value with God, who looks at Things, not Words and Phrases. They must indeed
be brought to God in vocal Prayer, which is never a Duty, except when we join
with others, and they with us, and we must see that all accord with, or do not
disagree from the general Rules of the Scripture. But it is a folly to think
that we for these are more acceptable in Person, or that our Prayers, the
Flesh, the Fat, the Blood, are more well-pleasing to God. We must not lay any
stress upon, put any confidence in that, which God will not vouchsafe his Altar
to Sanctify.

Offer then even this vocal Prayer: God expects in some cases, this in
Conjunction, but take heed, O my Soul, of relying upon it, as such, viz. the
Skin without the other, in Separation. Whether form or no form, what matters
it, it is but Skin and Hair. Why so much ado about it? Give the main to God, or
thou give nothing. God will take off the Skin, and burn it; burn not thy
Fingers about it; it is not for the Altar. Oh bring that chiefly which must be
presented there. God is a Spirit, what are Words to him? Oh let thy Prayers be
all Spirit. Words are but the vehicle, sometimes only Aereal, mere Wind, seldom
Ethereal, defecate and pure Quintescence, without Froth and Vanity, etc.
However, O see thou that there be an Angel within; if there be not an
Intelligence to turn about this Orb of Devotion; if a Soul do not animate this
Body of Duty, away with it, to the dunghill with it, it is but mere Carrion.
Bring the Male in thy Flock, not this corrupt thing. Thou can never derive
Comfort from Heaven, if thou lay nothing upon God's Altar but Froth and Wind.
Substantial Prayers, (and all substance is an invisible, inward thing) and
these alone introduce solid and substantial Consolations.

2 These. 2.16. Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God even our Father,
which has loved us, and given us everlasting Consolation through Grace,

17. Comfort your Hearts, and stablish you in every good Word and Work.

1 These. 5.23. And the very God of Peace sanctify you wholly, and I pray God
your whole Spirit, and Soul, and Body, be preserved blameless unto the Coming
of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Heb. 19.20. Now the God of Peace, who has raised from the Dead, our Lord
Jesus Christ, that great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the Blood of the
everlasting Covenant;

21. Make you perfect in every good Work to do his Will, working in you that,
which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ; to whom be Glory for
ever and ever, Amen.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
Chap. I. THE Introduction, with the Explication of the Terms, and their Sense
Critical and Moral, and Doctrine. page 1. Chap. II. The Doctrine explained, in
a Resolution of three Queries, a threefold Essay. p. 9. 1. The Character of
the Psalmist, not so much Personal as Moral, which determines the Subject
universally. p. 10. 1. He was a Man that lived under a due and deep sense of
God. ibid.
Chap. III. 2. He was a Man of Prayer. p. 18. Chap. IV. 3. That lived by Faith,
not by Sight. p. 25. Chap. V. 4. That did not live under the reproach of his
own conscience. p. 31. 1. He was very sensible of the odiousness of Sin to God.
ibid.
Chap. VI. 2. Conscientious in the observance of his Duty to Man. p. 45. Chap.
VII. 5. Of a Public Spirit. p. 73. Chap. VIII. 6. Honors God's Discipline,
Instructive, Corrective. p. 121. Chap. IX. 7. A Man of Experience, Eyes God in
all things. p. 133. Chap. X. 8. Seeks Comfort solely in, and from God. p. 140.
Chap. XI. 2. The Nature and Quality of the Psalmists Thoughts. p. 151. 1.
Fearing Thoughts. p. 156. 2. Grieving Thoughts. p. 164. 3. Despairing Thoughts.
page 174.
Chap. XII. 3. What Comforts these are in general. p. 175. Chap. XIII. 1.
Comforts in God, which God is derived from. p. 182. 1. His Existence. ibid. 2.
His Names and Titles. p. 183. 3. His Attributes. p. 184.. 1. His Wisdom and
Omniscience p. 185. 2. His Goodness. p. 189. 3. His Justice. p. 207. 4. His
Omnipotence p. 224. 5. His Fidelity and Vnchangableness p. 234. 6. His
Presence. p. 241. 7. His Eternity. p. 258.
Chap. XIV. 2. Comforts from God, which God gives in, p. 265. 1. Providence. p.
266. 2. Privileges. p. 269. 1. Sanctification ibid. 2. Propriety in God, and
assurance of it. p. 276. 3. Experiences. p. 286.
Chap. XV. Inferences. 1. Doctrinal, 1. it is lamentable to be left to our own
Thoughts. p. 296. 2. The best may be in perplexities inextricable by Nature. p.
298. 3. The infinite Condescension of God in the Provision he has made for us.
p. 302.
Chap. XVI. 2. Elenctical. 1. Convictive. 1. Theoretical, confutes the Doctrine
of Incertitude. p. 305. 2. Practical, establishing the conscience, in the right
method of discriminating true and false Comforts, which differ. p. 309. 1. In
their Origin. p. 310. 2. Their Attendants. p. 317. 3. Their tendency and
effects. p. 330. 2. Reprehensive for neglect of preparing for, and possessing
our selves of Divine Comforts. p. 337.
Chap. XVII. 3. Paideutical or Instructive, how to attain solid Comforts. p.
352. 1. Be Men of Thoughts. p. 353. 2. Endeavor to attain Ability, to give Law
to Thoughts. p. 361. 3. Get a clear notion of God and Goodness. p. 366. 4. Lay
the Foundation of Peace in Repentance and Holiness. p. 375, 376. 5. Be fervent
and constant in Prayer. p. 401.

ADVERTISEMENT.
These BOOKS are Published by the Reverend Mr. Oliver Heywood, M. A. Minister
of the Gospel, and Sold by Thomas Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in
Cheapside, viz.

1. BAptismal Bonds Renewed, being some Meditations on Psalm. 50.5. 2. Closet
Prayer a Christians Duty. 3. Sure Mercies of David. 4. Isreal's Lamentation
after the Lord. 5. The Holy Life and Happy Death, of Mr. John Angier, Minister
formerly at Denton, near Manchester. 6. Advice to an only Child, or excellent
Counsel to all young Persons. 7. Best Intail, a Discourse on 2 Samuel 23.5. 8.
Family Altar, a Discourse on Genesis 35.2, 3. for to promote the Worship of God in
private Families. 9. Meetness for Heaven on Colos. 1.12. designed for a Funeral
Legacy. 10. The New Creature on Gal. 6.15. lately Published. 11. The General
Assembly, or a Discourse of the gathering of all Saints to Christ.
BOOKS Written by the Reverend Mr. J. How.
OF Thoughtfulness for the Morrow: With an Appendix concerning the immoderate
Desire of Foreknowing Things to come.

Of Charity, in reference to other Men's Sins.

A Sermon at the Funeral of Mr. Richard Adams, M. A. sometime Fellow of
Brazen-Nose College in Oxford.

The Redeemer's Tears wept over lost Souls: In a Treatise on Luke 19.41, 42.
With an Appendix, wherein somewhat is occasionally discoursed, concerning the
Sin against the Holy Ghost, and how God is said to will the Salvation of them
that perish.

A Sermon directing what we are to do after a strict enquiry, Whether or no we
truly love God.

A Funeral Sermon for Mrs. Esther Sampson, the late Wife of Henry Sampson,
Doctor of Physic.

The Carnality of Religious Contention. In Two Sermons, preached at the
Merchants Lecture in Broad-street.

A Sermon for Reformation of Manners.

A Sermon preached on the Day of Thanksgiving, December 2. 1697. to which is
prefixed Dr. Bates's Congratulatory Speech to the King.

A Calm and Sober Enquiry, concerning the Possibility of a Trinity in the
Godhead.

A Letter to a Friend, concerning a Postscript to the Defense of Dr. Sherlock's
Notion of the Trinity in Unity, relating to the Calm and Sober Enquiry upon the
same Subject.

A View of that part of the late Considerations to H. H. about the Trinity:
Which concerns the Sober Enquiry on that Subject.

The Redeemer's Dominion over the Invisible World.

A Funeral Sermon for Mrs. Hammond.

A Funeral Sermon for Dr. Will. Bates.

A Funeral Sermon for Mr. Mat. Mead.

This Written by Mr. Flavel.
THE Fountain of Life opened, or a Display of Christ in his Essential and
Mediatorial Glory; containing Forty two Sermons on various Texts. Wherein the
Impetration of our Redemption by Jesus Christ is orderly unfolded, as it was
begun, carried on, and finished by his Covenant Transaction, Mysterious
Incarnation, solemn Call and Dedication, blessed Offices, deep Abasement, and
Supereminent Advancement.


