DISCOURSES Useful for the Vain Modish Ladies AND THEIR GALLANTS, Under these
following Heads, viz.

I. Of some of the Common Ways many Virtuous Women take to lose their
Reputation, etc. II. Of mere Beauty-Love, etc. III. Of young Men's Folly in
adoring young handsome Ladies, etc. IV. Of the Power Women's Beauty exercises
over most young Men. V. Of the Inconstancy of most Ladies, especially such as
are cry'd-up Beauties, etc. VI. Of Marriage, and of Wives who usurp a Governing
Power over their Husbands. VII. Of the Inequality of many Marriages, with the
sad End that usually attend such Matches. VIII. Against Maids marrying for mere
Love, etc. IX. Against Widows marrying. X. Against keeping of Misses. XI. Of
the Folly of such Women as think to show their Wit by Censuring of their
Neighbors. XII. Of the French Fashions and Dresses, etc. XIII. Of Worldly
Praises which all Ladies love to receive, but few strive to deserve. XIV.
Useful Advices to the vain modish Ladies, for the well regulating their Beauty
and Lives.
By the Right Honorable FRANCIS Lord Viscount Shannon.

Printed for J. Tailor, at the Ship in S. Paul's Churchyard, 1696

The Epistle Dedicatory. To the Right Honorable ELIZABETH, Countess of
Northumberland.
MADAM,
MY Lady P. acquainted me 'twas your Desire, which is still to me a Command,
that I should send you this small Book of Discourses and Essays: And though I
know many of the Subjects they treat of to be light and trivial, yet I
immediately concluded, though none of these Discourses are worthy your reading,
yet all your Commands are worthy my obeying; and I had much rather the World
should know I write ill, than you, Madam, should have the least thought I obey
you so.

And I humbly beg you to believe, Madam, that I do not present you this Book
upon any dependency I have of it is merit, but merely to publish the obligations
I owe you, which I must ever want ability to requite, but shall never lack
justice to acknowledge.

And I hope, Madam, you will be the more easily persuaded to pardon this great
confidence, when you consider that self-interest now governs this World; and
since a a King can raise and illustrate one of his meanest Subjects, and render
him Honorable by declaring him such; so, Madam, though this is one of the
meanest Books Dedicated to you, yet if you will be pleased to raise and honor
it with your countenance, it cannot but thrive under so great and noble a
Patronage.

And pray, Madam, do not think I write this Book out of any hope to show some
Wit, when really I never so much as thought of it; but merely to publish the
great honor I have for you, and how humble a Servant I am to you. And you
know, Madam, it is as well a Mark of Sovereignty to have one's Image stamped upon
a Penny, as a Guinea, the meanness of it is value, nor the smallness of it is
Image, not at all lessening the great power of the Prince it represents.

No more can I, Madam, by placing your great Name to this small Book, in which
your Virtues being only meanly set off and painted but in Dead colors, can
lessen and eclipse your high worth and splendid merits

I know, Madam, there are many great Ladies that keep alive in the Root the
Title of their noble and ancient Families; but indeed there are very few that
nowadays bring any addition of Honor to their House: But all know, Madam,
that you not only keep alive in the Root, but your Merits spring, and flourish
in all your Actions, both to your own, and Families Great Honor and
Reputation; for you not only live to the height of greatness that any of the
English Nobility now do, but to the height of Piety that any of the Primitive
Christians ever did; for you make it your great delight to read God's Laws, and
your main concern to keep his Commandments, never striving to procure a high
place in Court, but to secure a good one in Heaven; still courting the good,
not the great; never flattering the powerful, always praising the Virtuous,
being only a Servant to the Servants of God, and not Courtierlike an humble
Servant in Words to all, scarce in deed a true Friend to any, who seldom speak
what they think, and rarely perform what they promise; their words being
commonly, not the Interpreters, but Disguisers of their Thoughts.

But, Madam, you still kept your self in a kind of religious retirement, out of
the false and glittering Scenes of the Court; and not only from the common
Vices and Vanities of England, but from the Foppish Modes, and high
Extravagances of France, which were just upon being naturalized here in
England. And indeed you differ from most Ladies, for they love much to receive
Praises, but strive little to deserve them; but you, Madam, strive to deserve
them, but love not to receive them; your great Humility adding a luster to your
high Quality, and your high Quality, adding a luster to your true Humility, and
a blessing too; for God still gives Grace to the humble.

I shall not here trouble you much, Madam, with a Character of the vain idle
Vitioso Fopps of our time, nor here make it my business to set out the vain
modish Ladies of our age, since both make it their main concern to set out
themselves, though in a very bad Figure; but my design here is, that because I
did in my Youth persuade some young Wives to do what they ought not, I would
now in my old age persuade all young Wives and Women to do what they ought,
which is, To remember their Creator in the Days of their Youth, and to strive
more for the true lasting Beauty of Holiness, than the slight fading one of a
fine Face, which is only a mere outside Beauty; but the Beauty of Holiness is
like the King's Daughter, all glorious within, which will bring one an
agreeable satisfaction whilst one lives, and a sweet peace of Conscience when
one Dies: The other, but high and proud vain thoughts whilst her Beauty lives;
and sad Frettings and Discontents, when she finds it dies; for usually as the
Mistresses Beauty leaves her, so her Lovers Love leaves him; for Effects will
follow their Cause.

And though many of the vain Modish Ladies are guilty of Pride, Vanity, and
perhaps what is worse than both, yet most of them are so self-conceited of their
own merit, as they had rather judge the World Censorious, than themselves
faulty; like the Philosopher, that lost his sight, and yet would not believe
himself blind, but that the Room was Dark.

And now, Madam, being toward the end of my Letter, I shall speak as all
Christians do, or at least ought to do, at the ending of their Lives, which is,
to speak the truth from the bottom of their Heart, as I am sure I now do, by
saying, your Virtuous Life, exemplary Piety, and your extraordinary Charity,
which is not like that of most great Ladies, whose bounty extends no farther
than to that great Friend, or this near Kinsman, and that perhaps more to
enlarge their own fame, than to relieve his wants, and so savours more of Vain
Glory, than true Charity: But, Madam, your Charity is so generally good, and
bountifully great, as none need a better Title to it, than that of having a
great need of it. In a word, Madam, your whole Life has been a continued Series
of noble and Pious Actions, which has rendered your Fame so completely
excellent, as you are not only an honor to your Name, but a credit to your
Sex, and a comfort to both rich and poor about you, for you oblige the great by
your extraordinary Civility, and relieve the poor by your abundant Charity.

Madam, your trouble of reading this Letter being now near at an end it is full
time that my Apology for giving it you should now begin; and because it is a
good saying I much like and follow, That plain dealing is still the best
Policy, Truth being ever pictured naked, I shall tell you here, Madam, the
plain and naked Truth how your Name came to be placed in the Front of this
little Book.

When my Lady P -- acquainted me you desired to see it, she in a Rallying
manner, bid me send it you with a fine Epistle Dedicatory; and I, in a like
Rallying manner, told her I would; and presently writ thus far of this Letter:
But upon my word, Madam, without any thought or design, that it should ever
come to your sight, much less to public view: For as soon as I had writ it, I
resolved never to show it, or look on it more: But being to buy the second part
of this Book to send a Friend, whose Servant stayed purposely for it, after I
had given it him, and he was gone, talking with the Book-Binder, he told me, he
had very near sold all my Books; upon which I promised him one, but it seems I
had unfortunately forgot that I had left this Letter in the Book which I
ordered to be carried to him; and he finding this Letter dedicated to your
Ladyship, knowing the high Honor and great Esteem all have for you, concluded,
That your Name in the Front of this Book, must needs stamp a Value on it, and
breed a Curiosity in many for it, and so Printed this Letter and placed my Name
to it, considering only his own profit by Printing it, not your trouble in
reading it, or my discredit in owning it. As Soon as I heard of it, I went
immediately much troubled and surprised, to the Book-binder, who desired me not
to be so much concerned, for there were very few, if any, of the Books were
sold that had this Letter Dedicatory to your Ladyship Printed to them, they
being but just come out of the Press, and that for paying his Charges for
Printing them, he would deliver me them all, which I readily consented to, and
came a few days after to receive them; but this Book-binder was gone out of the
World, and by his Death, my Book was dispersed in it, past all possibility of
recalling.

This is, Madam, the plain truth, how your Name comes to be placed now in the
Front of this little Book, when it was Printed some few Years before, without
any Name to it at all; and that your Name is now, I am much ashamed of and
humbly beg your Pardon for it.

I have, Madam, in writing these Discourses, made it my great concern to avoid
all Roads and Paths that Essays usually Travel in, and treat of; but really
Virgin-Themes, and fresh Provision of Wit is now so fearce to find, that many
of our best Writers, and greatest Scholars are often forced to use cold
Repetition Meats, to furnish out their Books, as well as good Housekeepers are
cold Meats to set out their Tables. And though good Cooks can make several sorts
of Dishes out of one kind of Meat, yet they cannot with all their skill, make
one Dish to please all Palats, like the delightful Manna in the Wilderness,
that gave a pleasant Gusto answerable to every Israelite's differing Taste: No
more can one sort of Writing suit the Fancy of all kinds of Readers. I am sure
I do not expect these Discourses should please any one, they being Dull, and
most of the Subjects they write of, Light almost as very Light, as the airy
Ladies they treat of, and are designed for; and therefore I am so far from
pretending in the least, to any of my readers Praises, as I expect none from
any, but beg pardon of all: And I truly wish this Book may persuade the vain
young Ladies to beg God's: And that as I desire my Readers excuse for my dull
Writing, they may their Maker's Pardon, for their vain living. I am sure I am
doubly bound to beg your Ladyship's, both for giving you the trouble of reading
this Book, and assuming the Confidence of placing your Name, though undesignedly,
to it.

But I will add no Excuses, knowing a Conclusion to a dull long Letter is still
the best Complement; I am sure, Madam, it is the only one I can ever justly
pretend to make you, your Merits being much above all my Praises. I wish I
could as truly say, That your whole Life were above all sorts of Troubles, that
your reading this might not prove one to you; but as it is foolish to fear
what is unavoidable, so it is to wish for Impossibilities, since the most great,
the most virtuous, and the most happy in this World are not free from Troubles,
because they cannot be freed from Sin; we are all unavoidable Tributaries to
it, being all born in an original servitude to Sin, without any certain
measure, or exact number.

But though the misery of Sinning is unavoidable, yet we ought to make our selves
as Spiritually wise, and Worldly happy as we are able, that is, make our Sins
as few, and all our Troubles (except for our Sins) as little as we can; and
therefore, Madam, to make your Trouble the less in looking this over, I shall
desire you to read it, but just after the rate I writ it, which was, when I had
nothing else to do. And for all my other Readers, I only desire they will use
these Discourses, no worse than most do maimed Beggars, that is, though they
want the Charity to relieve their Wants, yet not so to abound in ill Nature, as
to jeer at their Defects: This is all I expect from them, and this is all,
Madam, I humbly beg of you, That you will please to pardon this poor Book's
Faults, and not jeer at its Defects, which shall ever be an Obligation placed
on,

Madam, Your most Obedient, and ever Faithful Humble Servant, SHANNON.

The CONTENTS of The First Part.
The First Discourse, OF some of the common ways many virtuous Women take to
lose their Reputation, though they keep their Chastity, being virtuous in their
inward Intentions, but indiscreet in their outward Carriage, and Men judge by
what they see, not by what Women say they mean. Page i. The Second Discourse,
(...) mere Beauty-Love, with some of the vile Arts, and wicked Deceits many
Gallants use, to ruin their Mistresses Reputation, under a false pretense of
true Friendship; And of the great folly of such Women who delight in censuring
others, but slight all others censuring them, because they fancy they do not
deserve it; with some useful Advices thereon. p. xxxii. The Third Discourse, Of
young Men's great folly in adoring and over-praising all young handsome Ladies;
and their greater vanity, in receiving it, and believing them. p. 1 The Fourth
Discourse, Of the extraordinary governing power, VVomens Beauty now exercises
over most young Men. p. 21 The Fifth Discourse, Of the Inconstancy most Ladies,
especially such as are cried up Beauties, and the folly of any Man, that
believes, he is fully acquainted with, and soley possessed of, a vain Beauties
Heart; and can give good reasons, for the various Motions of her Love-changes.
p. 42 The Sixth Discourse, Of Marriage, and of Wives who usurp a Govering
Power over their Husbands, which is now so common, as it is almost become the
general Grievance of the Nation. p. 5^ The Seventh Discourse, Of the inequality
of many Marriages, awd of the Inconstancy of most Wives, that Men Mar^^^ for
mere Beauty, or their Parents Match forba^ Money, with the sad end that usually
attends su^ Matches. p. 6^ The Eighth Discourse, Against Maids Marrying for
mere Love, or only (...) please their Parents Inclinations, though quite contrary
to their own. p. 8^ The Ninth Discourse, Against VVIDOVVS Marrying. p. 9^ The
Tenth Discourse, Against keeping of MISSES. p. 11^ The Eleventh Discourse, Of
the vain Folly of such Women as think to she^ their Wit, by Jeering at, and
Censuring of their Neighbors. p. 12^ The Twelfth Discourse, Of the French
Fassions and Dresses, lately used (...) England, by the modish Ladies and your
sparks. p. 13^ The Thirteenth Discourse, Of VVorldly Praises, which all Ladies
love to receive, but few strive to deserve, and the sad e^ of it, and them,
when they come to Die. p. 15^ The Fourteenth Discourse, Useful advices in order
to the vain modish Ladies we Regulating their Beauty and Lives. p. 17^
THE FIRST DISCOURSE, Of some of the common ways many virtuous Wives take to
lose their Reputation, though they keep their Chastity; being virtuous in their
inward Intentions, but indiscreet in their Talk and outward Actions; and Men
judge by what they see, not by what Women say they mean.
I Shall not here, Reader, pretend to present you with the Sum Total of the
numerous and various Ways, many handsome Women take to be ill talked of, for
that I am sure would be a Task as much above my Power to write, as I fancy
'twould be above, your Patience to read; and he that can perform that great
work, must need at least a Prophet's Knowledge, and a Job's Patience; and truly
I pretend to neither: Nor have I so much as a Thought of undertaking singly to
tell you all the Faults, Arts, Deceits and Indiscretions of all Wives, much
less of all Women, since I fancy if all the Husbands in the whole World were
assembled in one general Council, they could no more sum up all their Wive's
Faults, than cure all their Vices; for Miracles are ceased to the whole World,
but the Papist, of whose Faith, I thank God I am not of: But of this opinion I
am, that it is sufficient for every Married Man to carry his own Burden and
Proportion, in the Matrimonial Yoke, with Discretion and Patience; which latter
is a Virtue, their Wives will be sure to make them practice, if they be not
more fortunate, than the generality of Husbands are, and I think ever will be,
if one may judge of the future by the present.

I shall name but few, and write but little of the many, and several ways,
diverse virtuous (I do not say discreet) Wives take to be ill talked of, and
shall here skip troubling you with a Character of a vile sort of scandalous
Wives, that are commonly known, and publicly branded for such, who have, by
their wicked Lives, rendered themselves so contemptible, as they are to be used
by all virtuous Women, as we do persons infected with the Plague: We are not
bound to go see how they do, but we are obliged to avoid coming where they are,
both for our own sake, and the sake of others; and to remember to observe
Solomon's good Advice as to a virtuous Woman's carriage toward an ill
scandalous Woman, Remove thy way far from her, and come not near the door of
her House.

These are a sort of beastly Women, that take upon them the vile employment of
common censuring, and public railing at all strict Virtuous Women, arming
themselves with downright Impudence, having lost all their shame with their
Virtue; for they that part with the one, soon casts off the other: And because
they have rendered themselves contemptible by their ill Lives, they strive to
make good Women appear bad by their foul Tongues, scandalizing the Virtues by
all the ill Reports they can invent, being like those Solomon names, Who cannot
sleep without having done some mischief, being so abominably bad, as their very
Parents (for Friends they have none) want Confidence to excuse them, and they
Impudence to justify themselves. These Herd of beastly Women, the Virtuous are
bound in Charity to pity their bad Condition, but in Prudence to shun their ill
Company; and so I Will leave them with a red Cross on their Door, and a Lord have
mercy on their bad lives.

The first sort of Wives I shall here name, and but name, are a kind of Wives
that have the Happiness to be thought virtuous by many, but the Unhappiness to
be esteemed vain and indiscreet by most; they are careful to keep themselves
Chaste, but careless of what others say against their being so; and because they
think they do no ill, value not what ill others say they do, which is but a sad
sort of Logic, and an ill way of managing their Reputation; since though a
Wive's Innocence may satisfy her own Conscience, yet it cannot protect her
Husband's Honor, nor secure her own, since public Censure may blemish both,
if an outward discreet carriage does not prevent: Therefore, doubtless, a Wife,
who is truly virtuous, and truly desires to be esteemed such, is as much
concerned in Honor to keep a good Name, as she is bound in Conscience to lead
a good Life; and the Wife which in point of Reputation, values little what
others say, seldom care; much what she her self does, for what bad Censures she
casts on others, or others cast on her; and a Wife or Woman of that ill Temper
usually loves more to commit a hundred faults, than to repent of one, or be
told of any; never considering that a handsome Woman's leaving a Vice, argues no
defect in her Body, but a virtuous inclination in her Mind: For the very best
Women in the World are subject to Faults and Errors, as well as the worst, though
not so much; and with this great difference, That a pious Woman Sins against
her Will, a wicked Woman with it; in the first it is but the effects of the
Frailty of humane Nature, in the second it is the foul Issue of vicious
Inclinations and habitual Practice. Therefore, it is worth such Women's still
carrying in their Mind, this useful Memorandum, That it is always a bad Act, to
commit an ill Thing; but never an ill thing, to repent a bad Act; the first
being the Disease, the other the Remedy.

It Is a certain Truth, That all bad Women deserve Censure; and, it is as great a
Truth, that many good Women undergo bad Censures, though they do not deserve
them; many young Men dealing with handsome Women's Reputation, as Pilate did
with our blessed Savior, condemn him, though he ownd' be found no Fault in him.
Indeed the very Air of this Kingdom is so infected with the Nauseous Distemper
of Censuring, as I fancy 'twill be as impossible to stop all ill natured
Tongues from Censuring, as to stop all handsome Women's Eyes from stirring in
their Head, or their Blood from running in their Veins; for as long as they
move, busy Censurers Tongues will stir.

Therefore, the best and most likely way I know to prevent others speaking ill
of them, is, for them not to speak ill of others; for if they do what they
ought, you are unjust to Censure them; and if they do what they ought not, you
are unkind to do it; since none can do an ill Act, without being punished by
the very Act of doing it; and, therefore, by the Rule of God; Nature and true
Charity, pious, virtuous Women, ought rather to be troubled, than pleased for
the Faults of others, since she that is not, does in some degree, make others
Faults her own: As on the other Hand, she that shows Charity to a Man, does
good to her self, by doing good to him; for Charity to another is Charity to
ones self. A virtuous Wife may certainly say, she her self is virtuous; but she
cannot truly say such a Man's Wife is unvertuous, except she certainly knows
she is so; and all know that most Reports are false: But I am sure this is a
great Truth, That though a Wife be never so virtuous, yet she ought to be most
strictly careful, to prevent all others from thinking her the contrary, and to
shun provoking ill Tongues, as well as committing bad Deeds; since many a good
virtuous Woman's Reputation has been by others false Tongues sadly blasted, and
rendered unfortunate, though her Life and Carriage has been truly far from being
Scandalous or undeserving; so that no Woman ought to be so over-puff'd up with
the inward knowledge of her Virtue, as to slight the outward Care she ought to
take, and the prudent Means she is obliged to use to make all think her
virtuous; for though she be never truly such, yet she ought to take the same
care, and use the same means and method to plant a good Reputation in the
World, as good Gardners do in setting their Trees in Earth; let the Ground be
never so good and rich, which is, not to plant them too deep, for then they will
rot; nor yet too shallow, for then they will burn; so that a mean between both is
to be used in the very best Ground. So a Woman, though never so virtuous, ought
not to place so deep a value on her own Reputation, as thereby to undervalue
that of others; nor so debase herself and lessen her own Character, as to plant
too shallow an Esteem on her own Worth; for then all others will be sure to do
the like by her own Example; very reasonably concluding, That she ought best to
know her self. This is a way many a virtuous Woman takes to injure her good
Reputation; for she that will despise and censure others, must expect, and will
find, that others will despise and censure her.

There are another sort of Wives, though inwardly virtuous, yet outwardly so
overflow with Pride, Vanity and Ambition, as they are so very malicious as to
despise all below them, and hate all Persons above them; which is a wicked
Humor as to others, and an uneasy one as to themselves. These Women, because
some of their Neighbors Beauty is perhaps greater, or their Quality higher, or
their Estate larger, or their Equipage richer, or their Wit quicker, or their
Housekeeping nobler, and the like; these, because they cannot reach to their
high rate of Life, condemn and censure their way of living as very bad, vain
and extravagant; and because they cannot live as splendidly as they do, give
out, they do not livers prudent as they ought to do: And because these envious
Women are themselves too proud, give out, that their Neighbors are so too; and
by their unjustly and enviously cersuring their Pride (merely upon the account
of their own) it often inflames, and causes, or rather forces, their great
Neighbors to condemn their Folly in so doing, and perhaps their Chastity to
boot; and so to occasion many others to speak ill of them by their Example: For
Persons of high Quality and great Reputation, their Censures, like Bullets shot
out of great Guns, they carry farther, and pierce deeper than out of a lesser
size, though of a much better Mettle; the lesser must submit to the greater.
Fertile Plains are not the worse, though they are commonly overtopt by barren
Hills.

This is a usual way that many good Women make others censure their Virtue,
merely out of Revenge, (a Fountain many ill and scandalous Streams flow out of)
and thus by their indiscreet Carriage and malicious Reports, and censuring
others good Name, they lose their own, by causing others to condemn and censure
them; by which vain practice they are still like to come by the worst, which
made Solomon rank among worldly Vanities, That a Man should not contend with
one that is mightier than himself, Eccles. 6.10.

There are another kind of virtuous Wives that occasion their being ill talked
of, and Sacrifice their Reputation, because they will not follow the Manners
and Fashions of the Country they live in, and those of Quality they are
Neighbors to, being so vain, proud, and foolishly Self-conceited, that because
they cannot be allowed a Pattern to all, scorn to follow the Examples of any,
though of higher Degree, larger Fortunes, and much better Reputation and Esteem
than themselves.

I shall here name but one Example of the many I could give you, in order to
convince you, That all Persons are obliged by the Rules and Order of civil
Society, Prudence, and well and easy living, to follow the Manners, Customs and
Dresses of the Country they live in, and of the best and most esteemed Families
they accompany with, and are Neighbors to; and this one Example I shall take
out of France, because it shall be stamped with the best, at least most current
and modish Authority in the World. And, in that Kingdom, 'Twas in my time, and
I believe still is, among Persons of Quality, near as great a scandal for a
Lady to suffer a Man to sit on her Bed, as to admit him to lie in it. As for
instance: I remember when King Charles II. lived with Queen Mother in Paris, a
French Gentleman, of good Quality and great Estate, fell desperately in love
with an English Lady, so as to desire to Marry her (which I count Desperate
Love) and the Queen Mother had in a manner made up the Match; but, by an
unfortunate accident (I mean only for the Lady) a near Kinsman and Friend of
hers and Counselor in all her concerns (excepting those of her private Amors)
came purposely out of England to assist her in settling her Jointure, and other
Marriage concerns; and this Kinsman of hers, ignorant of the nice Punctilio's
of the French Ceremonies, did (that he might the more easily hear her, and she
him, he not knowing, nor she not remembering, how scandalous 'twas for a Man to)
sit on a Lady's Bed, (which is no very strange thing in England, where it may
be done without the least harm, though it cannot in France, without the greatest
scandal) but unfortunately this Lady's Lover came in to visit her, at the very
nick of time that he was sitting on her Bed, and the Monsieur seeing a Man
sitting on her Bed, was so surprised at the Sight, and scandalized at the
Action, that though the Man's great Age had been of it self a sufficient Antidote
against his Jealousy, especially knowing how near of Kin he was to her, and how
few days he declared staying with her, yet, the Monsieur, without using any
Words, or taking any Consideration, immediately left her and her Chamber, and
could never be persuaded to return to her again. This is only to mind you, That
the Custom of a Kingdom makes Rules and gives Laws in it is own Dominions, which
no Woman ought to break, if she desires to keep her Reputation whole. And that
Woman that knows she shall lose her Reputation, if she will admit a Man to sit
on her Bed, in my Opinion, deserves to lose her good name for doing it; let the
Action in it self, and her intention as to her self, be never so innocent.

But this severe Custom in France is nothing in comparison to the Severities,
or rather Cruelties that are generally practiced in Italy, by Husbands toward
their Wives; for, there, all young Gentlewomen are kept and bred up in a strict
Confinement, in Nunneries, till married; and, when they are so, are kept but a
kind of Prisoners in their own Houses: So that all the Writ of Ease a Maid gets
by marrying, is, but the exchanging one Prison for another, which renders them
the more eager after liberty; as penned up Rivers swell for being confined, and
run more violent when they get their freedom, for having been debarred of it,
and hindered from their natural Course; so most of these imprisoned Wives are
kept chaste by their Husbands strict confine meant of them, and careful
watchfulness over them, rather than by the Motions of their own natural Temper,
or virtuous Inclinations.

But for my own part as I utterly detest the Severities Husbands use to their
Wives in Italy, so I do not altogether approve the great Freedoms that many
Husbands do allow their Wives in England, (or their Wives will allow
themselves) some Husbands granting them such large Ranges of Liberty, as they,
by it, often show more alonfidence in their Wives, than Discretion in
themselves: Since a large liberty, without a suitable proportion of prudence to
well manage it, often causes high Extravagancies, and foul Excesses; and
therefore, I believe, as many Husbands have made their Wives dishonest by too
much mistrusting them (for Revenge is very sweet and natural to Women) so I
also believe some Wives have been made dishonest by their Husbands too much
trusting them: Opportunity often makes a Thief, which had not perhaps been a
Thief, but for the opportunity. The Italians have a certain way of reasoning,
as to the securing their Wives, by saying, That no Wife can be dishonest
without an Opportunity to be so, (Time and Action being inseparable) therefore,
say they, ever keep your Wife from an Opportunity, and you will ever keep her
honest. But God forbid that all Men that have opportunity should be Thieves; or
that all Women that allow Men Opportunity, should allow them Enjoyment. For
though the Italians say as true, That there can be no Enjoyment without
Opportunity, so the English say as true, That there may be Opportunity, without
Enjoyment. I Remember in Rome, upon a discourse with an Italian, of the great
freedoms Wives were allowed in England; I heard him swear a great Oath, That he
would not trust the great God with his Wife, when she was alone in Bed: And
asked me, not only with a serious, but furious Countenance, if it were possible
that strange Report could be true, That the Married Women in England had
liberty to go abroad with Men, and to receive Visits from them in their
Chambers; nay, sometimes when they were in Bed? I assured him, 'twas very
certain, That the Women of the highest Quality, greatest Esteem and best
Reputation, do both go abroad with Men in their Company, and receive Men's
Visits in their Cambers, and sometimes; by Men, (at the usual visiting hours,)
when they were in Bed, and by near Kindred at all times, and that this Freedom
was allowed by virtuous and great Women, to Men, without the least scandal; for
neerness of Kin, though it cannot greatly foul Actions, yet it can protect
Freedoms. But for a Married Woman to admit the liberty to a Man that is no way
related to her self, Husband or Family (except upon some good ground or
extraordinary occasion) argues, in my Opinion, great Weakness, and high
Indiscretion, being a thing, I cannot with prudence approve, nor a Wife, I
think, with discretion admit; for though some may favor such a Freedom with an
Innocent construction, yet others may brand it with a scandalous
Interpretation; and usually indiscreet Freedoms produce dishonorable Censures:
And that married Man that allows young Gallants to visit his Wife more than
ordinary, must allow Men to speak more than ordinary of her for it, or they
will be sure to allow it themselves.

Therefore, a strict, virtuous Wife, ought seriously to reflect on the Hazard
she runs, the Folly she commits, and the Dishonor she may suffer in her
Reputation, by allowing a Man that is unfitly qualified, so great a freedom. Now
as an Antidote to prevent reacting the like Indiscretion, I shall advise that
Wife that admits such Freedom to a Man at unvisiting hours, seriously to
consider, and soberly to reason and argue with her self, by supposing that this
her now dear Friend, she is so fond of, and so much relies in, should chance to
become her Enemy, and brag he has enjoyed her; (for such things have been
certainly done formerly, and may possibly be done again) whether she can, after
serious consideration and strict examination, satisfy her self, that she is able
in this case, to alledg more Reason, and produce better Arguments to justify
her Chastity, than her Enemy can bring to accuse her Virtue, before unconcerned
and unbiased Judges.

Let her, therefore, suppose the worst of her late dear Friend, but now great
Enemy, that he should swear, That he came often into her Chamber when she was
alone in it in Bed, and that she ordered and assigned him that opportunity and
convenience, that they might enjoy one another, as they then did; and, to
confirm the Truth of this Accusation, he says, she that was certainly so
indiscreet as to allow the one, might possibly be so unvertuous as to admit the
other; and alleges his being alone with her, to back the Truth of what he now
Swears, and to publish the Folly of that she then did; and farther adds, That
he can prove this her Indiscretion, by her own act. But she can never prove her
Innocence, when they were so alone by her own Words.

Therefore, let her seriously reflect and consider, how weak and slight her
Defense must be against her Enemies sworn Accusation, let her Wit be never so
great, and her Innocence never so clear, since she cannot produce so much as
one single Witness, to confirm the Truth of what she says, or to contradict the
Truth of what he Swears, having only her own bare Word, and that in her own
Cause, and to defend her own Honor, and Reputation, which she has exposed to
Censure, by the imprudent liberty she allowed her then Friend, either on the
account of her too little Wit, or too much Love, or at least too great want of
Discretion and Consideration.

I suppose she may make to his Accusation, some kind of Defense of this nature,
That in the first place, for his accusing her of suffering him to visit her at
unusual visiting hours, when she was alone in her Chamber in Bed, that part she
does not deny, because she cannot well do it; says, 'twas never but once, and
that once was mere accidental. Secondly, At the time he so visited her, he
swore he was, and she verily believed him to be an honest Man and her real
Friend, as well as her long and intimate Acquaintance. Thirdly, She takes God,
The Searcher of all Hearts, to be her Witness, that she did not then, or ever
before or after, act any thing with him in Thought, Word or Deed, that was not
truly virtuous and purely innocent, which his Heart knows to be a real Truth,
as well as he knows, what he swears to the contrary, to be an errant malicious
Lie. And, Lastly, she says, That scandalous Reports against Women of Quality
and Reputation, ought only to be credited by sober and prudent Persons, but
according to what they see themselves, and not according to what they hear from
others; because it is in the power of any wicked Man, to raise and cast
scandalous Reports on the most virtuous Woman in the World. All this I grant a
Woman may allege in her own Defense and Justification, which I cannot esteem
much, because she could not well say less.

First, as to his Accusation of her suffering him to visit her when she was
alone in Bed at unusual visiting hours; as to her Answer, that 'twas altogether
undesignedly, and accidentally, and that 'twas never but once, and that she was
fully resolved it should never be so a second time.

To this part of her Justification it may be answered, That granting the Judges
should take her own bare Word, (For she can give no more, that what she says is
a real Truth) yet it may be objected, That a Woman that will allow her self to
do one act of Indiscretion, in her carriage toward a Man, it may be indeed a
reasonable inducement to believe she may be persuaded to commit another. But to
draw an Argument, that though she committed one act of Indiscretion, yet we are
to credit her bare word, that she will never be brought to commit a second, is
but a weak and an irrational Conclusion; for if a pure sense of Honor and true
Love of Reputation, regulates all a Woman's Actions, and Carriage toward all
Men, (as certainly it ought) that Woman would never be so imprudent, as to
allow one freedom to her favorite Friend, at any time, which she could not
honorably own, and publicly justify at all times, and in all Places and
Companies, in case her Friend should become her Enemy; but indeed most Women
are too apt to mistake the difference between the word Lover, and the thing
Friend; for they will have them to be both one and the same thing, when in deed
they are very oft'n far from being so; for though every true Friend must be a
true Lover, yet every pretending Lover is not a true Friend, as many Ladies can
Witness by woeful Experience: But if Venus Love had then the predominant Power
over her Inclinations, as it certainly has over many Women, toward the
favorite Man of her present fancy, it may be better, and much more rationally
argued, That the same amorous Inclination which at that time overruled her
Discretion, by admitting him one freedom more than she should, might as well at
another time overpower her Discretion by admitting him a second liberty more
than she ought; for she that commits one act of indiscretion, shows, by it, a
probability that she may be prevailed with to act a second; but no
impossibility against her being persuaded to commit a third.

Next, as to that part of her justification, That the Man that did visit her
when she was alone in her Chamber in Bed, at an unusual visiting hour, 'twas
never but once, and that once was by one she verily believed to be her true,
faithful Friend, as well as her long and old Acquaintance: But to this it may
well be answered, That it is very common for great Friends, to prove great
Enemies, and often the greater Enemies, for having been great Friends; as the
Weight of a Pendulum Clock, falls the more backward, for being shoved the more
forward: And this I am sure, that there can be no Friendship in the whole
World, that is so loosely Tacked on, as that between a Man and a Woman, on a
mere Beauty Account, which must of course be destroyed by Death, impaired by
Sickness, and may be broken in pieces by a Thousand Accidents: Witness that
common one, of a Man growing to like another Woman better than his Mistress, or
she to fancy another Man better than him, (a common Fate that attends most
Beauty-Lovers), and so they grow to dislike one another; for great Beauty, though
it often creates great Fondness, yet it seldom contains a long constant Love:
For as Beauty is pleasing, so it is Clogging; and we know that the finest Sweet
Meats, make the foulest Surfeits.

For there we find it very usual among our young Gallants, that though one of
them has in a manner forsaken his Mistress, yet that Man cannot endure to see
her Love another Man; and it is ten to one she cannot endure to be without
another Man to Love; and this creates Anger and Revenge in her first Lover, and
perhaps provokes him to cast out Words that may highly reflect on her Honor;
(so vile and ill-natured is our present Age, as most Men are much readier to
revenge a mere fancied Injury, than to requite a real received Obligation.) And
if a Wife that allows a Man the freedom of visiting her, when she is alone in
Bed (at unusual visiting Hours) will but truly own the secret Thoughts of her
Heart, I am confident she cannot deny, but that one of the principal Motives
that induced her to grant her Lover that imprudent Freedom, was much occasioned
on this vain and foolish account, That she hoped, by her allowing extraordinary
Liberty to him, it would produce extraordinary Returns of Kindness to her:
Which is but a simple Fancy, since that Woman that enlarges her Favors and
Freedoms to a Man, beyond the just Bounds and Limits of a prudent, modest, and
a decent Carriage, though that Man may in Heat of Blood, seemingly embrace them
with an eager Fondness, and a passionate Delight; yet if he be either a Lover
of Virtue, or a Master of Reason, he cannot, but in his own Judgment, despise
her for it, and conclude, by her granting such over-large Liberties to him, it
savors more of hot Love, than true Friendship; and he cannot but in reason
judge, That as her present fond Love makes her now grant to him more Freedom
than is decent, so she may in a little time as well show more Kindness to
another than is discreet: For Beauty-love cannot be built upon any settled firm
Foundation, but on a Hill of Sand, which looks high, but stands weak; nor is it
raised and maintained by true Reason or pure Friendship, but rather hangs by
Geometry; that is, depends on a mere flashy, airy, amorous Fancy, as little
durable as Summers Rain, or Winters Sun; and therefore that Person she fancies
most, she will be sure to love best, and be fondest of, and kindest to, during
the present amorous Fit. And for that Wife, taking God, the searcher of all
Hearts, to be her Witness, That she never acted with that Man that accuses her,
any thing but what was truly Virtuous. Indeed she does well to take the God of
Heaven to be her Witness, for she can have none on Earth, except the Man, that
Witnesses against her: And, therefore, I shall desire her seriously to
consider, how is it possible to judge of a Woman's inward Intentions, but by
her outward Actions; and if they be indiscreet, how can any justly say, her
inward intentions are not so, since none can judge of the one, but by the
other? For we are to believe according to what we see, and not according to
what we hear, or the Woman vows she means, which (unless to God, the Searcher
of all Hearts) can be only known to her self, and consequently she can only be
a credible Witness to her self, and not others, as to her own inward intentions.

Lastly, for the excuse she alleges, That it lies in the Power of any wicked
Man to raise and cast scandals on the Reputation of the most Virtuous Woman on
Earth, as that she admitted such a Man to visit her, when she was alone in her
Chamber a Bed, when perhaps she never saw him out of it, much less he her in
it, having never possibly heard his Name, much less knew his Person; These
kinds of Reports, I grant lie in the power of every wicked Man, to raise on any
Virtuous Woman: But I deny it is in the Power of every wicked Man, to make a
Virtuous Woman say, she admitted him to visit her alone in Bed, when she never
did; and to own an indiscreet Act, which she never committed. Indeed I have
known many wicked Men disown ill things that they have done; but I never heard
of a discreet Woman own an ill thing she never did; so that I think it needless
to write any more than, That I look upon such groundless scandals, so falsely
raised, and shot at Random at a good Woman's Reputation, to be only able to
show a malicious Man's ill Nature, not justly to brand a Virtuous Woman's good
Name. But I fear I have already not only writ too much, but too sharp on this
Nice Subject; therefore, I shall only give this good, tho old Advice, to all
virtuous Wives, which is, still to use an Enemy, as if he may become a Friend;
and a Friend (especially in love matters) as if he may become an Enemy; that
is, a prudent Woman ought not to show too much Kindness to the one, nor declare
too fierce a Hatred against the other; but to manage with Discretion and
Moderation, her carriage to both, and to admit Piety, Virtue and due
Consideration, to regulate all her Actions; and she that observes these good
Measures, will be sure never to admit any Person (especially a Lover) any
private freedom which she cannot honorably own, and publicly justify.

Farther, a Virtuous Woman ought still to carry in her Mind, That she is bound
to satisfy all Persons as to her Virtue, as well as her self; others Tongues,
as well as her own Heart. Nor ought a virtuous Maid, or Wife, to depend much
upon her Lover's Vows or Oaths of a true and constant Love, and a perfect
unalterable Friendship; since most of their Vows and Love Oaths, being built
upon fading Beauty, which is but a Sandy Foundation, their Friendship commonly
moulders away, with the Beauty that created it.

I shall, therefore, advise all handsome virtuous Women not to depend much on
their Lovers fair Words, but on their own good Actions, strict prudent
Carriage, and pure Virtuous Life; and she that observes these good Measures,
will be sure not to show too much Love or Hatred to any Man, nor ever expose
her Reputation to her Lover's Humor; since by so doing, she is no longer his
Queen and Mistress, but his Subject and Servant, by trusting her Humor into
his Power, and what is worse, to his Mercy: And Solomon, the wisest of Men,
gives Men this good advise, Advoid Suretyship, and you shall be sure: And the
like Caution and Prudence also leads Women, not to be bound for, nor to trust
in any Beauty-Lover's Oaths, for this good reason, That if you never trust him,
he can never deceive you; but if you do, he may: And as it is natural for all
Women to hope the best, so it is discreet in all Women to fear the worst, and to
arm themselves against others bad Tongues as well as against their own ill
Acts. And as Discretion must ever be a great Virtue among Women so Indiscretion
must ever be a great Vice; for all it is being a great Mode, I esteem
Indiscretion to be much alike to Wickedness, as Covetousness is to Evil, which
is not only an evil Root, but the Root of all Evil. So Indiscretion is not that
sole Issue of one Vice, but the fruitful Parent of many, if not most. Now
remember this, That though it is possible that a Woman may be virtuous, and not
discreet in some Cases; yet it is impossible in any Case, that a Woman can be
indiscreet by being Virtuous, since Discretion is a part of Virtue.

I shall not here give it as a general Rule, without any Exception, That a
Virtuous Woman must still make a fond Wife; for Virtue is still the Gift of
God, but a Husband is often the gift of a Father, and sometimes forced by him,
and not chosen by her: And I will appeal to all Men and Women-kind, if this be
not a great and real Truth, That a Wife's liking and loving a Husband, must
depend solely upon her own free Choice, and not upon her Father's Will: She
may, indeed, obey what pleases him, but she cannot love but what pleases her
self: Love is to be led, not drawn: Virtue may make her a good Wife, but Love
can only make her a fond one, and Content a happy one.

Now though it is certain, That natural Heat still works strong in all young
Women's Temper; yet it is far from being certain, That Women's Love to their
Husbands, does still work strong in all young Wives Minds; for though a brisk
Heat still waits on a Woman's Constitution, whilst she is a young Woman, yet a
brisk Love to a Husband does not still attend a Woman's Inclinations, whilst
she is a young Wife: And the reason of this is plain, because often a Woman's
Love and liking in the choice of a Husband, only springs from, and is but the
bare Issue of her then first Fancy; which, perhaps, had not the least mixture
of good Reason, or true Consideration in its composure, but was merely to
gratify her passionate, amorous Inclinations; and such a kind of Love, or
rather Frenzy, is usually but like a Fire of Straw, which though it lights quick,
and burns fierce, yet it consumes soon; and this causes her Love-flame, to last
no longer than her Love-fancy, which is usually but of a short duration, as
well of a fickle composition: But the natural Temper of a young healthful
Woman's Constitution, its Operation may be of long Continuance, and must last as
long as her youthful Health does: Whereas the fickle Love to the Husband of her
mere Fancy, may possibly not last so long as her Youth, or Health either.

This is the Cause that many of the hot, fiery Venus-Brood of young Wives, love
their Husbands more for the Man's sake, than the Man for the Husbands sake; for
the Man's part oft'n creates Pleasure, but the Husbands part oft'n occasions
Trouble, which makes many of the young Mettle sort of Wives, to like well
enough coupling with their Husbands by Night, who cannot, with Gusto, relish
their single Company by day; for they can then entertain themselves with sweet
Variety; which plainly demonstrates what kind of Divertisement such sort of
Wives Love to their Husbands aims at, and is delighted in.

I shall not here venture to lanch my Discourse into the vast Ocean of Reasons
and Pretenses that there happens in Husbands loving or hating their Wives; nor
shall I here pretend in the least, to mark out the just bounds and true
Measures that Husbands ought to use in the Trusting or Mistrusting their Wives
Carriage in the Management of their Chastity; only thus much I may safely
write, That there must be great Care taken in raising or falling this Spring,
that must turn this Engine; for over-Liberty, or over-Watchfulness and
Restraint of Husbands to Wives, are of such dangerous Consequences, that a
Failure of the exact Proportions, and just Measures of either side, may prove
of fatal Consequence. Therefore I shall only say, That a wise Husband ought to
observe a moderate Care between both these Extremities, which is the most
discreet and secure way; and doubtless a politic Husband ought so warily and
prudently to steer his Course, and soberly and carefully to manage his Carriage
toward his Wife, as to avoid showing too great a Jealousy of her, or granting
too great a Liberty to her, lest the first may make her what she should not be;
and the second cause her to make him what he would not be.

But it is more than time to beg your Pardon for having led your Thoughts as far
as Italy, the Garden of the World, only to show and entertain you with the
worst Weed in it, which is the Husbands of that Countrey's jealous and
barbarous Usage of their Wives. I shall now conclude this Branch of my
Discourse by only adding, That many Virtuous Wives cause many ill Discourses,
and sharp reflecting Censures on their Reputation and good Name, by their being
so vain, proud and foolishly indiscreet, as not to follow the Fashions of their
Betters; for doubtless there are Rules and Measures in the Manners of Dresses,
as well as other Things, which Women, by the Rules of Discretion and Decency,
and the Orders of Civil Society, ought to observe and follow, according to the
general Practice, that such of their own Quality wear, and the Country they
live in, use; and the best and most virtuous Persons they are Neighbors to,
those to be Followers of, and to make a strict Friendship with; for men
commonly judge of Women's Inclinations, by the Company they make choice of, and
are delighted in.

There are another sort of Virtuous Wives, which is the last Sort I shall speak
of, who, for all their great Virtue, will yet make a hard shift but they will
be ill talked of: These are a nice, delicate, squeamish sort of Virtuous Wives,
who are, (or at least would have all think they be) great Critics, and strict
Followers of all the Punctilio's that belong to, and are useful for the
maintaining a pure and clear Reputation in this World, so as to deserve and
preserve a high and virtuous Esteem of all Persons, fancying they justly merit
all Men's Praises, and no ones Censures; having such nice and curious Palates,
in point of good Reputation, as they cannot endure the Scandal of allowing a
Gallant; but yet can, at the same time, suffer the public Censure of
Entertaining a He-Friend, as a dear, intimate and constant Companion; and hope
the good Name of Friend, will smother the bad one of Gallant. Indeed the Name
of Friend, may serve as a Blind against a Wives own Fears, but it cannot still
prove a Defense against others Tongues. So vile and censorious is our present
Age, as most of our young Men's Discourses of hansom Women, are so very
Satirical, as they generally interpret young Men and Women's entertaining one
another, to be but Courtship, that savors more of pure Venus-Love, than true
Platonic Friendship; and I can too truly say, before hansom Women can make all
young Men's Courtship to pass for true Friendship, they must weed out of this
Country all the busy, sharp, ill-natured Censures in it, who snatch up any
Pretensions to worry and devour a Woman's Reputation; for they will tell you,
That the pure state of Innocence was never but in one Woman, which was the
first of her Sex, and will be the last of that Kind: And as it begun soon, so
it lasted not long; for it left her, before she left the World. Now it may be
argued, That if the Nature of the Mother of all Women-kind, when she was in
perfect Soundness and Strength, would then yield to an Enemy in Paradise, what
may be now expected from her Daughters in this wicked World, and vicious Age?
If a Woman could stumble then in a pure Light, why should any wonder that many
Women should fall now in this our Age of Sin and Darkness? And if a Woman could
not defend her self against one Tempter then, why may not many Women yield to
diverse Tempters now, that there are near as many young Men that are Seducers,
as there are young Women that are hansom? Especially considering in what a
superlative Degree, Vice, Vanity and Idleness possesses most of them; and that
our vain Ladies Love to their Gallants, is now as very much in Use, as great
Beauty is in Esteem, and strict Piety out of practice.

And if when there was but one Man, and one Woman in all the World, so that
sweet Variety could not be then in fashion; yet all know, That one Woman could
not then be true to that one Man, but did deceive him, merely for
deceiving-sake; for she could not then leave one Man for another, which is now
grown a common Womanish Practice. Therefore it may be argued, That by the same
Rule and Parity of Reason, That as the Woman did deceive the one Man, when she
was in Paradise, so may many Wives now deceive many Husbands, whilst they are
here out of it; for as there are plenty of Eve's Daughters that still retain
the Subtilty of their Mother, so there will be ever plenty of Adam's Sons that
will still retain the Folly of their Father, and be beguiled by their Wives;
which is a Weakness and Distemper that is now grown so common and infectious, as
it is like the Plague that reigned so universally in Egypt, as it overspread the
whole Land. And all our most Learned Doctors are so very weak and ignorant in
the means of prescribing a Remedy for this Distemper to others, as they cannot
so much as compose an Antidote against it for themselves, though they should all
join in a Consultation.

And as the World is now more increased in Men and Women, so it is also in Sins
and Vices, Women having a thousand Arts, Cheats and Allurements to decoy Men
with, which were not known then, though commonly practiced now. Therefore all
Women, not only of the vain modish Brood, but of the most virtuous and pious
Kind, are in Duty obliged to make it their constant Endeavors, and hearty
Prayers to the Almighty, That he will please to repair the Defects of their
Earthly Nature, by the Supplies of his Heavenly Grace, that the Strength of
this latter may conquer the Weakness of the former; and that as they are by
Nature frail, and inclined to do what is ill, so they may, through Gods Mercy,
love to practice what is Good, and to shake off the wanton and vicious
Inclinations of the Flesh, to put on the heavenly Motions of the Holy Spirit,
which will certainly make a Woman love God, and keep his Commandments; which
will give her a happy Content of Mind whilst she lives, and a blessed Peace of
Conscience when she comes to die And I am sure neither a vain Life, nor a Fop
of a Gallant, can ever bring either.

It may be farther asked, Where is the great Difference between a mere
Beauty-Lover and a mere Gallant's Friendship, when it is only the Woman's Beauty
that creates and maintains the Gallant's Love, and his false subtle Craft that
nicknames his mere Venus-Love, by miscalling it real Friendship? And as many
virtuous Wives deceive and flatter themselves in the Title of their Lovers, by
calling their Gallants their Friends; so many Women are cozened in the Nature
and Measures of their Love: They Will tell you, and with reason too, (a thing not
very common among Women) That it is immodest and scandalous for a Wife to admit
a Man to make Love and public Courtship to her: But they will tell you at the
same time, That a Wife is not bound to take notice a Man makes Love to her,
till he tells her so; which, in my Opinion, is a very senseless fancy, since
that makes the fault of a married Woman's admitting a Man's making love to her,
not to consist in her receiving it from him, but in his telling it to her; not
in her suffering him to do it, but in his acquainting her, that he does it.

Sure that Woman's Judgment must be very dull, and her Eyesight very dim, that
can be so grossly mistaken, as to fancy a Man's making love to her, is not to be
taken notice of, by seeing it her self, but by her hearing it from him; when
it is most certain, that the Eye is a much quicker and surer Witness than the
Ear; as may be observed in firing a Cannon, the Flame of the Powder comes to
the Eye before the Noise of the Gun does to the Ear; and that Woman must be
strangely dull, that cannot discern a man's amorous Looks, and passionate
Actions, and Carriage toward her, that he is in love (or at least pretends it
by acting as if he were) without his downright telling her he is.

A Woman may possibly hear, and yet not believe what she hears; but it is
impossible she can plainly see, and not believe what she plainly sees; for
seeing is believing; and if we should deny Sight to be a sufficient credible
Witness, we must by it deny the Foundation of all Christian Religion; for the
Apostles seeing our Blessed Savior's Miracles that he did in his Lifetime,
and both seeing of him, and conversing with him, after he was risen from the
dead, is the great Security we have that he is so.

I grant it is not in a Wive's Power to hinder a Man from liking, loving, and
esteeming her; but sure it is in any Wive's Power to avoid receiving, or at
least countenancing a Man's private Visits, and entertaining his public
Courtship. And really it cannot possibly enter into my Belief, how a Woman
that is certainly assured that such a Man loves her passionately well on the
account of her Beauty, and who confirms it in all his Words and Actions, and by
his high Concerns for her, and abundant Courtship to her, which she receives
with great Kindness, Freedom, and Satisfaction, seeming to be abundanly
confirmed of his great and passionate Love, and that she cannot but be assured
that he knows she knows so much; and yet that I must believe at the very same
time, that she can be so very fierce, and barbarously ill-natured, as if that
Man she knows so highly loves her, should yet dare to tell her, he does so, she
should from that moment shun him, and forsake him: This, I confess, seems to me
such a Paradox in Love, and is so extravagant, so extraordinary, and so highly
impracticable, as it is much fitter for all Men's Wonder, than any sober Man's
Belief.

Therefore let such wild Romantic humored Ladies say what they will, I am
sure all Virtuous Women are to consider, as they ought, which is, That few
young Men make Love to a Woman (I mean upon mere Beauty-account) but on this
score, that either he fancies she likes him, and so is inclined to be civil, if
not kind to him, or he has some hope, that in time she will be both; or else he
must be a great Fool, eagerly to strive for that he never expects to obtain,
and fiercely to besiege that Place he never hopes to take; and so might as
wisely build in the Regions of the Air, or employ his time in weighing of
Flames, or making his study to answer Solomon's Question, What Profit has he
that labors for the Wind? I am sure, if he thinks there may be some, Solomon
thought there was none.

Really, I have often entertained my self with the Thoughts of what a strange
Brood of Lovers our next Age will produce, considering the Temper of our
present one, in which many (I think I might have said most) handsome Women's
Pride, Vanity, Idleness and Inconstancy reign in them so powerfully, and is
practiced by them so commonly, as nothing is more common, except the Debauchery
of their Gallants; and how Excellent and Religious a Brood, Vice, Idleness and
Vanity will produce, the next Age will be able to tell you more, if possible,
than this: I Am sure in this it is become common (I had almost said natural) for
most of our handsome Women to be more inclined to Vice than Virtue; and for our
young Men to be readier to speak ill than well of them, and to be more apt to
credit all malicious Reports, than to search into any real Truths; to believe
what Men say, than to examine what Women do, and what Character they justly
deserve. And if in their Love-Rambles, and Beauty-Chace they meet with a
handsome Woman that is truly virtuous (which is a kind of Rarity) they usually
avoid her, because she is so; and if they light on a handsome Woman that is
unvirtuous (which is far from being a Rarity) they despise her for being such;
many of our young Gallants being grown such subtle Logicians in the Politics
of making love, as to form to themselves this manner of arguing, That a handsome
Woman that can be persuaded to become too kind to one Man, may by the same Rule
of Folly and Wickedness, be persuaded to grow too common to many. And as a
virtuous Woman still carries in her mind the agreeable Satisfaction of doing
what she ought to do; so an unvirtuous Woman often carries in her Body the sad
Effects for doing what she ought not to have done; which great ill in some
Women, often occasions some good in many Men, by terrifying them from acting
that common English Sin, for fear of meeting that common French Punishment that
usually attends it; for many of our fine young Gallants, though they do not fear
the Sin of the Act, yet they dread the Sting of the Disease; the Pain of the
Body here, though not the Torment of the Soul hereafter.

To conclude in a word, The present modish superficial Love of most of the fine
young Gallants to their Mistresses, is become like our present Coin, which
either is so false, or so clipped, as there remains little of its outward Size,
or inward Value. So most of our young Gallants pretended Love to their present
Mistresses is so falsified and debased by their brutish Lust, and unvirtuous
Designs, as they only cry up Women for their Beauty, not Goodness; most of them
praising the latter, but in hopes to enjoy the former; most valuing their
Mistresses Bodies more than their Souls or indeed their own either. Therefore a
young, Gallants swearing to his Mistress that he loves her as well as his own
Soul, though it be a Compliment that sounds great, yet in effect it is an
Expression that means little, because he loves his own Soul so.

THE SECOND DISCOURSE, Of mere Beauty-Love, and of some of the vile Arts, and
wicked Deceits many of our Young Gallants use to ruin their Mistresses
Reputation, under a false Pretense of true Friendship; and of the great Folly
of such Ladies who delight in Censuring others, but slight all others Censuring
them, because they fancy they do not deserve it, with some useful Advices
thereon.
I Shall begin this Discourse with my Desire to to the Reader, that he will
please to believe this great Truth, That it is far from my Opinion to think
there can hardly be a pure, virtuous and innocent Friendship between a
beautiful young Woman, and a handsome young Man, except grounded upon a
Marriage-account, or a near Relation-score; for though I confess I esteem any
other, some akin to a Rarity, yet I am far from believing it an Impossibility;
though I look on mere Beauty-Friendship to be very fickle and undurable in most,
because it seldom lasts longer than the Woman's Beauty that creates it. But
where a Friendship is justly grounded, well suited, and virtuously fixed,
between a Man and a Woman, such a Friendship is certainly one of the greatest,
and most lasting Satisfactions of this Life, since it may, and in some does
last as long as life it self, and is the high Advantage a rational Man has
over a Beast, who, though he can love a Companion to eat with, yet he cannot
choose a Companion-Friend to converse with, to rely in, and make use of. And I
am sure none allows, nay, loves and esteems more a well-qualified Friendship
than I do; I mean such a sort of Friendship between a young Man and Woman, as
is contracted and maintained upon a lawful and honorable Account, being
founded on virtuous Addresses, as those of true Friendship, Kindred-kindness.
Marriage-design, or for Obligations done to ones Family in general; and
Obligations of that nature, every one of that Family is to acknowledge as done
to himself in particular, and accordingly endeavor a Requital, or upon any
other handsome or lawful Account; for doubtless a Friendship that is virtuously
qualified, and piously grounded, is altogether lawful and unscandalous, as well
as highly satisfactory; but my Design is here only to write against the common
modish, and mere superficial Beauty-Friendship that our young Gallants usually
have, or pretend to have for their Mistresses, springing out of a mere amorous
fit, without any good Reason, or true Consideration; growing up, Mushroom-like,
on a sudden, and raised only by a sight of a handsome Face at a Play, Park,
Court, etc. which sort of Love (or rather Fancy) for a Woman, I esteem to be
only great, because her Beauty is so, he only loving her well, because she
looks so. And sure none can deny, but mere Face-Beauty is shallow, frail,
inconstant and undurable, being as very fading as the Complexion it is much
composed of, and chiefly illustrated with.

I wish this sort of Lovers would take into their serious Consideration,
where is the real Satisfaction a Gallant can any way propose to himself to take,
in gazing on his Mistresses Beautiful Face, since at best, it can be but a
momentary Eye-pleasure, a thing next to nothing, and as little lasting as it is
little worth; so slight and sandy a Foundation is mere Beauty built on, it
being indeed only a fine bright burnished Clay, inamell'd with pure white and
red, which by many of our fine Ladies now adays, is oftener bought with Money,
than given them by Nature; and do but unmask the Skin of one of their Faces,
whether her Beauty's bought or given, and 'twill certainly at first sight prove
loathsome to ones Eyes, and in a very little time noisome to the Smell, being
only fit for nasty Worms, not fine Gallants.

Next let us suppose that an amourous young Gallant should be so prosperous and
fancically happy, as by the Expense of much time, many Oaths, and the Trial of
a Thousand costly Effays, to gain not only her free leave to behold her
beautiful Face, but to enjoy her beautiful Person. In the first place it is most
certain, That a Beauty-chase after a handsome Face, is but like a Fox hunting
Recreation, which though you follow never so eagerly, yet the pleasure lies only
in the pursuit, not in the taking of the Game. Next, I shall desire the young
Gallant to balance with the Pleasures he enjoys, the many Troubles he must
suffer by the several Fears, Doubts, Jealousies and vexatious Disappointments
he must rencounter in the keeping and securing his new Conquest; and sure there
needs no stronger an Argument to prove both the uncertainty and difficulty of
keeping his Mistress constant to himself, than the easiness he found in
persuading her to prove inconstant to another; for on the same score that she
left another for him, she may leave him for another. Next I shall desire this
Beauty-Lover but to look into common Experience, and 'twill tell him, That as
he will certainly be soon cloyed with her Face, so he will be soon weary of her
Body, since he loves the last, but for the first; and sure no Man can be so
ignorant in our wife, amorous and Romantic Age, as not to know that sweet
Variety is now all in fashion, and that Love, like Beauty, cannot always last,
because great Beauty it self never did, nor never can: And though most of our
fine, modish Ladies are, as to the Gallantry of having a Gallant very constant,
yet as to the person of one Gallant, most of them are very inconstant and
changeable, because one suits not with sweet Variety, which is now become the
common Mode, great Delight, and usual Practice of most young Gallants and their
Mistresses.

Now last of all, and indeed what is worse, and most strange of all, let us
suppose that our young Gallant's Mistress should chance to prove virtuous
(which indeed is a chance) and is fully and unalterably resolved to continue
still so; then must our hot, fierce, fiery Lover's eager desire after the
enjoying her, render his enflamed Heart, to be here on earth, as Dives his Soul
was in Hell, tormented with a Thirst never to be quenched; that is, whilst her
Beauty lives, or till his Love dies; and indeed, the best of it is, both are
mortal, and neither long-lived. In a word, If we seriously search into the true
Nature, and common Effects that mere Beauty-Love usually produces, we shall
find it is ordinarily accompanied with great Fears, constant Jealousies, and
daily vexatious Disappointments, which this sort of Beauty-Love is usually
attended on, tormented with, and commonly expires in.

And truly, Reader, it is only this sort of noisome Venus-Love, and mere Beauty
Friendship that I exclaim against, having, as I said before, no mixture of
Marriage-design, Family-Obligation, well-grounded Friendship, or so much of
Kindred-pretence, as that of a Welsh Cousin, to shelter and countenance their
long Visits, and great Familiarity: But many Women fancy that the virtuous Name
of Friendship excuse the scandalous one of Gallant, never reflecting on the
vast difference there is in the Carriage between a true pure Platonic Lover,
and a mere Beauty-Gallant's Friendship toward the Woman they pretend a real
kindness to, and a concern for, since he that is a Woman's true Friend indeed,
must make it his main Business and great Care so to order all his Looks, Words
and Actions that any way relate to that Woman he pretends and vows a true and
virtuous Friendship for, as to avoid giving all Persons the least Occasion or
Umbrage to suspect he has any Design to be esteemed her Beauty-admirer, or
pretended Gallant, which is a Title, a real Friend, on the account of his true
Friendship, ought as much to avoid, as a truly virtuous Woman, on score of her
good Reputation, ought truly to detest, since it is an undeniable truth, That no
Man can heartily loves a Woman's Person, that does not truly love, and heartily
endeavor to preserve her good Name, and make her Honor part of his own. Nay,
I am farther of opinion, that no Man does love a Woman as a real perfect
Friend, that does not love her Reputation as much as if she were his real Wife,
that is, to be a true Partner, and joint-sharer, in her good and bad Fame:
Whereas on the contrary, a mere amorous Gallant, is a Friend to a Woman merely
because she is handsome, and only loves her, because her Beauty likes him, and so
is a concerned party, only as to her good or bad look's, not her bad and good
actions; therefore he uses all his Arts, and employs all his skill and
endeavors, to accomplish his wicked ends on her, he so eagerly Courts; and if
her Piety and Virtue is so great as she will not suffer him to enjoy her, yet
his wicked design is so vile, as to strive to make all Men believe he does it.

In a word, this is the great difference between a true Friend, and a Fop
Gallant, the first makes it his real design and hearty concern, to preserve her
Reputation; whereas the Amorous Gallant, makes it his grand business and sole
aim to destroy it: But most Ladies are so vain (I had almost said foolish) as
to fancy they can defend themselves against all scandalous reflections on their
Reputation by the great Strength of their Wit; but really the strength of such
vain Wit, springs often but from the Weakness of their Judgment; therefore I
shall Caution that Woman who depend so much on the greatness of her own Wit, to
beware of two things; the first, is, Not to rely too much on her own Wit: The
second, not to depend too much on her Gallants Oaths; lest both fail her: For
indeed it is very common for young Women to have a better opinion of their own
Wit than they ought, and to place a greater confidence in their Lovers Oaths
than they should, and so run into a double Error, by trusting their own Wit too
much, and by mistrusting their Gallants Oaths too little.

Truly I have often observed, that many a young modest and bashful Woman when
her Lover makes the first approaches, as to the besieging and gaining of her
Heart, behaves her self as many young Soldiers do at their first coming to the
Siege of a Town; they are then fearful and cautious of all Shots made toward
them, lest they should wound or kill them; but after the Siege has continued
some time, and they are accustomed to hear the Bullets fly about their Ears,
and to see Men fall dead at their Feet, though their danger is full as great at
last, as at first coming, yet the Custom lessens their Fears, though not their
Danger; and those Shots, which at the beginning of the Siege, they shunned out
of discretion, they afterward slight through long Custom. Indeed it is much
alike with many a modest and bashful young Maid, when her Lover makes his first
approaches to the besieging and gaining her Heart; at the beginning of the
Siege, she is very wary and fearful, blushing at every Praise her Lover shutes
at her, or Compliment he makes to her, lest he should wound or destroy her good
Reputation; but after she has allowed her Gallants Siege for some time, and
shes accustomed to hear his frequent Compliments, and Vollies of Oaths in her
Praises, to fly commonly about her Ears, as they grow more usual to her, so she
grows less fearful of them, though they are not the less dangerous for being the
more common, and the more they are trusted, the more they betray; for all know,
a false relied on Friend, is worse than a declared Enemy; for the first you lie
open to, the other you arm your self against. When I see a young Gallant highly
praising, and eagerly courting his Mistress (I still except Marriage) and that
she seems much delighted in hearing his extravagant Romantic Praises of her
great Beauty and high Perfections, it puts me in mind of a story in Aesop's
Fables, of a Fox that saw a Raven upon a Tree, with a Bit in his Mouth, which
the Fox had a longing desire to get, which put him a thinking and casting about
what way he might, Cheat the Raven of it; at last he concluded, there was no
better nor more likely way, than to praise him out of it; and therefore he told
the Raven, he was a most excellent Bird, and fell upon extolling and praising
the gracefulness of his Person, the beauty of his Feathers, his admirable gift
in Augury; and now, says the Fox, if you had but a Voice answerable to all your
other excellent Qualities, the whole World could not show such another famous
Creature: These high Praises, and Nauseous Flatteries, so transported the
Raven, as it presently set him upon opening his Mouth to try to Sing, and in
that Essay he dropped the Foxe's desired Bit, which he presently run away with,
and bid the Raven to remember, though he extolled his Beauty, yet he commended
not his Brains.

Indeed it is much alike, that of a young Gallants courting his Mistress, and
his over-magnifying and extolling her Beauty; usually all the design his great
Courtship aims at, is only for the desired Bit of Enjoyment; which he no sooner
obtains, but he presently quits his Fondness for her, and Courtship to her, and
runs away in the pursuit of some new fresh Conquest; and in effect, says the
same to the Woman, as the Fox did to the Raven; though he did commend her Beauty,
he did not praise her Wit, but now Laughs at her Folly to be so deceived.

The Moral of this Story is, That a Woman that can be so vainly foolish as to
be brought to believe she is, what indeed she is not, may possibly, by the same
Rule of Folly, be persuaded to do what she ought not to do; and to admit her
Gallant to Stuff her Mind so full of the Praises of her Beauty, as she has no
room left, or time to spare, to think of Countermining her Gallants Plots
against her Virtue and Reputation; for as many Lights blind the sight, so many
Praises dim the Eyes of many Women's Understanding and Consideration; and whilst
her Gallant Swears she is the Possessor of numbers of Virtues and Perfections,
she ought never to claim; she neglects her Chastity, which she ought ever to
keep, leaving the substance of pure Virtue for the shadow of vain Praises.

Now I have done the Story of the Craft of the Four-legged Fox, I shall begin
to name the Folly of many fine handsome Ladies, that suffer themselves to be
cheated by the vile Arts of another sort of Two legged Foxes, which the Men
call Gallants; but most of the Ladies that entertain them, esteeming the name
of Gallant too course and scandalous, call them (or rather miscall them) their
Friends: I wish I could say they were, by the Ladies, more known than trusted;
but indeed they are trusted, because not known.

This sort of Two-legged Foxes, are full as Crafty, altogether as Treacherous,
and abundantly more Mischievous than the Four legged Foxes; because these only
worry the Bodies of poor small inconsiderable Creatures, merely to satisfy
their Hunger; but these Two legged Foxes, called Gallants, often rot their
Mistresses Bodies, and sometimes damn their Souls for ever, only to satisfy
their present Lust.

I shall now a little glanse my Discourse on these Gallants usual way of
advancing their Approaches toward the gaining, their Mistresses favor and
esteem, that is, the liberty to ruin their Reputation; for though most of our
young Gallants are grown too crafty and well-bred, to tell them in plain
downright English, That their aim is to debauch and make them their Misses;
yet most of their designs and endeavors are such, whatsoever they say or swear
to the contrary; and therefore they use many Stratagems, and put on several
Disguises, that if one fail, another may take, garnishing all their Discourses
with great Oaths of a most passionate and most undecaying Friendship and
Reality, and many such like Lovers Canting Expressions, which usually are as
constant to one Woman's Beauty, as the Wind is constant to one Point of the
Compass; and indeed, both are so Wavering and inconstant, as it is able to make
a sober unconcerned person, to swell as much with Laughter, as the Ladies
Gallant does with Love, to observe what Arts he uses, what Stratagems he
practices, what Pains he takes, what Oaths he makes, nay, what Oaths he breaks,
to make his Mistress believe him, what perhaps he is not, (for indeed few
Gallants are) real, constant, and virtuous Lovers; for most of their Love-Oaths
are not the true Issue of a pious, well-meaning, and unalterable Affection, but
merely the amorous and flashy effects of a lustful violent Passion which they
use to screw themselves up into their Mistresses Favor; which the better to
obtain, they cry her up for the best Woman and truest Friend in the whole
World; That her beauty is charming, her Carriage Civil and obliging, her
Converse most agreeable, her Wit quick, her Motions taking, which make all that
see her admire and praise her, and all that know her, love and esteem her; in a
word, shes Mistress of all the Perfections of all Kinds, Degrees and Qualities,
that belong to the compleatment of the most perfect of her Sex; which makes her
Gallant Swear, He is so far from being able singly to express all her Merits,
as it is not in the power of all the greatest Wits in the World together to
extract out of the 24 Letters so many Praises as her Merits justly claim and
truly deserve. Now her Lover has told her what she now is; his next part is to
Swear to her what he now is, and ever will be, in all his Pretenses and
Addresses to her, which is, that they shall be all ever pure, innocent and
unbyas'd, free from all Self-interest and ill Designs, or so much as any
unhandsom Thoughts, and so takes upon him whether she will or no, or at least
she knows not why, the officious office of serving her in all her concerns,
that is, in serving himself; for he designs they two shall be all one. This
part I believe he means really; but for that of his constant Love, and
unalterable Friendship, though he Swears to its Truth a thousand times, yet as to
that, I fancy he only deals with his Mistress, as a Cheat does with a Merchant,
that is Fool enough to trust him; he promises him any thing, because he
resolves to perform nothing; and defies the Ware he takes to be so bad, as the
Payment he means to make. So these sort of Beauty-admirers, love in effect but
after this rate, Vowing to his present Mistress, though he knows she has crowds
of Adorers, yet none of them are to be compared to him; for he loves her not
only above the World, but he love the World only for her; Swearing to her, That
what she dislikes, he hates; what she loves, he is fond of; and that her Will
is his Will in all things; he being to her just like Clay in the Potters Hand,
which she may Work into what shape she pleases: These are his ordinary
Protestations (I do not say real Meanings) and is the common Prelude to the
Tune of his making love (or rather practicing deceit) since usually all his
large repeated Oaths only aim to make his Mistress to him, as a Wife is to a
Husband; which is, That they two should be but one Flesh, (Marriage still
excepted, for he will be to her Beauty, only a Tenent at Will, not for Life;)
and in order hereunto, he ventures telling his Mistress, That the Tie of
Friendship is much more natural and agreeable, than the dull heavy Chains of
Matrimony; for the first is made wholly and and soly by the Woman's own
voluntary choice, the other usually by the advice and persuasion of Friends;
nay, often by the terrible and powerful awe and threatenings of Parents; and
sure such a Match as is made up by fear or force, and no Love nor liking, a
Wife cannot but esteem such a Husband, to be rather a Trouble to her Days, than
a Comfort to her Life.

And now I name Marriage, give me leave by the by to tell you, in a word, my
Opinion and Observation on Heiresses of great Estates, That they are generally
more unfortunately married than other Women that have but small Fortunes;
because rich Heiresses, are commonly sold by their Guardians, or betrayed by
their Kinsmen or Favorite Waiting Woman; for it is a fatal consequence that
usually attends great Heiresses, that because they have greater Fortunes than
they really need, they must have less content, than they truly want, and must
enjoy little Comfort, because they possess much Riches. And as many Heiresses
are rendered unfortunate by having very large Fortunes, so many young Women
suffer many fowl Censures for having a large proportion of Beauty; whilst other
Women, that are very far from being handsome, live very far from Scandals, though
perhaps not free from deserving them.

And now Reader, I have mentioned a few of the many Arts and deceitful words,
young Gallants use to deceive their Mistresses with; give me leave but only to
name a few of the ordinary excuses or rather justifications, diverse of their
Mistresses (tho perhaps other Men's Wives) alledg in their own Defense and
Justification, and with them seem fully satisfied, though their Friends and
Relations are far from being so, to whom they owe a respect and ought to have a
concern for, though they receive no Maintenance from; and when once an Amor
between a Mistress and her Gallant comes to flame out, to public view, and so
makes common Discourse, it must come at last to her Friends and Kindreds Ears;
for they cannot but hear, what all speak aloud to her Shame, and their
Discredit, which must make them troubled at it, and be much concerned for her,
though perhaps shes not in the least for her self, and therefore when her Friends
and Kindred come to discourse and argue with her about it, and assure her, though
her, Intentions be never so innocent and virtuous, yet her keeping so much
Company with such a Man cannot but raise scandalous Censures and ill
Reflections upon their Credit and her Reputation; but she to this part of their
Accusation, seems more incensed at what they say, than at what she does, and
instead of sinking into a Fit of Repentance for her own Deeds, she swells into
a Fit of Anger at their Words, in questioning her virtuous Life and discreet
carriage, protesting she does not in the least deserve her Friends ill Opinion,
or the Worlds bad Censure, and therefore says, she has good reason to exclaim
against their unjust Jealousy of her, and sharp Language to her, vowing she
never led but a pure innocent Life in all her Thoughts, Words and Actions with
that Man they accuse her of, and condemn her for, there having never been other
than a pure Platonic Love and Friendship designed by her, and she verily
believes intended by him; and therefore, instead of excusing her carriage to
him, she falls upon extolling and magnifying his great Civility to her, how
obliging and friendly he still showed himself in all her Concerns, on all
Occasions, and that with much Frankness, high Discretion, great Reality, and
abundance of Generosity; and as long as his Visits were kept in the bounds of
strict Virtue and true Civility, she cannot any way conceive, how her keeping
company with him, can in the least bring a dishonor to her Self, or Family;
and therefore she ought not to be so barbarously ill-natured and ungratefully
unjust, as to withdraw her harmless Conversation and justifiable Friendship to
this her Friend, by forbidding him visiting her, since that were in effect to
proclaim to the World the falseness of his Love, and the scandal of his
Company, and by it all may conclude, That he has either spoke ill of her
Reputation, or has acted some rudeness to her Person already, or that she has
reason to fear he will do it hereafter, and therefore has for bid him her
Company, either upon the account of revenge for what is past, or by the way of
prevention for the time to come; therefore, I am clear of opinion, a Woman
ought not to forbid an old Friend and Acquaintance visiting her, except it be
upon one of these two named Accounts, or else upon the score that she has
reason to believe her Husband does not well relish his coming so often to her;
and if that be the Business, if this her Friend be what he really pretends to
be, and she seems to believe he is, he cannot justly take it ill that she
freely tells him, That his visiting her so constantly, though their Converse be
never so Virtuous and Innocent, yet she has some cause to fear, it has, or may,
if long continued, raise her Husbands Dislike, and the Worlds Censure;
therefore, to prevent both, and secure her own Quiet, and good Reputation, she
friendly desires him, for the future, to make his Visits shorter, and seldomer,
to stop all busy ill-natured Censurers Tongues, and any Jealousies their
malicious Twatlings might raise in her Husbands Mind: And sure if this her dear
esteemed Friend truly deserves that Title, he must value her Honor as part of
his own, and make her Content his Satisfaction, since she freely and heartily
assures him, it is not at all upon the account of her lessening her true Esteem
and Friendship for him, but merely to secure her Husbands Love and Kindness to
her, that she desires this of him.

Next, I shall advise that Woman who stands so much on her inward Virtue, as to
slight her Friends Advice, and the Worlds Censure for keeping her Friend so
much company, seriously to consider, That it is above the power of any Mortal,
to dive into a Woman's inward Thoughts, and that Men can only behold her outward
Actions, not inward Intentions: For though Men can see her Lips move, when she
whispers, yet they cannot tell, what she speaks when she does so. Much less are
they able to dive into either of their Meanings; for that is so great a secret,
as one of them may deceive the other with for all their Vows and Oaths of an
open Heart, a true Love, and an unalterable Friendship.

I could name a thousand Arts, Slights and Deceits, that many Gallants use to
their Mistresses, but I am sure I should sooner tire my Readers Patience with
their great numbers, than by their great numbers to confirm his belief of their
great Truth, except it be the Truth of their great Folly and vile Falsity; for
indeed most of the young Gallants of our present sober and Virtuous Age, do
commonly in their Courtship to their present Mistresses, carry little Truth in
their Heart, but many more Romantic Lies on their Tongues than Teeth in their
Mouth.

And now, Reader, pray give me leave to change a little the Scene of my
Discourse of the great Beauty of the Mistresses, to add a word of the great and
wicked actings of some of their Gallants, who having tried all arts and means
they could invent to gain their Mistresses Heart (I still except Marriage) and
after all their Essays, find it so strongly fortified, and fully Garrisoned
with Virtue and Piety, as they see it impregnable against all their Batteries
and Assaults, so as to cast themselves into an utter despair of ever gaining
their wicked ends on them; I say, can any Man of common Sense, not think it
full time for him to found a Retreat as to following their Persons, though he
cannot leave admiring their Beauty? Indeed I have ever observed that
Importunity still breeds Trouble; but I never heard, it ever created Love in a
Mistress. Yet this sort of wicked, foolish Gallants are so indefatigable in the
folly of their endless Pursuit after their Mistress, as they will not believe
they hate them, though their Words and Actions declare their scorn and aversion
to them; but they will tell you, what is three Kicks of denial to a Lover that
has read the Patience of Job, or the sober Temper of Seneca, or has often
experimented the Inconstancy and Fickleness of an ill humored Mistress, which
perhaps exceeds both? And therefore, by way of Revenge he quickly resolves,
rather than be publicly ridiculed for missing his aim, losing his time, and
not gaining his Mistress, since he cannot enjoy her fair Person, he will
endeavor blasting her good Name, and make the World believe she is kind to him,
though she is only really so to her own Virtue and Reputation, by despising him,
and all his Courtship; and the better to accomplish his base and treacherous
Design on her, he alters his Course, changes his Battery, and comes and throws
himself at his Virtuous Mistresses Feet, with the greatest seeming Joy
imaginable, That God has so blessed him, as he is now become an entire
religious Convert, who has abandoned all the vain Pleasures of this World, to
contemplate the pure and endless Felicities of Heaven; and that now, instead of
being a Slave to the Beauty of her Body, he is become a devout well-wisher to
the good of her Soul: And intends to be so vile an Hypocrite and wicked a
Sinner, that since he could not gain her Body by all earthly means, he resolves
to fly to Heaven it self for a religious disguise to ruin her Reputation, and
satisfy his Revenge, since he could not his Love; and therefore he now only
pretends to pure Piety, strict Virtue, true Humility, much Gravity, and great
Penitency in all his Discourses and Actions (I mean before her only) and
seriously and devoutly protests to her (for in this Disguise he dares not
Swear) that he highly rejoices that all the Courtship he made, and Persuasions
he used, served only to try her Humor, not tempt her Virtue, which he now
highly rejoices to find proof against all Temptations, Vowing to her he is now
more delighted with the true Virtue of her Mind, than ever he was formerly
taken with the great Beauty of her Face; for the first is pure and Heavenly,
the last mere sensual; the first relisheth of Angel-Love, the second may, and
often does, savor of mere brutal Lust: And thus, whilst he makes up all his
Discourses in praising and magnifying her great Virtue to her self, he uses all
base, oblique and subtle Endeavors, and underhand Arts of Defamation, to brand
and blemish her good Name to all others, and thus hopes to obtain his base
revengful Ends, by a Holy and Heavenly means. And in pursuit of this his base
wicked and Treacherous Design, he entertains her, with how highly he is
delighted that he has quite stripped himself of the Fools-Coat of a vain amorous
Lover, to Cloth himself with the pious sober Dress of a holy Convert, and a
Devout Christian; and that he now does, and ever will, make it his hearty
Prayers, real Endeavors, and main Concern, to keep her, as well as himself,
always full of Heavenly Contemplations of the other World, by an entire
forsaking and abominating all the Wickedness and Vanities of this; and by this
mounting her mind above, he hopes the easier to delude her Thoughts here below,
and so to make her not to value any of this World's concerns, and to overlook
earthly Censures, as being things all pious Christians must of course meet
with, in this their earthly Pilgrimage, not on the account of any particular
affliction and punishment for their own private Faults, but as the common
Frailty appertaining to all human Being. And thus he entertains her, or rather
amuzes her, with heavenly Contemplations, and a mere seeming pure religious
Platonic Friendship, that he may, by his good and pious conversation, repair
often, talk much, and vifit long, unmistrusted by her, but much observed, and
highly censured by all others, who see his long and often Visits to her, but
hear not her religious Discourses with him, or his to her; and by this base,
treacherous Disguise, he hopes others will think him Master of her Body, whilst
he pretends to her, to be only a devout Servant to her Soul, and pleases
himself by putting a religious Cheat on her pious Meanings and virtuous
Actions, and makes use of God's good Name, only to procure her a bad one.

There is a remarkable Story, something of this nature, to be read in Josephus,
of a most rare Lady in Rome, called Paulina, who was much renowned for her high
Birth, great Virtue, admirable Wit, charming Beauty, abundant Wealth,
transcendent Wisdom and Discretion; and as an addition to all these, she was in
the very prime and Blossom of her Age; and what is yet stronger than all these,
she was reverenced by all, as a Mirror of Chastity; and that so many rare
Qualities should all center in one Woman, where there is hardly one of them to
be found in many Women, I am sure is not one of the smallest Miracles in Rome,
which could never be named the Holy City upon the account of the many holy and
virtuous Women in it; for in Rome all know Miracles are very plenty, but chaste
Women very scarce, and so are indeed chaste Clergymen; for the younger fort of
them love more to make many handsome Women unvirtuous, but reprove few, if any,
for being so, or Penancing them that they are so. This admirable Paulina, was
married to a young Noble Man, that well matched her in all her Excellencies,
and Virtues. He was called Saturnam. There was a person of great esteem, named
Decius Mundus that fell desperately in love with her, but could not corrupt
her, so as to enjoy her one Night, with all the Arts he could use, and vast
Proffers he did offer to the value of two hundred thousand Drachmas, which in
our Money amounts to about six thousand Pounds; but after having found all his
Essays of gaining her, fruitless, her Heart being impregnable, he fell into so
great a Melancholy, and so deep a Despair, as he resolved, since, he could not
feast himself on her Beauty, he would Starve himself to Death, to be delivered
from the Tyranny of his violent Love-passion for her, that so tormented him;
but a Woman, called Ida, being much troubled he should undergo such a sad
Death, went to him and desired him not to die with Despair, for she had thought
of a means, that for fifty thousand Drachmas, which she would so dispose as a
Bribe, that he should enjoy his dear Paulina: To accomplish which, she
practiced this subtle, but wicked Policy, by addressing her self to a Priest of
the Temple, who upon her large Promises and Offers of great Sums (which is
still a prevailing Argument among the Popish Clergy) she laid him down 25000
Drachmas, and engaging to him as much more as soon as he had performed what she
desired. She then acquainted him with the violent Love-passion Mundus had for
Paulina, begging him to contrive some way that he might enjoy her, or else he
could not long enjoy his own Life: The Priest, possessed with the great Sum she
gave him, and the much more that she engaged to give him, promised, That Mundus
should enjoy Paulina for a whole Night; And he having free access to her,
desired he might speak with her in private, which she readily granted him, who
told her, he was sent by the God Anubis, who was much inamored with her
charming Beauty, and desired that she would give him a meeting that night. This
Discourse so pleased Paulina, as she could not forbear telling some of her
intimate Friends how she had been honored with an amorous solicitation of a
God, (for though she was an excellent Woman, yet she was still a Woman, and
consequently vain and proud of her Beauty.) Paulina thought fit, in the first
place, to acquaint her Husband, how God Anubis had sent that he would come to
her, which her Husband consented to, relying on her great Chastity; she
therefore, after she had supped at her usual hour, repaired to the Temple, and
in the Priest his House she went to bed, and the Gates being by the Priest shut
and the Lights in her Chamber taken away, Mundus, that was hid in the Chamber,
failed not to accost her, who she thought was God Anubis. By this art of his
and mistake of hers, Mundus satisfied his wicked lustful desire of her all that
Night, and early in the morning before the Priests were stirring (who were
privy to the Treachery,) he retired himself, and Paulina also returned early in
the morning to her Husband, and acquainted him how God Anubis had appeared unto
her, and made her boast to some of her familiar Friends, what conference he had
used with her, which some of them could not believe; others were amazed at it,
considering her great Chastity. About three days after, Mundus meeting Paulina,
told her, she had saved him two hundred thousand Drachmas, which she might have
put in her Treasure; but, said he, I am not much troubled that you contemned me
under the name of Mundus, since I have satisfied my desire by enjoying you
under the Name of Anubis; and so left her. She amazed at his high Impudence,
and vexed at her own Misfortune, tore her Garments, and went and told her
Husband of Mundus his base, wicked and subtle Deceit, and begged his
assistance in the prosecution of her Revenge; and presently acquainted the
Emperor Tiberius of every particular of their vile Treachery; who after a
strict examination of the Priests concerning this base foul Fact, he condemned
them and Ida the contriver of the Plot against Paulina, to be all hanged, the
Temple to be pulled down, the Statue of Anubis to be cast into the River of
Tiber, and Mundus to be banished.

This sad Story teaches all Women this good Doctrine, That they are not to
grant a Man extraordinary Opportunities, though upon never so extraordinary
Pretenses, witness this wicked Cheat practiced on the Virtuous Paulina. The
message sent to meet him, was no less than faom a God: The Messenger that
brought it was no worse than a Priest of the Temple; she had her Husband's free
consent to justify her, and her own pure Innocence to protect her; yet when she
lay that Night from her Husband, she strayed that Night from her Prudence, by
fancying a God had more need or desire to have her appear to him in Bed out of
her House, than up and dressed in it; but it seems the Name of a God had a
charming power to deceive a Mortal Woman, when vast Gifts, large Promises, and
the most subtle Arts could not prevail, which I may well say again is a
Pattern useful to instruct Women. This prudent Caution, not to trust Men with
overgreat Liberties and unusual Opportunities, though they bow down their Knees
to the Ground, and lift up their Eyes to Heaven, humbly to make God a Witness
of their unalterable Constancy and real Affection, I say a Wise, Virtuous Woman
ought not to rely on either, since there may be Deceit in both.

Really as a Virtuous Wife cannot be too cautious and careful to maintain a
good Reputation, so she cannot be too wary and watchful to avoid a bad one, and
consequently to shun Men's Courtship, the grand occasion of it, since more
handsome Women lose their Reputation by being publicly courted, than by being
privately enjoyed; for though the one is but a high Folly, the other a great Sin,
yet the first raises a public Scandal, whilst the other is but a private Crime
between themselves, and cannot be talked of by many, because known but by few;
and indeed it is held by diverse Men, a measuring cast, and a disputable
question, which is worse, a Wife that is inwardly Virtuous, but outwardly in
discreet, or a Wife that is outwardly discreet, but not inwardly Virtuous: I
dare not undertake to tell you which is the best of the two, but I am sure they
are both bad; yet I fancy the first is less ill, since it is doubtless a greater
crime to offend God, than injure Men, a Scandal not being so bad as a Sin; for
a Scandal may rise only for breaking a Country Custom, but a sin, can only rise
from breaking a heavenly Command.

A Wife that is outwardly scandalous in her carriage, though never so inwardly
Virtuous in her intentions, yet that can give no satisfaction, or make any
reparation to her Husbands Reputation; for if a Man's Wife be generally reported
faulty, it is the same to her Husbands Honor, as if she were really so; for
though her inward Virtue and Innocence is hers, yet the scandal of the ill report
is his, so that the Wives being free from the Sin, does not clear the Husband
from the shame. Now of all that I have writ, good Wives ought to make this
Conclusion, that since it is not a Woman's Innocence of Life, but her discreet
living in the sight of the World, that must preserve, or ruin her Reputation in
it, and as much of her Husbands Honor, as relates to it, this Consequence must
needs be undeniable, that a good Wife is as well obliged to live discreetly on
her Husbands account, as she is bound to live Virtuously on her own, and to be
truly careful, strictly diligent, and purely modest in all her Looks, Words,
and Actions toward Men, since as you just read before, many Men are so very
false, treacherous and wicked, that if they cannot by all earthly means gain
their Mistresses kindness, they will fly to Heaven it self for a disguise to
ruin their Reputation.

Therefore that Wife that is truly Virtuous, and that truly resolves to
continue so, and desires to be by all thought such, must not only avoid doing
what is really ill, but what is seemingly imprudent; and so may occasion, though
not deserve censure, and in order thereunto she is to avoid all scandalous
company of either Sex, and not only to shun all Sin, but all Inviters to it, or
Patterns of it; for evil Communication not only corrupts good Manners, but
creates a bad Reputation; therefore a Virtuous Wife must not only abstain from
making an intimacy with, but receiving Visits from, such as are branded with a
general ill Reputation; for it is a fault to keep company with such as are
commonly esteemed to be faulty; for that Woman that truly hates such Women's
Vices will Shun their Company for their Vices sake; for as Virtue is only
followed by the Virtuous, so Vice is only by the vicious, so that a good Wife
ought to be discreet as well as virtuous, since if she be not the one, she will
hardly pass for the other; and it is much to be doubted, that she that will not
keep in the Bounds of a discreet outward Carriage, will hardly contain her self
in the Limits of a pure inward Virtue. Lastly, since Self-interest (to speak
moderately) governs the greatest part of the World in all things, sure it ought
to govern all good Women in this one thing, especially since it is so much for
their advantage, which none can deny, who considers, that it is a certain Rule,
and a common Practice, that she that Censures others, must expect that others
will Censure her, for in this rule, there is rarely any favor showed, or
respect given; and therefore a Prudent Woman cannot but esteem it both
reasonable and necessary to believe that by passing sharp Censures on others,
whether they do much, little, or not at all deserve them, yet they are still
received, and often returned, by those they are intended for, and levelled at,
with great Anger, bitter Malice, and sharp Revenge; for though they fall on those
that are truly faulty, and so justly deserve them, yet that hinders not such
from being transported with Fury against the Reporters of them; for though many
Women love to commit faults, yet most hate to be told they do.

And if you blame and censure those whose good and virtuous Life no way
deserves such sharp Censures, they will be sure to be incensed against you for
unjustly accusing them, so that both Good, and Bad will be angry to be ill
spoke of; and this methinks should dissuade all Women, that pretend to Wisdom
and Discretion, to avoid scandalizing any; for if you speak ill of a Woman, as
on your own knowledge, and yet do not certainly know it, you commit a divelish
fault, by telling a Lie, and so raise a Blister on your own Tongue, by
endeavoring to raise a Scandal on her Fame; and if you report Scandalous
things of a Woman as Truth, only upon the account of hearing them from others,
it is very possible you tell a Lie at 2d Hand, by telling that as a Truth, which
you are not certain is so; therefore, it is my advice to all Ladies to root out
of their practice, this base, though modish Crime of Defamation, which will do
you hurt, but can never do you good; for you will always get Hatred for it, but
never gain Love by it; so that indeed the best and most prudent Course, is,
that of persons you cannot speak well of, be silent, and rather make their
Faults the subject of your Trouble, than that of your Discourse, or the
exercise of your Wit, which is in truth, but the practice of your Malice: And
as Cheating can never make a part of true Wisdom, so ill Nature can never make
a part of good Wit; and indeed Women may rely upon this as almost an infallible
Rule, that those that delight in Censuring others before you, will as well
delight in censuring you before others, as soon as your back is turned. In a
word, those that take pleasure in scandalizing others, whether it be to make
Discourse, or to show Wit, or to vent Malice, it is not only Unjust and
Unhandsom, but it is what is worse than both, irreligious and deceitful, if you
will take St James's word for it, for he says, If any among you seems
Religious, and bridleth not his Tongue, he deceives his own Heart, and his
Religion is vain, James 1.26.

Lastly, give me leave to mind you again, that she that will censure others,
must expect others will censure her; and you know that one that fights many,
must needs fight upon great disadvantage; so in matter of Censures and Scandals
she that provokes many Tongues to Shoot at her own single Reputation, those
many are much likelier to wound her, than she to wound those many; since she
that shoots at the Reputation of great numbers of Women, it is improbable she
should hit all; but if great numbers shoot all at one, it is very improbable
that one should be missed by all; so that it is unfafe as well as unreasonable
and imprudent for any one; Woman to provoke many Women Certainly to cast sharp.
Censures on her, merely out of her uncertain hopes to cast Scandals on them.

And Censurer disguise your malicious ill nature, with the purest Gloss, and
the best Wit you can: You shall never make it pass for true Wisdom and good
Policy, to forfeit your Judgment, to exercise your Wit; Therefore if your
Prudence and Discretion cannot hinder you from engaging in such an unequal
Cambat, as one Tongue must be to fight against many, pray let Self-interest,
upon the account of self-preservation, dissuade you from it; and remember, to
be worsted in fight is still disgraceful, as well as to be victorious, is ever
glorious: Therefore, rather follow Prudence, than practice Malice; and rather
conceal your Wit, than divulge your Envy, or exercise your ill Nature; and
since foul censuring is ever bad, still remember, you can never show good Wit,
by doing an ill thing.

And now, Reader, to conclude all in one word (for I know I have reason to
believe that I have already writ too many, to tire your Patience, though perhaps
not to convince your opinion,) that a virtuous Woman ought to avoid public
Censures, as well as private Sins; and to shun as much getting an ill Name, as
committing a bad Act. Now to prevent both, let all your Thoughts be good, and
all your Words and Actions discreet and Un-censorious, that though the Beauty of
your Person, may cause some that are unvirtuous, to wish you so, yet let the
Piety of your Life, and the Prudence of your Carriage, cause all such that are
truly Religious and strictly Virtuous, to report you to be the like; and make
it always your great care, and constant concern, that you never scandalize any,
and your great trouble, that any should ever scandalize you; for let a Woman be
never so purely virtuous, and free from deserving bad Censures, yet she must be
unfortunate in receiving them; for scandalous Reports must hurt a good Woman's
Reputation, though she does not deserve them; as well as wound a wicked Woman's
Conscience, that does.

THE THIRD DISCOURSE, Of young Men's great folly, in adoring, and over-praising
all young handsome Ladies; and their greater folly in receiving it, and
believing them.
IT IS not more natural for heat to attend Fire, nor more common for the Sun to
exhale vapors from the Earth, than it is for great Beauty to attract high
Praises from young Men; and truly such of them, as have wit to spare, time to
lose, favor to hope for, and no other world to think of, are fittest to Court
their Beauty in this, which is but modish breeding, and suitable to most men's
practice and all handsome Ladies expectation, I do not say merit.

And such Men as are pretenders to raillying wit, and French breeding, may show
both, by entertaining them with Courtly Harangs, all set out with high Praises,
and great Complements, (which few Men speak as their belief, but most Ladies
receive as their desert,) and with such Idolizing postures, and Dying
expresons, as if they designed their fellow Creatures to be perfect Goddesses,
who were made like Nebuchadnezzar's golden Image, only to be worshipped; so
naturally agreeable are such sinful adorations to vain Ladies, as the first
temptation we read of in Scripture that ever prevailed on Woman, was that of
being made like to God, and that Woman then comprised in her self, the whole
species of Women kind; and indeed it is very probable, that her aspiring
presumption then to more knowledge than she ought, does still punish most of
her Sex with less Wisdom than they need.

Really if handsome Ladies had but that share of Prudence which they ought to
have as good Christians, and to use in the practical part of Christianity, to
which all Women are called, (though few strive to be chosen) they would never
endure, much less countenance, such young Men to Court and magnify them at
such an extravagant rate, as to present them with that Composition of Praises,
merely for vain pastime, or what is worse, evil ends, which ought to be
attributed to divine Worship only; nor can there be a more clear and plainer
Argument to prove Women's want of wisdom, then that many of them will receive
such profane Praises, not as the vain Effects of young Men's wicked folly, but
as the deserved Trophies of their own conquering beauty and merit. All I shall
say is, that such courtly Incense, suits well with such a vain false Deity, and
that such young Women are as foolishly guilty in receiving such vain
Attributes, as such young Men are highly profane in offering them:

Thus Men by the deceitful reflexes of high praises, divert young Women from
remembering their Creator in the days of their Youth, and possibly all the time
of their Life, by Charming them with their own Charms, and disguising
themselves, to themselves; and by telling them so often what they are not,
makes them forget what they really are; and by these means they advance their
minds so far above any dismal thoughts of their own mortality, that truly few
of our young cried up beauties now adays, scarce hears any thing of Death, but
what they are Romanticly told their own killing beauty does occasion, though in
truth, if we read the Weekly Bills of Mortality, we shall find that the effects
of Anger kill many more, than the passion of Love; Men being often Angry with
many Men at once, but never in Love with more than one Woman at a time, and
that one it self, is too many by one.

But my design being not to Court the young Ladies with high Complements, but
to serve them with great reality, I must assure them that these high praises,
the more they are trusted, the more they will betray, and the more you Ladies
confide in their worth, the more you will be deceived in their value; so that it
follows by the plain Rule of common reason, that so much as you deduct of Men's
overpraises, so much you lessen of your own self deceivings. Indeed these
poisoned Darts of praises, have got such a predominant power over most young
handsome Women, (and the most handsome, are most subject to them,) that most of
them are in danger of being wounded by them, because the peril of flattery
still mounts with the degrees of beauty, as the Suns heat still increases
proportionable as it rises.

Flattery and vainglorious praises are both insinuating Devils, two Twins
begot by the father of Lies, and these not only attempt all, but possess most
vain handsome Ladies; and therefore they ought above all, to be very strict, and
diligently active, to shun such tempting discourse, and avoid such dangerous
Company, or at least when with them, to be sure still to carry about them S.
James his good direction and antidote, resist the Devil, and he will fly from
you.

Really if young Ladies would but take a steady resolution to resist and slight
all young Men's vain Courtships, and place no such high estimation on their own
beauty, they would easily do the like on men's praises, and by this means young
Gallants would slacken in their Courtships, proportionable to the young Ladies
cooling in their receptions of it, and so make Men despise Women's beauty,
suitable to their slighting Men's Love, and thus Women's prudence, would become
Men's wisdom, for in real truth, it is hope of gain makes love Merchants as well
as others; none watch Bees but for their Honey, and few Court fair Ladies but
for some hopes of a return; and therefore you never hear of any of the young
Sparks that plant their Love Batteries against Nunneries, not because they
think the young Women in them have too little beauty, but because they believe
they shall meet there with too great a resistance, by the care they take, and
strictness they use, to prevent Men's making any Addresses and near approaches
to them: for as Mr. Cowley says, a well governed heart, like rich China, admits
Men only to the Frontier part; for a strict virtue sets certain bounds to young
handsome Women's carriage and behavior toward Men, which they are not to
exceed; as the Almighty gave to the Sea, so far you shall go, and no farther.

And though I know there is no such thing now adays in practice among our young
Men, as Angel Love, which is the pure Commerce of the Souls, yet I believe
Venus Love does not rage so very much, nor is its infection so very strong and
rife, as Censurers would fain have it, making our Age much worse than it is,
when God knows it is but too bad, at best; as if the youth of both Sexes were
now so corrupt, as that a young Gentleman cannot visit a young Lady, nor a
young Lady receive visits from a young Gentleman, without imputation of
scandal, or the censure of ill and vicious designs on both sides; tho I verily
believe, some young Men, (I do not say all, nor yet many) love Women's company,
and Women Men's, on no other account than for their great wit, good humor, and
agreeable Conversation, without any farther ends.

And now I am beginning to enter into that part of this Discourse which
principally addresses it self to the handsome young Maiden Ladies, and chiefly
among them, to such as are innocently and modestly bred, for such sort of young
Women often entertain discourses, and make acquaintances with young Men,
without the least thought of love, or design of ill, many of them looking
civilly, and talking freely to them, on no other account, than to show and
exercise their wit, and that may be more to please their own fancy, than on
design to take that of others; but yet I must advise such young Women to
consider, that mere civil looks often tempt, and refusals may be given after
such a manner, as may rather embolden one to ask more, than to beg pardon for
having asked too much; for as one well observes of strict virtuous Women, That
Man comes too near to them, that comes to be denied by them. Indeed it is not
very rare now a days, for civil looks in young Women to breed Adulterous
thoughts in young Men, for the Gospel tells us that there is an Adultery of the
Eye, and I am sure we ought all to remember with grief of mind, that as soon as
the Serpent had persuaded that the forbidden fruit was pleasant to the Eye, it
soon followed that it became delightful to the Taste; if Men's Vows of Love, and
Oaths of Constancy, can but once tempt young Maids appetites to taste, 'twill
soon make them anticipate their fears to eat.

Therefore Ladies have a care of receiving Men's praises and flatteries, and
though you believe your own Virtue never so strong, and yours Lovers Courtship
never so innocent, as possibly they may be at first received by you, and
designed by him, only as the effects of pure civility, and not of any ill
intention; yet praises are so naturally agreeable to vain handsome Ladies, as
they often unperceived insinuate, and wind themselves so about their hearts, as
to kindle there by degrees Love likings, though perhaps they do not feel so
much as the least slight atome Love to creep on the superficies of their heart;
Love sometimes like a Tortoise makes its way, though it does not seem to stir,
or like the hand of a Watch, which though you cannot perceive to move, yet you
may plainly see its hourly advances; Love often growing in young Women's minds,
as Diseases do in their bodies, without ever giving the least Alarm or
Advertisement of its approach, till it breaks out into a dangerous fit of
Sickness.

Solomon says, a soft word breaks the Bone, therefore no wonder if smooth
praises and complements should charm a young Ladies tender heart; for sure it is
no wonderful operation in our times, for small freedoms like little Thieves to
open the Doors to great Liberties, and venial wantonness, to turn to modish
wickedness.

Therefore let me advise the vain Ladies, not to deceive themselves in fancying
that they are more invincible in their Love railleries, in receiving praises
from young Men, than King Solomon was with dallying with strange Women, which
drew him into the Sin of Idolatry. This example may serve as a Caution to young
Ladies, not to rely too much on their own strength; for many Maids hearts,
like strong Fortresses, have been lost by too great a dependency upon their own
strength, and too mean an undervaluing of others attempts against them: I shall
therefore advise all young Ladies, especially Virgins, by no means on any
account, to suffer their beauty to lie under the pressing temptations of young
Men's high praises, and constant Courtship which often enflames them beyond
their own natural temper and strength; for continual blowing, is able to kindle
in time, a great Fire out of a little Spark: And also young handsome Women ought
to avoid giving or receiving any favorable attracting looks from young Men;
for the Eye is as well the Pulse of the Mind, as the Door of the Heart, and no
Love flames can enter into the heart, but it must first enter the Eye, as we
see the Sun it self, still sends his light, before he brings his heat.

Next Ladies remember that the Scripture couples with the lust of the Eye, the
pride of Life, as a lesson to teach you, that you ought as much to well order
your looks, as to regulate your lives which you may perform much the easier and
better, if you will but seriously reflect on the ways and means young Gallants
use in making their approaches toward gaining their Mistrisses; (I do not here
intend as to the making them Mistrisses in order to being Wives but Misses)
which is usually after this kind of manner; first they present them with swarms
of Praises and Complements, thick garnished with great Oaths and repeated Vows,
of a never dying love, and a never failing constancy, and all attended with sad
looks, deep sighs, and humble postures; (no matter though there be not one
grain of reality among them all,) and if these Counterfits can but work so
powerful an Operation on their Mistrisses soft good nature, as to make them
receive the constant repeated Oaths of their highly adoring them, with some
kind of delight; they are then in a sad yielding condition; for such Women's
hearts cannot pretend to be stronger than fortified Towns, which when they once
come to admit of frequent parlies, seldom hold out after long Sieges, but yield
to a Surrender.

Certainly if young Gallants can by their eager courting their Mistrisses, but
gain of them some returns of compassion and esteem, next of course follows a
favorable liking of them, and then there is no very great difficulty, after
such prosperous advances, to create in them the beginnings of a Love fondness;
and fondness in a young Woman's heart, like a weighty body down a steep Hill, it
seldom stops till it runs to the very bottom; and when a Gallant has worked his
Mistress into such a yielding temper, as to credit his Oaths, and be pleased
with his Company, as believing he truly loves her, and highly admires her, and
so grows delighted with the Repetition of them, esteeming all his Courtship
real, then surely they cannot on the account of good Nature, and pure Civility,
forbear presenting their Gallants, though to their own ruin, this new Article
of their Faith, that they believe their Oaths, and love their Persons, and
when once they declare that, common experience may soon teach them this, that
it is no great rarity in young Maids by liking of young Men, to stray into
vicious actings with them; and thus by these kinds of degrees and steps,
Gallants commonly mount to their Mistrisses ruin; for as the Poet says, Long
waiting Love does still a passage find, to the most unbelieving mind, at least
to the blasting her Reputation, if not the utter undoing of her virtue,
fortune, and freedom; for when once a Gallant is become Master of his
Mistrisses heart, he commonly swells to a Monster, and governs like a Tyrant,
and instead of treating you like an adored Mistress, he uses you like a
conquered Captive.

Now I have told the young Ladies some of the common ways their Gallants use to
gain them by, give me leave here in a word or two, to tell you their usual
manner of treating them, after they have gained an entire Conquest over their
hearts, which is very bad, and sinful in then to suffer. Therefore, let me
advise you to carry still this Memorandum about you, That all your Gallants
dying expressions, Love-Oaths, Idolizing postures, and often repeated Vows,
that their admiration, and love for you, shall be as lasting as their Lives,
which translated out of the Lovers Language into true plain English, is no more
but just as long as they shall fancy your Beauty; for usually as fast as their
Mistrisses beauty breaks, so do their Oaths of Love and Constancy, which they
think they are bound to keep no longer, than their Mistrisses keep their
beauty, as being but the mere effects of that cause, and the cause being
removed, the effect must of course cease, and besides there is nothing more
certain than that skin deep beauty, seldom creates better than mere sensual
love, which never contains reality, or long duration.

But Ladies if this were all it would not be so very bad, or indeed this is
only the least part of it, and when your Gallant has enjoyed you, methinks you
ought not to wonder that he honors you no longer as his Mistress, when you
dishonor your self by becoming his Miss; for fancy what you please, an enjoyed
Mistress is no better, let her Quality be never so good, and her beauty never so
great, and there is no Woman ought to think it strange, that her Gallant after
enjoyment, undervalues her, when by it, she shows him the way, by fiirst
undervaluing her self, and so ought to expect little Love, and less Courtship,
but rather much slighting, if not aversion; for this is most certain, Ladies,
that though your Gallants use all flattering means and arts, not sparing their
Oaths or Money, Soul or Purse, to purchase your good Nature, (I should have
said sinful folly,) to bless them, as they call it, with the enjoyment of you,
(that is, to curse your selves by admitting it,) which when your Gallants have
obtained on any terms, Swearing and forswearing not excepted they presently
like greedy Hawks, who as soon as they have fully gorged themselves on their
Quarry, slight and turn Tail to the very same Game, which just before they flew
so eagerly after, and grow soon as weary of an enjoyed Mistress, as most eldest
Sons are of their long long lived Fathers, or their ugly monied Wives; in a
word, our Amorous Age is so very wicked and unchaste, that really most of our
young Men's fiery Love to the thing called a Mistress, is by our present mode
become of the same nature of Fire it self, which all know cannot subsist long
if not often recruited with fresh matter.

And I have yet, Ladies, something more to add, which is of a much worse
consequence than all before, which is this, that after your Gallants have
enjoyed you, though never so much in private, they will not be satisfied unless
they may boast of it in Public, so vain are our young Sparks, as to take more
satisfaction in the thoughts that others believe they enjoy their Mistrisses,
than they themselves do in the actual enjoyment of them; our young Men
retaining still so much of the old Roman pride, as to love the Triumph more
than the Conquest, and indeed I am of opinion, that on the bragging account of
enjoying Mistrisses now so much in fashion among the late Debauchees; those Men
that boast they do, though they do it not, are not so bad, as those that boast
of it in so vainglorious a manner as to act a real Sin.

Then the young Gallant can tell their enjoyed Mistrisses, that mere love of
beauty is but a mere amorous desire, and that none but fools desire what they
possess, possession being the full end and accomplishment of all desire, and
consequently of all beauty Love, and so laugh at the simplicity of those that
will endure long the scorching flames of a violent Love passion, fancying none
but the foolish barbarous Persians can long adore that Sun which burns them.

And our young Gallants are now generally grown so very nice, that they cannot
feed on any thing, but sweet variety, which makes them rant in the Hectoring
Language of the Times, and say that it is as unmodish to have but one Mistress,
as to have none at all, and therefore Swear that Mistrisses enjoyed though
never so young and beautiful, are but like Romances read, and Plays once seen;
and indeed methinks enjoyed Mistrisses, ought not to wonder at their Gallants
sickleness, it being not at all strange that an unvertuous Love should make an
inconstant Lover.

And now I must beg leave to glance my discourse a little on a Fault, which
some young Ladies commit, without ever considering it is one, which is sometimes
to exercise their wit, show their pride, and vanity, or gaity of humor, or what
else you please to call it, to make themselves sport and entertainment, spread
abroad their fine silken nets of enticing arts, and attracting allurements, to
encourage and invite some young Fop, to become fond of one of their Company, as
his dearly beloved, and highly admired Mistress, only that they may have
thereby, the better means and occasion to railly, and make pastime with him,
never considering that by making him thus to fall in love with one of them, he
is obliged by the general Rules, and common practices of our Modern refined
Lovers, to magnify and extol her beauty; and never to be sparing of his Oaths
and Lies, in praising her perfections, and his own overflowing passion and so
cause him to sin in earnest, though probably designed by the Lady as a Jest;
but 'twill be no sufficient excuse in this bad kind of raillery, to say your
intention was innocent, since its effect is culpable, for we are not to do ill,
that good may come of it; and sure much less to do ill, where no good can come
of it, and I am sure this is an undeniable truth, That she who makes another do
an ill thing, does an ill thing her self, by her making another to do it.

Therefore Ladies, whether in Jest or Earnest, if you are truly virtuous, and
desire really to continue so, and that the world should esteem you such, as
designing to admit men only to admire your Persons but never to ruin your
virtue; the best way to effect it is never to let them Court your beauty; for
remember that the Fire of Love is like that of Anger, a short, but fierce
madness; for a Man that is in Love, during the raging fit of his enflamed
lustful passion, talks light and idly, for a Lovers heart rises and falls, is
happy and unhappy, according as his Mistress is kind or unkind, it being indeed
but very suitable to the folly of being in Love, that such a Lovers heart,
should never move according to the dictates of his own reason, but the vain
motions of his Mistrisses fickle fancy; and therefore because such Men know not
what the do, their Mistrisses ought not to mind what they say, nor admit their
Addresses, though they pretend them in jest, or for mere pastime, and not to
kindle their hopes, when they mean never to feed their desires, but avoid
conversing with them, and entertaining of them; for surely all persons ought to
avoid mad Bedlam acquaintances, and young Men during their distracted Love
passion, value not what Praises they present, what Offers they make, nor indeed
what price they give, to purchase the enjoyment of their dear Mistrisses,
though it be at the damnable rate of long continued Idolatry, and often
repeated Perjury.

O strange and wicked madness, that these kind of Lovers cannot be content to
give their Mistrisses their heart for a little time, without giving their Souls
to the Devil for ever, and fancy he is as very obliging as they are foolish,
and inconstant, and that the Devil will as easily forget the Oaths they made to
him, as they do theirs they made to their Mistrisses, which were intended but
as mere Courtiers Complements, which are meant no longer than they are
speaking, and therefore ought to be thought on no longer than they are hearing;
but though such Lovers fancy they give their Souls to the Devil but in jest,
yet he will be careful to keep them in earnest, for if they will commit the sin
of making such Oaths, let them have a care the Devil be not permitted to make
them endure the Hellish Penance of keeping them, God will not be mocked.

I have enlarged this Discourse on the folly of Men's overpraising and Courting
Women, with great Confidence, because I fancy with much Experience, though I am
sure with little Prudence, for I confess such experience was bought too dear,
yet I have this satisfaction, that the fault of committing a vice, does not
consist in the confession of it, but in the yiedling to it, and therefore I own
I have served much more than a thrice seven years Prenticeship in the Trade of
Love, and its foolish appendant Train of Fopperies, which was (I confess) a
great fault against the well spending of my time, which might have been much
better employed in the duties of Religion, than in the pastimes and vain
company of modish Women; but I have now served out my Time, in that foolish
Trade, and am become a perfect freeman, as to that folly of Courting all modish
Ladies; not that I am at all grown a Woman hater, or a precise Puritan, or such
a true Disciple of Job, as to make a Covenant with mine Eyes, not to behold a
handsome Woman, for I shall still own, I look upon all beautiful Women, to come
nearest of all Creatures in brightness and splendour to the glorious Angels, and
am very much pleased, when I can pass away an hour or two in an afternoon,
among such of them as are not irreligious, but of a virtuous reputation, and
are good Wits, free humor'd, and of pleasant Converse, for it is not keeping
company with, but paying an adoration to, Ladies beauty, that makes the crime
sinful; as it is not making Images to adorn Churches, but building Churches to
worship Images, that makes the Idolatry.

And since Recreation for the mind is as well necessary as Exercise for the
body, I see no reason why it may not be lawful for me to recreate my self, now
and then in an afternoon, in such good young Women's company and conversation,
to hear their opinions, and discourses, (which the rude sort of Men call
Twatlings) on the Stories of the place, and their several fancies and judgments
on the diverse Fashions then worn; who are the Women most talked of, for whom,
and what beauties are highest cried up, and which of them loves most, and
carries on an Intrigue best, lives highest, wears the richest Clothes, keeps
the finest Equipage, and has most Gallants, and this Gentlewoman is to be
Married to that Gentleman, who in a little time will find her Debts much
greater than her Beauty or Portion either, and such a pretty Maid is to be
Married by a Match of her Parents making to such a one, in whom she will be
very unhappy, her heart being prepossessed by another, and such an old Man is
jealous of his young Wife without a Cause, and such a young Man is not jealous
of his handsome Wife with one, and the like Subjects, which I grant in severe
strictness, may be truly called an omission, in not spending our time so well
as we ought, which I look upon to be more a venial vice, than an unpardonable
sin, and therefore do not believe that the knowledge of my infirmity, ought to
be the despair of my Recovery; but I am truly pleased that all unlawful
designs, and unchaste desires as to Women, are banished from my heart, and that
Virtue has made me quite leave them, before Age has made them quite leave me.

But it is more than time to finish this Discourse, for I have dwelt longer on
it than I intended, but the trouble of it, I hope the Ladies will the more
easily pardon, since it is not only a fault, but a habit, that I have been much
subject to, and long infected with, which is to be loath to part with young
Women's Company, when I am once got into it, and therefore I will conclude this
Discourse, with this Complement to the Ladies, that I heartily wish it may
prove as satisfactory and advantageous to them, as to make them all now as fond
of piety, as I was once of beauty, and that they may continue to love it, as
many years as I did them, and then I dare assure them this double blessing,
That they shall neither live ill, nor die young.

THE FOURTH DISCOURSE, Of the extraordinary governing Power that Women's Beauty
now exercises over most Men.
BLess me and deliver me! What a strange Subject do I now fall on, and into
what a vast Sea am I now Imbarking! The Bay of Biskay with all its proud
swelling waves, is but as a calm pond to it; for that only tosses Ships into
the Air, and presently brings them down again; but this Subject elevates my Pen
above the Sky, and there leaves it; for Women's governing Power, has no certain
Top nor Bottom, but Circle-like, is without beginning or end: How can it
possibly be then described, it being a mere Maze of difficulties, and a
Labyrinth of Confusions, in which it has made so many cross Paths of pride and
folly, vanity and power, as I know not which to take, or which to leave, where
to advance, or how to retreat: And yet I find in my self an earnest inclination
to venture on it, though I am sure to be lost in it; for I must expect that
this dull and short Discourse on the voluminous Subject of beauties mighty
power, can have no other fate than that of Rivers, which still run with an
eager, haste, though it be only to plunge themselves into the Sea, in which
they are presently lost.

Story tells us of some English Frigates that sailed up to Constantinople, and
were there so generally admired, that the great Turk himself went to see them,
and was very much taken with their beauty, shape and strength; and being told
there were hundreds finer in England, he commanded that the Map of the World
should be presently brought him, that he might see that brave Kingdom, which
produced such gallant effects; the Map being come, he laid his finger carelessly
on it, and asked whereabouts England was, but the person that was to show it
him, told him he could not do it, till he took off his finger, for it quite
covered that Kingdom.

Thus one Inch of the Worlds Map serves to set out all Englands Confines, but a
hundred sheets of Paper cannot half describe the extraordinary bounds of Women's
usurping power: If I look up toward the height of it, I am confounded at the
sight of so bright and clear a Scene of mere sanciful Splendour, and if I look
downwards on it, I meet in my Compass, crowds of Adorers and Suitors thick
prostrate at their feet, some courting their great beauty, others admiring
their high power, some begging their favor, but most bribing their interest.

But though their beauty cannot at all dazzle my sight, yet this Subject does
indeed puzzle my Pen, for really I am so far from knowing how to end this
Discourse, as I profess I know not yet where to begin it, and indeed when I
have writ all I can on it, I fancy I can make no other than this whole sale
judgment of it, That beauties universal governing Power is of a miraculous
nature like that of the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea, every body may daily see
its strange effects, but none can give a good reason for the true cause;
therefore I am sure my weakness ought not to attempt, what the strength of wit,
and Philosophy could never perform.

So that I am resolved to venture on this Subject, but as little Boys do on a
great River, not hazard far on it, for fear of being lost in it, but content
themselves with wading a little on the Brink of it, and there to dable and wash
them, out of the reach of its great depth, and fierce stream.

And though I know that the cause of Men's so enslaving themselves to handsome
Women's power cannot spring but from a mean slavish nature, and so ought not to
be looked upon better by any considering Men, than a kind of Kingdom in the
Moon or Fairy Land, only hatched by the fiery amorous Love, of a high, lustful,
and enflamed distempered passion; seated in the vain Aerie Region, of mere
foolish imagination, being not grounded on any foundation of true reason or
good consideration.

Yet I cannot imitate the Map makers, who still leave a blank for their Terra
Incognita, but I must fill up my Paper, and rather than not write more of it, I
will leave of scratching my head, and breaking my brain any longer about it, to
find out how, and where to begin this desperate Subject, it being like a Coal
all over red hot, there is no touching it in any part, without burning one
finger, it is like a Hedge-Hogg all over prickles, so that 'twill be almost as
hard a task for me to know how to hit upon a safe good way to begin this
Discourse, as to find a sure means to put an end to Women's governing power. But
since I must begin, I will as all Builders do, never mind to have the first
foundation stone cut into any shape; so I am resolved to lay my first entrance
into this Discourse, on the Courtships, and power of the Welsh Ladies, for
there I fancy the Men take no pains, nor use any arts to square or polish their
Addresses; but only take what comes uppermost, as they arise out of pure
Natures Quarry.

And truly I am of opinion that according to the Rules of sober reason, and
naked truth, the Welsh ought to be esteemed the more for it, since as it is a
general approved Rule, that of evils we ought still to choose the least; so
sure by the same rule of proportion, we ought of troubles to choose the
shortest, which being granted, we must necessarily come to own, that the Welsh
Courtship, and manner of making Love, must needs surpass our great Masters of
that Trade the French; for the Welsh are all plain honest dealing Men, and good
kind friends, who are well acquainted with one another humors; and therefore
esteem it superfluous to make many words to a Bargain, which makes them railly
both the English and the French, who they say dare not approach their
Mistrisses but with humble looks, and obedient postures, speaking as Solomon
says, Prove. 6.13. With their feet, by making so many Legs before they come to
them, and those with as much exactness, as Poets make Verses, where every
syllable must be weighed, that they may keep just Measures, and true Cadence,
as well in their approaches as addresses: Nor dare they speak to them but with
large Harangues of Praises, still besieging their Mistrisses with Armies of
Complements, in admiration of their beauty and perfections, and most of these
fierce great Lovers, (I had almost said worse) differ and excel one another, in
their manner of Addresses, means of Approaches, expenses in Presents, degrees
of Courtship, and ways of Treating and the like; whereas the plain dealing
honest Welch-men, are most of an equal kind of breeding and birth, being all
Gentlemen of Wales, and most of them high born, which is a truth, all that have
Traveled through their Country will easily believe, since really in one sense,
few of them can be other, considering the many elevated Mountains their Country
is made up with, and yet I often observed in my Traveling through it, that the
Men of that Country, are generally of a very plain breeding, and much of a
level Capacity, for though Wales is highly seated, yet it is but of a short
extent, which occasions the whole Country to lie under the same degree of
Elevation.

And as the Welsh Gentry have for the most part an aversion to the Roman
Doctrine, so they have no fancy for Romance Courtship, few studying the one, and
fewer practicing the other, and yet for all they are both great Vertuosos, and
expert Soldiers in the Art of expeditiously managing a Venus War, and can
sooner take by storm the Fort of their Welsh Mistrisses heart, than the English
or French can finish their Approaches to gain so much as the outworks of their
Mistrisses civil and favorable Looks.

But I am strayed from my Theme, and therefore I Will conclude my Welsh Travels,
and Interloping Discourses of Wales, leaving the Welsh Cavaliers to the power
of their own Country Mistrisses.

And take notice how we are now in England shrunk into such a Brood of
unmasculine Petticoat Men that are such adorers of their Mistrisses beauty, as
they cannot behold them but through the magnifying Prospective of their own
enflamed lustful passion, and amorous folly, which renders their Mistrisses
beauty so large and Charming, and their Power so high and Mighty, that like the
possessed man in the Gospel, they will run through fire and water, in their Love
fit, and to feed their momentary flames, will venture those of everlasting
Burning.

This wretched sort of Slaves to Women's Power, who in their Courtship and
Addresses to gain their Mistrisses hearts, do so desperately hazard the loss of
their own Souls, by offending God in their words and actions, resemble exactly
those People of Jerusalem and Judah, which the Prophet Isaiah cap. 3. v. 8.
speaks of, They are fallen down because their Tongue and doings are against the
Lord, provoking the Eyes of his Glory.

And now the Prophet has told you their fault, he will also tell you their
punishment, The Lord of Host will take from them the Judge and the Prophet, the
Prudent and the Ancient, and will give Children to be their Princes, and Babes
to be their Governors; and pray what is the consequence of this noble Infant
Government? why the Prophet tells you, Verse. 5. And the People shall be
oppressed one by another, every one by his Neigbour, the Child shall behave
himself proudly against the Ancient, and the base against the honorable, etc.

And as it is a practical Art in Oratory to keep the best Arguments to bring up
the Rear of the Discourse to leave the strongest Impression at the last, so God
is pleased to reserve for the last, the greatest punishment of all, which he
here threatens by the Prophet when he tells men, verse 12. And Women shall rule
over them. Really it is a sign the Peoples stay and strength are gone, and their
prudence out of Power, when Women are placed to Rule over them, from whence
without the help of Philosophy, I can easily extract this Observation, That the
Almighty who sure best knows the abilities of his own Creatures, places Women
in the same Rank with Children, thereby plainly denoting, That a Nursery kind
of Government suits best with Women's Power; and this kind of doctrine is in some
manner confirmed by S. Paul, though in a larger Character, for he ascribes to
Women as their fit sphere, and proper employment the guiding of the house, that
is, the Women in it.

There is an Author who in his discourse of Women very well observes, that they
have but three States of Life, Virginity, Marriage, and Widdowhood; for the
first two they are, or ought to be, states of subjection to Parents, and
Husbands; and for that of Widdowhood, God himself counts that state of life to
be desolate and sad, the Almighty having designed them for subjection and
therefore accounts Women most miserable, when most at liberty from Man's Power.

And now surely out of these reasons and considerations of his, I may here
safely, because truly, draw this undeniable Argument and conclusion.

That it cannot but be very bad for Men to be under Women's Government, when God
says it is very sad for Women to be under their own.

And so I have done with the time, when 'twas appointed for Women to govern
over Men; next of course follows the manner how they Ruled, and that we have an
account of in few words, in the 12 verse of that Chapter aforementioned by the
Prophet, O my people says the Lord, Those, (that is the Women) that lead ye,
cause you to err, and destroy the ways of thy Paths: Thus we find that error
and destruction, are the effects of Women's ruling power, it being contrary to
the ways of Truth, (for it causes Error,) and the Laws of Nature, of Reason, I
cannot say of common Practice; and it was here appointed to Women, not as a
favor, but for a punishment, as an effect of Gods wrath against his People, it
being a Reverse of the Fundamental Law which was made by God almost as soon as
the World, I am sure as early as the first Man in it; for Sacred writ tells,
that 'twas laid as a load on the first Woman for her disobedience to her Maker,
that she should be subject to her Husband, and though to be so now, is but the
practice of very few Wives of our Age, yet that does not hinder it from being
the duty of all from the beginning of the World.

Therefore let all our high spirited governing Women, who make their silly
Husbands, and foolish Gallants, such slaves to their Power, because admirers of
their beauty, remember what one very well observed, That the day of the date of
Women's Power over Man, was the day of the date of her sin against God: It being
most clear and plain, that from Adams time, the Woman ought to be in subjection
to the Man, and therefore S. Paul said, I will not have the Woman usurp an
authority over the Man, and seems to give the Reason, for first Adam was made,
then Eve.

Seneca well observes in saying, There is something of meanness in the most
seeming gallant and inviting sin; I am sure there is a great meaness of Spirit
in Men's so subjecting themselves to Women's power, since such must in effect
declare, that they have lost not only the Courage of Men, but the very Nature
of Gentlemen, what did I say, they have lost the Nature of Gentlemen, nay I
might have added, the very natural right and reason of humanity, and deserve to
loose the great honor of being English Men, for such Petty-Coat Men ought to
be Transplanted into the Suburbs of England, Wales, where the Language of that
Country fits exactly their effeminate humor, who by a kind of Welsh Paradox,
call the Man, hur, not he, and indeed hur, suits betten than he, with such a
sort of female Gentry, who are composed of such unmasculine Spirits.

Really when I reflect on what Crowds there are of this pitiful rank of Men,
who take so great pride and delight, in being constant adorers, and humble
servants to their Mistrisses beauty, not in railery, but in reality, who are as
very happy in their own conceit, if their Mistrisses do oblige them with a kind
word, or favorable look, as if the Day Star from above had come to visit them,
and to lead them into eternal light, and that all the Aspects of the Stars had
combined together, to be propitious to them.

Yet after all it is a very great pity, that these sort of Mistrisses, do not
bestow on these kind of servants Lace to their Coats, for sure they are fools
enough to deserve it, and I see no reason why such who are so ambitious of
their service, should refuse to wear their Liveries, and be out of Countenance
to be known Fools by their Coats, when they are not ashamed to deserve that
name by their actions.

Solomon says a slothful Man shall be covered with rags; and so indeed ought
such Men, who are dull and drowsy in the exercise of their own power, and
over-active in their obedience to Women's, for which they well deserve to wear
the Colors of their Mistrisses Soveraignity, and their slavery, on the ragg'd
Fools Coat of their own simplicity.

Sure all such Men as will debase themselves into such an effeminate servitude,
as to render it both easy and habitual to them, cannot pretend in the least to
possess a noble or generous spirit, for that must be averse to it, since it
makes a Man not any unfit to serve his King and Country, (the duty of every
good Subject,) but even to be useful to himself, and family. Whereas if young
Men studied noble Sciences, instead of courting handsome Women, who can only
divert their Time, probably corrupt their Lives, whereas the practice of
virtue, and the study of Men and business, with other useful Sciences, will
refine and strengthen their knowledge, fortify prudence in their actions,
kindle Magnanimity in their hearts, raise glorious desires in their minds, and
so polish and regulate all the weighty actions of their lives, so as to render
them fit to serve their Country, both in War and Peace, and themselves and
families to boot, which advantage can never redound on either, by courting and
serving beauty never so long, for mere beauty sake: And I wonder your beauty
Courtiers do not observe, that great beauties seldom esteem, the long
attendance, or great services of their Adorers as they ought, because they
value more their own beauty than they should, which makes it common for such
Women to ruin their Lovers liberty, to proclaim their own Sovereignty over it,
and therefore sure it cannot appear very unreasonable, that such Men as will
make themselves Slaves to Women's beauty, should pass for fools in sober Men's
thoughts.

Indeed there is one Law (and but one Law I know) which though a French one, yet
as great lovers as our English Ladies are of the French fashions; they are so
far from esteeming or allowing it, as they will not endure so much as to hear
it named, and that is called the Salick Law, which in France prohibits the
female Sex from wearing the Breeches, and Reigning, which our high spirited
governing Women in England, so hate the Name of, as there was a report, they
were about calling a Parliament of Women, to vote it high Treason, against the
Power of their present Government, to but name bringing that Law into England;
but as good fortune would have it, they could not agree among themselves about
choosing a Speaker, for every one would be one, and knowing where all will speak
aloud, none can be heard, they were necessitated in Prudence to dissolve that
Parliament design.

But truly in my opinion, at the high rate of power Women's beauty now Governs,
the Ladies have no cause to be concerned, that the Breeches are not given to
them by Act of Parliament, since it is freely bestowed on them by the Custom of
the Country, and Custom you know makes Laws, and those as binding as any she
Act of Parliament, since they are ratified and confirmed by the Major part of
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, as well as the Knights Burgesses, and
Commons, who by many Signs and Tokens give great cause of fear, that they have
submitted, in a perfect obedience to beauties Sovereign power and Wives
Government over their Husbands.

Indeed for the Protestant Clergy, they must be concerned parties and fellow
sufferers, in the general Calamity of having Governing Wives: but for the Roman
Clergy, they are quite free from that misery and servitude, because they must
never Marry, so that they can be no concerned parties, as to their own Wives,
and therefore may be aiding and assisting in promoting, and confirming Wives in
their Universal Monarchy over their poor Husbands, which they are briskly
sailing toward with a too prosperous Gail. But I hope the Fates will protect
poor Husbands, from such an unnatural, shameful, and Tyrannical kind of
Government; for if ever all Wives should attain to that Supremacy of Power,
(which but too many have already,) Wives would then make such a total
destruction of all Husbands authority over them, as the Wives Monarchy would be
then as absolute in England, as that of the French King is now in France, and
would make then their Husbands as great Fools, as that King does now his
ordinary Subjects Slaves: In short I really fancy, English Wives would be then
as very resolute in maintaining their new Franchises over all their Husbands in
England, as the Pope is now steady in destroying the old Franchises of all
Ambassadors in Rome.

Then we must conclude, that Diogenes his Prophecy is fullfill'd, who ordered
himself to be buried with his Face downward, saying, The World will turn upside
down, and then he shall lie in his right place. Then we shall reckon as the old
Germans and Gauls did, by Nights, not Days: Then we shall look on all
Government, as we read Hebrew, that is backward. Then that Verse shall be razed
out of the Bible, that says the Woman is the weaker Vessel: Nor shall S. Paul's
instruction to Titus when he left him in Crete, pass for good practical
Doctrine, 1 Timothy 12. That young Women, are to be sober, discreet, and obedient
to their Husbands, the Apostle thereby plainly implying, That a Wives
obedience, is a Wives discretion, Then shall the old Men see Visions, and the
young Men, (especially the married) dream Dreams.

And now I would gladly hear what sort of answer and interpretation, the
Governing-spirit Ladies will make to the Question of our blessed Savior, Can
the Servant be greater than his Lord? For surely Wives assuming power, cannot
render them so over senseless, as to fancy he asked it as a Question of doubt,
but spoke it as a thing of impossibility, that a Servant can be greater than
his Lord, any more than a Son elder than his Father.

And now Women are about impossibilities, and vain dreams, methinks they ought
to endeavor getting the Philosophers stone, for that would be very convenient
to carry about in their Breeches Pockets, so that as they have now got the
powerful knack, to change Men into Women, and their poor Husbands Rentals into
Shop-books, so they may then by the virtue of the same Elixir, and the more
powerful Charms of their own killing beauty, turn all Metal into Gold, as well
as too many Wives now a days turn their silly Husbands Lands and Woods into
rich Gowns, and fine Coaches. 'Twas the saying of a great Roman; (who I fancy
Married a kind of an English humor'd Wife) that the Women's rich Gowns destroyed
more Men, than all the Enemies Arrows.

And now Reader, I am sure you must be tired as well as I am of this Subject of
Women's Power, tho many Men are not of their subjection to it, and therefore I
will now take leave of these great beauty adorers, for I cannot as they do,
Dream with my Eyes open, nor can I spare them so much of my patience, as to
wait for the Chimera issues of their Dreams, my design being only to write of,
not to dwell on this Subject, and perhaps I have already not only writ more on
it than I should, but sharper of it than I ought; for considering how
generally, as well as powerfully Women now wear the Breeches, it is dangerous
provoking them, especially having now in my mind the saying of a great
Philosopher, Those that consider little (as most Women do) are apt to be angry
soon.

And sure if wise Solomon in his days, when certainly the Women did not then
pretend to half the power they now usurp, could prefer dwelling in a
Wilderness, before living with an angry Woman, how cautious, nay fearful ought
the writers of this subject to be in offending them, when their Anger is as
fierce, as their power is great; and in some Women, their passionate revengeful
humor suitable to both: Therefore if the Apostle thought he had good reason to
pray to be delivered from unreasonable Men, sure Men may also pray to be
delivered from unreasonable Women.

And doubtless as it suits well with all the measures of true Reason, and good
Policy, that those who Command, ought to be wiser than they who are to obey.
And therefore Women ought not to use a Sovereignty over Men's Actions, whilst
they are Subjects to their own Passions, and sure none can deny this Truth,
that she who cannot Rule her self, is very unfit to Govern another.

But it is full time for me to begin to relinquish the argument of this
dangerous Subject, having spent time enough in dabling my Pen on the brinks of
it, for I did not dare venture farther, for fear I could not get out of it, so
strong and fierce, is the stream of female power, that like an unruly torrent
it runs so violent, that I am afraid instead of making it my business to
diswade you against it; I fancy my securest way to defend my self is by a
retreat from it; for I find I can only act on this Subject, as good Pilots do
in great Storms, who tho they cannot show their power to make the winds obey
them, yet they may show their skill, in making the best use to have them
prosperous. And so in Soldiership, in extremity of danger, a well made Retreat
is as commendable, as a great Victory obtained, and deserves to be Crowned with
Laurel as well as with the Trophies of a great Conquest, and that Soldier, who
has only Courage to make a bold Charge, and wants skill to make a good Retreat,
has learned but half that belongs to the making of a great Captain: We read
that Homer the King of Poets, praised Achilles for understanding the great Art,
of knowing how, and when to run away conveniently: Adversity has her Virtues,
as well as Night has her Stars, and a great General may show his good Conduct,
in the midst of his bad fortune, and ill success. So I cannot but hope, that
this my attempt in writing for the moderating Women's overruling power, was
good, tho my success in accomplishing is but bad, and therefore I will give it
over. And as Ships of War, fire Guns in their Retreat out of their Stern, so
shall I here in the end of this Discourse, discharge in my Retreat this farther
Consideration, That Wives over governing Power runs its Course quite contrary
to the overflowing streams of the River Nilus, for that by it produces great
advantage where ever it goes, without letting any know from whence it comes;
but all Men, (and in a most especial manner the Married,) can tell by woeful
experience, that Women's overflowing power, in governing their Husbands, must
and does produce sad effects, and shameful disorder where e're it goes.

And do but ask one of these mean-spirited Husbands, from whence his Wives
governing power comes, and he cannot deny, but it flows from the same spring
his mean effeminate humor does, in allowing it, usurpation; and I am sure our
father Adam, for being ruled by his Wife, did justly receive, as well as truly
deserve, Gods wrath, and punishment for it, and therefore surely all such mean,
tame, pitiful governed Husbands, well deserve all sober Men's contempt and
scorn as the just demerit of so shameful a condescension, which argues either
their want of wit or manhood. And now the only hope of Reformation that appears
to me on this particular is, that Solomon tells us, there is a time for all
things, a time to mourn, and a time to rejoice; so that there may be yet a time
hereafter, for Wives to obey, as well as they have now to command, and when
they will submit as they ought to their Husbands Government, then they will
certainly deserve that praise and respect that is due to the honor of their
Sex, and receive the admiration of all Men's just courtship and esteem: then may
be presented on the Stage again, the old-fashion Play, so very long out of
date, (as few Husbands remember it was ever Acted,) called Rule a Wife, and
have a Wife, which indeed very few Husbands dare say they do, (I mean before
their Wives,) and few would be believed if they really did, so rare and strange
a thing is this thing called Wife obedience, as many believe it is only to be
found at John Tredeskins, among his Collections of Antiquities.

So that I must be forced to yield that this rare Woman temper of Wife
obedience is a thing only to be hoped, not expected, and therefore I will not
vainly strive as Xerxes did, to level Mountains, nor with Nero, attempt to
alter the Course of the Sea; but instead of endeavoring such impossibilities,
I will now wisely resolve, neither to trouble my self, nor ruling Wives, to
dissuade them to lessen their governing power, which I am sure, would be a Task
as hard for me to obtain, as that of Xerxes or Nero was to perform: Women's
governing power, being so long and deep rooted an usurpation, possessed by so
many Wives, and yielded to by so many Husbands, as long Custom has made it a
Disease in most Husbands minds, incident like the infirmities of sickness or
age to their bodies, which commonly has such distempers that attend it, that
they are worthy of all Men's pity, though past all Men's cure: Therefore I will
imitate your good Physicians, who esteem it unsafe to stir up those humors,
they cannot possibly purge away, and upon this consideration I shall now muzle
my Pen, and found a Retreat, esteeming it more wise and safe, to think much,
rather than write more on this extensive and dangerous Subject.

THE FIFTH DISCOURSE, Of the inconstancy of most young Ladies, especially that
are cried up beauties, and the folly of any one that believes he is fully
acquainted, and solely possessed of a vain Ladies heart, and can give good
reasons for the various motions of her Love-Changes.
I Cannot deny but that young Women's Company may be very advantageous, as well
as agreeable to young Men, as being very useful to whet their Wit, to civilize
their behavior, and to polish their Discourses; but yet they ought still to
remember, that the Conversation of these vain young gay Ladies, is to be used
but like Sauce to Meat, good to quicken the Stomach, but bad to make a Meal on,
being to be taken like strong Cordials, not too much, nor too often, and
therefore to make their visits so moderate, as not to keep longer in their
Company than just to refresh and fit their minds for better employment, and by
these means young Men may relish young Ladies Conversation with great gusto,
and return to them with a no less virtuous than agreeable inclination.

But instead of observing these wise measures, most of our young Gallants, make
Courting of handsome Women, not only their pastime, but their business, so as to
wast all their Time, and use all their endeavors in the pursuit, and attempts
of gaining every new handsome face they see, and if it be but new, it must be
handsome and taking, if 'twere only for being new, on the modish account of
sweet variety.

And truly most of our vain Ladies fall not at all short of them in the same
act of Inconstancy, but are as extravagantly foolish, and as little real as
they, and therefore if 'twere possible to persuade young Gallants and Ladies,
but to allow themselves time seriously to consider this matter, I am apt to
think first that Men would be ashamed of their folly to rely on the airy,
fickle and inconstant humors of most of our vain modish Ladies, especially that
are the cried up beauties, and these our fickle Ladies no less blush (I mean if
their Peeter would give them leave,) at their indiscretion in receiving those
high praises, and believing those great Complements, and often repeated Oaths,
their young Gallants make them, when in real Truth, these Gallants are as much
inconstant to their Mistrisses as their Mistrisses can be to them, and their
perjured Vows of constancy on both sides, weigh as little in themselves, as the
breath that speaks them, which immediately vanishes into mere Air, without ever
making the least return, their Tongues and Hearts being so great strangers, as
there is seldom any correspondence between them; so that it is most certain that
such Men may very rationally extract out of Women's fickleness, this true
Conclusion, that the more they confide, either on Chance, Fortune, or handsome
Women's Constancy, (which are all three now a days much alike,) the more folly
as well as falsehood they entertain in their relyance and depending on them.

Sir John Sucklin was a person of great Wit and Parts, and not only highly
esteemed of by the applauded witty Men, but by the handsome Ladies of his age,
and was one who had made many Philosophical Essays, on the wavering nature, and
various windings of many of the Ladies humors, and inclinations, as far as an
extraordinary Wit, a plentiful Fortune, a liberal Mind, an open Purse, and a
Venus heart, could carry him; and after having employed all these, with all the
care and industry imaginable, he found most young Women's hearts, so volatile
and inconstant, and to come so far short of real Truth, as nothing can be
farther, which occasioned this noble Knight Errant, to leave behind him in
Print, this friendly Caution, that it might appear as public, as young Women's
inconstancy, or young Men's folly, who pretend to a perfect knowledge, and sole
possession of a young beauties heart; you that propound to your selves
propriety in Love, know Women's hearts like straws do move, and that which you
vainly think is Sympathy with you, is really but Love to Jet in general.

Indeed the most experienced Venus Philosophers, and enlightened Inspectors into
the humors of most Women's hearts, and affections, are apt to make as gross
oversights, in their guesses, and fancies of their making good Wives, or true
Lovers, as the ablest Seamen do often commit mistakes in their sight at Sea,
sometimes taking Land for Clouds, other times Clouds for Land.

Really the very best and most able Masters of Art, and most Critical Enquirers
with their greatest observations, and pretenses of knowledge as to the Motions
of Ladies hearts, can only make such imperfect guesses and speculations as
Astronomers do of the Operation of the Stars, which is but by the great; they
can give an account of the general order of Providence in their Stations and
Motions, but can give no certain Rule, or true Measure to discern their
Influences upon particular actions, or bodies, no more, than they can give a
reason, (other than Gods Will,) why constant success attends this Man's
undertakings, and a continued ill fortune waits on another Man's endeavors, or
why a wicked cursed Tyrant should live out his Natural Life prosperously among
his abused Vassals, and our highly excellent, and truly pious Martyr King
Charles the first, of ever Blessed Memory, should be barbarously Murdered by
his own free Subjects; which is a most clear and plain Lesson of instruction,
not to Judge the true right of Causes, by the false light of successes, and
therefore sober religious Men, freely own their ignorance as to the certain
Causes, of the diverse effects of Gods providence as to the event of things in
this world; there being such an infinity of Causes that depend on one another,
that good and wise Christians esteem it their best and safest way, to live in a
state of Neutrality, as to a pretending knowledge, of the effects of Gods
providence in the Issues either of his Mercies or Judgments.

And truly if our young Gallants were as wise as they ought to be, they would
also live in a State of Neutrality, as to their Judgment of the motions of
young Ladies fancies, and be satisfied with these general notions, that their
minds, and inclinations are generally bent toward men, who are young, handsome,
rich, witty, high born, well bred, and the like; but how to discern special
Causes, for particular Occurrences, and to be able to tell the true reasons,
and give the just measures, for Women's so often differing and varying in their
Love fancies, is I believe beyond the power of Man to Judge; some Women
esteeming the black before the fair, others the fair before the black, in which
few agree; or this handsome Man before the other, and sometimes an ugly Man before
them both, Women's likings to Men, being like their mode of governing, who tho
the power be still the same and certain, yet the manner of it is always
changeable and inconstant.

I say in all these changes or rovings of fancy, the most knowing, and
experienced Lovers, can make at very best but imperfect Guesses, almost as very
uncertain as Women's Constancy, or young Men's Love; which indeed is much of the
nature of common Hay and Stubble, which a little spark lights, and a small time
consumes; young Men being more inconstant in their addresses, than very beauty
in its duration, most of our young Gallants Love, being not able to keep up to
the same degree of Elevation, as the short space wherein their Mistrisses
beauty does: In a word, I think the best Wit, and most knowing Lover, cannot
say better of the nature of Women's Love, than what S. Austin said of the nature
of the Times, I fancy I know it, when no body bids me describe it, but find I
am ignorant of it, when any does.

Truly few of our (...) L^^^es, guide themselves in their Love choices by the
clear Light, and true Rule of Reason, which occasions their being so often
misled by the vain Love flashes of their present Airy fancy. And indeed when a
young Man's alluring beauty, (or what else you please to call it,) attracts a
young Woman's sight, and thereby moves her fickle fancy, and inconstant likings,
and so stamps a fierce, but hasty impression of Love on her tender slippery
heart, which commonly makes the newest object, the richest prize, for indeed
most of our modish Ladies Gallants are to them like the Fashions, where usually
the last Commer, is best liked, and most used.

And the Jest of it is, that many of these changeable Ladies being so smitten,
are apt to believe that this their last Love is the only true one, and that all
their former Loves were but a kind of Mushrom Love, which sprung up in a Night
as Mushroms do, without any Root; but that this their present Love is built on
good reason, and true consideration, and therefore shall be like the Laws of
the Medes and Persians, unalterable, being so deeply engraven in their marble
hearts as it is never to be altered or worn out but by death, forgetting all the
Changes they formerly made, and by the same Rule of Inconstancy they may
hereafter make, according to the taking objects which new conversation may
present, and that it is possible, if not probable, that their present passion of
Love that is so newly kindled and fully lighted, may in some farther time be
swallowed up, and extinguished by a more inviting beauty, that may present more
charming and agreeable, and it is most certain that the Love which possesses and
inflames a young Ladies heart last, Eclipses all former fancies, as the Suns
appearance darkens all other Lights, the Sun being to be seen by no other light
but his own. In short, most Women's hearts, and Love vows of Constancy, are to
be read but like strange Prophecies, which are to be understood, not by their
Words, but by their Events.

Indeed most of our airy Ladies, are so volatile and fickle in their Amors, as
not only their Eyes, hearts and inclinations, but their whole nature is so
addicted to change and variety, as one might as easily fix Mercury, or make
brickle Glass malleable, as to fix a young Woman's humor, and love-fancy, so as
not to break out into change and inconstancy, they being more fickle and
changable, than the very Wind it self, for there are Trade Winds that blow
still certainly one way all the Year, without ever altering from the same Point
and Place; but a vain Ladies Constancy, is not certainly to be found at any
time, or in any place, their Love-humors being like the Camelions Colors,
whose property is to have no certain one. So that it is no wonder to find a
young Woman that is inconstant, but a greater one to find one that is not; the
Earth being not more variable in all her Properties, nor the Heaven in all its
Influences, than most of the vain great beauties are in their Love-fancies; and
sure if the Basis and groundwork of their whole Love-nature be sandy, the more
Men foundation on their Constancy, (I mean only in point of Love) the more they
expose themselves to their deceit, and consequently to creating their misery.

Therefore I am clearly of opinion, that as to Ladies Constancy, when the
greatest Critics have made their most studious Observations, and Essayed their
most subtle experiments, on all the points of Loves Compass, they must own
their Ignorance touching the various ways and diversity of motions of Women's
minds, since Love often works upon their Imaginations, and flies to their
Hearts, as Blushes do to their Faces, which they can neither command their
going, or hinder their coming, since they still go and come at their own rate;
therefore I am fully of opinion, that the most able Artists, Naturalists, and
Venus Philosophers with all their speculative Rules and Measures, ought to
strike Sail, and yield to common practical experience, as to the Choices of
young Women's several fancies in their Love-likings; and to grant that Men's best
Logic will be to Argue, in most young Women's way of Arguing, It Is so, because
it is so.

Since then the discovery of the Ebbing and Flowing of young Women's hearts and
minds, are like that of the Sea, a wonderful Motion, exposed to the public
view of all, but concealed from the true knowledge of any, for one may as
rationally hope to find the Philosophers Stone, that turns all Metals into
Gold, as to find the Art of turning all young Ladies Love-fancies so as to meet
in one Center of Constancy; which is as impossible as to be able to measure the
Sea with your Span, or what is as feasible, to fathom the depth of a young
Woman's inclinations, with the Plummet of your reason, their changable Love
being as very far from true certainty, as almost the drop of Ink that writes
this is from the Ocean: Therefore I shall end this Discourse with this serious
Consideration, and Resolution, that since it is not in the power of Man to find
it out, fairly to leave it as such, and hereafter only to wonder, at ones
wondering, at my not being able to discover the various humors, and intricate
windings of young Women's minds at all times, when few of them know their own at
any time.

THE SIXTH DISCOURSE, Of Marriage, and Wives who usurp a governing Power over
their Husbands, which is now so common, as it is become almost the general
grievance of the Nation.
THere are of Wives, as of most other things, two sorts, the good and the bad;
the good presents the Husband with much happiness, and great Content; and the
bad creates as much misery and dissatisfaction: The first is a kind of Heaven,
the second a sort of Hell upon Earth, for there can be no Purgatory seated in
the mid way between them; for out of Purgatory it is possible to be redeemed for
Money, but from Marriage it is impossible to be ransomed but by death. All I
shall say of Purgatory is, that if there is such a Place, (which I cannot
believe) though it may be much visited, yet I fancy it is little inhabited,
because such as have Money may buy themselves out of it, and those that have
none, are not worth keeping in it.

I shall here only name some of the main ingredients that go to make up the
Composition of a real happy Marriage, to complete which there must be on both
sides, hearty love, and true liking; that so they may join their Hearts, as
well as the Minister does their Hands, and as their Marriage Vow makes them tho
two, but one Flesh; so it must make them both, to be but of one Mind, and one
Concern, which is, to please one another; and to this good Consort of Humors,
and Inclinations, there must be added a like degree of Age, and a suitable
manner of breeding as well as an equality of Families and Fortunes, and all
these Flowers are to be bound up into a sweet and well made Nosegay, by a
fervent Zeal, and a holy love to Piety and Virtue, for without a mixture of
these, the Married Couple, do but found their happiness on the Sand, and build
all their hopes of Content, with untempered Mortar; for tho it is as true as
common, that mere beauties do often breed great fondness, yet it can never
create true Love; for beauty is but the slight fading varnish of the Face which
soon wears off, but Virtue is the substantial lasting beauty of the Mind, and
makes a handsome fine Lady, like the Kings Daughter all glorious within, and
preserves her Marriage Love in a sweet, and perfect Harmony, without which, it
can have no duration, but must soon fade, and ravel out into change and
inconstancy.

And now I must tell you, I know not certainly where to direct you to find the
great rarity of such a happy well matched Couple; but this I know, that where
ever they are to be found about this Kingdom, it is a thousand pities that death
should ever take them out of it because they are so very hard to be found in it.

And now I have named some of the principal Ingredients, that are absolutely
necessary to complete a happy Marriage, I hope I shall not need here name any
of those great Faults, and ill Humors, which go to the making up the
Composition of a bad Wife, but shall refer you to the next Husband you meet,
and know, who can certainly tell you by woeful experience some of them that his
Wife has, and the next you inquire after may tell you more, for every Husband
can tell you more or less of his Wives faults; for there is no Husband but
knows some, and it is well if she has not some more than he knows, so that I
shall only need tell you here by whole-sail, that as many Figures joined
together make a great Sum, so many great Faults and cross peevish ill humors
united in one Woman make an ill Wife.

Now if you would know the difference between such Husbands, who esteem
themselves in their Wives very happy, and those that believe themselves to be
made by them very miserable. Of the first kind, the Husband thinks, as good as
his Wife is, that there cannot be a Wife that has no fault, the other thinks
that there can be no fault, but what his Wife has; so that the sum total of
this difference is easily cast up in these few words, as to the belief that
good, and bad Husbands have of their Wives faults, that all Wives have some,
and some Wives have all.

But this truth, neither the good or bad Husband can deny, that tho there are
as well bad as good successes in Men's choice of Wives, and Wives choice of
Husbands, yet that does not at all lessen, or take from, the holy Institution
of Marriage; which is pure and comfortable in it self, tho more are made
miserable than happy by it, Marriage being a Sacred Order, not only as old as
our father Adam, but almost as Nature her self, for it began with the World,
and is not like to end but with it, and can truly boast, both of the greatest
Antiquity for its Parent, and the first rank of Miracles for its honor; for
Scripture tells us, that the first Miracle our blessed Savior did in Canaa was
at a Wedding, and we read in Genesis, that God had no sooner finished Creating
the World, but he presently acted a Miracle in it, by making a Marriage, for
the perfection of which, he miraculously divided one body into two, and united
two bodies into one.

And in those blessed days of purity and innocence, before sin began to reign
in the World, God the great Maker, and wise disposer of all things, thought one
Husband sufficient for one Wife, and one Wife for one Husband; but in our
wicked Age of excess, wantonness and inconstancy, there are crowds of Men and
Women that list themselves into the holy Order of Matrimony, that will not
confine themselves to those limited bounds which God himself gave, and they
themselves vowed to keep, but will rather choose those Adulterous courses God
has forbid, than use those lawful means, which God has given by Marriage: But
it is a sin descends to us from our father Adam; to leave all the lawful fruit
in the Garden, to eat of the forbidden Tree.

And now I fancy it need not pass for Raillery, or a mere Romantic expression,
to say, 'Twould be now another Wedding Miracle in England, to see our vain
modish Ladies as just and obedient to their Husbands as they ought to be, or
indeed our foppish young Gallants, as kind, and constant to their Wives as they
should be; for we are got into such a Brood of ill Wives, and bad Husbands,
they commonly hunt in Couples, one still helping to make the other as infamous
as they can, and so as many of the bad Wives think one Husband too little, so
many of these ill Husbands think one Wife too much.

Now if any wonder at this new fashion, of ranking in writing, the Wife before
the Husband, I fancy they will not much admire at it, when I tell them my
reason is, because it is the Wives right from the very beginning of the World,
to take place and go before her Husband; but yet you ought not to be either
pleased or proud of it, when I remember you in what manner you took place, and
went before your Husband, which was only in sinful disobedience, a misery Wives
ought ever to mourn for, but never to boast of, and which is so far from a new
fashion, as we may read in Scripture it is as very old as the first Woman, and
afforded Adam no other excuse for his being persuaded to disobedience by his
Wife, than that the Woman beguiled me, and I did eat.

S. Paul orders the Wife to be subject to her Husband, and gives this reason
for it, for first Adam was made, then Eve, to show it is the Man's place to go
first, and the Woman to follow the Man, and not the Man to follow the Woman, so
that it is most clear by the Law of God, the Woman was made for the Man, and
formed the weaker Vessel; but by our new English practice, it seems to pass for
good current modish doctrine, that the Man was created for the Woman, and made
the weaker Vessel, else sure Men would never endure, that so very many Wives
should rule their Husbands, and so very few Husbands should govern their Wives.

The subtle Lawyers that can talk the craftiest Men out of their money; (some
giving them indeed only but talk for their money) cannot yet talk their Wives
into due obedience, many of them only laughing at their Husbands threats of
bringing Writs of Errors, and Actions of Trespass, against them, for usurping
and practicing an unlawful governing power over them, which tho contrary to
Magna Charta, and the fundamental Law of this Kingdom, and all other Laws
whatsoever, except that of Custom, yet Lawyers Wives will keep this Law in full
force, (I am sure they cannot say, and virtue) for they break all Laws, both
divine and human by it.

Nor can our Ministers with all their Canonical gravity, Divine Rhetoric, and
eloquent Preaching, teach their Wives so effectually S. Paul's lesson of
submission as to make them pay them so much as the Tithe of obedience, for if
they could, sure they would never suffer them to wear such rich Clothes, which
is not only unsuitable to the gravity and decency of a Clergy Man's Wife, but
very contradictory to the Apostle Paul's doctrine, who orders in general all
Women, and sure Ministers Wives above all, not to adorn themselves with rich,
but modest Apparel; nor can our great Merchants that Plow the Seas with their
Ships to all Kingdoms of the World, in all their long Voyages, and great
dealings, purchase any considerable quantity of this rare Commodity, called
Wife obedience, and let me tell them, not for their comfort, if they can buy
none of it abroad, they will hardly find any given them at home.

Nay I may yet go farther, and say, that the greatest, and most wise Statesmen
with all their Politics, cannot make their Wives pay them their just
obedience, and I fancy their Husbands esteem it a great part of their wisdom
and prudence not to expect it, because probably they in great wisdom do
seriously reflect on the state of their Adam, who though he had all the Wit and
Wisdom, Policy and Power, of the whole World solely and entirely in himself,
yet when he got a Wife, or rather a Wife got him, we all know to his high
shame, and our great misery, that she governed him, not he her; by which all
Husbands may receive this small Consolation, that Wives usurping the
Government, is no new Error, but as old almost as the Creation.

All I shall say to our Nobility and Gentry on this sad Subject of Wives
governing their Husbands, is only to desire most of them to lay their hands on
their Hearts, and then tell me if seeing is not believing. In truth one need go
no farther than the Streets to meet many Men that do not govern their Wives,
but one must travel the whole Kingdom over to meet a few that do.

We find that Springs which move only by the mere course of Nature, will mount
no higher than their Heads, because it is against Nature to do it, and if we may
believe S. Paul, and he is no good Christian that does not, he tells us that
the Husband is the head of the Wife, and if the Wife will but believe that,
sure she cannot tell how to deny this, that Africa it self, can produce nothing
more monstrous, than for a Woman to grow above her head, which being the
uppermost part of the body, nothing can grow above it, for if it did, then it
cannot be the uppermost part. Sure such silly beast-like Husbands, that do not
know their own strength, and so allow the Prerogative power of Governing to be
in the Wife, could never wonder at Balaam's Prodigy, that the Beast should be
wiser than the Rider.

Certainly this sort of Wives that make it their Practice, and believe it their
right, to exercise a Sovereignty over their Husbands, never read, or forgot
they ever did, S. Paul's doctrine, I suffer not the Woman to exercise an
authority over the Man, God first Created Male, then Female, Gods command to
the Wife to be subject to her Husband, was given as long ago as the first
Woman, and really I believe, 'twill be as long hence as the last Wife, before
it be strictly observed by a general concurrence of obedience, if one may judge
of all Wives, by the common rate most now adays govern at, and what is worse,
are like to do, for it is most certain, that long Custom makes a firm Law, and
what Men are long acquainted with, they are usually well contented at.

I have heard some of those high-spirited governing Wives, that have been so
wickedly foolish, as to borrow some of the Devils sophistry to argue with, that
because the Command of Wife obedience, is as old as the first Woman, and was
then only given to one Woman, and that beyond the memory of any Man, that
therefore it ought now to be out of the practice of all Women of our times,
especially of such as are modish and witty, and consequently unfit for them to
follow; but those that instead of paying obedience, make it their sport to
railly at Gods Commands, let such expect that Gods Judgment without raillery
will follow them; be not deceived, God will not be mocked.

There was among this Hectoring brood of Women, a Parson's Wife that governed
her Husband, as too many of them do, but could not govern her Tongue, as too
many of them do not, who was so very senseless, as to ask in a jeering ranting
manner a grave learned Minister that came to visit her Husband who was not very
well, (and indeed no wonder, for his brains were never well in their right
order since his Wife first governed him) what S. Paul could mean by that
saying, the Woman is the weaker Vessel. To which the learned Minister gravely
replied, Truly Madam Governess what the Apostle meant I know not, except your
Sex was the weaker Vessel in discretion and Continency.

Indeed 'twere much better for these high-spirited governing Wives, to consider
how they can exempt themselves of that great profaneness of daring to vie
Miracles with the Almighty, as in effect all governing Wives do, for as God
wrought a Miracle by taking the Woman out of the Man, so they would act
another, by turning the Man into the Woman; but Miracles are ceased, and I wish
for the public good that all governing Wives power were so too; but if that
were, some may object, that then Miracles cannot be ceased, since that would be
a new and great Miracle indeed.

Really if Wives were but as wise as they ought, then they would consider as
they should do, and constantly observe, what they cannot but still truly
believe, that it is Gods positive Command, that the Wife should be in subjection
to her Husband.

And now if I should ask one of these ranting governing Wives, this Question,
how she can pretend to exempt her self from the foul fact, of beheading her
Husband; I really believe it would puzle her to give a rational and
satisfactory answer, for if the Apostle S. Paul by saying the Husband is the
head of the Wife, means that the Husband as head has the governing power over
the Wife, which certainly is the true sense of these words, and no Wife that
has sense can deny it; then the Head signifying the Power, and the Power the
Head, this conclusion must necessarily of course follow. That the Head being
the Husbands governing Power, the Wife that cuts off the Husbands governing
Power, cuts off the Husbands head, for if she will allow the first, she can
hardly deny the latter; but I shall end this Discourse, and seriously conclude,
that if Husbands were as wise as they ought, governing Wives would not be so
numerous as they are, nor rule so much as they do; for then Men would never
yield up so tamely and meanly their birthright of governing power, which the
Law both of God and Man, (and I wish I could say the Law of Custom too,) has
given the Husband over the Wife, that so it might become hereafter as strange
in England to hear of a Wife that does govern her Husband, as now it is to hear
of a Wife that does not; and that governing Wives may be as very scarce, as now
they are very common, and as much out of fashion, as now they are in.

But methinks I hear some blaming me for being unreasonably severe, in writing
against governing Wives in general, when I cannot but own that there are some
governing Wives that for being so, are not blameable, but commendable, which
are such prudent sober Women, as are Married to foolish sottish Men, who if
their Wives did not govern, they could not govern themselves, and so their
great noble Estates would soon be wasted, and moulder away into a foolish and
shameful ruin; which by their Wives wise and discreet management is prevented.
To which I answer, that there is no general Rule without an exception, and
besides I do not design this Discourse against such governing Wives, as find
their Husbands fools, but against those Wives as make their Husbands such
merely by their governing them; but if a Husband be so foolishly blind in his
Judgment, as he cannot see the right way to order his Person, and Estate, it is
a necessary duty and kindness of his Wife to govern him, and his fortune, and
to lead him out of all the dangers and inconveniences he might run both it,
and himself into, and such a Wife deserves no more blame, for governing such a
Husband, than a Servant does for leading about his Master, and showing him the
way, when he cannot see to find it being quite blind: But yet this governing
power a Wife must perform with great respect and civility to her Husband, by
lessening, and sheltering his weakness to all persons as much as possibly she
can, that all may see, the occasion of her Governing is not an Act of Pride,
but a Work of pure necessity; not her delight, but trouble. In a word, she must
be very far from saying of her Husband, what a ranting Widow did, that had
three Husbands and governed them all, and for her fourth she chose a mere Fool,
and being asked her reason, she answered, she was grown Lazy, and therefore
Married a Fool, to save her self the trouble of making him one.

THE SEVENTH DISCOURSE, Of the Inequality of many Marriages, and the
Inconstancy of most Wives, that Men Marry for mere Beauty, or their Parents
Match for bare Money, with the sad end that usually attends such Matches.
IN my Opinion, the great reason why disagreeing Marriages are now grown so
rife, is because unequal Matches are now become so common, most Parents making
it more their business to Match well Portions and Estates, than Sons and
Daughters; and so their Fortunes do but suit well, no matter if their Age,
Humors, and Inclinations agree ill; many Parents making it more their concern
to provide their Children plenty of Livelihood, than contentedness of Living,
being much more taken with a great Gingling of Guinnies, than with a Sweet
Consort of Virtues, or a good Pedigree of Gentility, which occasions some fine
great Ladies to have rich Husbands, and fair Estates, and yet but bad Fortunes,
to be well Married, and yet but ill Matched, because they do not fancy, and so
are not satisfied with one another.

Content and Happiness are Twins, born out of the same Womb, and spring out of
the same Root, and none can be content with what he does not like, no more than
discontented with what he does; for if he likes, he must be content, else he
does not like. And it is also the same, where there is no Content, there can be
no Love; for if he loves he must be content with what he Loves, else he does
not Love, and where there is no Content and liking, there can hardly be any true
Constancy, for none can affect a Constancy to that they do not like, but their
Mind is still in pursuit after that they do.

Most Parents in Marrying their Children, are sure to remember Solomon's
saying, That Money answers all things, but forget his meaning, that is
purchasable with it; for several young Ladies that are richly Married, can tell
by woeful experience, that much Money cannot still buy true Content, since many
of them have little content, in the midst of their much Money.

And farther, common experience, which is usually the effect of reason, assures
us that it cannot purchase many things, as to give sight to the Blind, or Youth
to the Aged, or what is equally impossible as both, to create Love against
liking. It Is true indeed that Guinnies do often tie a fast Matrimonial Knot,
but of themselves can never tie a true Lovers one, since no Medicine that has
not a mixture of the Sympathetick Powder, can operate kindly on young Women's
minds; for as nothing can force a Man's belief contrary to his own reason, so
nothing can compel a Woman's Love against her own liking. It Is true one may be
forced to obey at the rate of a Tyrants Will, but it is as true that none can
believe or Love but proportionable to their own reason or fancy, which made the
great Tyrant Nero say, that he had much rather be feared, than loved; because
said he, they that fear me, fear me after my rate, but those that love me, love
me after their own.

Indeed most of these Matches that are made up on the account of Interest, and
not Love, their kindness is but like a Winters Sun, faint, and of no duration,
and tho it may now and then in some time of the Day, shine bright and clear to
the Eyes of Spectators, yet it carries no true heat with it, and therefore can
never bring forth any ripe fruit of true content or satisfaction; and indeed no
wonder since such a Winter Sun's Love can produce none of the pleasant Fruit of
Marriage delights, when the Days civilities between them are very Faint, and
the Night Embraces very Cold; for these Matches of mere Convenience, that are
made up only for great sums of Money, or mere fanciful beauty, no sooner that
the Wives beauty is gone, or the Husbands Money spent, (they being the only
Cement, that fastened a common civility between them,) but the unbeautiful Wife
appears disagreeable to her Husband. And the Monyless Husband, seems
contemptible to the Wife, and both Husband and Wife, become not only
unpleasing, but despisable the one to the other.

There was an Italian that writ a great Book in praise of good Wives, and
concluded there was but one good Wife in all the world, and said that was
enough for all, since every Husband that truly loved his Wife, might fancy
'twas her; but by the Italians leave, tho one good Wife that is trusted abroad,
is more by one, than is in all Italy, for no Husband in that Jealous Country
will venture on the desperate Experiment, of trusting his Wife abroad in Men's
Company, to try whether she be virtuous or not, much of the Wives Chastity
there depending on their Husbands strict watchfulness over them; the Italians
esteeming it a most excellent and Sovereign Antidote to hinder their Wives from
becoming kind to Men, is to prevent Men's being able to come to be kind to their
Wives; for every Italian carries still about him, this old English Proverb,
That it is the occasion makes the Thief, nay and observes it with more reverence
and punctuality, than all the Proverbs of Solomon together.

But in England there are many virtuous Wives, that go where they will, and
keep what Men's company they please; but this great trust of free liberty, is
not convenient to be extended to all Women, since sometimes Husbands by it,
show more confidence in their Wives, than discretion in themselves; and as too
much liberty spoils some Wives, so a strict watchful Jealousy, makes many
Wives worse than they would be, by believing them worse than they truly are;
for doubtless many Husbands make their Wives dishonest by mistrusting them; for
that breeds anger, and hatred, and they often create revenge, which some hot
Womanish spirits will act upon any account, tho they themselves are the
greatest sufferers by it.

I esteem Jealousy to be a most ridiculous folly, not only because Jealous
Men, eagerly seek, what they highly dread to find; but if a Man had more Eyes
than Argos, yet as Argos was, he may be deceived by a simple Woman; for if a
Woman will but put on the wickedness of the Devil, she will not fail being
furnished with the subtilty of the Serpent.

And therefore it often happens, that great and wise Statesmen in the Politics
of Marriage, who trust in their Wives virtuous words, great modesty, and strict
outward behavior, may be deceived; for unvertuous thoughts and designs are
usually disguised and set out in finer expressions, than plain honest dealing,
and those commonly promise most, that mean to perform least, because they
intend to pay in no other Coin than bare words and false assurances; and
therefore none ought to wonder if great Politicians as well as others, are now
and then deceived in their Wives virtue. We read that Sampson with all his
Strength, tho he could not be outwitted by all the Philistines, was
overreached by the subtilty of a Woman.

A strict seeming outward modesty, is not still an infallible sign of a Wives
true inward Virtue; since it is not extraordinary to see a Woman look like a
Saint before Company, and act like a Miss in private; for many handsome Women,
that are of a good coming and melting nature, as soon as you are a little
advanced into their acquaintance, and favor, yet seem very coy and severe at
first entrance into it, imitating the Sea, which tho never so quiet and calm in
the main, yet still casts out rough waves near the shore.

And now, whatsoever men may think of me, I am sure my meaning is truly
friendly, in advising them, that if they are in the happy state of freedom, not
to yoke their Liberty in Marriage for mere Beauty, or bare Money, but chiefly
for virtue and goodness; for if you but consider seriously, you will find
certainly, that the misery of an ill Wife, is no new affliction, but as very an
old one as Marriage, and almost Nature it self, witness Adam who lived in a
continued innocence, and felicity whilst he remained in the Paradise of a
single Life, but he was no sooner Married to Eve, but he was cast out of both.

And it is most certain, let your Love range over Court, Town and Country, nay
ramble over the whole World, you can never choose a Wife, that is not her
Daughter; and common experience tells us, that there are few Daughters that do
not favor something of their Mothers humor, as well as nature, and therefore
'twill be highly prudential in this sad and weighty affair, to consider that
Marrying a bad Wife, (as it is more than an even Lay one does,) has something in
it of the nature of that sin, for which men can have no repentance or pardon,
no more than they can have any ease, or relief for it while they live; for one
may as well pretend to free Deaths Prisoners from the Grave, as unchain the
Married during their Lives; no Skill of the greatest Artist, nor yet Argument
of the most subtle Socinian, can ever evade or loose a Wedding Knot, it being
of an extraordinary lasting Union, quite differing from all others, for Men can
unbind all others whilst they live, but a Marriage Vow, can only be unbound by
death it self.

And now I have given you this part of my Opinion as to mere Money, or beauty
Marriages, which many Husbands may truly call in the Apostles phrase, (tho
spoke in another and more divine sense,) That Labor of Love. I hope 'twill not
appear an extraordinary fault, in saying it. S. Paul had foreseen the Romantic
Gallantry, and extravagant folly, (I think, I might have said madness,) of many
Marriages made now adays, which some of our vain inconsiderate Ladies are drawn
into, by the common report, that such a Man has a great Estate, which suits
well with her eager desire to keep a Coach and six Horses, (which she vainly
fancies, will not only carry her through all the miseries of Marriage, but into
the Towering pastime of the Park) without the least concern of getting a good
prudent sober religious Husband, many of them not valuing, or at least not
considering other, than the keeping a splendid Retinue, and glittering train of
Liveries, than wearing rich Clothes adorned with Gold, and costly Pearl, when
there are a hundred more weighty concerns, that are more needful Appendencies
to complete a happy Marriage.

Really this is one of the chief Causes why such Marriage Love decays, and
wears out with their Wedding Coaches, and is as often out of order as they,
('twere well if they still could be as easily mended) which none ought to
wonder at, it being but natural for effects to follow their Causes.

Among all the great and extravagant follies that are used in the inequalities
of Marriages in our days, there is none appears to me more irrational and
unnatural, than an old Man's Marrying a young Woman, which in my Opinion seems a
Match fitter to make sport for others, than to raise joy to themselves; for an
old Man is to his young Wifes Bed, but like juice of Orange to her Stomach; it
may create in her an Appetite, but of it self can never satisfy it; such an
old Man being not only unsuitable, undecent, but unwholesom too, being to her
like a March Sun, which all the great Physicians concur in opinion, to be very
unhealthful, as having only strength to exhale Humors, but wants force to
dissolve them; so that such a Match is so great a folly, as I shall only here
need name one shameful misery that commonly attends it, and indeed I need name
I think no other, either to fortify my opinion against it, or to set out ones
misery for doing it, which is this, That an old Man that Marries a handsome
young Woman, tho his Wife may be so virtuous as not to Cuckold him, yet the
world is so wicked in its reports to Censure him, so as it will always; which
minds me of a story of a Gentleman, whom both his Wife, and Neighbors agreed
to proclaim the truth of his being a Cuckold, and she dying, he Married an old
ugly rigid Puritan, that was so odiously deformed as he was satisfied, she
wanted Power, and the world Charity enough to Cuckold him, for 'twas impossible
there could be a spark of Love, or liking in the Case, and he did believe that
this Wife would not only be a perfect Antidote against horns for the time to
come, but a Remedy for what was past; but one of his Neighbors being of a
contrary belief called him Cuckold, upon which he repaired to his learned
Counselor in the Law, to know if his present Wife being honest, (though his
former was not so,) whether he was still a Cuckold, or not? to which his
learned Lawyer gravely answered him, That tho he was not one in pure strictness
of Law, yet being once so, the Custom of the Country, was so civil as to give
him the Title during his Life.

And now I have given you my opinion, and told you the usual fate that attends
old Men's Marrying young Women; next comes that of young Women's Marrying old
Men, and tho they appear both alike foolish, yet there is great difference in
their folly, for as by this sort of Matches, old Men glut themselves with much
more of the Woman than their age wants; so young Wives (if virtuous) stint
themselves with much less of the Husband than their Youth needs, and besides
tho Marriage has the power tounite two Bodies into one Flesh, yet it wants that
of uniting the two Fleshes into one temper or Constitution; for a young Wife
that is in the Spring of her age, is like the Sun in the Spring of the Year, it
not only gets the ascendant every day higher and higher, but grows every day
more strong and vigorous; but an old Husband, is like Autumn, whose strength
goes only downward.

Therefore I fancy an old Man Marrying a handsome young Lady, has nothing to
plead, but Guilty; but a young Lady for Marrying an old Man, may have some
colorable excuse, to moderate the folly, and lessen the shame of such an
unequal Match; for perhaps she will tell you, she has heard a story, which if as
true as strange is a rare one, That the reason that Stags live so very long,
is, that when they find themselves to decay, they swallow a live Serpent, and
as it consumes in their body, they revive in their strength and Spirits. So
possibly a young Woman will say, That she did not Marry an old Man for being
rich in Years, but Money, and because she found her Fortune decaying, and almost
quite decayed; therefore she swallowed a Marriage with an old Man, as the Stag
does a Serpent, in hopes that as her Husband consumes and dies in her bosom, so
she may revive in her sprightly gay humor, and please her self with the
delightful thoughts of the wealth he will leave her, and the ways she will
Intrigue to spend it in the fanciful hopes she has, of suddenly gaining a young
Husband suitable both to her Youth, and aerie Inclinations.

There is another sort of Women, but indeed their number is very small, who
being not handsome in their own opinion, and therefore may besafely concluded
very ugly in that of all others, who to supply the defects of nature and age,
give out they are very rich, and that they hope will make amends for all, Gold
being always young, handsome and taking, to all sorts of Men, and Ages, for Money
answers all things, and by these reports of their Wealth, tho often false, they
decoy young Fops who have lost their Annuity at Play, or spent it in
Debauchery, to Court them for their fame of having much Money, and too eagerly
press the Marrying them for it, Swearing that they Love their persons more than
their Money, valuing them a thousand times before it; and no wonder that they
that swear so commonly for nothing, should now lie for much Money; for in real
truth they only put the Widow before the Money, as we do in common speaking, the
Box before the Jewels, which though first, is altogether inconsiderable to the
latter, as only containing that Riches, which it self makes no part of.

And many of these old rich Widows are so doatingly senseless, that because
their Money Courters, swear they are handsome, they verily believe they are so,
and credit others words before their own eyes, tho their spectacles are on,
which renders some so sottishly impudent, as to tell their Gallants, that tho
their beauty is in the fall of the Leaf, yet Autumn can breed Lovers as well as
the Spring does, when in truth, an old withered Autumn face, does but Chill the
blood, and dispirit the vigor of the most active and resolute Courtier; and
therefore a Spring beauty can only inflame the heart, and tho possibly a young
Man may be sometimes foolishly taken with an old Woman's great wit, good humor,
or rather greater riches; yet it is, I think, impossible he can be really in
Love with her deformed face, person, or age, which must quench the fire of any
amorous flames in a youthful or vigorous heart.

Therefore I shall advise all such Women, to be so prudent as to yield to the
seasons of Age, as they must to that of the Year, and not hope to turn Winter
into Summer, or Autumn into Spring; but instead of striving for what is
impossible, yield to what is reasonable, and submit to these true Measures, That
Eighteen is the gay sprightly blossom age that a young Woman's Life shines out
in its brightest splendour and beauty: That Thirty is the stale year of a Maid,
and the worst age of a Wife, (I mean that is an ill one,) because a Wife at
Thirty is old enough to be ugly, and young enough to live long; but a Woman
that is so far advanced in years as the frigid Zone of Sixty, ought in all
reason to banish all vain Love thoughts, as to the youthful pleasures of this
world, and to fix them on the other, so as to live only in order to die,
imitating the good old Woman named in the Gospel, Luke 2.37. Who kept in the
Temple, who fasted and prayed to God night and day.

Indeed it becomes old Women much better to frequent the Church with the good
old Godly Matrons so renowned for gravity and religion in former days, than to
visit the Park or the Play, with their vain young Gallants, lest their old
Dress, and Antic Faces, should make Men say, such a one is more fit to be a
Spectacle, than a Spectator; wants good Men's Prayers, rather than young Men's
Praises; and is more apt to create thoughts of Mortality, than to raise motions
of Love; really I am of opinion that if 'twere possible to turn beauty into the
same nature of content, that the little Kingdom of England would swarm now more
with handsome Women, than the Country of Palestine did ever with fighting Men,
of which Scripture makes mention of many hundred thousands, for than every ugly
Woman, young or old, as thought her self handsome, (as most do,) must be really
handsome only for think it, as well as all those that believe themselves Content
must be Content, or else they could not believe themselves so; therefore all
old, and ugly Women, that are not past all years of discretion, tho they are of
beauty, should never strive for impossibilities, for youth will as soon come to
the aged, as beauty to the ugly; but since beauty will not come to content you,
be you content without it, and strive for that you may obtain, which is the
beauty of holiness, which infinitely excels all others, it being much better to
live well, than look so, and to have a good soul, than a fine face, that being
earthly and ever fading, but a pure soul is heavenly, and never decays being
everlasting.

In short, that Man who is so simple to Marry great Age for mere Money, when
that is spent, (and you know that Money, like Love, cannot always last) all the
use of consolation I can think of, is to send for a Minister to give him some
spiritual advice, of which he may perchance receive some to ease the trouble of
his mind, but as to the bodily distemper or plague of his broken infirmity I am
sure there can be no remedy, but that of death; for indeed it may be fitly
said, of a young Man's Marrying an old ugly Woman, what the Apostle said of a
greater folly in another sense, be that does so, offends against his own body,
and truly such a one has in my opinion, no other plea left him to excuse his
folly, than Adam had to excuse his first Sin, The Woman beguiled me; I say in
Cases like this possibly S. Paul might have thought it equal, for so indeed it
is, things rightly considered, for such men to suffer, or rather indeed conquer
the disturbance of a lustful burning, than endure the plague, and continual
misery of an ill old ugly Wife, that can neither please the fancy, nor satisfy
the appetite, and therefore coming to such a sad Marriage, is like coming to
the age of fourscore, after which experience tells us, there is only Labor,
Infirmity, and Sorrow, young Husbands, and old Wives, being but mere names,
things of form, not use, only made to torment one another, Living in one House,
but Lying in two Beds, for the old Wife would have what the young Husband will
not give, and the old Wife cannot give what the young Husband would have; in
short a bad Wife at Land, is like a Storm at Sea, which because a Man is so
unhappy to be engaged in, and cannot be rid of it, must be suffered out with
patience.

And so I have done with old Wives, for I am certain the Reader must be weary
of them, as well as I am sure the Writer is, and therefore I will leave this
extreme of old Age, and treat on that of young beauty, and the folly of them,
that Marry merely for it, and here set you down in a few Lines, the common
degrees, usual accesses, and woeful events, of such hot, rash, hasty, mere
beauty Marriages, as are now in fashion among many of our young Gallants, who
choose Wives as the silly Indians do our Merchants Tynsel and Bawbles, who
value their real worth only by their glittering show.

The first steps and degrees of a young Gallants growing love and fancy to his
Mistress are generally these; first he likes the Woman as we say in a Lump, or
by wholesale, then he admires her beauties apart, courts her person, loves her
humor, thinks all she says is witty, and all she does is graceful and becoming,
and all her actions agreeable and excellent, though possibly not one of them
are so; for you must know that beauty in Love, is like Charity in Religion, it
covers a multitude of faults. Then he presents his heart, and she becomes the
sole Mistress of it, and as his passion increases, so he fancies her beauty
does, till at last he believes the scorching flames of her beauty, to be more
insupportable than a Midsummers Sun, in its full meridian heat and strength;
and therefore resolves to follow S. Paul's advice, It Is better to Marry than
Burn; but then pray take this Caution with you, that tho of two evils, it is
best to choose the least, yet that argues neither to be good, (as indeed it was
not, when S. Paul first spoke those words,) and in some sense may not be so
now, yet however our fierce Lovers heart being all a fire, his mind thereby
grows restless, and as very much out of order as his reason, (if a Man in Love
has any,) for to say a passionate Lover that has lost his heart, and can yet
keep his reason, is the greatest of follies, next to that of being so in Love.

But since our Amorous Gallant is so furiously smitten, rather than not quench
the Amorous scorching flames of his lustful passion, she resolving not to admit
him to her Bed, in any other shape, than that of a Husband, not confiding at
all in his Vows of speedily Marrying her, possibly because she had tried
another word before, and he broke it, and deceived her, and therefore she
resolved not to be cozened so a second time, by a second Trial; our hot
Politic Lover, to enjoy the momentary delight of embracing her beauty, does
with much desperatness, and little consideration, cast himself down that
dangerous Precipice of Matrimony, and long-lived trouble of a Wife, tho he buy
her at the dearest rate of Purchasing, and it may be worse sort of sooling an
ill Marriage, a very sad bottom to Insure the content and happiness of a Man's
life upon, since he who only Trades to get the Merchandise of beauty, may
become a sad looser tho he gets his whole Adventure, since such a sort of
Matrimony does usually bring the Husband, and often the Wife, Springs of misery
and inconveniences, but seldom so much as any drops of the Oil of pure
gladness, and true satisfaction.

And indeed one of the great reasons why Men that Marry for mere beauty, are
commonly so unhappy in their Choice, is, That as their Mistrisses beauty is but
a mixture of flashy and glaring colors, so is in a manner their reason; for
not considering, that beauty Love, is but like Gunpowder, which as it flames at
the first Spark; so it sets forth all its strength and fierceness at its first
firing, and then soon expires into mere smoke and air.

The first falling in Love of an amorous Man, being just like the first
surprise of Anger in a Choleric Person, it runs on so violently, as it stays
not to attend reason, nor consult discretion or convenience, and so strips it
self of true understanding, and therefore as soon as such a Husband has cloyed
his sensual Appetite, on that surfeiting Dish of a mere beauty Marriage, his
stomach being used to feast on sweet variety, longs for other food, and then
first Love grows indifferent, his passion soon cools, his eager fiery fancy
grows quickly dull, and his mind suddenly changes; so that he presently forms a
new desire, or passion of love, and loathes his former beauty Companion, as the
most irksom deformity; and she whom he was so lately fond of, as the most
pleasing Charm and Converse of his life, who was a kind of Elixir salutis to
his very heart and soul, and the Center point where all the Lines of his
happiness did meet; She in whom he could find no discontent with, or content
without; She whose presence made a Village as agreeable as London, and her
absence London as doleful as a Village. In short this very She, whose Company
he esteemed his Heaven upon Earth; no sooner was the flower of her fair and
youthful beauty worn off, but his fickle passion as soon decays and grows
languid, and this late Soul of his soul, and Joy of his heart, turns to be the
very clog and burden of his life, and from all Mistress, becomes all Wife; that
is, she falls from the top of all admiration, to the depth of mere misery, and
from an extraordinary charming delight, to an ordinary necessary evil, called a
Wife.

And such Husbands commonly call such Wives, and so do Wives such Husbands, the
Yoaks of Liberty, and the Stocks of Love; and all know that neither of them can
be easy or pleasing in such a bondage, being an enemy, and destroyer of sweet
variety, so that the Husbands love being decayed with his Wives beauty, he
grows weary of her, she of him, and both of one another.

And as to a young Man's Marrying an old ugly Wife, merely for her Money, all I
shall need say of it is, that often such young Men fancy such Money Wives, to be
of the same Nature of Money it self, whose virtue consists not in keeping of it,
but in parting with it, and so commonly use such Wives accordingly; and thus
this wild passionate Love or mere Money Marriages, like wildfire, soon devours
and consumes it self in its own flame; and Torrent like, instead of refreshing,
it destroys, and by over-pressing too violently the course and streams of its
Waters, soon Ebbs and runs it self dry.

Therefore that Man that will sell his sweet Liberty, and enslave himself into
Matrimonial Chains, merely to enjoy a Woman's beauty; sure he does not know, or
at least does not consider that still the richer the Metal, the heavier the
Chain, and therefore though his Mistress be never so much the admired object of
his present fancy, and that I should allow her golden Chains to weigh as long
light on his mind, as she continues beautiful to his sight, yet to bind himself
to herin a Matrimonial Vow only on the account of her beauty, till death them
depart, on assurance that he shall feast on her beauty as long as he lives, is
just such a kind of folly, as if a young Man that were a great Lover of Sweet
meats, should leave all his business, employments, and pastimes to bind himself
an Apprentice for seven Years to a Confectioner, merely on the account, and
assurance, that during that time he should every day feast himself on them,
when very common Experience is able to inform him, though his confidence be
never so great, his inclinations never so eager, and his stomach never so good,
yet it is natural for him to eat so fiercely at first falling on, that like a
greedy Howk, he soon over-gorges himself with his own Prey; and after having
taken a full draught of that sensual delight, seeing them continually exposed
to his sight, and prostrate to his will, he comes to hate them as much after
enjoyment, as he courted them before; for though the Fire of Love still burns
for enjoyment, yet enjoyment still quenches, (if not extinguishes) the fire of
Love, and he grows in a little time so cloyed, as he wants not only appetite to
eat them, but almost patience to see them.

Then when it is too late, he accuses the unreasonableness of his prefancied
delight, on which he built his confidence of a lasting pleasure, and allows it
to be not only a great folly, but sin against reason, in any Man to believe,
that his sensitive nature ought to be gratified, when it proposes only a bare
satisfaction to the Appetite, and cannot secure any durable happiness or
content to the reason and judgment of mankind.

And this is really the cause, why so many of our young Gallants now adays make
Marriage a kind of Paradox in Love; for one of these to obtain the Woman he is
in Love with, turns his Mistress into a Wife, and then it is two to one, in a
little time, to get rid of his late beautiful Mistress, being shrunk into the
shape of a mere Domestic Wife, he parts for ever with his late Mistress, to get
free from his present Wife; and note that tho many Mistrisses turn to Wives,
yet no Wives ever turn to Mistrisses; Wife and Mistress being of the same
differing nature as Water and Wine, it is common to drink Wine with Water, but
of Water to make Wine to Drink, was never done but once, and that by the first
Miracle of our Savior; so that in effect they did but see mingly agree, really
to fall out, piece together, to fall asunder, and Married to get rid of one
another Company.

And it is some of these unfortunate disagreeing Husbands that says the
Translator of S. Paul's Epistles, has left out the word, well, in one of them;
for where the Apostle says, He that gives in Marriage does well, it should have
been, He that gives well in Marriage does well, for all know there are more bad
Wives, than good; and sure all believe, that S. Paul was too wise to write or
think, that any Man could do well in Marrying ill; so that I am of opinion, the
sum of the Apostles meaning by saying, He that Marries well does well, but he
that abstains from Marriage does better, has some reference to that good plain
English saying, That next to no Wife, a good Wife is best, which occasions my
pitying the many Husbands that have bad Wives, and the many Wives that have ill
Husbands, and to wish those few, that fancy they have good ones, as truly
content in their Marriages, as I am in my Resolution of never Marrying; and I
am sure none can deny, but that I have this advantage by the Bargain, that it is
impossible for me to meet a bad Wife that does not Marry, but it is very
possible, and common for him that does.

THE EIGHTH DISCOURSE, Against Maids Marrying for mere Love, or only to please
their Parents Inclinations, though quite contrary to their own.
I Am against Maids Marrying for mere Love; because they that Marry for mere
Love, Marry in a manner for mere fancy, and so to feast their sensual appetite
on what they then like, they often starve the body of what it will hereafter
need; for though your fancy may tell you that beauty great store makes Love a
feast, yet truth can tell you it is too slender a Diet to make a livelihood on;
therefore in my poor opinion, 'twould be a much wiser course for Maids to make
up their Marriages with a good share, and large proportion of interest and
convenience, to mix with their Love-liking, and present fancy, for the true and
durable content of Marriages is so founded on these two great Pillars, that
without them Marriage-content can never flourish much or last long; for a good
sufficient Estate of Land is as necessary to buy rich Clothes, and maintain a
handsome plentiful way of Living, as the Foundation under the Ground, is to
support the fine Rooms above it.

Beauty is a fine Flower, but it must soon fade, and a young Woman's Love fancy,
may often change, but can never long hold, but a good Estate may continue
longer than you can love or live, and last after you are dead, to your
Childrens Children to the worlds end; but a mere naked Love-match, is at very
most, but a Tenant for Life, and usually not near so long; a good Estate can
keep you in sickness, and in health; but a Love fastened on mere beauty or
fancy, never can, for such a fancy-Love still fades away with the beauty that
occasions it, since as soon as the flower of beauty begins to wither at the top,
the admirers Love begins to die at the root.

Yet indeed I cannot think it very strange, that young Maids should be deluded
with the delightful thoughts of pleasing and satisfying their present beloved
fancy, of enjoying the Person of their inclinations, since in most young Maids,
their fancy, makes their Reason, and not their Reason governs their Fancy, and
therefore it is not to be wondered that they should esteem it reasonable, that
there is great happiness, and that there will be long content, in such mere and
bare love Marriages, because they never tried the sad experiment of such a rash
hasty Marriage, and therefore their want of experience, may well serve for some
kind of excuse, to moderate their want of Consideration, but after a dear
bought Trial, too many of them find by woeful experience, that a Marriage Love
built on bare beauty, or mere fancy, (which are much alike) can never stem the
Tide of the troubles of disappointments, and inconveniences, (the usual Issue
of want,) that commonly attend such hot and hasty Love-Marriages, since they
cannot fancy so well of it, as they will find ill in it, yet there is so great a
Charm in this thing called a Husband, Maids representing the Man as they would
have him, without considering what he really is, as poor silly Maids dance
about him as merrily, as they do a Maypole on a Summers day, and one Sisters
sad and unhappy Marriage will not serve the other for a Caution and Warning
against it, because she fancies her wit is quicker, her humor better, her
beauty greater, and her person more taking, so easily young Maids believe what
they desire, and therefore doubts not, but her Fate will be kinder, and her
Husband better, than her Sisters; but it is more than an even Lay, she will soon
after her Marriage, experimentally find, she had more faith in believing her
good fortune, than she had reason for depending on it, since she had on that
account more danger to fear, than happiness to hope for, or at least to rely on.

Thus such Marriages, are to most young Maids, like the forbidden Tree in the
midst of Paradise, pleasant to the Amorous Eye, and therefore they will be
tasting of it, tho they are almost sure to be ever after miserable by it, by
their abandoning, and ever after losing their great Virgin prerogative, the
Apostle Paul ascribes them, of being exempt from the troubles of pleasing their
Husbands, and being in subjection to them.

And sure none that is Master of common reason, can deny but a Virgins life is
much happier, because more innocent than any other, and as it is much nearer the
blessed state of Innocence, in this World, so also it is much more secure as to
the felicity of the next, especially in this one particular, That it is much
easier for a Virgin to keep her self virtuously Chaste, than either a Married
Woman, or Widow; because both natural reason, and common experience teaches us
this plain Philosophy, that it is much harder to abstain from a pleasure one has
often tasted, than it is to live without a delight one has never enjoyed, it
being such a certainty as none can deny, that it is less difficult to keep ripe
Fruit that is fair and sound, and was never touched, than it is to keep any such
after they have been so.

Therefore in a word, you Virgins that are so much in the State of happy
freedom, as not to be yoked in such a sort of Marriage, and to the pinching
troubles of want, (for fancy can only feed the mind, not the body) and possibly
to the sottish humors and impertinent follies of a jealous Husband, for want is
apt still to create jealousy. I say if you Virgins truly desire to continue in
your freedom and happy Life, never allow Men to become your Masters, by
swearing they are your humble servants, and by calling you their Queens, make
you their Subjects, for by Marriage you make your Servant your Master, and from
being Mistress of your self, you become little better than a Slave to your
Husband.

Therefore as an Antidote against this misery, I shall advise all young Virgins
to carry still this Memorandum in their minds, That tho beauty is still taking,
yet it is never lasting; sweet, but frail, and that all Husbands love
Sovereignty much, but few own beauty long, especially in the domestic face of
a Wife.

And because it is great pity these sort of unhappy Marrying Maids, should have
no companions to solace them in their fad penitential state of Mourning, give
me leave to introduce some Married Women into their dismal Society; for as many
Maids make themselves miserable by Marrying for mere Love, so many are also
made unfortunate in Marrying merely to please their Parents, not at all to
satisfy themselves; for really most Parents make it more their concern to
match Fortunes than Children, or to suit inclinations or ages, when it is but a
kind of Reversing Nature it self, it being as feasible to unite two contraries,
and make Fire and Water agree, and May and January meet, as by the Magic of
Matrimony to make a very old Man, and a very young Woman to be but one flesh
and temper; for youthful beauty to the mind, is as cold old Age to the body;
Heat penitrates the pores of the body easily, because they expatiate themselves
to receive it, but when Cold approaches and attacks it, presently it closes, as
being contrary and averse to it.

Yet many Parents think to deal with their Childrens Marriages, as they do with
their Fruit Trees, and think they can Graft humors and inclinations between
Husband and Wife, as they Graft different kinds of Fruits on one another, and
by their Grafting and binding them together, they make their differing Natures
to become but one by Marriage, but upon serious Consideration, which does not
always attend Marriage; they will soon find, that the Minister can only join
their hands, but it is the free will offering of the heart, that can only unite
and Graft their affections together, and this free will offering is to be led
by Love, not drawn by the Cords of Wedlock, for the Will is a free faculty, and
consequently cannot be forcibly determined to any act, but yet is capable of
admitting persuasions, and inducements, and so may be by them inclined, but
without them cannot be forced.

And therefore tho Maids ought not to Marry without their Parents consent, yet
they ought not to be compelled against their own; It Is true indeed that large
Estates can produce a plenty of Livelihood, but it is as true, that Content only
can produce happy Living, for Content and Riches prove often to be no a kin to
one another; but Content and Happiness are Twins, and ever inseparable friends,
and like Water and Ice, one still makes the other.

Content is certainly the greatest worldly happiness, for it makes the poor
Rich with it, and the Rich poor without it, and very common experience tells us
that many poor Men are made happy by their unrich Wives, and many wealthy
heiresses are made miserable and unfortunate by their rich Husbands, for it is
not much but enough that satisfies, and the Weekly Bills of Mortality inform
us, that more die with Surfeits, than starve with Hunger, the true Measures of
Contentment not consisting in quantity, but quality, for many have much that
have not enough, and many have enough that have not much; some young Women
being composed of such distempered Hidropick feverish humors, as there is no
quenching the Thirst of their hot ambitious desires; others are so temperately
minded, and healthfully wise, as a moderate and indifferent kind of condition
satisfies them, and those are happy in such a moderation to a high degree;
Content being the Throne of happiness, the very top of our ambition, and the
end and accomplishment of all our desires, the sole want of which, is like that
of wanting health, which is sufficient to unpleasure all our other enjoyments,
in a word, Content is of such an obliging generous Nature, and of so universal
value, as it furnishes us with every thing, that either our real necessity
wants, or our vain desires fancy.

And as Content is thus pleasing, so discontent is little less unpleasing, and
therefore I cannot but highly blame and Censure such Tyranical ill natured
Parents, as because they like such a Man's fortune, therefore they will make
their Child Marry such a ones person, tho it is as odious to her sight, as
pleasing to her fathers Covetous humor, and so to satisfy his will, must force
her inclinations to Marry him, tho utterly against her own. Indeed it is such
kind of forced Marriages that drives young Women into a double evil, and that
of the worst sort too, being those of Perjury, and Treachery; for how can you
make it less than Perjury, in a young Woman, to make a solemn Vow in the face
of the Congregation to Love that Man her whole Life, whom she knows she cannot
Love a piece of a day, nay not so much as that very time of her Life, she is
vowing to Love him, till death them depart.

And surely there is no less Treachery in such a Marriage Vow, that must be a
kin to that black one of Judas, who under pretense to kiss his Lord and Master,
brought a band of Soldiers to seize him, so averse forced Marriages under
pretense of long continuing friendship and kindness, by shaking hands, but not
joining hearts, do often bring Bands of discontents and miseries to each others
Lives, and Liberties.

Therefore to conclude this Discourse, my opinion is that Parents may choose
their Daughters wealthy Husbands to live with, but it is only themselves that
can choose Husbands to be delighted in, and therefore those Maids do well that
Marry with their Parents liking, and they do ill, that Marry against their own.

THE NINTH DISCOURSE, Against Widows Marrying.
WHen I consider truly, and reflect serionsly, how many Widows have made
themselves miserable by Marriage, and how few make themselves happy by
Marrying, methinks it should be now as needless a Task to dissuade such from
Marrying as to advise them not to eat again of that Dish they came just from
surfeiting on; for sure she that makes her self unhappy by a second Marriage,
deserves as much her own misery, and merits as little others pity, as the Man
that steals again after having been burn in the hand, does the Gallows: for a
repeated fault is a twofold Crime, and deferves a double punishment.

I know I need not mind the Reader of the old and common fable, of two Women
that went as soon as they died, to S. Peter to get admittance into Paradise; the
first assured him, that her Husband was such a devilish wicked ill natured Man,
that he made her life a kind of Hell on Earth, upon which account S. Peter
thought it reasonable, that since she had suffered a Hell in this World, she
should not endure another in the next, and so admitted her into Paradise.

The other Woman observing this, thought she had a double Key and Ticket, for
she was not only tormented with one, but two bad wicked cross-grained Husbands,
which rendered her life most miserable: but S. Peter answered her, that since
she was so very simple as not to think one bad Husband enough, but she must
have two, he bid her be gone, for Paradise was no place for fools; indeed that
Widow must be extravagantly foolish, and unreasonable, that did not think the
misery of one base Husband sufficient, but she must try the experiment of a
second.

I confess, I cannot at all agree in opinion with that Writer who says, a woman
is but an imperfect Creature whilst she is without a Husband; but had he said a
Widow was not come to her full perfection of misery 'till she had one; I fancy
he had given a truer Character, and taken a more just measure of most Widows
lives that Marry, since common experience may assure all Wives and Widows, that
there are generally ten bad Husbands for one good one, and I believe there are
few Widows in our age, that are so perfect Disciples of Seneca's wisdom, as to
extract satisfaction out of misery, it being an Apostolical virtue to be
satisfied, and contented in, whatsoever condition it pleases God to place one
to.

But I am rather of the belief, that a young beautiful Widow, that leads a
strict virtuous unmarried life, leads a kind of Miraculous one, in as much as
she being born a Subject to the Law of Nature, and to the Lustful frailties of
it, having not only tasted, but probably delighted in them, and yet can contain
her self so in the bounds of such a virtue and pious Mortification, as to be so
much Mistress of her self, and of her own youthful temper, and inclinations, as
to resist the pressing temptations of young handsome Men with an unmovable
virtuous constancy; such young Widows do really live in this world, as the
Papists say the Nuns do in their Nunneries, That they live in the flesh, as if
they had no bodies.

And sure since it cannot be denied, but a virtue that overcomes the highest
difficulties, fiercest inclinations, and most youthful passions, must needs
excel all others; then it cannot be in the least doubted, but that a young
handsome Widow that leads a retired, strict and unmarried life, must needs in
that kind surpass all other Women, because she practices more the virtue of
continence than any of them can, I mean as to the outward mark of our
knowledge, since a Widow that lives in a true conformity to such a strict pious
life resembles most, and approaches closest to the heavenly one, which must
needs be the best as coming nearest to perfection, for she declines the natural
commerce of the body, to enjoy the better and Spiritual Contemplation of the
Soul. And it is most certain the more Women keep their thoughts and desires from
worldly delights and vanities, the more their minds will be fortified against
them, and the more ready they will be to embrace true felicity.

We read in Scripture that the Woman's subjection to the Man, was laid on her as
a penance and punishment for her disobedience to her God. Truly most of the
young Married Sparks of our Age, are very active in observing Gods pleasure
herein, yet not at all on the account of the Almighty's design, but the worlds
practice, which is for such Sparks to make Marriage a punishment to the Woman,
as much as they can, that is as much as some Wives will; for serve, honor, and
obey, are grown but words of course, which all Women must repeat after the
Minister at Marriage, but few will perform after they are Married, and their
promise of obedience till death them do part, is seldom in their thoughts as
long as they live.

Indeed I have known some young handsome Widows, who have loved their own
Reputation and their Husbands Memory, so much as to continue some years in a
strict deep Mourning, as well in their Life as Dress. And I have also known
other Widows, of the wild brisk London brood, that have not so much
Complemented their Husbands death, as to hold out one year a Widows Life, tho
contrary to the Custom of the Country, and the common Rules of decency and
civility.

And as showing so little a concern for a Husband is very unbecoming, and
highly immodest, not to speak worse; so on the other hand overmuch grief and
despair, are both imprudent, and irreligious.

But I need not speak much of this overabundant Mourning for a Husband, since
it is a distemper of mind, very few Widows of our age are inclined too, and
therefore not in danger of being infected with; for most Widows can tell us
that they are so well read in the brave Roman Story, who though they had no
other bounds to their aspiring hopes, than the Conquest of the whole world, yet
they still placed their glory and praise, as much in suffering well, as in
doing so, saying, as they ought not to be overmuch exalted by prosperity, so
they ought not to be too much depressed or cast down by adversity, but to
observe the Golden Rule of Mediocrity in both Cases, and therefore it is not ill
Wife like, but brave Roman like, to suffer all losses with Courage and Patience.

And it is from these Considerations that many of our fine young gay brisk
Widows say, They esteem more the Philosophers Wit, than his Wisdom, who being
in great affliction, and weeping most bitterly for the death of his Wife, one
of his friends told him, his crying, could do neither him, nor her any good;
Therefore said the Philosopher I Cry.

But this is a kind of doleful Logic, that suits ill with the sprightly gaiety
of our fine young Widows, and therefore it must be needless as well as
troublesome to mind them of it, it being a very unmodish doctrine, to preach to
such young Widows, that because their Husbands are out of the world, therefore
they ought to live as if they were not in it, and bury themselves alive in a
strict solitary retirement, which they will tell you savours more of great
folly, than true wisdom; since no Woman by her Matrimonial Vow, is engaged to
Love her Husband longer than till death them do part; and indeed as Wives now
go, I think it is very extraordinary to meet one that truly loves her Husband
half so long. In a word, she that gives her Husband a more lasting Love than
she promised, is generously kind, but she that pays him as much as she engaged
for, is truly just.

Next it is most certain that all extremes are bad, and therefore Widows ought
to avoid them on both sides; either by showing too little a Concern, or too
violent a Grief, for their Husbands death; I know I need not travel your
thoughts so far as the East Indies, to show you the barbarous examples of
Women's love to their dead Husbands bodies, by sacrificing themselves to the
Devil, by burning themselves alive, soon after their Husbands death; we have
examples enough in the History of our Neighboring Princes, of their Wives
barbarous Cruelty committed against their own Lives, for their Husbands loss of
theirs; (but then do not mistake me, so as to think, I believe there are any
such kind of fond foolish Wives in our age,) as Adymond Queen of Sweedland,
who, when she heard her Husband was killed by the Danes, said she would soon
follow him, and presently stabbed her self. I might name you many more of this
bloody Nature, but surely such kind of Tragical examples are to be looked upon,
but as the vile and wicked effects of madness or a devilish despair, and not at
all the motions of a pious virtuous love, since good Wives may show their
kindness, without shedding their blood, and may mourn heartily, without dying
Cruelly; for such unnatural deaths utterly destroy that great Christian virtue,
of well regulating their passions.

And certainly no Widow stands more engaged to her Husbands memory, either by
the Laws of outward Civility and good manners, or by the inward effects of true
love and real esteem, than to observe those kinds of measures, and degrees of
mourning for their Husbands, which are usual according to the rules of custom
and decency, which is to live a strict religious and unmarried life, for some
considerable time, or longer as some Women do; and among those many who
continue so to the end of their days, and so are Widows indeed according to S.
Paul's phrase, and so deserve his character of honor. And among those I cannot
omit a just commendation of the three most Excellent virtuous Ladies, and kind
Sisters, who live together near London, I need not name them, because I am
sure, there are not three Widow Sisters of their high Quality, great Virtue,
and clear Reputation, that live together in all England; for which as they have
the just admiration and praises of all true Lovers of Virtue; so I wish all
Widows would strive to imitate their religious example, that so like them, they
might enjoy comfort of true devotion and felicity upon earth, as an earnest of
more blessed comforts and happiness they do expect in the other World.

And who by leading such a constant religious, and unmarried Life, the world
must plainly see, that such Widows have no particular fondness for any Man in
the world, since their dear Husbands are out of it, and that they do still show
a constant affection, real esteem and memory of their Husbands virtues and
reputation; and by a particular kindness continued to all their Husbands
Relations and Friends, as much as if they had been now actually living, and
could be made sensible of the effects of their good or ill nature toward them.
I say such a virtuous and discreet carriage in Widows is a most clear
demonstration that Loves do not expire with their Husbands Lives; and certainly
such an affection must be more real, and less by assed, as to all appearances,
than the love of any living Wife can possible be; since that may only look
counterfeit, and be disguised, by wearing a Mask of self-interest, or design
rather than of true affection or value, and may be reckoned on the account, of
living in good esteem or reputation as to the world, or be counterfeited for an
outward seeming kindness to her Husband, tho she has no real inward one, in
order to live at peace and quiet at home, both for her Childrens good, and for
her own and families ease.

But a Widow that continues (as I have said) consonant kindness to her Husbands
memory and Relations, and lives in the state of a private and religious
widowhood; such a one can expect no return, or hope for any praise or
advantage, but from the just commendation of her virtue while she lives, or
indeed the more certain comfort and assurance of her eternal happiness, when
she comes to die.

But mortifying Discourses of this nature, I am sure must be far from making
any agreeable music to the fine young Widows, but it may be sound harsh, and
unpleasant, as well as useless and unliking; many of the fine gay young Widows,
making the day of their Husbands death, the joyful Birthday of their own
freedom.

And there are few of these brisk witty sort of Widows that are not so great
Philosophers in the Politics of Marriage, and so perfectly read in all parts
of Scripture tending to that point, as to be wisely able to extract out of it,
the virtue of Patience, and to possess it in so high a degree, and great
measure, as to be able to raise to themselves satisfactory Arguments, of all
sizes, degrees, and qualities whatsoever, to arm themselves against the loss of
a Husband of any kind; be he good or bad, poor or rich, so as to render his
death at least easy, if not pleasing, by arguing and reasoning with themselves
after this manner:

If my Husband was good and virtuous, and made a holy end, suitable to his
religious life, sure I ought not to mourn for it, but rejoice at it, that he is
gone to Heaven, and that I have in a manner half my self there beforehand; and
therefore it must argue want of Charity, kindness and good nature to lament and
mourn for his happiness, in living and dying so well.

If my Husband was wicked, lewd, and profane, I have a double reason to
rejoice for his death; first, that the world is rid of so bad a Man, and I of
so ill a Husband, and am no more obliged to lie every night, with so much
wickedness in my bosom, and that we are now no more one flesh, who were so far
from being of one mind, and humor; and I have also this second means of
extracting this heavenly advantage by it, that having experimented the slavish
misery of serving the Creature, I am now, or at least ought to be, the more
ready and willing to dedicate all my remnant of Life, only to the service of my
Creator, whose service is still perfect freedom, and everlasting felicity.

If my Husband was poor and needy, I have reason to be glad he is entirely
delivered from the great misery of want, and that his poverty is dead and
buried with him, for none ever feels want in the Grave.

But if my Husband died Rich, I have great reason to rejoice that he has left
me so, and has given me by his death, what he denied me all his life, the
incontroulable Treasure of his Wealth; and that I have now the range of the
whole Kingdom, to ramble over, and spend it after what kind of manner, and with
what sort of Company, as I fancy most, and love best; and by being a Widow I am
become the perfect Empress of my own Will, instead of being confined at home a
Subject to my Husbands, and sure none can relish with more gusto, the ease and
liberty, and the many pleasures of freedom, than she that is newly delivered
from the bondage of a Marriage confinement, and therefore what Seneca said of
Virtue, that there is no Passion, or Affliction in the World, that Virtue has
not a Remedy for:

The same may be said in reference to most young Widows love to their Husbands,
let their passionate kindness for them be seemingly never so great, whilst they
live, yet they will be sure to find Remedies for their overmuch mourning for
their death.

And therefore I shall advise Husbands never to Antidate their trouble, by
fearing that their death will produce a long sadness in their Wives, at the
common rate Marriage-Love now goes, there is no great fear of it; since in most
Wives their good Jointure-Rents, outweigh their Love-sighs, or at least
Counterpoise all their formal Mourning; for there is really, so little pure
Love in many of our Marriages now adays, as Husband and Wifes Love, is but of
the same nature of that of great Sovereign Princes, whose Love is but mere
Interest; and a Husbands death to many of our Wives, is become as Repentance
for Sin, which cannot come so soon or late, but it still brings Comfort with it.

And now lest you may take my speaking against Widows Marrying, to be but a
kind of raillying Discourse, fit only to entertain, but not to convince; and
that my reasons against Widows Marrying are but mere Romantic, pleasant to be
read, but needless to be believed; I will wave my own weak reasonings, and
quote you some Scripture ones, that seem not to favor Widows Marrying, but
rather the contrary, to continue as they are, and for their encouragement to
it, propounds to them great advantages by it, which are these, The first is out
of the Old Testament, Lev. 22.13. If a Priests Daughter be Married, she must
not eat of the Offerings of holy Things, but if the Priests Daughter be a
Widow, she may eat as in her Youth, that is, as if she had been never Married
and was a Maid, which was a privilege Women had by living Widows under the
Mosaic Law, and which would not have it seems been granted, had she been made
unclean by a second Marriage.

And S. Paul speaking of the happiness and advantages Virgins have over Married
Women, gives this as one of his principal reasons, that they live free and
exempt from the cares of observing and pleasing their Husbands, and being in
subjection to them. And sure Widows enjoy at least as much, if not more, on
this account than Virgins can; for doubtless it must be a far greater degree of
pleasure, and satisfaction to those that have cast off the Yoke of an ill
Marriage, than it can be to those that never wore it; as a sick Man that
recovers his health must needs enjoy more pleasure by it, than another can in
his health that was never sick; and really in my opinion the Penance of an ill
Marriage ought to be the best Remedy, to make a Widow well savor the happiness
of an unmarried life, and the most persuasive Argument to make her continue so.

I shall further observe, that the same Apostle in his first Epistle to
Timothy, chap. 5. verse. 5. Seems to divide Widows into two sorts, the good, and
the bad; the good he Characterises with the Title of being Widows indeed, and
gives us this sign to know them by, She that trusts in God, and continues in
Prayers, and Supplications night and day. This is the holy Mark, you may know a
godly Widow by, and this is the Widow that the Apostle calls a Widow indeed,
and orders Timothy to pay them great honor as such.

I am sure these are not at all a kin to the race of proud brisk ranting Widows
that are in, and about London, who abstain not from Marriage upon the account
of any retired religious Inclinations, or upon any want of desires to Marry,
(for most of these Widows desire more Husbands than Husbands desire them) for
they only abstain from Marriage because they cannot get Husbands to suit their
fancy, for they must Marry such as are high enough to Match their Quality, Rich
enough to maintain their Extravagancies, and fools enough to be governed by
them; but such a sort of Abstinence from Marriage, springs rather from great
pride, than true devotion; and so proves rather a Penance to their body, than
proceeds from any principle of Virtue in their mind.

The bad sort of Widows the Apostle brands with the foul marks, of being not
only idle, but tatlers and busybodies wandering from House to House, which
among the London Ladies is called Visiting; these sort of Widows S. Paul orders
Timothy to refuse, and not to admit into the number, and seems to give this
reason for it; for when a Widow waxes wanton against Christ, that is against
holiness, she will Marry, (where by the by, take notice Widows, that Marrying
is a sign of waxing wanton) and next, if that young Widows had not been
naturally inclined to this sort of wantonness, the Apostle would never have
given this strict charge about it, by ordering Timothy not to admit a Widow
into the number under sixty, the Wife of one Husband, not two, which in effect
was to admit no Widow, but such a one as resolved never to Marry; for sure the
Apostle might very well conclude, that a Widow that did not Marry before sixty,
would never Marry after; it being an unfit and undecent Age, as exceeding all
the bounds of gravity and discretion, being an age altogether incapable to
answer one of those ends Marriage was chiefly ordained for, bringing Children
into the world; for S. Paul in the same Verse, Where he will that young Women
should Marry, he orders them to bring Children. 1 Timothy 5.14. So that it is
clear, that a Widow at sixty ought not to Marry, because a Widow at that Age
cannot bring forth Children; and tho I confess a Widow at sixty may with her
great Wealth buy a young Husband, (for Gallants are still to be had for Money,)
yet it is impossible that her years should ever breed a Child; for though her
Money may bring her a Husband to Bed, yet all the Midwives in Christendom can
never bring her so.

And now I have given you my opinion as to old Widows, I shall here present my
advice to the young ones, which is, instead of venturing on the great
uncertainty of meeting a good Husband, you will dispose your selves unto the
service of a good God, where you will be sure to enjoy true content in this
world, (which is more than you will be sure to do in a Husband,) and eternal
felicity in the next, in such a perfect state of bliss, as you will have
nothing to hope, or fear, wish, or desire; for she that has all she desires,
can have nothing to wish.

S. Paul says, she that lives in pleasure, is dead while she lives; therefore
all Widows will do well to reflect seriously on the vast difference, of living
in vanity, sin, and pleasure, and that of living virtuously, and in a true
love, and holy fear of God; and so to be listed in the blessed number of those
that S. Paul calls Widows indeed, who continue in supplication and prayer,
night and day.

To conclude, this is the vast difference between the Widow that lives in vain
Pleasure, and she that lives in the true fear of God; The one is dead whilst
she lives, and the other shall live eternally after she is dead.

THE TENTH DISCOURSE, Against keeping of MISSES.
NOW I have finished my Discourse on the unpleasing Subject, of many Widows
miseries by making second Marriages; I shall change that doleful Scene, and now
bring on the Stage the gay, brisk, modish vice of keeping Misses; a sin grown
so in fashion, as the great custom of the fashion, has overgrown the sense of
the sin; being a vice so common, as its commonness makes many forget it is a
vice, nay some of your young Atheistical Gentlemen are so far from condemning
the sinfulness of it, as they pretend to justify its practice as not sinful;
but for this sort of Satanists, they are only fit to be shut up with a Red
Cross, and a Domine miserere upon their Doors, that they may be branded so for
the plague of their impiety, as to keep in their infection to themselves, for
these are steering directly before the Wind, with a full sail to Hell.

There are another sort, that steer almost the same course, but with a side
wind; and though these are of very wicked principles, yet they are not of so
profane and debauched a kind, as the former; for these own, that keeping a Miss
is ill, but they hold it a less evil to keep a good-humored handsome Miss, than
to live with an old ugly ill-natured Wife; for say they, one need keep a Miss
no longer than he likes and loves her; but one is still bound to live with a
cross-grained Wife, though he is so far from loving or liking her, as he hates
her; but this Argument carries no force, but in wickedness, being indeed as
very senseless and ridiculous, as its maintainers are highly impious and
extravagant; since a Man by living with his ugly Cross Wife, may thereby often
meet occasions to exercise his patience, which may prove a virtue in some kind;
but by keeping a Miss, he can never by it exercise a virtue in any kind;
besides a Man by living with his Wife, though never so deformed, does but what he
ought; but a Man by keeping a Miss, though never so handsome, does what he ought
not, since in so doing he offends his God.

There are another sort of vicious young Sparks, who you will easily believe
have not attained to years of discretion by their pretending to Argue, that
it is not a greater ill to keep a handsome Miss, than for a Widow to Marry a bad
Husband, but in my opinion this admits of no comparison; for sure no Widow can
be so mad, as to Marry a Man, that she is sure beforehand will be a bad
Husband. But all Men that keep Misses know beforehand, that by so doing they
act a great sin. A Widow by Marrying an ill Husband, only commits a fault
against her own content, but he that keeps a Miss, offends against his Makers
command; which must needs be very much worse, since an ill Husband can only
disturb the body, but a scandalous sin may destroy the soul.

But yet tho a Widows Marrying an ill Husband, cannot possibly be of so ill a
nature as a Man's keeping a Miss, yet it may probably be of a much more lasting
trouble, since an ill Husbands life is like to last much longer, than a fair
Misses beauty; for we all know it is very customary, for Miss keepers love, to
end with their Misses beauty, since their beauty only makes the love.

In a word, I have known ill men that have made kind Husbands, so that it is
possible a Widow may Marry an ill Man, and not be miserable; but it is
impossible a Man can keep a Miss, and not be wicked.

It Is a common Proverbial saying, That a Wife is a necessary Evil, which I
fancy, is not to be taken in the sense most do, that Men cannot not live
without them; but because Men are still bound to live with them; for whilst
they are Wives, tho far from being good ones, yet poor Husbands are obliged to
serve out their time of bondage, according to agreement for better for worse,
till death them do part. But now for the new Mode of protempore Wives, called
Misses, they are generally looked upon by our Gallants, and keepers of them, as
only Tenants at will, to Men's Persons, and Purses; being tied to them in no
other manner, than we are to reading Romances, on which we may begin when we
will, and leave off when we please, for we are not obliged to read longer in
them, than they suit our humor, and please our fancy.

Indeed Misses are now become in most great Towns, (especially London) to
Gentlemen, as Books are in Stationers Shops to Scholars, where they may pick
and choose, Read sometimes this kind of Books, another that sort, all, or any,
and hire them by the Day, Month or Year; and when they have read them over as
often as they please, and have no longer delight in them, or farther use of them,
they may return them, and leave them where they found them, and there is no harm
done, they lying ready exposed for the next Courteous comer.

Misses in Towns are like Free-booters at Sea, no Purchase, no Pay, they are
never out of their way, (except to Heaven) so they can but meet a prize in it;
indeed our fine young Gallants are wise in this particular, (but pray do not
ask me in what other lest you puzle me,) and this their wisdom consists only in
choosing of two evils the least; for they will keep Misses which is ill, but
they will not be bound to keep them longer than during pleasure, which is less
ill than a longer time; that is, they will be tied to Misses by no other Law,
than that dearly beloved one of sweet variety, Misses being to be used but like
slight summer Garments, which are only useful in the youthful Spring or hot
Summer Season of Men's Lives, and may without much Ceremony, or great difficulty
be put on, or cast off; ('twere well if the sin of using them could be so too)
lightly worn, and cheaply bought; Misses being but a kind of Summer-Fruit, for
present eating, not long keeping, for their beauty will never hold out long
after a hot Venus blast, or burning clap of thunder, and their Bodies are often
withered and rotten before they are near ripe, in substance and perfection, as
many of the Merchant Adventurers in that Trade, can tell you by woeful
experience.

And therefore young Men do wisely in not binding themselves to them, in
Health, and Sickness, for then they are not only useless but chargeable; not
till death them do part, but till their Misses beauties does decay, or their
Passion change; for Miss-Love must still be Passionate, because it cease to
be Love, when it cease to be Passionate, having no other motive to cherish
and maintain it; and therefore usually such Men's Love, expires as soon as their
Misses beauty breaks, or may be sooner, if he be taken with a more agreeable
object, for his present fancy and convenience; for though most of our young
Gallants Love constantly, yet few are constant in their Amors; for tho they
are still Loving, it is Women more than a Woman; for considering they are only
Constant to Inconstancy, they can only keep the name of Constant Lovers, as
Rivers still keep the same Name, tho they are never two Minutes the same Water,
they still running into the Sea, as Springs are still running into them.

Indeed if young Gallants were bound to keep their Misses during life, such an
obligation would come so near to matrimonial bondage, as our young Gallant, on
those terms, would as little love and like a handsome young Miss, as an ugly old
Wife, all confinements to our Sparks of the times being odious.

O what a brave World and pleasant Age do we live in, when new setts of Misses,
are now grown modish marks of Greatness, as numbers of Wives and Concubines
were signs of Magnificence in Solomon's days, which is the only thing I know
our young Gallants imitate him in, and their only grand reason for doing it, is
merely because Christ's holy Gospel forbids them doing it.

Really the Drunkards in S. Paul's days, were a kind of sober Men to the
Libertins of our Age; for they knowing their deeds were evil and scandalous,
had so great a sense of modesty and shame, (tho not of sin,) as to cast a vail
of darkness over them, to hide themselves and their Debauchery from the sight
of others, which is implied by S. Paul's saying, Those that are Drunken, are
Drunken in the Night; but the Debauchees of our times, so glory in their own
unshamefulness as they expose their Persons and Vices, (I might have said Sins)
to the open Sunshine, and public Assemblies; and are so far from casting a
vail, either to cover their own shame, or their Misses painted faces, as many
of our young Sparks, nay, others that are more than middle aged Sinners, allow
their Misses Coaches to themselves, but with Coachmen in their own Livery, for
fear all might not know whose Misses they are, and who keeps them, to show to
the World that their vile impudence scorns all sober Men's censure, as well as
it defies the great Gods punishment.

This base species of mercenary Miss Love, being grown as very common as
themselves are, who are as impudent in their Carriage, as lewd in their
Actions; and really it is now grown a disputable question which now abounds most
in London, Hackny Coaches, or Hackny-Women, Tradesmen or Trading-women.

Thus impudence is now become a kind of Staple Commodity in our Kingdom of
Love, it being now adays esteemed a shameful meanness of Spirit in a young
Gentleman, to be out of countenance for keeping a Miss, but grown no shame at
all to keep one; they being now looked upon but as marks of greatness and
riches, and signs of Youth, health, fashion, and gaity; but never in the least
thought on, to be the sad effects of sin, shame, folly, and wickedness.

O strange change! That sin should be thus supported by a customary impudence,
and virtue suppressed by a general Custom: Thus the tolerated, nay I might have
said encouraging mode of acting this sin, has taken away both the shame and
conscience of committing it; yet as very debauched as our Age is, we ought not
to cast our faults on it, for there can be no time so bad, as to render sins
necessary; for general Custom, can never justify particular faults, since we
might all live well, if we did not spend our time ill; for the will in her
immediate operations, neither depends, nor moves by the temper of the body, or
the fashion of the times, but by the motions of the mind, in her own
Resolutions.

In a word, keeping of Misses, is now grown so common, not only among great
Men, but others of as bad Lives, though not of so great Estates; that now as to
the keeping of Misses, there is nothing in it so strange, as that any should
think it so.

THE ELEVENTH DISCOURSE, Of the vain folly of such Ladies who think to show
their Wit, by Jeering and Censuring their Neighbors.
INdeed there would not need many Lines or Arguments on this Subject, to
dissuade Ladies from Jeering at others Faults, if they would but seriously
reflect on their own; for then certainly they would neither accuse others, nor
justify themselves, but avoid keeping Company with, or at least practicing of,
this base ill natured and uncharitable vice, of Jeering and Censuring their
Neighbors.

We read in the Gospel of S. John, how the Scribes and Pharisees brought before
our Savior, the Woman that was taken in the Act of Adultery, to tempt him,
saying, Moses in the Law commanded us, that such should be stoned, but what
say thou? and after often asking, Jesus said unto them, he that is without
sin among you, let him cast the first stone at her; and they that heard it
being convicted in their own Consciences, went away one by one, and all left
her; for as Solomon says, who is so pure as to have no sin?

If all Censorious Ladies would but truly and heartily apply this saying to
themselves, and fancy our Savior now saying unto them, the Lady that is free
from fault among you, cast the first Jeer at your Neighbor, I am confident the
Ladies would be so Conscious of their own Guilt, as they would presently all
leave this filthy sin, as the Scribes and Pharisees did the Adulterous Woman.

For there is no Woman in this World of so holy and pure a mixture, as to be
free from any stain and fault, for then she must be more than a Woman; and
therefore all Ladies ought to make it their business rather to mend their own
faults, than make it their pastime to Jeer at those of others, which very
likely they are guilty of themselves, and to consider, since all are infected,
none ought to censure any, but every one to repent in particular for himself,
and to be sorry in general for all.

I have known some ordinary homespun witty Women, who have proclaimed
themselves very foolish in great Companies, and have showed their want of wit
in attempting to Jeer at others above their reach, having only slight Ideas, of
which they pretended to have a perfect knowledge, and so have exposed their
faint glimmering wit and flashy talk, of self conceitedness, on a Candlestick,
to be judged, and looked into by every prying and abusive Critic, which had
been much better kept at home under a Bushel, among their Friends and
Neighbors; many of these pretenders to Rallying wit, fancying they have a
perfect knowledge of things when they do not understand, nor so much as know,
that they do not know it; for there is a knowledge of Ignorance, as well as an
Ignorance of knowledge, and some sin by a presumption of knowledge, as well as
others do by an ignorant presumption; and therefore such Women pretenders to
wit, may be assured that they have great reason to wish for a deliverance from
their unknown ignorance, as well as holy David teaches all Men to beg pardon
of God for their secret and unknown faults. It Is in ordering of wit, as in
managing of a voice, she that has an indifferent sweet low voice, and sings
within its reach, may do it agreeable enough; but if she striving to sing
better than she can, over mounts and stretches her voice, by so overstraining
it; she raises her weak voice to mere squeaking, and so renders it more discord
than good vocal Music.

So truly an indifferent Wit that moves in the Sphere of her own ability, may
pass for good witty pleasant Company; but if she pretends to talk of what she
does not understand, and by endeavoring to make witty scoffs on others, to
cast only some gross foul slanders on them; such a one drowns her small Spring
of wit, in the Ocean of her folly, and receives but contempt, instead of praise.

For my part I have a more nice opinion of that they generally call ignorance,
than usually most have; for many esteem ignorance to consist only in the want
of School learning, others in that of History, Philosophy, Mathematics,
Politics, or the not well understanding the Affairs of the World, and the
Intrigues of Courts, and the Men and factions in it, when in real truth, one
may be a perfect Master of Art in all these, and yet be an ignorant Fresh-man
in the very dawning, and beginning of true Wisdom, the fear of God; which truth
is confirmed by a wiser Solomon, than any that dares contradict it; it is only
that wisdom that leads to salvation.

Therefore I am of opinion that a Learned Man that knows much, and lives ill,
and is uncharitable; is much more ignorant, than that Lady who knows little,
and prays much, and gives Alms plentifully; and this occasioned the Wiseman to
esteem Worldly wisdom but vanity, because it makes not wise to salvation, and
S. Paul tells us, that worldly knowledge puffs up, but charity edifieth, and
both Gods Word, and our own experience, (if we are holy,) can assure us, that a
good Conscience, (which our gracious God never denies to those that beg it with
great zeal, and in good time) is a continual feast.

Therefore your vain Ladies cannot but own in spite of all their aversness to
it, that there must be much more wisdom in going to the House of Prayer, than
pastime to go to the Playhouse; though if we look into the seats on Sundays,
and at the boxes on all the Weekdays, we shall find more Ladies set out at
this, than that; tho we know one is the great duty of Religion, and the other
but a mere delight of fancy.

And if the fine Ladies and young Sparks, could read this and not be angry, I
would desire them to consider seriously; tho I know serious consideration is
very unmodish, and consequently very unusual among them to practice, and so
uncivil in me to ask, what are witty Plays, and fine Romances; truly Plays of
the very best sort are but fine pleasant Plots, sometimes taken out of true
Story, sometimes raised by mere fancy; well acted, and finely represented on
the Stage, richly gilded and set out with fine Scenes, quick Wit, pleasant
Fancy, good Humor, modish Dress, and pure double refined Language, exactly
fitted and tuned to the present temper of the Times; and when all this is done,
tho one may hear much wit in them, yet none can learn much wisdom by them;
Plays being writ for mere pastime to please the fancy, more than instruct the
understanding, made to get the Poet praise, and the Players money, rather than
to teach the hearers virtue.

And so of Romances what are they other, than a pleasant ingenious mixture of
fiction, made up in a large Volume of extraordinary Adventures, and witty well
composed fancies; rarely set out, and richly adorned, with pure smooth
Romantic Language, of strange things done, and fierce love made, by Knights
Errants in the Air, where the Lovers perform a thousand Miracles in Fights, and
single Combats, killing Men without ever hurting them, or so much as drawing
their Sword toward it; (for all such relations are writ to the height of
Invention, no matter if it surpasses all possibility of performance, for those
niceties are needless in Romances,) and say all the fine things imaginable,
without speaking aword, and follow their Mistrisses over many Kingdoms, without
so much as stirring one step after them; so that I may truly enough say, that a
Romance, is a Monster, composed of great contrarieties, and high falsities.

In short, when you have once read over a Romance, tho it be never so good and
pleasant, yet it is but a kind of dull entertainment, to read it a second time,
a Romance being like a Stratagem of War, never to be used well but once. And
yet these Plays and Romances are so many in number, and so highly in esteem,
with our vain young Ladies, and fine Sparkish Gallants, as among many of them,
they make it the main employment of their Study, and the Library of their
Books, (except perhaps an old Practice of Piety of the family, all moldy
through long keeping, and never using) being the great Treasury of their Wit,
and the chief subject of their Discourses.

Indeed the vain flashy Wit of Plays and Romances, is but like sweet Flowers,
or a fine delightful Voice; they can only for a little time, recreate and
refresh the Senses, but can never benefit the Soul, or satisfy the necessities
of the Body; which can never be fully fed, either by the Ears or Eyes.

And as the light of the Sun, tho it be of a most excellent general influence,
yet alone could produce nothing; so a general Jeering wit, of it self can never
bring forth any thing to strengthen the judgment, or improve the understanding;
because it will not make use of the good Guides of Virtue, Prudence, Sobriety,
and Piety, to direct it, on what Subject it may fall on, on what occasion it
should be employed in, and by what degrees and measures it ought to move, with
fitting considerations of the persons, time, and place; and such Wits as will
not observe these Rules, their drolling Wit will work like new Wine in old
Bottles, which will be sure to burst and fly about, to the prejudice of
themselves as well as others.

And now if the vain Ladies will but give themselves the trouble to observe
carefully one of these common pretenders to rallying wit, (for all jeering wits
are but pretenders; for if they had good wit, they would never be jeerers) you
will find such a one chiefly made up of those four Elements in composition,
viz. Extravagancy and Dissimulation, Cowardice and Indiscretion, all which he
practices to every point of the Compass, guiding all his rambling talk by them,
which is commonly so rude and abusive, as it causes all modest and virtuous
persons to shun and detest the company, and acquaintance; for the hearts and
tongues of such Men like ill Neighbors hardly ever meet in Unity and Communion
one with another, they living in their bodies, as their eyes do in their heads,
which tho still very near, yet never see one another; in short your Jeerers
commonly want justice and consideration, either to speak what they think, or to
think of what they speak, shooting their words at mere random; and so will be
sure to have their share in the Proverb, That a fools bolt is soon shot, for
their Tongue can only abuse themselves, not others: They hate a quiet settled
Life, being never at rest, but whilst they are rambling from one Company to
another, and never so well as when in motion; like some froward Infants, that
are never at quiet longer than they are Rocked in the Cradle, and as soon as
that is at rest, they are not. And now I have named a Cradle, I cannot but
fancy that many of these ignorant pretenders to wit, got a knock in their
Cradle, which has hindered their Brains, and consequently their Tongues, from
being well settled ever since.

And as one may rationally enough conclude of the common Habit and Dress of a
Nation, by only seeing one just come out of it, that lived long in it; so I
fancy I may here venture to make a short description of the common nature of
most of these drolling abusive Wits, by here making a Just representation, and
giving you a true Picture of one of them, tho in little.

A common public pretender to Jeer and abuse others, with his rallying Wit, is
usually one, who makes it his great delight, and chief business to inquire, and
pry into, others Men's words and actions, and to make his venomous Reflections
on them, he only passing through their Discourses, as a Spy does an Enemies
Country, with a mischievous design, to observe and return Intelligence of the
defects and weakness in it, and then to be sure to attack those weaker parts
with his sharp abuses; for if a Man has never so many virtues, and has but one
vice, he will be sure to skip them all, to fall foul on that one; as flies
leave the whole body, to fasten on the least gawl'd patch: for such abusive
Wits are like Surgeons, who live by others hurts, and have nothing to do with
those parts that are sound.

A censorious scoffing Wit, is ordinarily composed, and made up of such a kind
of Stuff as Fireships are, which serve for no other use, and are built and
kept for no other purpose than to do mischief; the only good in them consists
in doing harm, so the spirit and quintessence of these Men's ill tempered venom,
lies chiefly in abusiveness, turning all their Notes to the same Tune that the
Philistines did Samsons words, only to raise and spend their mirth on, though to
the prejudice of their dearest Friends, and nearest Relations, which they had
rather lose than their Jest.

A common Talkative raillier ought by his Trade to be so courageously stout, or
rather fool hardy, as not to fear jeering every one; and yet indeed the
Generality of them are so tame and Cowardly (for a generous mind scorns such a
base and mean employment) as to endure (as he well deserves) the slights and
contempts of all he plays upon; for tho he makes War against the whole Kingdom
with his Tongue, yet he dares not fight with one Man in it with his Sword, and
indeed for this he may well pretend some reason, (which I am sure he cannot for
Jeering all Men,) first because a Sword is much sharper, and can wound far
deeper than his Tongue; and next if he should fight with every Man he raillies,
and takes the liberty to abuse, he must fight more Duels in the Field, than
ever Captain Bessus received Challenges in the Play; but my Gentleman is too
wise in his Mirth to expose his body to such a sharp Encounter. In a word, if
you desire to see this fierce Satyrist drawn to the life, you need but look on
S. George's picture drawn a horseback, where he is still holding up his hand,
but never strikes; for he fears danger like a poor-spirited Mortal, though he
lives, as if he thought he should never die.

This sort of Men that make it their business, with their pretending Wit, to
abuse all Persons; all the ill I need say of them, (for they say enough of
themselves) is, that they take upon them an employment which they must have a
great share of Wit to perform well, and must much want discretion to undertake
at all; for at best if they are Masters of any Wit, they employ it ill, since
they do not live so much by their own wit, as by others folly.

I hope now the vain Ladies that are given to Jeering will please to take
notice, that I have on this Subject used them with the same respect that Tutors
do young Princes, who when they have committed any great fault, instead of
whipping them, whip their favorite playfellow, for their Fault; that the
Prince seeing the severe punishment used on their favorite boy, may by his
Chastisement avoid acting himself, the like fault for the future.

So tho I do not here name the Ladies, that are given to this filthy
ill-natured vice; yet I assure them this Discourse was writ merely for them,
and aims only at them, as knowing it a Crime, that most of them through vanity
do affect; and truly this base fault of Censuring must needs appear worse in a
young Lady, than in any other; for as a black spot shows the clearer, the
whiter the skin is that it is placed upon; so sharp raillery, and abusive wit,
appear the more black and foul, coming out of the mouth of a beautiful Lady,
whose words ought to be full of sweetness suitable to her looks.

And let me tell you this great Truth, that our pert Censorious Ladies might in
a far shorter time, and with much less pains, and abundant more content to
themselves gain the blessed Title of good Christians, than the bad Character of
being witty and profane Jesters; which can only for a little time give them the
applause of some irreligious and ill disposed persons, whose praises are really
but discommendations: Whereas a truly pious and virtuous Lady, will still
justly deserve, and ever constantly receive the true esteem and commendation of
godly sober Men in this World; besides securing to herself Eternal happiness in
the next.

Therefore if any of our vain Ladies desire to attain this happy state of
bliss, let me here assure them, that their right way to it, is wisely and
charitably to Judge themselves, and not others, and instead of Jeering at
others defects to mend their own; by first repenting of their own immoralities,
and then being sorry for those that do not the like for theirs; for as wise
Seneca says, He that does good to another, does good to himself, not only in
the Consequence, but in the very present act of doing it; for the Conscience of
well doing, is a very pleasant ample reward in it self; and therefore (I am
sure) tho it be a very unmodish advice, yet it is a very good Christian doctrine,
not to undo a Ladies reputation to please your own boundless and extravagant
fancy in being admired and thought witty in doing mischief, and therefore it is
rather a Christian duty if you see your Neighbor lie under any affliction, or
live under any imputation of scandal, that you are free from, to correct your
proud and high minded thoughts in fancying that by this you merit so much
better than she; but rather thank God, that he is more merciful to you than
her, and be still reforming other Women's faults, by your own good example,
rather than continue to inflame them by your sharp invectives, and malicious
Censures, which often create bitter Enemies, but seldom make good Friends or
better Christians.

Solomon says, Prove. 20.3. It is an honor to avoid strife, but every fool will
be meddling; all Ladies ought so to govern their Discourses, as to make them
civil and obliging, not indiscreet and Censorious; but to be suited to the
time, place, and company you are in, for airy talk, and rallying mirth, would
not agree but look ill at a sad, and grave Funeral assembly; and so on the
other hand, an abundance of gravity and reservedness must be very unbecoming,
as being very unsuitable to a Jovial Wedding-Company met only to feast, dance
and be merry; for then gravity would pass for a kind of dislike as if you
censured others jollity.

We read in Scripture of Tongue Murderers, who tho they are bloudless, yet are
not guiltless; and Solomon says, That a whisperer separates chief Friends; and
yet how common is it among our vain young witty Ladies, to make defamation
their chief talk, and whispering of lies against their Neighbors the main
Topics of their Discourse, if not the constant entertainment of their
Visiters, esteeming it but a part of modish Repartee and fine breeding, to
ralily at and censure others, and to make sport at their infirmities; nay often
create falts merely to make sport, so they be but wittily invented, no matter
how unjustly they are raised; sure such Ladies never read that saying of
Solomon, That to do mischief is the sport of a fool, and he that utters a
slander is one; and therefore she must be much worse than a fool, that not only
vents, but invents slanders.

How common is it among our vain witty Ladies, to make a quarrel, rather than
lose a Jeer, and disoblige a good Neighbor, sooner than stifle a witty Jest;
and so as the Wise man says, make sport with casting out Firebrarnds, never
considering, (at least not caring,) that an unjustice done to your Neighbor is
a sin against God; for tho you really only aim it at your Neighbor, yet being
forbidden by God, your disobedience renders it a sin against God himself: And
it is little less to Jeer at any ones natural defects or infirmities, as being
born ugly, crooked or the like, since it is in a manner reproaching God for
making them so.

But why should I spend time in taking notice of Ladies jeering at others ill
shapes, bad faces, or little wit, when many of the young Atheistical fry of our
times, are so profane, as to pick out faults, in Gods sacred Word, and so
railly at, what they ought to adore, and can only hope to be saved by; I am
sure our blessed Saviors Doctrine is so far against the scandalous abuses and
censures of the Age, wherewith some reproach their Neighbors, who have been
possibly injurious to them; that he forbids us to return them never so little,
tho they are giving us never so much, but commands us not to rail and jeer at
them, that jeer and rail at us; but to pray for our Enemies, and to do good to
those that spitefully use us; God having instituted it as a Fundamental Law to
Mankind, not to do our Neighbors any harm, in Body, Goods, or good Name; but
to do them all the good we can in every of them.

In short, this is the sad and unequal deportment of most vain handsome Ladies,
both as to themselves, and others; which is to be angry with their Neighbors
without a Cause, and never to be angry at themselves, tho they have one, many
of the vain Ladies esteeming it a sufficient ground of quarrel, and anger, at
other young Ladies for being more handsome than they; but forget at the same
time to be offended at themselves for being less pious than them, in not loving
their Neighbors as themselves, for if they did, they would never offer, what
they would not take.

But so vain and wicked is our Age, as common Custom, and little Consideration,
makes many of the vain witty Ladies to fancy, that Romantic Lies, and
detracting Jeers, are but Wind, which if granted, yet it cannot be denied, but
the often repetition may unite them into a storm of sins; for does not
experience teach us, that light flakes of Snow, that singly scarce weigh any
thing, being but a kind of half congealed Atoms, yet do often by their long
united Confluence swell into an ability of destroying Houses and Families in
spite of their greatest resistance.

Solomon says, Prove. 16.27. That an ungodly Man's lips is as a burning fire, and
in the very next Verse seems to explain what he means by a burning fire; a
froward Man sows strife, and a whisperer separateth chief Friends, as I said
before; how common is it among the vain Ladies of the times, to lessen their
handsome Neighbors beauty, merely on design that by Eclipsing it, they might
make their own shine out the Clearer, and often to raise scandalous Reports to
blemish her Reputation among her Friends, and Lovers; it being indeed too
common a practice among them to whisper about ill Reports of their Neighbors
as told them abroad from others, when really they were Coined at home by
themselves. O vain Ladies, if you will not for your own and shame sake, at
least for virtue and honor sake, abandon raising all wicked scandals on your
Neighbors, and banish from your practice, all impertinent senseless strifes,
all censuring twatles, and sharp offensive scoffs, which tho a mode vice, is so
great a Crime, as it truly requires a strict Repentance, and a high Reparation
for the offense to the Persons so injured; and that such scandalous Jeerers
would for the future, as David says, Keep a Bridle in their Mouth, that they
offend not with their Tongue; and so new mould, and well regulate it, as
instead of using it as an Engine to rack their Neighbors Reputation with, they
may henceforward, employ and consecrate it to the setting out, and stretching
forth, their virtue and good name; and let all your strife be in a pious
Emulation of virtue and holiness, and in religious endeavors who shall excel,
and take place in the true and constant practice of them, in their lives and
conversation; for in them consists not only the greatest wisdom, highest wit,
but also the best breeding, and most sublime and splended beauty, being the
everlasting one of holiness, besides that of pure honor indeed; for Gospel
Heraldry must ever be the very best, for the greatest Monarch in this World
must live a sinner, but the meanest Woman in it, by her living a godly and
virtuous life, may die a Saint, and therefore it must certainly be much better
to live well, and so die happily, than to be born great, left rich, or look
handsome; for the beauty of a fair delicate Complexion, may be a Woman's own
purchase, not Natures gift, and her high Title, and great Estate, may be left
her by her friends, without being in the least merited by her self; but to be
highly pious, and truly virtuous, must most certainly be the true and lawful
Issue of a Woman's own Religious inclinations: Therefore I shall conclude this
Discourse, with this undeniable Truth, That true goodness, is true greatness;
and that Lady will be the greatest in the other World, that lives the best in
this.

THE TWELFTH DISCOURSE, Of French Fashions and Dresses, now used in England, by
the modish Ladies, and young Sparks.
DIvines tell us, that perfect life may be seen in short measures, and Painters
assure us that exact beauty may be drawn in small proportions, and experience
shows us, that an infinity of words, is made of a few letters; and it is
approved by the great Wits, and Poets of the Stage, that a short Prologue may
suit well with a long Play; and since I do not here pretend, nor indeed so much
as ambition to keep company with their great Wit, I hope they will admit me to
follow their short measures, and by their example justify this my small
discourse from appearing very unsuitable to this large Theme.

Solomon in his Character of a Covetous Person, says, He is one whom God has
given riches and honor to, so that he wants nothing of all that he desires,
but God gives him not the power to eat thereof; which is an evil Disease,
because such a Man wants even what he has; what can such a miserable be
called better than a sad wretch, that makes himself a voluntary Slave, to
labor in the Mines of his own wealth, and Vassal-like only to enjoy the
drudgery part for his own share, making his wealth a burden, without reaping
any true pleasure or advantage by it; so that such a Man, though he be never so
rich, must die in debt to himself; for he strips himself of necessaries during
his own life, to make his Children a Wardrobe after his death.

I am sure the prodigality of our London Gallants is after a quite different
Manner; for so they can but make a Wardrobe for themselves and Misses during
their own lives many of them care not though they leave their Children in a
condition to want necessaries after their death, which too many of them can
justify by woeful experience; several of their Fathers Estates, that did belong
to them as their Birthright, by their Parents luxury, pride, and folly, have
been made a sacrifice to the extravagant expenses, and vain profuseness of
their Mistrisses pride, and their own sottishnefs, as that they have left
nothing to their Heirs of Inheritance, but the wind, (as Solomon expresses it,)
Prove. 11.29. The certain loss of their fathers Estate, and the uncertain
getting another for themselves if they can.

I have read of a Philosopher that was persuaded by his friends to leave his
retirement for a little time to see a fine Shop plentifully stored with all
manner of rich things, and fine knacks, and being asked what he thought of all
those rare things: I am thinking (said he) what a World of things are here I do
not want, for what is more than we use, is more than we need.

I am confident if one of our fine London Ladies had been shown that sight, and
asked that question; her answer had been, what a World of things I want that
are not here, which much justifies a Writers saying, that the ancient Latins
called Women's Wardrobe, Mundus, a World; yet I find in the Map of Women's
ornamental Dresses, reckoned by the Prophet Isaiah, the sum total of them there
named, to be but twenty one; which clearly shows the vast difference between
the twenty one years of Men, and the twenty one Dresses of Women; for by the
Law of our Kingdoms, all Men's years under one and twenty, are not allowed to
reach discretion; but our Prophet seems here to say, that by the Law of God,
all Women's Dresses, that amount to, much more that pass beyond twenty one, must
exceed all discretion; for certainly they must be too many for Women to wear,
whom God declares too many for him to like.

And tho without any dispute it is a sin to doubt, that those ornamental Dresses
which the Creator thinks too many, no Woman Creature but ought to esteem more
than enough; yet so extravagant and fantastical are many of our fine Ladies
and Gallants, as they are so far from esteeming that Number sufficient, as they
send almost every week to Paris, for such supplies of new fashion Dresses, as
one might as soon Climb up to the Top of all Numbers, as to hope to reckon the
numberless variety of Women's Dresses; there belonging much more Rigging to set
out a young Lady, than a Man of War; so hard it is to cast up the variety of
parts, as now adays belong to complete a great Modish Ladies Dress and Equipage.

And therefore I fancy an old Philosopher gave both a good Reason and true
Character of the fashion of rich Dresses, That 'twas the deadly catching
Disease of Women, and the foolish passion of men. Indeed I find no reason to
believe any of these kind of Ladies are knowing in Philosophy, because they
cannot be lovers of Wisdom, that are haters of Discretion which makes a main
part of it. But I have a great deal of reason to believe that they are knowing
in Satan's Arithmatick, and too well understand sinful Subtraction, and vain
Multiplication, since we find so many of them can Subtract the Ten Commandments
to the scarce keeping of one, and multiply the twenty one ornamental Dresses,
to the using of hundreds.

And the worst of it, is, that not one of these twenty one Dresses are a kin to
those S. Peter advised the Women of his time to wear, which was not putting on
Gold, or curling Hair, or what is Corruptible, but the Ornaments of a meek and
quiet Spirit, 1 Pet. 3.3, 4. which exactly suits the true beauty of Religion,
which the Apostle says, is of great price in the sight of God, for that will
render Women of so pious a Temper, as tho the youthful gaiety of their human
Nature, may make them think of the vain dresses of the times, yet their
sanctified minds will never let them forget to be true followers of the state
of Eternity.

Indeed it is a hard measuring Cast, whether their variety of vain extravagant
Dresses, deserves more Men's sober pity, or contempt, most, I am sure are fitter
for either, than my description; yet I must be Charitable to them, tho they are
far from being so to themselves, as to wish that these our fine young modish
Ladies, and their Gallants, would keep more Commandments, and use fewer
Dresses, that they might thereby lessen their own particular vanities, and
moderate the general English outcry against French fashions, which many think
have not only overrun, but near destroyed, all our noble ancient great way of
Living; and grave kinds of sober Dresses.

Sure if our fine young Ladies and great Modists, would but a little seriously
reflect of what most of their fine Clothes are made, they would not be so proud
to glory in, what they really ought to be ashamed off; for the fine Silks we
wear, are but the workings of poor little Worms, and our finest Cloth is made
of the Wool of Sheep; so that our covering was but that of Beasts, till our
pride and vanity robbed them of it.

And indeed our great adored Mistress Money, which all, of all sorts receive with
so great joy, and entertain with so high delight, as the only true happy, and
undecaying Mistress in this World, for all Love her passionatly at once, and
what is yet stranger than all, both Sexes are still constant in their eager
love, and great fondness of her; nay Solomon had so great an esteem and value
for Money, as he said it answered all things, yet if we truly look into its
Extraction, we shall find it as very mean as that of our Clothes, for as Seneca
well observes, That Gold and Silver were still mixed, and never kept better
Company than Earth and Dust, till avarice and ambition raised and parted them,
and so they became our Masters as well as Mistrisses.

O how strangely is Apparel Metamorphosed! We read in Genesis that it was first
used to hide our Shame, but now it is worn to show our Pride, and God knows if
we truly consider, we are very far from having any reason to boast of our
Apparel, since it is but the cover of Shame and Sin, and therefore we ought to
wear it but as deep mourning for the great loss of our dear friend Innocence.

Nor can any deny, but that Mourning is a Garment fitter according to the
strictest niceties of our very present Modes, to denote true sadness, than set
out vain glory; to manifest grief, than express joy; yet so evil is our present
Age, as many of the wicked brood of elder Brothers, who as one said, pray for
their Fathers lives, but not their living, plainly show at their Fathers death,
in what a manner they are concerned for his loss, (not theirs) by their
cheerful Countenance, and Gay Lives; which clearly Proclaim that they Mourned
rather because their Fathers lived so long, than died so soon, and so make
their long funeral Cloaks, (which usually weigh heavier on their Backs, than
the cause of them on their Hearts,) rather a Habit of great Joy, than true
Mourning.

But real Mourning has nothing to do with our French Dresses, therefore this
discourse shall have no more to do with it; and I will now return to my
Subject, and mind you that the French have brought into England so many strange
Fashions, as it is to be feared our young fry of Nobility, and Gentry, will
esteem piety and virtue as things quite out of fashion, and use; and indeed
their Lives cannot be more extravagant and vain, than their Apparel, if I can
properly say they have any left.

Certainly if Sir John Suckling had lived to these times, he might well have
added to that pithy saying of his, This trifle Woman, will unman us all, and
uncloath us too, for Doublets are quite left off by all the Modists: And for
the Breeches most of our young Sparks, and some of the old Fops have lost them
also, being generally given by our Gallants to their Mistrisses, and by the
mere Country Gentlemen to their Wives, which by the by, is a new Mode that
contradicts the old Law, to confound the Habits of several Sexes; so that if
our Women increase thus in Power, and our Men continue so in folly, it is very
probable, that those of the next Age may see our English Modists pictured as
they do Truth, that is naked.

These sort of Men, if I may properly call them Men that have lost their
Manhood, having left off their Doublets, and yielded up their Breeches, have
nothing on to wear but their Coats, which may indeed serve to cover their
Nakedness, but can never hide their Shame; for so degenerating is their temper
as to make themselves servants to Women, whom by their birthright they ought
to rule over as Lords and Masters; and what is worse and stranger than all
this, to be pleased and glory in their servitude.

I read of a great Politician that Counseled his Prince, to reflect on the
dangerous consequence that might happen by admitting his Subjects to receive
Pensions from foreign Kings; and his reason was, that foreign food, was apt to
breed foreign blood in them. And indeed it is a saying as very true, as old,
that use is a second nature; we being apt to like best, what we are accustomed
to most; both history and our own experience afford us many strange examples of
the nature of Custom, and among those many, one of an English Gentleman, who
was in my time in the Galleys at Marseillies; where by long Custom of being so,
he not only grew a Contended Slave, but if I may so say, a Voluntier; for he
was a good Gentleman of the Family of the Courtnies, and (as he said) had some
prospect of an Estate in England; yet he chose to continue that kind of Life,
rather than enjoy his Liberty, which they say was offered to be procured for
him; which mad refusal of his, has totally defeated half the French Proverb,
That there can be no such thing in Nature, as an ugly Mistress, or a handsome
Prison.

It Is an old Curse among the Turks, I wish you as little rest as a Christians
Hat, and I wish it may not grow a new Curse among the Christians, I wish you as
little rest as an English Fashion, for they are now so much Frenchefied, as
they change oftener than the Moon, and rest as little as the Sea, which is in a
continual motion: And I think I may properly enough say of Fashions, what a
Writer said of Serving-Men, such as are extraordinary Tall are entertained for
Porters to Lords; and such as are very Low, are taken to be Dwarfs to Ladies,
whilst Men of a good middle-size Stature, often want Masters.

So all extremities of Fashions are worn by many of the Lords and Ladies, but a
sober moderate Dress few will entertain.

So much have these extremities of French Fashions infatuated our minds, and
debauched our fancies, that those that do not exactly follow their Measures
(tho they are above all needful use, and very much beside all decent sobriety)
are esteemed as great Phanaticks, and Dissenters to the gentile Rules of modish
Dressing, as any Nonconformist can be to the Government of Church Discipline.

Thus we have fooled our selves into such ridiculous extremes, as to make the
French superfluities, to become not only the Standard of our Fashions, but the
very necessity of our Apparel; Paris being for Fashions, like the Camelion for
its Colors, who gives them to all beholders, whereas in all others we receive
them from the Ideas of things we meet with.

And indeed the French Fashions change so often, and cost so dear, that many of
our young Fops that are newly got into their Estates, but not at all into their
years of discretion, do follow their vain fashions and so (to be esteemed
modishly well bred,) in a little time, are forced to sell their real Estates
for ever; and if 'twere not for fear of grating your Ears with the unsavory
sound of a Clinch, I was just going to say, that they are the very worst sort
of Fools, that will sell English Lordships to buy French Manners.

As our Conditions are not alike, so our Dresses ought not to be the same, for
our Clothes must match our Revenue, as well as fit our Body, for great Expenses
become a poor Man, as a large Switzers Breeches does a Dwarf. The Cost of
keeping a great Table, a rich Equipage, and a large Retinue, being only for a
Person of great Quality, and good Estate; and he that sells his Lands, only to
live at such a ranting extravagant rate, in a few Months shows his great folly,
as well as merits the misery of sad want.

Apparel like a River, is only good and useful, whilst kept within the Banks
and Limits of Moderation, but when it begins to swell and break out into
excess, it is so far from being useful, as it still proves pernicious if not
destructive.

We read that the Romans were so very cautious and wise, as to banish out of
their Republic, such as should attempt to give any new advice in it, and I
fancy the reason for it was, that they believed there were more bad, than good
Men in their Republic; and therefore such more forward to receive ill Advice,
than hearken to good Counsel. And since I put no Name here, I will venture to
say, 'Twere well the same Rule were used as to Dresses, and that any one that
brought into England a new fashioned Dress according to the Paris Mode, might
be banished it; because it is most certain there are more of our young Men and
Women, extravagantly given, than virtuously inclined; and consequently more apt
to imitate a new Mode, especially if a French Dress, than any sober decent
Apparel of their own Country Growth; for indeed it may be truly said of our
English following French fashions, what a Writer said of Aristotle, that
whatsoever indigested notions he vomited up, there were many young Philosophers
ready to lick them up; I am sure what extravagant fashions the French wear, too
many people are apt to approve and follow.

Really I cannot now but laugh, as well as wonder, when I think how our young
English Nobility and Gentry, are tied and confined to the strict Rules of the
French fashions; for our English Judgments (in that grand affair of Dresses)
are only admitted to imitate and approve, and many imitate what they do not
approve; for their Fancies are not allowed to invent or choose, scarce add or
diminish, but we must forsooth with an implicit Faith, reverence what the
French wear, and to be as infallible a rule to our English Modes, as a Church
Decree is a Guide to those of the Roman Faith.

In a word, our young Gallants are grown so very vain in their Apparel and
Dresses, that desiring to see change and excess of vanity, we need but look on
one another vain change of Dresses, being almost as diverse as the Persons
that wear them; and therefore it is impossible to view them all, but I can give
you in a line this exact and true Character of them, That our Modes are become
the effects of our vain fantastic Prodigality, and more irregular Inconstancy.

Indeed all our vain expensive French Dresses, may make the Ladies or Gallants
finer, but never better or worser; for Embroidered Clothes to our Bodies, are
but like flowers of Rhetoric in Speeches; they make the words sound the
sweeter, but render not the sense the better, it may please the Ear, but it
does not improve the Judgment: Or like silver Dishes on a Table, they may show
their own Costliness, but they make no addition or goodness to the Meat they
contain, whatever they may do to the fancy of the Eater, or Observer.

Really if we would but allow Conscience or Reason a Vote in this affair, we
should soon be assured by them; that there appears more true wisdom, and
satisfaction in giving one Penny, as an Alms-deed for Christ's sake, than in
laying out many Pounds on bravery for our own; more real fine in Clothing one
that is naked, on a pious account of true Charity, than by bedawbing twenty
footmen in Gold or Silver rich Liveries on the score either of vanity or
Fashion, and that because it suits the London or Paris Mode. For I esteem
Liverymen (excepting those that are really necessary to a Man's person and
Quality) but just so many Porters that are hired to carry about a Man's pride
and folly, and the several Colors of his Liveries to be but so many Lures, and
Jack Puddings to draw men's Eyes to behold a fair show, not only of his own
Pride, but often of his Merchants loss; for it is now grown no common wonder,
especially in London, to see young Sparks Clothes, and their Footmens Liveries
to last longer in their Merchants books, than on their own, or Footmens backs,
and they turned off, before the Books are Crossed out.

In a word, I wish our French fashions, may not prove fatal follies, by being
soon naturalized into English Customs; for then let them be never so costly,
ridiculous, and vain, like blackness among the Aethiopians, the commonness may
remove their deformity, but can never smother the prejudices against them.

I will now only add this Consideration to conclude all, in reference to our
fine young Frenchefied Ladies, and that is, that they would seriously reflect
on the end of all their fine Modish Dresses, and their greater loss of precious
time they wast about them, which occasions their minding so much the fineness
of their Bodies, as many of them neglect by it the care of their Souls, the
best and only lasting part; and therefore they should remember that they must
die certainly, though they now live pleasantly, and then all their plenty of
finch rich Frenchefied Dresses will be contained in one poor Winding Sheet, and
their exact slender shape in a Coffin, and all their fine Gallants, and
constant admirers, will leave them at the Grave, where their Bodies will be
only fit to be enjoyed by nasty worms.

This (young Ladies) is the true Epilogue to the sad Tragedy of your vain
Dresses, and what is yet worse than all, your Souls will be in as sad a
condition as your Bodies after death without a hearty Repentance, which can
never be without a real amendment, in abandoning, not only great Sins, but vain
excesses, as well in Dresses, as wasting time about them, and that you come to
esteem them as Solomon did the pleasures of this World, only as vanity of
vanities.

Therefore all you young Ladies, that desire to cloth your Souls in a Heavenly
dress, adorn your Lives with constant Piety, and your Bodies with modest and
decent Clothing, such as wastes not too much of your time or Estate; but wear
still what is most generally worn, and then you may be sure, that few persons
will either gaze or laugh at you.

THE THIRTEENTH DISCOURSE, Of Worldly Praises, which all Ladies love to
receive, but few strive to merit; with the sad end of it and them, when they
come to Die.
WOrldly Praise is a Subject I shall write little of, for these two Reasons,
first that I need not write for it, and next that I dare not write against it,
for as one the one hand it would be vain and superfluous to make that my
business to commend, what all Praise; so on the other side, it would argue a
great folly to write against that all the World writes for; therefore to
prevent all I can writing superfluously or foolishly, I shall only glance this
Discourse on the Worlds high esteem, and eager ambition after vain Praises; the
desires of gaining it being as inseparable from most Men and Women's Actions, as
Light is from the Sun, or heat from fire, and shall only name the common ways
to it, and the usual end of it, and them, when they come to die.

Praise is that great Idol, which all people in the World adore and flatter as
the Supreme object of their pleasure and delight, as having a perfect influence
over all our Actions of what kind, degree, and quality whatsoever. And
therefore let public Writers say what they will, and pretend what they please,
self Praise is the Jack they all Bowl at, tho many take several Grounds to it.
And tho some Writers are more humble, and reserved; more moderate, and less
opinionaters of their own Writings, less apt to Censure those of others, that
differ in Opinion from theirs, than usually most kind of Writers are; yet all
of them court Praise, tho in several shapes and differing manners.

Some court Praise by their ingenious Writing, others think to gain it by their
witty speaking, and a third sort hope to procure it by a discreet silence,
relying upon wise Solomon's saying, a Man of understanding holds his peace,
and a Fool uses many Words.

The finest Ware is usually the closest wrapped up, and Silence is not only still
useful to shelter a Fool, but often to discover a wise Man. It Is wisdom to
speak when one ought, and folly when we ought not; he needs much Reason that
speaks well, but a little serves him that holds his Peace; since he that
takes upon him to speak wisely on a Subject, but does it simply, all hearers
are Judges and witnesses of his folly, but he that is silent, none can justly
tell whether he can speak wisely or not, and so as to him, ought to hold their
Peace, because he does his.

There are as many Roads and Paths to Praise as there are employments, I think
I might well venture to say all Actions in the World, and hope of Praise is the
common Guide and Conductor general to them all, making the greatest Enemies,
and most distant Inhabitants of the World, to agree in the bands of unity and
friendship.

Praise is the greatest of all Levellers, for it brings the highest and lowest
degrees of Men to an equality; for the greatest Monarch in the World, and the
meanest Subject in his Station are alike as to their desires of Praise, tho
they vastly differ in the manner and degrees of aspiring to it; Praise is as a
Sum writ in Figures, it is every Nations Language, and is, and will be every
Countries ambition.

And it is well worth observation, that this thing called Praise, is so light,
airy, and volatile, as tho few are such Fools to hope for a Livelihood solely
from it, yet many are so mad as to expose their Lives merely for it.

Really the fine young Ladies need but open their Eyes, and they cannot but
behold their partiality, in distributing of their Praises to others, and in
receiving others praises to themselves; for if one of the Ladies is Mistress of
any one quality that they know is truly esteemable, they believe all the World
looks on it, but then oversees all their vices that are apparently faulty; so
very wicked many young Women are, as to be more apt and ready, to see and blame
their own faults in others, than to consider or mend them in themselves.

And the like measures they usually observe, as to the beauties, or defects of
their bodies, if they have any part that is very handsome, they fancy all that
look on them fix their eyes on it; but if their Nose or Eyes be ugly, they
think none takes notice of them; but I desire the Lady that pretends to praises
after this rate, to oblige me, or rather themselves, so much as seriously to
consider this very plain question. If you should see a fine young Gentleman, of
a famed virtuous Life, and most excellently well bred, and highly renowned for
his true humility, and great Charity; in a word, that was a Person endued with
all the excellencies both of body and mind, that can render a Man completely
perfect and admirable, only that he wanted an Eye; pray ask your self, if you
should not be more ready to observe and blame the blemish of that one Eye, than
to praise any of all his Excellencies; I am confident you cannot deny but you
should, and sure such a blind kind of imputation in you, is as bad as the want
of an Eye in him; for perhaps he lost his Eye by a fit of sickness, as many do
in the Small Pox, which is now his great trouble, but never was at all his own
fault, and therefore we ought rather to pity that misfortune, than jeer at that
defect: Or suppose he met that loss in his Infancy, and was in a manner born
so; might you not then as wisely, and reasonably, despise the two grand Seasons
of the Year, the Summer for being too hot, and the Winter too cold, when they
are not too immoderate, but you too foolish, for esteeming them so.

There is no Woman's beauty under the Sun, that is so entirely perfect as to be
without some Fault, for then she must be more than Woman; nay the very glorious
Sun it self is not without its Eclipses; yet sure none can be so very foolish
as not to admire and praise its splendor and brightness, though it is sometimes
obscured with a Cloud.

Nor can you propose to your self, that it is a think fitting or reasonable to
despise and railly any man, because he cannot work Miracles, and perform
impossibilities, by raising the dead to life; for 'twould be as ridiculous in
any one to hope to restore a lost Eye, by wishing for it, as you to change the
Seasons of the Year, by your blaming of them.

Therefore let me advise you instead of raillying at what cannot be helped in
others, strive to mend those Faults which may be yet cured in your self, which
can never be well done, till you still behold the defects of others with a sad
troubled Eye, which you cannot forbear doing, if you observe as you ought Gods
Command of loving your Neighbor as your self, for his afflictions must be then
yours, as well as yours are now your own: And his blemishes or faults would be
but so many Memorandums of your own frail defects, and so must render you more
fit, and better disposed to, support those of others, and rather make it your
business to be concerned for them, than your pastime to jeer at them.

In a word, the young Lady that enjoys that share of beauty, which perhaps her
Neighbor is troubled for the want of, let it not render her proud, that she is
more celebrated than another, but rather let her express her humility, and make
it the great motive of her praise to God, that he has been so liberal to her in
this perfection.

But to return to my designed Subject, Praises that are not stamped with true
virtue and great merit, are but mere Air; all false Tongues can flatteringly
give them, but it is only your own virtues that can justly merit them.

It Is with Praises, as with Faults, they that charge you with those you are
free from, do you no real hurt, and those that present you with praises you no
way deserve, do you no real good; therefore to apply to your self the right use
of both, instead of being angry at others for accusing you of some vices you do
not act; be angry with your self for acting the many you do, which is the true
way of having Praises, and deserving them too.

Praise is not only the dearly beloved Mistress of Christendom, but also of
Turkey; for 'twas Praise that was the octasion of making the grand Vizier
Mustapha lose so many Men before Vienna; for his Story tells us, that he did
not attempt that Siege so much to serve his Master, as to Court his Mistress,
more out of design to gain her, than out of hopes to take it; but Mustapha was
as much mistaken in his measures of Conquering his Mistrisses heart, as in
those of taking Vienna; for by destroying her Husbands life, he totally
destroyed her Love, and so made his Mistress to revenge her Husbands death, to
beg the Grand Seignior to take away Mustapha's Life, which he did, and by it,
she showed her kindness to her Husband, and the Grand Seignior his Justice to
her.

It Is desire of praise and ambition that makes the French King employ such vast
Sums of Money, and Armies of Soldiers to work about his Palace of Versaillies,
which is rather a Prodigy of Riches, than a Miracle of Nature; fitter to be
wondered at, for the vast expenses laid out on it, than to be praised for any
agreableness about it, except the Gardens and Waterworks, which indeed excel
all either of Rome or Florence, and consequently the whole World; but for the
House it self, I could observe nothing in it extraordinary except the rich
Gildings both within, and without; and therefore as to my own opinion of the
Place, I think there is nothing so wonderful in all that glory, as that any one
should so much admire it, having neither River, Wood, good Land, or pleasant
Prospect about it, being all round about close besieged by great coarse and
ragged Hills, which cannot add much luster and glory to the Situation of any
place of such vast Expense and Magnificence, so as to be Celebrated by some as
one of the Wonders of the World.

We read in History that Alexander the Great expressed much trouble, that he
had no more Kingdoms left him to Conquer; I am sure the French King needs no
cause of trouble, for want of more Hills to Conquer and site about his Palace
of Versaillies, as long as he lives, tho he had more Men and Money to employ
about levelling them, than now he has. Indeed such a Royal Building of
Magnificence well deserved a most pleasant and Stately Situation, but it seems
that King thought it more noble and better becoming his greatness to make one
by the expense of Art, than to be beholden to one of Natures free bounty, that
the World might know, he scorned so mean an offer, whilst he has Armies that
can level Mountains as plain as he pleases, and Money to mount Rivers as high as
he desires.

And indeed if we range over not only France and Turkey, but all the whole
World, we shall find that Praise is the Butt all Shoot at, tho few hit the
Mark; for if we but look narrowly into Praises, and consider the Actions, as
well as the Persons, they are commonly great Flatterers, and the breath of such
Praises, is but like a Rainbow, which is no other than a mere seeming
Collection of many bright Colors, without any true substance, or long
duration, one day discovering the folly of the other, and a few days will show
you your own end, and with it the vanity of them all.

Therefore if the young Ladies could but persuade themselves to think seriously
of the little reality there is in the Praises Men present them, and the vain
pastimes the World deludes them with; both Women and Men will find that most of
their delights are vain and despicable, for the possession of much beauty
breeds great pride, and high concern; and the decay of it creates in such as
much discontent and envy at what they then lose, and afterward see others
enjoy. And so it is the same with many of Men's Worldly delights, which soon
become uneasy to the Mind, and often destructive to the Body; for a debauch of
drinking makes most sick and out of order after it, and the enjoyment of
handsome ill Women, causes usually foul Pocky Diseases, (such French punishment,
suiting well with such an English transgression) for the fondness of an
unvertuous Love placed on an unchaste Woman's beauty, is like the Fire of a
Candle, which lasts no longer than it flames, and Candle like as soon as its
flame is consumed, it presently expires in a stinking snuff. So such a
debauched Love; (I should have said Lust) commonly ends with the odious
detesting thoughts, of such a foul and lustful passion, which makes him then
loath the sinner, as he ought still the sin, and himself for having committed
the folly.

And if any one of these Venus Courtiers falls in Love with a truly virtuous
Beauty, and hopes to gain his base unchaste desires of her, by fierce Courtship,
great adoration, large offers of Presents, and all these thick larded with the
common false Oaths of the praises of her great beauty, and his great and
constant Love, the Lingua franca, of all Gallants which all still swear to
observe, but few ever design to perform, and therefore handsome Ladies never
ought to Credit; for surely he that speaks what he does not believe, none ought
to believe what he speaks, but is bound in Conscience and Honor, to slight his
Courtship, and scorn his Offers, or else she must do much worse, slight her
self, and reputation too. It Is a Proverbial saying, that Love is blind, I am
sure such a sort of Lover is; for he will not see the unjust desires he makes
to her, but only minds the unkind returns she makes to him, without ever
considering that they spring from her Love to Virtue, and a good Reputation,
but vainly fancies it is her Love to some happy Lover, that is in her favor, and
keeps him out, which disquiets and torments his Amorous mind, with a fierce
Jealousy, which Solomon calls the Rage of Love; and tho young Men are more
naturally enflamed with eager desires in the pursuit of beauty, than old Men
are; for Age to Love, is like Water to Wine, the more quantity of Water, the
less strength in the Wine; but it is most certain old Men are as able Courtiers,
and Lovers of Wealth, as any young Men can possibly be; Riches being like the
Sun, agreeable and comfortable to all, and indeed nothing is more common, than
to see Covetousness to grow in most with their Age; and the reason of it in my
Opinion is, that all other youthful sprightly delights but that of gaining
Wealth, decreases as Age increases; but the pleasure of Money, all Men can keep
as the Heathen do their Gods they adore, under Lock and Key.

But yet this so adored beauty, Riches, carries its troubles, as well as
delights, for there is great labor in procuring Wealth, trouble in defending
and preserving it, and also great Cares in the well spending it whilst one
lives, and well disposing of it when we die; and so if we look over, and search
into most Worldly pleasures and vanities, we shall find them as contrary to the
true repose of this life, as they are to the felicities of the next.

Certainly there is some great Charm in this thing called Praise, that tickles
the ear, inflames the heart, raises the spirits, enlivens the resolution,
deludes the reason, flatters the hopes, and deceives the sight, by giving a
false gloss, and making a counterfeit representation of things; for, the Bait
of Praises, for which both Men and Women so strive, and eagerly pursue, is
still painted and set out in the brightest and most oriental charming Colors
that are imaginable, to allure our eyes, inflame our hearts, and enliven our
ambition.

But the Hook that is hid in this Bait, that is, the great dangers, hardships,
and thousands of vexatious disappointments, that one must necessarily meet, and
run through, in the pursuit of this Idol folly, is so obscure and artificially
drawn, as it is not commonly seen, but very ordinarily felt by many, in some to
their loss of Life, and to others of their greatest satisfactions in it.

And now to put my last finishing Touch to this Picture of Praise, the Mistress
and Darling of the whole World, methinks we ought not to wonder that this
adored beauty, is so Coy in her Carriage, and so difficult to be gained; if we
do but reflect, tho in a wholesail manner, the sad oversights, great mistakes,
and blind pursuits of its followers; of whom I shall only say in general, that
some are so eager in gazing at it, others so over earnest in their seeking it,
as really most oversee the right way to it, which is by true Piety, constant
Charity, and a daily practice of Virtue and Godliness in all their actions: And
no wonder that such as will not take these blessed Guides, should miserably
miss their way to it, and be sadly defeated in their hopes of it.

And now having done with my Discourse of Praise, give me leave to change the
Scene, and to pass by the uncertainty of your meeting it, tho to reflect on the
certainty of deaths meeting you, and the terrors that then appear at the end of
a vain wicked life; and to beg the vain young Ladies Company for a little time,
that I might lead their thoughts into the sad and dismal Regions of Mortality,
that they may now consider it, to prevent it hereafter from surprising them,
and that they may carry their thoughts to the Grave, before their friends carry
their Bodies.

The Seasons of our Lives resemble exactly those of the Year, the Summer of our
Life swallows up the Spring of our Youth, and the Autumn of our Age makes us to
decline, as the Sun does daily of its vigorous heat and influence, till all the
fair days, and various productions of natures beauty at last yield to old Age
Winter, as their Grave; for as the Apostle says, It Is appointed for every Man
once to die, and one day is still the death of the other; and tho many things
may keep back the thoughts of deaths coming, yet nothing can retard the time of
his approach.

And now I must humbly beg our vain modish Ladies pardon, if I here a little
mind them of the sad concluding Scene of their Life; and in how miserable a
condition some of them must necessarily be in when they come to die, and have
wasted all their Life, in Vanity and Sin, little considering Reputation, and
less fearing Scandal; little valuing Conscience, and less esteeming Eternity.

It has often come into my mind, that the sad end of such vain Women's Lives, is
like the last Scene of their Loves, to their Gallants, which is just as an Ague
turned upside down, the cold fit after the hot; for when the fiery passions of
youthful Love are changed through their Inconstancy, or worn out by Age, or
wasted by Sickness; for you know that Loves-vanity, is but of a short date, it
either vanishes in the act, and is nipped in its gay and vigorous blossom, like
the tender-leav'd Plants, by a cold Northern-wind; or else grows wrinkled and
impotent, like crooked and deformed shrubs, for want of fap and moisture, and
so grows loathsome and deformed as the grim Jaws of Death, that will too at last
come with a dreadful stroke to level all our fair Cedars to the ground, and
make your beauty (Ladies) to consume away like a Moth fretting a Garment; every
Woman is therefore but vanity: and when you are thus brought to your Deathbeds
of pain and languishing; O then Consider what a sad condition you must needs be
in, when you will find all your fond beauty and vanity going off the Stage,
when your life is just expiring, when the scorching thoughts of your past vain
life come to inflame your mind more fiercely, than the burning Fever can your
body, and that the remembrance of your past extravagant pride and vanity will
torment your troubled Conscience more, than ever before they pleased your
sensual appetite, and that the shivering fit of guilt, not only seizes your
heart, but pierces your very soul, with sad and sober thoughts of your past
sins, and the strict account that you must soon give of them, and of the
terrible punishments that you must justly suffer for them; when perhaps you
cannot comfort your afflicted Conscience with the assurance of having so much
as performed in your whole life one pious act, or charitable deed, when you had
both time and means to have performed thousands; and so as too many of you do,
lose the blessings of the other World, merely for slighting Gods mercies in
this.

And farther 'twill be well worth the consideration of our vain Ladies, that
when they lie a dying, the sins of their life will fly about their troubled
minds, as naturally as sparks do about fire, and will lighten them to a clear
sight of their pride and vanity; and their greatest trouble when they are
leaving this World, is what will become of them when they are out of it; and
truly it will not be without great cause, since their Consciences will then
assure them, that their Bodily pain in this Life, will be but the Prologue or
first step to their Souls eternal misery in the next.

Whereas a pious young Lady who with holy David, makes a covenant with her Eyes
that they should not behold vanity, but observe Gods commandments as her chief
study and delight; by truly living in his fear, she will certainly die in his
favor, and will find at her death, that her good Conscience will be her real
friend, and true comforter, and furnish her with a cheerful readiness to submit
her will to Gods, which will never fail to protect her against all those
spiritual conflicts and temptations of Conscience, which still rack and torture
ill Women's minds when they come to die; for tho God casts her on her Bed of
sickness and pain, yet he will be sure to lift her up with the arms of mercy;
and bless her with the assurance of a perfect state of Bliss, after her painful
life is ended; for tho Death be the wages of Sin, yet a Pious death, is but the
passage to a Heavenly Life. And a Religious virtuous Woman at her death will as
certainly enter into a state of eternal Felicity, as an impious vain and wicked
one will into that of deserved misery.

Solomon says, That the fear of God is not only the beginning of wisdom but the
end of it; for it teaches you to regulate your desires, and purify your
actions, as it will make you live well, in order to die so. So that indeed our
good actions concur in their influence toward the happiness of our souls, as
the Sun does in motion to the Dial; the Dial is not the true cause of the Suns
motion to it, yet by the Suns shining on the Dial, you may truly Judge of the
true motion of the Sun.

But leaving aside that dispute whether good works can only merit Heaven, or
not (as the Papists teach,) I am sure living a pious virtuous life in the faith
of the holy Jesus, will certainly carry you there; this all Ladies know, but
few will practice, or so much as think of, I mean as you ought; for you usually
defer all thoughts of the other World, till you are just parting out of this,
when alas the time present is only yours; for that past is no more, and that to
come is not yet, so that you do but live between them both; the present being
the only time you can properly call yours, for God well knowing what great
Prodigals you are of it, is so providently merciful, as to trust you only with
a Minute at a Time; for as he gives you one, so he still takes away the other,
as a Lesson of instruction, not to rely on any time but the present, and to
perform all your Christian duties in it, as the only time appointed you by God
for it. And Ladies if you will but employ this present time as you ought, you
will certainly find time enough in it, to enjoy both the delights of this
World, and to secure you the felicities of the next.

By this all our vain Ladies may easily know, and joyfully conclude, that there
needs no great difficulty in obtaining Heaven, since it only requires, (as I
have told you) a strict pious and virtuous life to compass it; which may easily
be done, if you will but spend half so much time in serving your God, as you
daily wast in looking on your Glass; in praying for your Soul, as in setting
out your Face, which must certainly, nay perhaps suddenly, stink, rot, and be
eaten up by nasty Worms. And really supposing there was no such place of Bliss,
as Heaven for the Godly, nor yet of Torment, as Hell for the wicked; yet a
pious virtuous life, cannot but be more healthful for the body, and more
satisfactory to the mind, than excess, pride and vanity, can be to either.

Next it is worth your consideration to think, how little true content most of
you can find in this World, and how little time it is you can enjoy that little
you do desire; for such considerations cannot but render you somewhat sensible,
of your great and extravagant folly in all your ludicrous sports and pastimes,
unskilfully gaming away your souls; so as in a manner to set Eternity against a
Moment, I mean, the Momentary pleasures of this life, which cannot last, before
the joys of Heaven, which are everlasting; and sure there can be nothing more
foolish than to rely on the duration of your abode on Earth, as any solid and
lasting possession, there being nothing more frail and tottering than the Basis
your life stands on; for tho you are never so healthful, yet you cannot but
find in your self, some marks and symptoms of Mortality, which may serve as
Advertisements of the instability of this your earthly being, which is subject
to a thousand Diseases, and a torrent of Accidents, especially in you fine
young Ladies, whose bodies are so tenderly built, and nicely composed, as the
leaving off a Hood, or wanting of a Skarf; the least crum of Bread, that sticks
in your Throats, or the smallest stop in the course of your Blood, (I had
almost said or motion of your Tongues) puts the whole O^^onomy of your body in
disorder, if not utter ruin, witness as an instance of this accidental
mortality, Pope Adrian, who as story says, was choked with a Fly; nay your
very food, the support and maintainet of your life, ought to be a Memorandum of
your Mortality, since you cannot live without it; and if sleep be the Image of
death, you are by the very necessities of your nature, to die every night,
during the few days you live.

But whether you live long, or die early, you must certainly Die; and you are
in this as well as in all things else, to submit your will to Gods, and to bend
your greatest endeavors, and fix your strongest resolutions, in an entire
obedince to it, which if you truly and heartily do, you must learn the great
virtue, and Christian perfection of self-denial, and despise all those worldly
flatteries and enjoyments; mortify all your excess of vanity and extravagant
pleasures, that you may become truly amiable pure and holy in the sight of God;
when you live in compliance to his holy Laws, and submit in all things to his
good will and pleasure, who is all love and beauty it self, in the highest
measure and perfection; and therefore the least spot or impurity in your lives,
is a direct violence and contradiction to the most excellent nature, and being
of an infinitely pure and holy God.

And now before I quite finish this Discourse let me beg one of you Ladies, to
suppose your' self to be in the actual possession of all the worldly pleasures
you can fancy, that you enjoy as great honors as your ambition can aspire
unto, and as much Beauty, and Riches, as your vain and Covetous humor can
thirst after, and as many rarities as your appetite can wish for, and that your
Gallant was as kind, handsome and constant as you could wish: In a word, that
you thought him as beautiful, as you think your self; pray do but now consider,
what all these will amount to, at the hour of death, and in order to it,
reflect a little seriously, what a weak Basis your life stands on; for
according to the common Law of the Land, a Life is valued but at seven Years
purchase, and many times by the course of Nature, a Life does not last half so
long.

Next if you will but condescend so far to mortify your self, as to go and
visit one of these Lovers of vanity, and railliers of Religion, one of these
coynesses of folly, and despisers of virtue, lying sick on her Deathbed, past
all hopes of recovery; and do but observe how her Words and Looks are changed,
and indeed the whole Scene of her Life, her Countenance being all shadowed over
with the pale and dismal Colors of Mortality, instead of her gay Vermillion
paint; for all beauty and worldly delights vanish and leave you with your
health, being like a Sun Dial, only useful, whilst the Sun shines on it; then
you shall find the but naming her rich Diamond Pendants, and fine Pearl
Necklace, her Embroidered Gowns, and Costly Points, will prove troublesome to
her, and the sight or smell of her late beloved Dainties will then loath her
Stomatch; nay a visit of her dear Gallant, whom she was so fond of, and
delighted in, will be odious to her sight, as well as the thoughts of having
too much loved him, will be grievous to her mind: Then her Bottles of
White-washes, or Cosmeticks will be thrown out, and filled with showers of
penitent Tears for having used them: Then her Boxes of Peeter, and Patches, and
all her Ornamental knacks and dresses, she was wont every day to wast so much
time about, and to take so great pastime in, to adorn and set out her beauty,
will only serve to disquiet her thoughts, and the Praises of her beauty, will
be but so many disturbances in her Sickness, and she will be then as much
troubled to hear them, as she was formerly delighted to receive them, and proud
in the vain thoughts of deserving them.

In short, on her Death bed, all her late dearly beloved Vanities, will at that
time appear her most afflicting Enemies; and she will then loudly declare, that
nothing but a religious Life, can produce a Comfortable death; and will then
tell you, that if she were the sole Mistress of all the Riches of both the
Indies, she would give it all for the blessing of a good Conscience; for that
never leaves one, in Sickness, or in Adversity, but is still the best of
Friends, in the worst of times.

THE FOURTEENTH DISCOURSE, Useful Advices in order to vain modish Ladies well
Regulating their Beauty and Lives.
I Humbly beg the vain Ladies pardon for beginning this Discourse so uncivilly,
as to tell them, it is the Opinion of most sober and observing Men, that many of
you make but a self-deceiving Calculation in the account of your Christian
duties, and holy performances; by fancying your selves well secured, and
diligently active, in the exercise of Gods Commands; and in your obedience to
him, if you do but rise early enough on Sunday to go to Church in the Morning,
and can Dine so temperately as not to sleep at the Sermon in the Afternoon, and
do say a kind of sizd Prayer like a short Grace of a few customary words,
rising and going to bed all the week after, which perhaps may be said more out
of long habit, than true devotion.

How many Ladies are there, and those of a good and sober sort, (as Women go
now adays) that fancy because they live Chaste, read the Bible now and then, and
miss going to Church but seldom, who are Charitable to the Poor, Loving to
their Neighbors, true to their Friends, good will to all, and in love with
none, (unless may be a little with themselves,) think they perform all
Christian duties perfectly, and therefore deserve all Men's Praises truly; and
indeed they would not think amiss, if they would be but near as just and exact
to God in their daily account of their time to him, as they are in creating
daily fresh pastimes and pleasures to themselves, and that they would measure
out their time, according to Gospel Precepts, instead of employing it in vain
London follies and pastimes, which among the modish Ladies, are partly those:

So many hours for Dressing, so many hours for receiving and returning Visits,
so many for the Play, and the Park, so many hours for Dining at this friends
house, Supping with that, and playing late at Cards at to others, or being at a
public Ball or Dancing at another, so many hours to sleep a Bed to satisfy
Nature, so many more to lie a Bed, to continue their full Face, and good Looks;
besides hours for going to Court, to see new fashions, and ransacking Shops to
buy new-fashioned Silks and fineries, besides other times of vain idleness and
prodigality of excess and folly; as such a great part of the Year for a
pretended Disease, or rather diversion at the Bath, such a season for an
infirmity, or recreation at the Wells of Tunbridge, or Epsom; to raffle away it
may be our time and money, to be profuse, and game at public Lotteries, or to
charm or decoy some rich Heir, or Gallant for next Winters service; and now
Ladies, when all these misspent hours are abstracted out of the twenty four,
besides other parts of your lives accounted; I am afraid you will find so great
a consumption and ill management of your time, as you do often too sensibly of
your Estates and Money, and so miserably condole those lost Minutes which you
might have employed to better purposes, in being soberly modest and pious, to
have performed the duties of Religion, which is the only true pleasure and
pastime of the soul: And tho some of these divertisements I know are not barely
in themselves sinful crimes, yet sure they are no better than venial sins, by
their totally taking up, and so entirely devouring of young Women's whole time.

1. My first Advice therefore to the vain Ladies, is to alter the mispending of
their time as now they do, to employ it as really as they ought to do; which is
in preparing to die well, rather than striving to live high, or look fair, and
not to fancy they spend their time well, among such as they but lose it with;
for as Seneca says, They are idle, who might be better employed; so such Ladies
live in some kind ill, that may live in many degrees better.

Therefore as prudent Men manage and regulate their Estates, by dividing it
into several proportions; so much for House keeping, Servants wages, Apparel,
private expenses, and the like; and so suiting their Income, to answer their
several Charges, according to their ability to perform, as their occasions
require; which necessary Measures, because many of the young Estated Men will
not observe, they steer without a Compass, run they know not where, spend they
know not what, and live they know not how, extravagantly, without ease or order.

Now Ladies to prevent such an extravagant manner of spending, or rather
wasting of your time, I shall advise you in order to the well managing of it,
not only to divide it into several hours, for that is already done to your
hand, by many good Clocks and Watches; but you must subdivide the hours of the
day, into so many portions set out for devotion, business, and pastime,
according to your ability, and convenience, always giving place to the duties
of Religion, the first and principal part in all your designs, and actions;
still beginning the day with Prayer, and praises to your Creator; who made both
it, and you, in order to your worshipping and serving him, and by so dividing
the day into so many several parts, and Stages of hourly employments, the
changeable variety that is in them, will afford you variety of pleasure, as well
as business, to entertain and direct you, and prevent you Ladies from
complaining, as I have heard many of you, O what shall we do to pass away this
afternoon, since you will see all the days business and divertisments marked
out before you; and really nothing more distracts and vitiates vain young
Women's minds, than emptiness of business and employment, the want of which
fills you up with the ill vapors of idleness, that old Mother of wickedness,
whereas certain hourly employments, fill and replenish your fancy with such
diversity of change, and business, as is able to suppress, and allay, all fumes
of vain idle thoughts, from arising in your minds, and save you the expensive
trouble, of imitating many of the fine gay modish Ladies, who by chargeable
means and studied Arts, purchase ways vainly to pass away their time, which by
the course of nature, without their help, and beyond their power, runs away but
too fast of it self.

2. My next Advice to the vain Ladies, tho I am sure it is very good, yet I
doubt 'twill be little liked, and less followed; which is to shun the
infectious temptations of a vain London life, which often gets many young
Ladies bad Reputations, but seldom good Husbands. London being become the very
Center point, and Rendezvous, where all the vices and vanites of the Kingdom
meet; yet these vices and vanities, are among many of the fine Ladies, so
richly gilt, finely painted, and splendedly set out, as they are so far from
appearing deformed, as they seem beautiful and taking to most, I mean the
inconsidering young Men of the Town.

Really the Air of London is so infected with Pride, Vanity, and Idleness, that
it is hard for one of you young Ladies to appear in young Men's Company, but you
must have your Ears furred with Oaths and Profaneness, or else your person
Complemented with vain Romantic Courtship, which is not exactly applied and
fitted for any one Woman, but for all handsome Women in general; like false
flattering Looking Glasses, which Complements not only one, but every one that
looks on them, not staying for a great beauty, but still flattering the first
comer.

But Piety and Virtue is still like a pure wholesome Air, a comfort to all, and
an Infection to none, and is so far from dislodging, or overcasting the
lightsomness of any lawful pleasures, as it clears and dissipates any dark
Clouds of fears that may hang over them; for it is most certain, Piety and
Beauty, Recreation and Devotion, may live peaceably together, and yield a
mutual aid and comfort to one another.

Indeed if you Ladies would but use to mix Piety with your pastimes, you would
soon come to make a pastime of Piety; and then instead of dividing the hours
for vain London pleasures, you would make them so many Memorandums of the eflux
of time, to put you in mind of the duties of Mortality, and of the hourly
advances you make toward it, which requires hourly preparations for it; for
the same hours serve as well to tell you of your approaches to Death, as to
divide your pleasures in Life, as the same Figures in your Watch serve to tell
the hours of the night, as well as those of the day.

Then Ladies you will find that time laid out in Prayer and Devotion, is not
spending, but gaining time; and if you will but seriously reflect, and heartily
practice this great Truth; you will soon find, that Piety is as to advancing of
worldly delights, and pastimes, but as Ballast to a Ship, which does not
hinder, but only regulate its motion, not flackning but steddying its Sailing.

A fine Lady whose mind is only fraighted with the Airy Cargo of pride and
vanity, can never steer steady in her heavenly Course; but is still tossed from
one side of folly, to another extremity of vanity, for the want of the true
blessed Ballast of godliness, which will Calm and dispossess your mind of all
modish vanities, and irregularities, and will allay all kinds of immoderate
heats, raised by the Feverish distempers of Womanish Passions, and will fix
your affection on what is immovable, and perpetual, and will soon cause you to
abandon the vain empty undurable pastimes of London, for the true endless
felicity of Heaven, and this is a Heaven upon Earth, To love God, and keep his
Commandments; for then you will truly love Virtue, and constantly practice
Piety, and only delight in the beauty of holiness; which as it transcends much,
so it differs far from, all Earthly love, for that is seldom or never enjoyed
with true quietness, long satisfaction, or just and equal returns; for the most
passionate Love we can fancy, as a Mistress to her Gallant, or a Gallant to his
Mistress, is commonly of so fickle, volatile, and inconstant a nature, as if a
Woman thinks her Gallant loves any other Woman, she grows Jealous; and if he
fancies his Mistress loves another Man, (as it is ten to one she does) he becomes
enraged, for as Solomon says, Prove. 6.34. Jealousy is the rage of a Man, here
on Earth tho most are Lovers, yet many are false ones, but in Heaven all are
Lovers, and are true ones; since in your Heavenly Love, your act of loving, is
the certain fruition of your Love: a Woman by loving Virtue, it becomes hers,
but by loving a Gallant you become his; for she that is under a Gallants
command, cannot truly say she is under her own. In a word, all the Riches and
Pleasures imaginable, that you abandon for the love of God, you enjoy them all,
in loving God above them all.

And you may be certain Ladies, if you can but thus love God as you ought, you
must despise the World as you should, and then you will take more true delight
in the title of a good Christian, than you did ever before in the vain praise
of a great beauty, and slight this, in comparison of that, for a handsome Woman
like the Sun, is to be esteemed more for her Virtue, than Splendour. Beauty is
but a fine outside Skin, but true Godliness is all glorious within, and will
bestow on you more Celestial beauty in the other World, than all your false
Glasses, and Gallants falser Tongues, can flatter you with in this.

3. My next advice to your vain Ladies is, when you are putting on your fine
rich Gowns which so many of you adorn your selves with every day, with so great
care, high excess, and vast expense, as well of time, as money, which makes many
of you by being so over careful in setting out your body, to be over careless
in looking after your Soul, in not allowing it perhaps so much as a clean shift
of Repentance once a Sunday, I mean a penitent Sigh or Tear in a Week, to blow
off, and wash away your Sins, and Vanities, which your own corrupt Natures, and
idle Company breeds in you every day: Therefore when you are putting on your
new rich Gowns, if you could but remember at the same time, to Lace about your
hearts this Memorandum of the Prophet, That Worms are breeding under your
Covering; doubtless such mortifying reflections, would humble your pride, and
abate your vanity; and not only hinder you from leading such vain Lives, but
wearing such rich Clothes, which though they may exactly suit with the Rules of
the Modists; yet I am sure it is quite contrary to the Precepts of the Apostle,
who orders Women not to adorn themselves with rich, but modest Apparel, as if
rich Apparel, was not modest, nor to use painful Dresses, which is an excess of
folly of another kind, by squeezing your selves into a fine slender shape, by
pinching in, and thereby tormenting of your bodies, by lasing your selves so
straight to take Men's sight, as you can hardly take your own breath; and if
this be not great pride, and high folly, I confess I know not what is.

4. My next advise to the vain Ladies, which (I am sure) is of great use, and
high advantage, in order to their living virtuously, and dying religiously, is
this: Not only to shun, but totally to banish that familiar companion of your
Sex, Pride; I shall not strive here to dive far into the depth of this vast
Ocean of iniquity; though all our actions run as naturally to it, as Rivers do
to the Sea: Nor do I here pretend to make a subtle penetration, into any hard
Conceptions of the sinful nature, and wicked consequences of this common, (I
had almost said Womanish) Vice of Pride, my design being not to enlarge on it,
but only to present you with some plain useful advices, and directions how to
destroy, or at least Countermine this raging Sin, which must be done by a
common practice of humility; which if young Women would but consider truly, and
follow carefully, it would soon persuade them, to lay aside their Delilah
Creature of vanity, and to call in a more virtuous acquaintance of humility,
and make her their bosom friend; for Pride is one of the seven Sins Solomon
tells us God abominates, and Scripture assures you, That God still rebukes the
Proud, and ever gives grace to the humble.

Pride is now turned into a Cancerous humor very apt to grow in all young
handsome Women's breasts, and in most it swells and rankles, so as to become
noysom, not only to humility, and piety, but indeed to very common Society; and
it is easy to observe, that many handsome Women, whom Nature has presented with
a large proportion of beauty, which of it self had been able to render them
agreeable, and taking to all persons; yet many of them do so fully and overcast
the glory of it with Pride, and self conceitedness, as to give it a
disagreeable Air, and relish to most of its admirers, by their too apparent
proud affected estimation of it. And it is observable Ladies, that such of you
as are always ready to place too high a value on your selves, are still apt to
cast too low an esteem on others, and so cause most to undervalue you, for your
slighting them. Whereas the virtue of true humility, ascends by the means of
descending, as Trees mount and flourish upward, by rooting and growing downward.

Pride is a distemper of the mind, which most young Ladies are naturally
inclined to, and easily infected with; for the least enflaming their beauty by
Praises, presently turns to the filthy ulcer of pride, which is of such an
extraordinary malignant nature, as low birth, little wit, no beauty, great
want, nay very ugliness it self, is not a sufficient Cure and Antidote against
it; Solomon says, Want of Bread will not starve Pride, and I am sure experience
reaches us, that want of beauty, will not starve some Women's proud fancies of
being handsome, tho they have not the least feature of it; so over-apt are young
Women to believe themselves so, that if Men will be so great liars as to tell
them they are beautiful, they will be so great Fools as to believe them, and
rather credit other Men's words, than their own Eyes; sure Women so blinded,
ought above all things to beg of our blessed Savior, as the blind Man did in
the Gospel, Lord grant me my sight, that they might clearly come to see
themselves, and their own folly and ugliness.

Sure 'twould be impossible that handsome Women, could so delight in this
Devilish sin of Pride, if they would but remember, that humility is as well a
certain improvement of beauty, as a constant inhabitant with virtue; for
humility makes a little beauty appear great, but Pride makes a great beauty to
appear little; the first being taking to all, the second odious to every one:
The more beauty a pious young Lady has, the less pride she will show, like a
Pyramid, that still lessens as it rises, and as a Philosopher said, He is a
brave Man indeed, whose wealth, honor, and power, makes the least part of his
greatness; so that young Lady is a real perfect beauty indeed, that makes the
handsomness of her face, the least pride or concern of her mind; so vast a
difference there is between the virtue of the Soul, and the beauty of the Face;
as Seneca well observes, That Virtue is the only Immortal thing that belongs to
Mortality, and we may also well observe, that the beauty of the Face is the
most fading thing that belongs to frailty. Methinks our proud Ladies ought to
remember the humility of David, who though a great King, was yet so humble as
to style himself a Worm and no Man, but most of our celebrated beauties, are so
far from the humble thoughts of esteeming themselves Worms and no Women, as
they are so highly proud, and ridiculously foolish, that like the Babel
projectors, they hope to Toure themselves as high as the Heavens; for some of
them fancy themselves to be Stars of the first Magnitude, a kind of Goddesses
raised up to the Sky; but if you ask me how, I can but tell you, they were
only raised there by the lofty Muse of their own vain imagination; and
therefore such proud puffed up beauties, are really but like your Schoolboys
Paper-Kytes, which are only mounted into the Sky, by the Wind, and fall to the
ground again as soon as it ceases to blow them up.

Really if I durst venture to give my free vote as to my opinion of beauty, I
should tell the Ladies that I think it is a measuring cast, and a disputable
Question, which is most unsolid and unlasting, either the matter of this fine
composition called beauty, which is in the handsomest Woman but like the fading
color of a Tulip, only pleasant to the Eye; for a little time, and there is
all; or the maker of it, which is no other than the various opinion of every
gazers inclination, beauty having almost as many Fathers, as there are Men
Judges of it.

Surely these vain proud Creatures have read the Story of Theodosius, a Spanish
Prince, who was raised to be Emperor for his good Face; and therefore think
they may well hope to be raised not only to an Empire over Men for their great
beauty, but that they do well deserve a great transcendency over the ordinary
rate of Women-kind, but indeed such high beauties are at very best, but like
Meteors, which are exhaled but a little above the Earth, and are yet a great
deal below the Heavens.

But suppose I should be so highly Complemental as to allow these great
beauties, the full Swing, and extravagant range of their own vain proud and
lofty fancies; that they are as far above the ordinary sort of Women, as the
Sky is above the Earth, and that their motions were very generous and sublime,
imitating the Sea, which impatient to be confined by the bounds which God has
given, is still swelling and striving to mount and raise it self above the
surface of the Earth; yet I would gladly learn, because I can no way fancy how
they will pretend to be begot there, except it be by the Man in the Moon; and
indeed that may possibly be some reason, why our great beauties are generally
so fickle and inconstant in their Love, as receiving their great mutability
from the influence of the Moon, as their immediate Parent.

5. Therefore my next Advice to the vain Ladies, is still to remember that
though your beauties may be extraordinary, yet your lives can never be Immortal
on Earth; and that your great beauty, and proud thoughts, must both perish with
you; for it may be truly said of great beauties, what the Psalmist said of
great Princes, Though you are styled Gods, yet you must die like Men; so though
you may be called Goddesses, yet you must die like Women; and though your
beauty could make as great a Conquest of hearts, as ever Alexander did of
Kingdoms, who had no more to subdue; yet as death has certainly put a period,
to his success and life; so he will certainly do the like, to your beauty and
days.

For indeed the greatest beauty, is but like the finest Glass, the more clear,
the more frail, and easily broken; for alas, take beauty in its very highest
Altitude, and greatest vigor, it is a fabric composed, and made up of so many
tender pieces of such brittle ware, and delicate Contexture, as the least spot
or flaw, in any one part, spoils, or at least blemishes the luster of the
whole; and as the Poet says, One that is all over Heart,
Every place proves a Mortal part.


Now Ladies if you resolve to be all over virtuous, and discreet in Reputation,
so as to live Shot-free, from all the wounding Darts of censure, you must arm
your selves with a clear and innocent complexion of virtue; to procure which,
you must not only abstain from evil, but the very appearance of it, not only
from doing bad Actions, and keeping ill Company, but even the hearing, much
less receiving vain praises; and as you ought to show a general civility to
all, so you ought not to give a particular freedom to any.

In a word, you must manage all your actions with a strict prudence, a perfect
modesty, a real humility, a virtuous behavior, and a constant fear of God in
all you say and do, and these will gain you praises, and make you well deserve
to be admired; for Solomon says, Prove. 31.30. It Is the Woman that fears God
shall be praised, and by such a blessed and holy kind of life, you will secure
your self against all the Censorious talk of envious bablers, against the venom
of those lying malicious Tongues, who are not fit to be believed, nor worthy to
be feared.

Indeed Ladies, the best way to make your earthly beauty, continue good and
lasting, is to be humble in your own thoughts, and not to pride, or value your
selves more than you ought; since it is so vain, and uncertain in its most
lovely colors and complexion; for this will give Men a just admiration of your
prudence and modesty, and preserve the virtue of it Immortal, beyond the
duration of this fair and naked substance, which some sudden accident or
disease can soon blast and rob of all its blooming and youthful vigor, strip
it of all its gay attirement, and you of that vain delight in your own
self-admiration; so then beauty is only less commendable in her, who makes it
her only pride and concern to set it off; and such a Lady, thus trigg'd up, and
furnished out, by great art and invention, by glittering apparel and proud
ostentation, is but like a fire of Straw, it may blaze much, but it cannot last
long, and whilst it lights others, it consumes it self. But a handsome Lady
that is free from affectation and pride, and is blessed with great Piety, and
true Humility, is like the Heavenly fire in Moses Bush, which burnt and lighted
others, and yet never consumed it self.

A handsome woman that is very proud, does but enjoy her beauty, as the Miser
does his Wealth, who does not so much possess it, as it possesses him; and
therefore your truly pious Ladies, do but use their worldly beauty, as the
Apostle says we are to use this World, that is, as if we used it not, by a
godly habit of mind, consuming all the usual vanity affected by others in the
pious reflection, that there is no true virtue, or durable satisfaction in it.

We read in Genesis that good old Abraham, made no other use of all his wealth,
than to purchase him a Grave; O why should not all proud Women imitate him, and
though they be never so rich in beauty, employ it all in Purchasing a Grave of
Humility, to bury the dust of their Pride in; and by so doing, they will
certainly find a Resurrection of true Glory out of it, which will raise to them
Garlands of perpetual Praises, of so Heavenly a nature, and vast an extent, as
they will as much excel all the false vain glittering splendour of this World,
as the noon day brightness, of a Summers Sun, does the small glimmering light
of a little Glowworm, which cannot be seen, but by the help of darkness.

6. I shall next advise the vain Ladies, to resolve to new mould their Lives in
this Spiritual frame of Reformation, and to square out all their actions by the
Golden Rules of Piety and Virtue. I heard of a Gentleman that being dangerously
ill of a Dropsy, went to a famous Physician for his Advice, who bid him
abstain from all Drink for a Twelve Month, and it would Cure him: I am
confident the like kind of Remedy would cure the fine Ladies, let them but
abstain from all vain thoughts on themselves, and not hearken to the vain
flatteries, and praises of others but for one Year, and 'twill certainly cure
them of that Devilish distemper of Pride; for by one Twelve Months banishing
it, and conversing only with virtue and humility, which are inseparable
friends, they will certainly make them so religiously prudent, and happily
virtuous, as to hate and shun all proud desires, and flatterers Praises, and
cause them to love only those that Court them in the holy Language of Truth, to
the Love of Godliness; which is the very best way, they can express their Love
to you, or you your Love to your selves; and truly Ladies I cannot see the
least reason, why you should be against this holy change, since it will not be
a parting with, nor so much as a Retrenching of your love delights, but rather
be a better means, to enlarge and improve them, by placing and fixing your
mind, on a much more noble object, and a far finer entertainment, by
transplanting your affections, into a far richer soil, from Earth to Heaven;
from the fading vanities of this World, to the never decaying felicities of the
next; and when once a young Ladies Inclinations are firmly rooted in a real
desire and hearty endeavor for this blessed Change, she will soon find that
her Love will become so piously purified, that instead of her fixing it on
mortal Man, she will only dedicate it to the service of the ever living God,
whose service is still true happiness, and perfect freedom.

Then such a Lady will be happy above the low Region of all worldly flatterers
and the more vain concerns of a fading beauty, she will not value the rallying
scoffs and contempts of those who deride her humble and strict deportment, now
so much out of fashion among the vain Ladies of our times; for such a reformed
Lady, whose mind is truly sanctified, will extract uses of virtue, out of such
extravagant Women's vanities, like the Be, that sucks Honey out of all sorts of
venomous Herbs, and like Fire, that turns all things within its compass to its
self; and such a Ladies holy course of Life, will be steady and certain in its
progress like the Sun in his daily motion, nothing of Storms or changable
weather, can ever hasten, or retard its regular course; for a Lady that is in
the holy state of true Mortification, her constant Piety will so purify and
draw off her inclinations from all vain pastimes and modish vanities, and from
those foul dregs of impurity, that are the usual attendants of a vain idle
London Life, that by this Transfiguration of Mind, and pious habit of Life; her
Conversation will be as the Apostle says, fixed up in Heaven, and we all know
that the upper Region of the Air it self, will admit of no Storms or Thunder,
for they are all formed below it.

And farther that Lady who is so blessed as to have her heart touched with this
Magnetic virtue of true godliness, her thoughts will be elevated to such a
heavenly pitch of spiritual virtue and religion, as she will despise all the
young Gallants fine words, deep sighs, and languishing looks, with all their
high Praises, and showers of Complements, which will work no more on her
sanctified Mind, than showers of Hail on the tops of well covered Houses, which
fall off, as soon as it falls on, without ever touching any of the inward part.

And whereas our vain Ladies receive the extravagant encomiums and flatteries,
I might have almost said Adorations, of their vain Gallants as the Lawful Issue
of their own applauded Merit; a truly pious Lady, will only hearken to all the
Airy Praises young Men ascribe to her beauty, to be but the Bastard brood, of
their own abundant sin, and folly, and she will make such pious reflections on
such young Men's overmuch praises, grounded on a sense of her own unworthiness
of them, as she will not only despise their extravagant speeches, but
themselves for speaking of them; which doubtless cannot but be very acceptable
to God the searcher of all hearts, who still gives grace to the humble.

Therefore Ladies, if you really desire true piety and humility, I must advise
you again, and again, never to hearken with delight, or hear with belief, or
indeed suffer with patience, but shun with diligence, young Men's airy praises
and Complements, nor yet countenance their flatteries; for multitude of Praises
cannot but perplex young Ladies Minds, as many Lights still confound the Sight;
and therefore when you hear young Men give their Tongues such loose liberties,
and over large ranges, in magnifying your beauty, remember such high
Complemental expressions are to be trusted no more, than the Christian Flag of
a Turkish Pyrat, which he only hangs out, that you might esteem him your
friend, that thereby he may make you become his Slave.

Therefore Ladies keep still about you this preservative of your virtue, that
you look upon on all the vain Gallants, that Court you with high Complements,
and great praises, to be but so many Judas's that come to betray you with a
kiss, and do not believe their Oaths, either on the account of what they swear,
as to your great beauty, or their own true Love; for really flattery and vain
praises, are now grown such common Arts, among fond Lovers, as well as great
Statesmen, and Complemental Courtiers, as we often meet the truth of their
meaning, in the contradiction of their words.

7. My last concluding advise to the vain modish Ladies is, when one of you is
curiously beholding and admiring your fine Face in your Glass, and find that
the great beauty of it, raises proud thoughts in your heart, (which is almost
as common among handsome Ladies, as it is for them to look in their Glass, which
nothing can be more common) humble your pride with these mortifying
reflections, that this very fine Face of yours, that you like so much, love so
well, and are so taken with, and fond of, must unavoidably in a little time
become loathsome, rottenness, stink, and corruption, turn odious either to be
seen or smelt, which is as very certain, as mortality it self; and death you
know is not only sure to meet you, but your are exposed by a thousand accidents
to meet it, whilst you are traveling in this Earthly Pilgrimage; for the
spritely gaiety of your blossom youth, can only let you know how long you may
possibly live, but can give no advance security how long you certainly will;
therefore young Ladies as well as old Men ought still to march under the safe
Conduct of a virtuous Life, and not to trust to the temptation of a long Life,
but to rely only on the blessed security of a good one.

I shall conclude this Discourse and Book with the good saying of an excellent
religious person, That the vainest beauty on Earth, cannot justly deny this
great Truth, that beauty is not absolutely necessary to the good of this Life,
but that Piety is essentially necessary both to the good of this Life, and the
next too, since one may live well, without beauty, but one can neither live or
die well without Piety.

FINIS.

