A DISCOURSE CONCERNING Conscience; WHEREIN An Account is given of the Nature,
and Rule, and Obligation, of it. AND The Case of those who Separate from the
Communion of the Church of England as by Law Established, upon this Pretense,
that it is Against their Conscience to jo^n in it, is stated and discussed.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishops Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1684.

A DISCOURSE OF CONSCIENCE: With Respect to those that Separate from the
Communion of the Church of England upon the Pretense of it, etc.
THere is nothing more in our Mouths than Conscience; and yet there are few
things we have generally taken less Pains to understand. We sit down too often
with this, that it is something within us, we do not know what, which we are to
Obey in all that it Suggests to us, and we trouble our selves no further about
it.

By which means, it frequently comes to pass; that though we have espoused very
dangerous Errors, or happen to be engaged in very Sinful Practices; yet
believing, and Acting, as we say, according to our Conscience; we do not only
think our selves perfectly Right and Safe, while we continue in this State; but
are Effectually Armed against all sorts of Arguments, and Endeavors that can
be used for the bringing us to a better Mind.

This is too Visible in many Cases; but in none more than in the Case of those
that at this Day Separate from the Communion of the Church as it is Established
among us. Though the Laws of the Land both Ecclesiastical, and Civil, do oblige
them to join in our Communion; though many Arguments are offered to convince
them, not only that they Lawfully may, but that they are bound to do it: though
they themselves are sensible, that many-fold, and grievous mischiefs, and
dangers, do ensue from this breach of Communion, and these unnatural Divisions,
both to the Christian Religion in General, and to our Reformed Religion in
particular, yet if to all these things, a Man can reply, that he is Satisfied
in his Conscience that he does well in refusing his Obedience to the Laws; or
that he is not satisfied, in his Conscience that he ought to join with us upon
such Terms as are required; this single pretense shall be often thought a
sufficient Answer, both to Laws, and Arguments.

A strange thing this is; that Conscience, which among other ends, was given to
Mankind for a Preservative, and Security of the Public Peace; for the more
Effectually Obliging Men to Unity, and Obedience to Laws; yet should often be a
means of setting them at distance, and prove a Shelter for Disobedience, and
Disorder: That God should Command us to Obey our Governors in all Lawful
things for Conscience sake, and yet that we should Disobey them in Lawful
things for Conscience sake too.

It is the Design of this Discourse to examine what there is in this Plea, that
is so often made by our Dissenters for their not complying with the Laws, viz.
That it is against their Conscience so to do; and to show in what Cases this
Plea is justly made, and in what Cases not; and where it is Justly made, how
far it will Justify any Man's Separation, and how far it will not. And all this
in order to the possessing those who are concerned, with a Sense of the great
Necessity that lies upon them, of using their most serious endeavors to inform
their Conscience aright in these matters, before they presume to think they can
Separate from us with a good Conscience, which is all we desire of them; for it
is not our business to persuade any Man to conform against his Conscience; but
to convince every Man how Dangerous it may be to follow a misinformed
Conscience.

But before I enter upon this disquisition, it will be necessary in the first
Place, to prepare my way by laying down the Grounds, and Principles, I mean to
proceed upon. And here that I may take in all things, that are needful to be
known beforehand, about this matter, I shall treat distinctly of these Five
Heads.

1 Of the Nature of Conscience. 2 Of the Rule of Conscience. And under that, 3
Of the Power of Humane Laws to Oblige the Conscience. 4 And particularly in the
instance of Church Communion. 5 Of the Authority of Conscience; or how far a
Man is Obliged to be guided by his Conscience in his Actions.
I. And first, as for the Nature of Conscience, the truest way to find out that
will be, not so much to enquire into the Signification of the word Conscience
or the several Scholastical Definitions of it; as to consider what every Man
does really mean by that word when he has occasion to make use of it; for if it
do appear that all Men do agree in their Notions, and Sense, about this matter;
That without doubt, which they all thus agree in, is the true Notion, and Sense
of Conscience.

Now as to this, we may observe in the first Place, that a Man never speaks of
his Conscience, but with respect to his own Actions, or to something that has
the Nature of an Action which is done or omitted by him, or is to be done or
omitted, Matters of mere Knowledge, and Speculation, we do not concern our
Conscience with; as neither with those things in which we are purely Passive;
as neither with Actions, if they be not our own. We do not for instance, make
it a Point of Conscience one way or other, whether a thing be true or false; or
whether this or the other Accident that befalls us, be prosperous or
unfortunate; or whether another Man has done good or bad Actions, in which we
are no way concerned. These kind of things may indeed prove matters of great
Satisfaction or Disquiet; of Joy or Grief to us: But we do not take our
Conscience to be affected with them. That word never comes in, but with respect
to something willingly done or left undone by us; or which we may do or may
forbear.

Secondly, we may observe that in Common Speech, we do not neither use this
word Conscience about our Actions, but only, so far as those Actions fall under
a Moral consideration; that is, as they have the Nature of Duties or Sins, or
as they are Lawful or Unlawful. Always when we speak of Conscience in our
Actions, we have respect to some Law or Rule, by which those Actions are to be
directed, and governed, and by their agreeableness or disagreeableness with
which they become morally Good or Evil.

Thirdly, this being so; the only thing remaining to be enquired into for the
finding out what Conscience is, is, what can be reasonably thought to be our
Sense, and meaning, when we use the word Conscience, with such Application to
our Actions as we have now said. Now for that I desire it may be considered;
that when we talk of our Actions as we concern our Conscience in them, they can
but fall under these two Heads of Distinction, that is to say, in the first
place, we either consider our Actions as already done or omitted: or we
consider them as yet not done, but as we are deliberating about them. And then
Secondly, whether we consider them as done or not done; as past, or future; yet
we Rank them under one of these three Notions.

We either look upon them as Commanded by God, and so to be Duties; or as
forbidden by God, and so to be Sins; or as neither Commanded nor forbidden, and
so to be indifferent Actions. (With these last Actions indeed Conscience is not
properly or directly concerned, but only by accident, to wit, as those
indifferent Actions do approach to the Nature of Duties or Sins:) Our Actions,
I say, do not touch our Conscience, but as they fall under some of these Heads.

Now in all these Respects we have indeed different ways of bringing in
Conscience but yet as it will appear, we mean the same thing by it in them all.
First of all when we are considering an Action as yet not done; if we look upon
it as Commanded by God; we say we are bound in Conscience to do it; if we look
upon it as a Sinful Action, we say it is against our Conscience to do it; if we
look upon it as an indifferent thing, we say we may do it or not do it with a
Safe Conscience. Now I pray, what do we mean by these expressions? I desire
that every one would consult his own Mind, and deny if he can, that this is the
Sense of his words. If he says he is bound in Conscience to do this or the
other thing, whether he does not mean this? that he verily thinks it is his
Duty to do that Action. If he says that it is against his Conscience to do
such an Action; whether he means any more than this? that he is persuaded in
his Judgment that to do such an Action is an Offense against God. If he says
that he can do it with a Safe Conscience whether he has any other meaning than
this? that to the best of his Knowledge, and Judgment, the Action may be done
without Transgressing any Law of God. This is now undeniably, the Sense that
every Man in the World has, when he makes mention of Conscience as to Actions
that are not yet done, but only proposed to his Consideration. So that taking
Conscience as it respects our Actions to be done or omitted, and as it is to
Govern, and Conduct them (in which Sense we call Conscience a Guide or a
Monitor, and sometimes, though very improperly, a Rule of our Actions) it can
be nothing else in the Sense of all Men that use that word, but a Man's Judgment
concerning the goodness or badness; the Lawfulness or Unlawfulness of Actions
in order to the Conduct of his own Life.

But Secondly if we speak of our Actions that are done and past, and consider
Conscience with Reference to them; here indeed we do a little vary the
Expression about Conscience, but the Notion of it is the same we have now
given. As for instance, when we talk of Peace of Conscience, or Trouble of
Conscience, with Reference to some Action we have done or omitted; when we say
My Conscience bears me Witness, that I have Acted rightly, and honestly in this
Affair; or my Conscience acquits me from blame, as to this or the other Action,
or I am troubled in Conscience for doing what I have done: If we turn these
Phrases into other words, we shall find that there is nothing more at the
bottom of them than this; that reflecting upon our own Actions, we find that in
this or the other instance, we have either Acted or omitted, as we are
convinced in our Judgment we ought to do; and the remembrance of this is some
Pleasure, and Satisfaction to us: or we have done or forborne something contrary
to what we take to be our Duty; and the remembrance of this affects us with
grief and trouble. But still, in both these instances of Expression, that which
we mean by Conscience is the same thing, as in the former Cases, viz. It is our
Judgment and Persuasion concerning what we ought to do, or ought not to do, or
Lawfully may do; only here we add to it this Consideration, that the Action
which we are persuaded to be good, or bad, or indifferent, is now done or
omitted by us, and we do remember it. In the Former Case, Conscience was
considered as the Guide of our Actions. In the latter Case it is considered as
the Witness of our Actions. But in both Cases, Conscience is the Judge, and
consequently in both Cases the Notion of it is the same, only with this
difference, that in the former it was a Man's mind, making a Judgment what he
ought to do or not to do; in the latter it is a Man's mind reflecting upon what
he has done or not done, and Judging whether he be Innocent or Culpable in the
matter he reflects upon.

I do not know how to give a clearer account of the Nature of Conscience in
general than this I have now given. This I believe is the Natural Notion that
all Men have of it, and there is no Expression in Scripture about it but what
does confirm this Notion. If indeed we put Epithites to Conscience, and talk of
a Good Conscience or an Evil Conscience; A Tender Conscience or a Seared
Conscience or the like. Then it includes more, both in Scripture, and in Common
Language, than I have now mentioned. But to give an account of those things I
am not now concerned, as being without the Limits of our present enquiry.

II. And now we are sufficiently prepared for our Second general Point which is
touching the Rule of Conscience; if indeed after what we have already said it
be not superfluous to insist upon that.

It appears plainly by what I have represented, that Conscience must always
have a Rule which it is to follow, and by which it is to be Governed. For since
Conscience is nothing else but a Man's Judgment concerning Actions, as good, or
bad, or Indifferent; it is certain that a Man must have some measures to
proceed by in order to the framing such a Judgment about Actions; that is to
say, there must be something distinct from the Man himself that makes Actions
to be good, or bad, or indifferent; and from which, by applying particular
Actions to it, or comparing them with it, a Man may be able to Judge whether
they be of the one sort or the other. Now this, whatever it be, is that which
we call the Rule of Conscience; and so much it is its Rule, that Conscience can
be no farther a safe guide than as it follows that Rule.

If now it be asked what this Rule of Conscience is, or what that is which
makes a difference between Actions, as to the Moral goodness or badness of
them; the Answer to it is Obvious to every Body: That it can be nothing else
but the Law of God. For nothing can be a Duty but what Gods Law has made so;
and nothing can be a Sin but what Gods Law has forbidden (the very Notion of
Sin being, that it is a Transgression of the Law;) and lastly we call a thing
Lawful or Indifferent upon this very account, that there is no Law of God
either Commanding or Forbidding it; and where there is no Law, there is no
Transgression. So that undeniably the great, nay I say, the only Rule by which
Conscience is to be Governed is the Law of God, considered either as it
Commands Actions, or Forbids them, or as it neither Commands them nor Forbids
them.

But in order to the giving a more distinct account, of this Rule of
Conscience, there is this needful to be enquired into, viz. In what Sense we
take, or what we mean by the Law of God; when we say it is the Rule of
Conscience.

Now to this our Answer is, That by the Law of God, we here understand Gods
Will, for the Government of Men's Actions, in what way soever that Will is
declared to them.

Now the will of God is declared to Men two ways; either by Nature, or by
Revelation; so that the just, and, adequate Rule of Conscience is made up of
two parts the Law of Nature, and Gods Revealed Law.

By the Law of Nature, we mean those Principles of Good and Evil, Just and
Unjust, which God has Stamped upon the Minds of all Men, in the very
Constitution of their Natures. There are some things Eternally good in
themselves; Such as to Worship God, to Honor our Parents, to stand to our
Covenants, to Live Peaceably in the Government, from which we receive
Protection; and the contrary to these will be Eternally Evil; the Heads of all
which things thus good in themselves, are writ so plainly, and Legibly, in the
Minds of Mankind, that there is no Man who is come to the use of his Reason,
but must of necessity be convinced, that to Practice these things will always be
his Duty, and not to Practice them, will always be Evil, and a Sin. Now all
these Heads, and Principles put together, is that we call the Law of Nature,
and this is all the Rule of Conscience, that Mankind had, before God was
pleased to discover his Will by more particular Revelation. And this is that
Law, which the Apostle speaks of when he says that the Gentiles, who had not
the Law of Moses yet had a Law written in their Hearts; by their Acting
according to which, or contrary to which their Conscience did bear Witness to
them, and did either Accuse them, or Excuse them.

But then Secondly, to us Christians, God to this Law of Nature has superadded
a Revealed Law, which is contained in the Books of Holy Scriptures. Which
Revealed Law yet, is not wholly of a different kind from the former, nor does
it at all void the Obligation of it. But only thus; God has in his Revealed
Law, declared the Precepts of the Law of Nature, more certainly, and accurately
than before; He has given greater Force, and Strength to them, than they had
before, by the Sanctions of greater Rewards, and Punishments: He has likewise
herein perfected the Law of Nature, and has Obliged us, in point of Duty, to
more and higher Instances of Virtue, than Nature did strictly Oblige us to: And
Lastly, He has added some Positive Laws for us to observe which were not at
all contained in the Law of Nature, as for instance, to believe in Jesus
Christ, in order to Salvation, to make all our Applications to God, in the Name
of that Mediator Christ Jesus; to enter into a Christian Society, by Baptism,
and to Exercise Communion with that Society, by partaking of the Lords Supper.

And this is that Law, which we Christians are Obliged to, as well as to the
Law of our Natures, and which as it is a Summary of all the Laws of Nature, so
indeed is it a Summary of all our Duty. So that if any Man will call it the
great, or only Rule of Christian Conscience, I shall not much oppose him,
provided that this be always Remembered, that,

In the Third Place, when we say that the Natural and Revealed Law of God, is
the just Rule, by which we are to Govern our Conscience, or when we say that
the Law of God, as Revealed, and contained in the Bible, is to us Christians,
the just Rule. We are so to understand this Proposition as to take into it, not
only all that is directly, and expressly Commanded, or Forbidden by either of
those Laws: But also all that by plain Collection of Right Reason in Applying
Generals to Particulars, or comparing one thing with another does appear to be
Commanded or Forbidden by them.

So that by the Law of Nature, as it is a Rule of Conscience, we are not only
to understand the prime Heads, and most general Dictates of it, (which are but
a few) but also all the necessary Deductions from those Heads. And by the Law
of Scripture, as it is the Rule of Conscience, we are not only to understand
the express Commands, and Prohibitions, we meet with there, in the letter of
the Text; but all the things likewise, that by unavoidable Consequence do
follow from those Commands, or Prohibitions. In a word, when we are
deliberating with our selves, concerning the goodness, or badness; the
Lawfulness, or Unlawfulness of this, or the other particular Action: We are not
only to look upon the letter of the Law, but to attend further to what that Law
may be supposed by a Rational Man to contain in it. And if we be convinced,
that the Action we are deliberating about, is Commanded, or Forbidden, by
direct Inference, or by Parity of Reason; we ought to look upon it as a Duty,
or a Sin, though it be not expressly Commanded, or Forbidden, by the Law, in the
letter of it. And if neither by the letter of the Law; nor by Consequence from
it; nor by Parity of Reason; the Action before us, appear either to be
Commanded, or Forbidden: In that Case, we are to look upon it, as an
indifferent Action; which we may do, or let alone, with a safe Conscience; or,
to express the thing more properly, we are to look upon it as an Action in
which our Conscience is not so much concerned as our Prudence.

III. Having thus given an account of the Rule of Conscience, that which
Naturally follows next to be considered, with Reference to our present design,
is, what share Humane Laws have in this Rule of Conscience? whether they be a
part of this Rule, and do really bind a Man's Conscience to the Observance of
them or no? which is our Third general Head.

Now as to this, our Answer is, that though the Laws of God be the great, and
indeed the only Rule of Conscience, yet the Laws of Men, generally speaking, do
also bind the Conscience, and are a part of its Rule in a Secondary Sense, that
is, by Virtue of, and in Subordination to the Laws of God.

I shall briefly explain the meaning of this, in the Four following
Propositions.

First, there is nothing more certain than that the Law of God, as it is
declared both by Nature, and Scripture does Command us, to Obey the Laws of Men.

There is no one Dictate of Nature, more Obvious to us, than this, that we are
to Obey the Government we Live under, in all honest, and Just things. For this
is indeed the Principal Law, and Foundation of all Society. And it would be
impossible, either for Kingdoms, or States; for Citys, or Families to subsist;
or at least to maintain themselves in any Tolerable degree of Peace, and
Happiness, if this be not acknowledged a Duty.

And then, as for the Laws of God in Scripture, there is nothing more plainly
declared there, than, that it is Gods Will, and our Duty to Obey them that have
the Rule over us; and to Submit our selves to every Ordinance of Man, for the
Lords sake, and to be Subject not only for Wrath but for Conscience sake. So
that no Man can doubt that he is really bound in Duty to Obey the Laws of Men
that are made by Just, and Sufficient Authority. And Consequently no Man can
doubt that Humane Laws do really bind the Conscience, and are one part of the
Rule by which it is to be directed, and Governed.

But then having said this, we add this farther in the Second Place, that
Humane Laws do not bind the Conscience, by any Virtue in themselves; but merely
by Virtue of Gods Law, who has Commanded that we should in all things be
Subject to our Lawful Governors, not only for Wrath, but for Conscience sake.
Conscience is not properly concerned with any Being in the World, save God
alone, it has no Superior but him: For the very Notion of it, as I have often
said, is no other than our Judgment, of what things we are bound to do by Gods
Law; and what things we are Forbidden to do by Gods Law.

So that all the Men in the World, cannot bind any Man's Conscience, by Virtue
of any Power, or Authority, that is in them: But now God having made it an
everlasting Law, both by Nature, and Scripture, that we should Obey those who
are set over us, whether they be our Parents, or our Masters; and much more our
Princes, and the Sovereign Legislative Power, under whom we Live; by Virtue of
this Command of God, and this only; we are for ever bound in Conscience, to
Govern our Actions, by the Commands, that they impose upon us; and those
Commands of theirs are a Rule, (though a Consequential, or a Secondary Rule,)
by which we are to Govern our Conscience, because they are the Instances of our
Obedience to the Laws of God.

But then in the Third Place, this is also to be remembered; that Humane Laws
do no farther bind the Conscience, and are a Rule of it, than as they are
agreeable to the Laws of God. If any Law, or Command of Man, do Clash with any
Law of God; that is, if it be either Evil in it self, or Contradictory to the
Duty of Christians, as laid down in the Scriptures; in that Case, that Law or
Command, by what Humane Authority soever it was made or given, does not bind
our Conscience, nor is any Rule of our Actions. On the contrary we are not at
any Rate to yield Obedience to it; but we are here reduced to the Apostles
Case, and must Act as they did; that is, we must Obey God, rather than Men, and
we Sin, if we do not. For since God only has proper, and direct Authority over
our Conscience, and Humane Power, only, by Delegation from him: And since God
has not given any Commission to the most Sovereign Princes upon Earth, to
alter his Laws, or to impose any thing upon his Subjects, that is inconsistent
with them. It follows by necessary Consequence, that no Man can be Obliged to
Obey any Laws of Men, farther than they are agreeable to, and consistent with
the Laws of God.

There is yet a Fourth thing, necessary to be taken in for the clearing the
Point we are upon, and that is this, That though Humane Laws, generally
speaking, may be said to bind the Conscience, and to be a part of its Rule: Yet
we do not Assert that every Humane Law, (though it does not interfere with any
of Gods Laws) does at all times, and in all Cases, Oblige Every Man's Conscience
to Active Obedience to it; so as that he Sins against God, if he Transgress it.
No, it would be a very hard thing to affirm this; and I do not know what Man
among us, upon these Terms, would be Innocent.

Thus much I believe we may safely lay down as a Truth; That where either the
Matter of the Law is of such a Nature; that the Public, or some private Person
shall Suffer Damage, or Inconvenience, by our not Observing it. Or Secondly,
Though the Law, as to the matter of it be never so Trifling; nay, though
perhaps all things considered, it be an inconvenient Law; yet if the Manner of
our not Obeying it, be such, as gives Offense to our Superiors, or to any
others; that is, either Argues a Contempt of Authority, or sets an ill Example
before our fellow Subjects: I say in either of these Cases, the Transgression
of a Humane Law, renders a Man guilty of a Fault, as well as Obnoxious to the
Penalty of that Law. But out of these two Cases, I must confess, I do not see,
how a purely Humane Law does Oblige the Conscience; or how the Transgression of
it, does make a Man guilty of Sin, before God. For it is certain if we secure
these two Points; that is to say, the good of the Public, and of private
Persons; and with all the sacredness, and respect, which is due to Authority,
(which is likewise in Order to the Public good:) We Answer all the Ends, for
which the Power of making Laws, or laying Commands upon Inferiors, was
Committed by God to Mankind.

So that though it be true, that Humane Laws do Oblige the Conscience, yet it
is also true that a great many Cases may, and do happen, in which a Man may Act
contrary to a purely Humane Law, and yet not be a Sinner before God. Always
supposing (as I said,) there be no Contempt, or Refractoryness expressed
toward the Governors: Nor, no Scandal, or ill. Example given to others, by
the Action. For if there be either of these in the Case; I dare not acquit the
Man, from being a Transgressour of Gods Law, in the instance, wherein he
Transgresses the Laws of Men.

For this is that which we insist upon; that the Authority of our Governors
ought to be held, and esteemed very sacred, both because the Laws of God, and
the Public good require it should be so. And herefore, wherever they do
peremptorily lay their Commands upon us, we are bound in Conscience so far to
comply, as not to contest the matter with them; nor to seem to do it. And
though their Commands, as to the matter of them, be never so slight; nay,
though they should prove really inconvenient, either to our selves, or the
Public. Yet if they stand upon them, if they persist in requiring our
Obedience to them; we must yield, we must Obey; always supposing they be not
against Gods Laws. For we are at no hand either to affront their Authority our
selves; or to encourage others, by our Example, to do it. For to do either of
these things is a greater Evil to the Publ^ck, than our Obedience to an
inconvenient Law can easily be.

IV. And now it is time for us to apply what has been said in General,
concerning the Rule of Conscience, and the Obligation of Humane Laws; to the
particular Matter here before us; that is, the business of Church Communion;
The Obligation of Conscience to which, in such manner as the Laws have
appointed, is the Fourth general Head we are to consider.

This point of the Obligation to Communion with the Church, as by Law
Established, has been largely handled by several Learned Men of our Church,
and particularly it is the Argument of one of those Discourses which have
lately been writ for the sake of our Dissenters. Thither therefore I refer the
Reader for full Satisfaction about this Matter being only just to touch upon it
here, as one of the Principles we take for granted, and shall proceed upon in
the following Discourse.

And here the Proposition we lay down is this, That it is every Man's Duty, and
consequently every Man is bound in Conscience to join in Communion with that
Church, which is Established by Law in the place where he lives; so long as
that Church is a true, sound part of the Catholic Church, and there is nothing
imposed or required as a Condition of Communicating with it, that is Repugn^nt
to the Laws of God, or the Appointments of Jesus Christ.

This Proposition is Evident, not only because it Necessarily follows from the
foregoing Principle; which was, that every Man is bound in Conscience to Obey
the Laws of Men that are not contrary to the Laws of God; and therefore
consequently a Man is bound to Obey in Ecclesiastical matters, as well as
Civil; (unless it can be showed that Christ has forbid all Humane Authority,
whether Ecclesiastical or Civil, to make any Laws or Orders about Religion;
which I believe never was or can be showed:)

But it is Evident upon another Account, which I desire may be considered. We
are all really bound by the Laws of Jesus Christ, and the Nature of his
Religion to preserve as much as in us lies the Unity of the Church: Which Unity
does consist not only in professing the same Faith, but joining together with
our Brethren under Common Governors in the same Religious Communion of
Worship, and Sacraments. And therefore whoever breaks this Unity of the Church,
by withdrawing his Obedience from those Church Governors, which God has set
over him in the place where he Lives; and Separating from the Established
Religious Assemblies of Christians under those Governors; does really
transgress the Laws of Jesus Christ, and is Guilty of that Sin of Schism, which
is so very much cautioned against, and so highly Condemned in the Scriptures of
the New Testament: Unless in the mean time it does appear to the Man, who thus
withdraws, and Separates, that there is something required of him in those
Assemblies, and by those Governors, and that as a Term, and Condition of
holding Communion with them, which he cannot Submit to without Sin.

And this Point I do heartily wish was well considered by our dissenting
Brethren. They do seem often to look upon this business of coming to Church,
and joining with us in Prayers and Sacraments, no otherwise to bind their
Conscience than other purely Humane Laws. They think they owe no Obedience to
the Laws in these matters, different from that which they yield to any common
Act of Parliament. And therefore no wonder they often make so slight a business
of them.

But this is a great mistake, there is much more in these things than this
comes to. The withdrawing our Communion from the Church carrys a far greater
guilt in it, than the Violating any Law, that is purely Humane. For though we
do readily grant that all the Circumstances of Public Worship enjoined in the
Church, as for Instance, the Times, the Gestures, the Forms of Prayer, the
Methods of Reading the Scripture, and Administering the Sacraments; as also the
Habits of the Ministers that are to Officiate; be all of Humane Institution,
and may be altered, and varyed at the discretion of our Governors: Yet the
Public Worship it self under Public Lawful Governors is of Divine
Appointment, and no Man can Renounce it without Sinning against Jesus Christ,
as well as Offending against the Ecclesiastical Laws.

A Humane Law grounded upon a Divine, or to speak more properly, a Divine Law
modified or Clothed with several Circumstances of Man's Appointment, does Create
another kind of Obligation upon every Subject, than a Law that is purely
Humane; that is to say a Law, the matter of which is neither Good nor Evil in
it self, but perfectly indifferent. In the former Case, we must yield Obedience
to the Law, as to the Law of God; however it comes Clothed with Circumstances
of Man's Appointment. In the other Case we only yield Obedience, as to the
Command of Man; and for no other reason, than that God in general has Obliged
us to Obey our Superiors.

To make this a little plainer, let us for Instance take the business of Paying
Tribute, and Custom in this Nation, in which Case there is a Complication of a
Divine Law, with a Humane, as it is in the Case we are now upon. That every
Subject should Pay Tribute to whom Tribute is due; Custom to whom Custom is
due; is a Law of God; as being a branch both of Natural and Christian Justice:
But out of what goods we should Pay Tribute or Custom, or what Proportion of
those Goods should be Paid, this is not defined either by the Law of Nature or
the Law of the Gospel, but is left to the Determination of the Municipal Laws
of every Kingdom. But now, because Humane Authority does interpose in this
Affair, and settles what every Man is to Pay to the King, and out of what
Commodities; does it therefore follow, that if a Man can by Fraud or
Concealment detain the Kings Right from him, that he incurs no other guilt for
this, but only the Transgressing of an Act of Parliament, and the being
Obnoxious to the Penalties, in Case he be detected? No certainly; for all that
the Customs in that manner, and form be settled upon the King by Humane Law
only; yet the matter of that Law being a point of Natural Justice between Man
and Man; the Man that is thus Guilty, ought to look upon himself as an Offender
against the Divine Law; as an unjust Person before God. And his willingness to
Submit to the Forfeiture of his Goods, will not render him less unjust, or more
excuseable.

The Case is much the same as to the matter we have now before us. It is not a
mere Humane Law, or Act of Parliament that Obliges us to keep the Unity of the
Church; to bring our Children to be made Christians by Baptism; to meet
together at Solemn times for the Profession of our Faith, for the Worshipping
God, for the Commemorating the Death of our Savior in the Sacrament of his
Supper. All this is tied upon us by the Laws of Christ. These things are as
much required of us by God, as Christians; as it is required that we should Pay
the King, and every Man, what is due to them, if we would not be dishonest and
unjust. It is true that the particular Forms, and Modes, and Circumstances of
doing these things, are not Commanded, nor Prescribed, by the Laws of Christ,
in this Instance of Church Communion, no more than they are prescribed by the
Laws of God in the other Instance I gave: But they are left entirely to the
Prudence, and Discretion of the Governors that God has set over us in
Ecclesiastical matters; just as they are in the other. But in the mean time
these things thus Clothed by Humane Authority, as to their Circumstances: Yet
being for the Matter of them bound upon us by Christ himself, we can no more
deny our Obedience to the Public Laws about them, than we can in the other
Instance I have named. And that Man may as well for Instance, purge himself
from the Imputation of Knavery before God, that will contrive a way of his own,
for the Paying his just Debts contrary to what the Law of the Land has
declared to be Just and Honest: As any Man can acquit himself from the Sin of
Schism before God, that will choose a way of his own for the Public Worship,
different from, and in Opposition to what the Laws of the Church have
prescribed; always supposing, that the Worship Established be Commanded by just
Authority, and there be nothing required in it as a Condition of Communion that
is against the Laws of Jesus Christ.

The sum of all this is, that it is every Man's Duty by the Laws of Christ, as
well as the Laws of Man, to Worship God in the way of the Church; so long as
there is nothing required in that Worship, that can justly offend the
Conscience of a Wise and Good Christian. And therefore there is more in
departing from the Communion of the Church, when we can Lawfully hold it, than
merely the Violation of a Statute, or a Humane Law, for we cannot do it without
breaking the Law of God. Nay so much is it against the Law of God to do this,
that I think no Authority upon Earth can warrant it. So that even if there was
a Law made, which should Ordain that wilful, causless Separation from the
Established Church should be allowed and tolerated, and no Man should be called
to an Account for it: Yet nevertheless such a Separation would still be a
Schism, would still be a Sin against God; for no Humane Law can make that
Lawful which Gods Law has forbid.

There now only remains our last general Head about Conscience to be spoken to,
and then we have done with our Preliminary Points: And that is concerning the
Authority of Conscience, or how far a Man is Obliged to follow or be guided by
his Conscience in his Actions.

When we speak of the Obligation of Conscience, or of being bound in Conscience
to do or not to do an Action, it sufficiently appears from what has been said,
that we can mean no more by these Phrases than this, that we are convinced in
our Judgment that it is our Duty to do this or the other Action, because we
believe that God has Commanded it. Or we are persuaded in our Judgment that we
ought to forbear this or the other Action, because we believe that God has
forbidden it.

This now being that which we mean by the Obligation of Conscience, here we
come to inquire how far this Persuasion or Judgment of ours, concerning what is
our Duty, and what is Sinful, has Authority over us, how far it does Oblige us
to Act or not Act, according to it.

Now in Order to the resolving of this we must take Notice, that our Judgment
concerning what God has Commanded, or Forbidden, or left Indifferent, is
either true or false. We either make a right Judgment of our Duty, or we make a
wrong one. In the former Case we call our Judgment a Right Conscience; in the
latter we call it an Erroneous Conscience. As for those Cases where we doubt
and hesitate, and know not well how to make any Judgment at all (which is that
we call a Doubting Conscience, but indeed is properly no Conscience, unless by
Accident,) we have nothing here to do with them, but shall reserve them to
another place. Here we suppose, that we do make a Judgment of the thing; that
is, we are persuaded in our Minds, concerning the goodness, or badness of this,
or the other Action: And that which we are to inquire into, is, how far that
Judgment binds us to Act according to it.

Now if our Conscience be a Right Conscience; that is, if we have truly
informed our Judgment according to the Rule of Gods Law: It is beyond all
Question, and acknowledged by all the World, that we are in that Case
perpetually bound to Act according to our Judgment. It is for ever our Duty so
to do; and there can no blame, no guilt fall upon us, for so doing, let the
Consequence of our Acting, or not Acting, be what it will. So that as to a
Right Conscience, or a well informed Judgment, there is no dispute among any
sort of Men.

But the great thing to be inquired into, is, what Obligation a Man is under to
Act according to his Judgment, supposing it be false, supposing he has not
rightly informed his Conscience, but has taken up false measures of what God
has Commanded, or Forbidden.

Now for the Resolution of this, I lay down these Three Propositions, which I
think will take in all that is needful, for the giving Satisfaction to every
one, concerning this point.

First, Where a Man is mistaken in his Judgment, even in that Case it is always
a Sin to Act against it. Be our Conscience never so ill instructed, as to what
is Good, or Evil, though we should take that for a Duty, which is really a Sin;
and on the contrary, that for a Sin which is really a Duty: Yet so long as we
are thus persuaded, it will be highly Criminal in us, to Act in contradiction
to this persuasion; and the reason of this is evident, because, by so doing, we
wilfully Act against the best light, which at present we have, for the
direction of our Actions; and consequently our Will is as faulty, and as
wicked, in consenting to such Actions, as if we had had truer Notions of things.

We are to remember, that the Rule of our Duty, whatever it be in it self,
cannot touch or affect our Actions, but by the Mediation of our Conscience;
that is, no farther than as it is apprehended by us, or as we do understand and
remember it. So that when all is done, the immediate Guide of our Actions, can
be nothing but our Conscience; our Judgment and Persuasion, concerning the
Goodness, or Badness, or Indifferency, of things.

It is true in all those Instances where we are mistaken, our Conscience proves
but a very bad and unsafe Guide; because it has it self lost its way, in not
following its Rule as it should have done: But however our Guide still it is,
and we have no other guide of our Actions but that. And if we may lawfully
refuse to be guided by it in one In^^ance, we may with as much reason reject
its Guidance in all.

What is the Notion that any of us has of a Wilful Sin, or a Sin against
Knowledge, but this? That we have done otherwise than we were convinced to be
our Duty, at the same time that we did so. And what other measures have we of
any Man's Sincerity or Hypocrisy? But only this; that he Acts according to the
best of his Judgment, or that he does not Act according to what he pretends to
Believe.

We do not indeed say, that every one is a good Man, that Acts according to his
Judgment; or that he is to be commended for all Actions that are done in
pursuance of his Persuasion: No, we measure Virtue and Vice by the Rule,
according to which, a Man ought to Act; as well as by the Man's intention in
Acting. But however we all agree that that Man is a Knave, that in any instance
Acts contrary to that which he took to be his duty. And in passing this
Sentence we have no regard to this; whether the Man was Right or mistaken in
his Judgment, for be his Judgment Right or Wrong, True or False; it is all one
as to his Honesty, in Acting or not Acting according to it.

He that has a false persuasion of things; so long as that persuasion
continues, is often as well satisfied that he is in the Right, as if his
Persuasion was true. That is, he is oftentimes as Confident when he is in an
Error, as when he is in the Right. And therefore we cannot but conclude, that
he, who being under a mistake, will be tempted to Act contrary to his Judgment;
would certainly upon the same Temptation Act contrary to it, was his Judgment
never so well informed And therefore his Will being as bad in the one Case, as
in the other, he is equally a Sinner as to the Wilfulness of the Crime, tho
indeed in other respects there will be a great difference in the Cases.

This I believe is the Sense of all Men in this matter. If a Man for instance,
should of a Jew become a Christian; while yet in his Heart he believes that
the Messiah is not yet come, and that our Lord Jesus was an Impostor. Or if a
Papist should to serve some private ends, Renounce the Communion of the Roman
Church, and join with ours; while yet he is persuaded that the Roman Church is
the only Catholic Church; and that our Reformed Churches are Heretical or
Schismatical: Though now there is none of us will deny that the Men in both
these Cases have made a good change; as having changed a false Religion for a
true one: yet for all that, I dare say, we should all agree, they were both of
them great Villains and Hypocrites, for making that change; because they made
it not upon Honest Principles, and in pursuance of their Judgment, but in
direct Contradiction to both. Nay I dare say we should all of us think better
of an ignorant well meaning Protestant; that being seduced by the persuasions
and Artifices of a cunning Popish Factor, did really out of Conscience, abandon
our Communion, and go over to the Romanists; as thinking theirs to be the
safest: I say we should all of us entertain a more favorable Opinion of such a
Man in such a Case; Though really here the change is made from a true Keligion
to a false one; than we should of either of the other Men I have before named.
All this put together is abundantly sufficient to show that no Man can in any
Case Act against his Judgment or Persuasion, but he is Guilty of Sin in so
doing,

But then, our Second Proposition is this, The mistake of a Man's Judgment may
be of such a Nature, that as it will be a Sin to Act against his Judgment, so
it will likewise be a Sin to Act according to it.

For what Authority soever a Man's Conscience has over him, it can never bear
him out, if he do an Evil thing in compliance with it. My Judgment is (as we
have said) the guide of my Actions; but it may through my negligence be so far
misguided it self; as that if I follow it, it will lead me into the most horrid
Crimes in the World. And will it be a sufficient Excuse or Justification of my
Action in such a Case to say; that indeed herein I did but Act according to my
Persuasion? No verily; I may as certainly be damned without Repentance, for
Acting according to my Judgment, in some Cases, where it is mistaken, as I
shall be, for Acting contrary to it in other Cases where it is rightly informed.

And the Reason of this is very plain. It is not my Judgment or Persuasion that
makes Good or Evil, Right or Wrong, Justice or Injustice, Virtue or Vice. But
it is the Nature of things themselves; and the Law of God, (and of Men under
that) Commanding or Forbidding things, that makes them so. If the Moral
Goodness, or badness of Actions was to be measured by Men's Opinions, and
Persuasions; then Good and Evil, Duty and Sin, would be the most various,
uncertain things in the World. They would change their Natures as often as Men
change their Opinions; and that which to Day is a Virtue, to Morrow would be a
Crime; and that which in one Man, would be a Heroically good Action, would in
another Man be a Prodigious Piece of Villainy; though yet there was no
difference in the Action it self, or in the Circumstances of the Man that did
it, save only the difference of Opinion.

But such consequences as these are intolerable, nor indeed do Men either talk
or think after this manner. Every Man when he speaks of Good or Evil, Lawful or
Unlawful, means some certain fixed thing which it is not in his Power to alter
the Nature and Property of. That Action is good, and a Duty, which is either so
in it self, or made so by some positive Law of God. And that Action is Evil,
and a Sin, that is Forbid by God in either of these Ways. So that unless it was
in our Power to change the Nature of things; or to alter the Laws of God: It
will unavoidably follow; that we shall be for ever Obliged to do some Actions,
and to forbear others, whatever our Judgment concerning them, is: And
consequently we may be Guilty of Sin, if in these instances we Act contrary to
this Obligation; though at the same time it should happen that we are firmly
persuaded that we ought so to do.

And thus is our Proposition fully proved; but then for the further clearing of
it, I desire it may be taken notice of: that we do not thus lay it down, that
every mistake of Judgment about Good or Evil, does involve a Man in Sin, if he
Act according to that mistake: But only thus, the mistake of a Man's Judgment
may be of such a Nature, that as it will be a a Sin in him to Act against it,
so it will likewise be Sin to Act according to it. It is not every Error in
Morals that brings a Man under the necessity of Sinning, if he pursues it in
his Actions. A Man's Conscience may mistake its Rule in a Hundred instances, and
yet he may safely enough Act according to it. And the Reason is because a Man
may entertain a great many mistakes, mistakes, and false Notions of his Duty,
and Act according to them too; and yet in such Actions he shall not Transgress
any Law of God.

Now this that I say, holds chiefly in these two instances. For example in the
first place, if a Man believe a thing to be Commanded by God which yet indeed
is not; but neither is it Forbidden: As if a Man should think himself Obliged
to retire himself from his business, Seven times or Three times a Day, for the
purpose of Devotion; or to give half of his Yearly Income to Pious, and
Charitable uses, if he can do it without Prejudice to his family. Now in this
Case he is certainly mistaken in his Duty; for the Law of God has not bound
him up to such measures in either of these instances: But yet because God has
not on the other hand laid any Commands upon him to the contrary; it is certain
he may in both these instances Act according to this mistake, without any Guilt
in the World; Nay, so long as that mistake continues, he is bound to Act
accordingly.

Again in the second place, if a Man believe a thing to be Forbidden by Gods
Law, which yet is not; but neither is it Commanded: As for instance, if a Man
think that he ought by Virtue of a Divine Command to abstain from all Meats
that are strangled or have Blood in them; or if he believe it unlawful to Play
at Cards or Dice; or that it is Forbidden by Gods word to let out Money at
Interest: Why in all these Cases he may follow his Opinion, though it be a
false one, without Sin; Nay, he is bound to follow it, because it is the
dictate of his Conscience, however his Conscience be mistaken. And the reason
is plain, because though he be mistaken in his Judgment about these matters,
yet since God has not by any Law, Forbid these things; there is no
Transgression follows upon Acting according to such a mistake.

But then in other Cases where a Man's mistake happens to be of such a Nature,
as that he cannot Act according to his Conscience, but he Transgresses some
Law of God; by which Conscience ought to be Governed: As for instance, when a
Man looks upon that as a Lawful Action, or as a Duty, which God has Forbidden;
or looks upon that as a Sin, or at least an indifferent Action, which God has
Commanded; here it is that the mistake becomes dangerous. And in such Cases the
Man is brought into that sad Dilemma we have been representing, viz. That if he
Act according to his persuasion he Transgresses Gods Law, and so is a Sinner
upon that Account: If he Acts against his persuasion, then he is self
condemned, and very guilty before God upon that Account.

Well, but is there no avoiding of this? Must it be laid down as a constant
Universal Truth; that in all Cases where a Man's Judgment happens to be contrary
to the Rule of his Duty, Commanding, or Forbidding an Action; he must of
necessity Sin; whether he Act, or not Act, according to that Judgment? If
indeed he Act against his Conscience, it is readily granted he Sins; But it
seems very hard, that he should be under a necessity of Sinning when he Acts
according to it; especially when he is perfectly ignorant of, or mistaken in
the Law against which he Offends.

This is indeed the great difficulty that occurs in this matter; and for the
untying it, I lay down this third general Proposition, viz. That the great
thing to be attended to in this Case of a Man's following a mistaken Judgment,
is the Culpableness or Inculpableness; the Faultiness or Innocence of the
mistake, upon which he Acts; for according as this is; so will his Guilt in
Acting according to it be either greater, or less, or none at all.

We do not say that a Man is always Guilty of a Sin before God, when upon a
misinformation of judgment he Omits that which Gods Law has Commanded; or does
that which Gods Law has Forbidden. No though these Omissions or Actions may be
said to be Sins in themselves; that is, as to the Matter of them; as being
Transgressions of Gods Law: Yet before we affirm that they will be imputed to a
Man as such; that is prove formally Sins to him; we first consider the Nature
of the Action, and the Circumstances of the Man. If we find upon Examination
that the instance wherein Gods Law is Transgressed, is such an instance as even
an Honest minded Man may well be supposed to mistake in: And if we find
likewise that the Man had not sufficient means for the informing himself aright
as to this matter; and that he has done all that he could do in his
Circumstances to understand his Duty: If in such a Case as this he be mistaken
in his Duty; and Act upon that mistake; yet we do not say that the Man is
properly Guilty of any Sin in that Action, however that Action is indeed
contrary to the Law of God. On the contrary we believe him to be Innocent as to
this matter; nor will God ever call him to an Account for what he has done or
omitted in these Circumstances.

And the Reasons and Grounds upon which we affirm this are plain, and Evident
at the first hearing. No Man can be Obliged to do more then what is in his
Power to do. And what ever a Man is not Obliged to do, it is no Sin in him if
he do it not. So that if a Man do all that one in his Circumstances can, or
should do; for the right understanding of his Duty: If he happens to be
mistaken, that mistake cannot be imputed to him as a Sin; because he was not
Obliged to understand better. And if his mistake be no Sin, it is certain to
Act according to that mistake can be no Sin neither.

So that the whole point of Sinning, or not Sinning, in following an Erroneous
Conscience, lies here. Whether the Man that is thus mispersuaded, is to be
blamed, or not blamed, for his Mispersuasion. If the Error he has taken up do
not proceed from his own Fault and Negligence; but was the pure unavoidable
Effects of the Circumstances, in which he is placed; (which Circumstances we
suppose he contributed nothing to, but he was put into them by the disposition
of Divine Providence:) Then of what Nature soever the Error be; he does not
contract any guilt by any Action which he does in pursuance of that Error. But
if it was in his power to Rectify that Error; if he had Means and
Opportunities to inform his Conscience better; and the nature of the Action was
such, that it was his Duty so to do: So that he must be accounted guilty of a
Gross and Criminal Neglect in not doing it: In this Case the Man is a
Transgressor, and accountable unto God, as such, for all the Actions that he
does, or omits, contrary to Gods Law; while he Acts under that mistake, or in
pursuance of it. And accordingly as this Neglect or Carelessness is greater or
less; so is the Sinfulness of the Action which he does in pursuance of it,
greater or less likewise.

And this is a plain account of this matter. So that we see there is no Fatal
unavoidable necessity laid upon any Man to commit a Sin by Acting according to
his Conscience. But if at any time he be brought under those sad Circumstances,
he brings that necessity upon himself. God never put any Man into such a
Condition, but that he might do that Duty which was required of him; and be
able to give a good account of his Actions. But here is the thing; Men by their
Vice and Wickedness; by neglecting the Means of Instruction, that are afforded
them; and not using their Reason and Understanding as they should do; may
suffer themselves to be brought under the Bondage of such False and Evil
Principles; that they shall so long as they hold those Principles, fall into
Sin, whether they Act according to their Conscience, or Act against it.

I have done with the general Points concerning Conscience, which I thought
needful to be premised, as the Grounds and Principles of our following
Discourse. I now come to that which I at first proposed; and for the sake of
which all this is intended; that is, to speak to the Case of those that
Separate from the Communion of the Church of England, upon this pretense; That
it is against their Conscience to join with us in it.

Now all that I conceive needful to be done, in order to a full discussion of
this Case, and giving satisfaction about it, are these Two things,

First, To Separate the pretenses of Conscience that are truly and justly made,
in this matter, from the false ones: Or to show who those are that can rightly
plead Conscience for their Nonconformity; and who those are that cannot.
Secondly, To inquire how far this Plea of Conscience, when it is truly made,
will Justify any Dissenter that continnes in Separation from the Church, as
Established among us; and what is to be done by such a Person, in order to his
Acting with a safe and good Conscience in this affair.
Our first inquiry is what is required in order to any Man's truly pleading
Conscience for his refusing to join in Communion with the Established Church.
Or who those Persons are that can with justice make that Plea for themselves.

I think it very convenient to begin my Disquisition here, because by removing
all the false Pretenses to Conscience; the Controversy will be brought into a
much less compass; and the difficulties that arise will be more easily untyed.
The truth is, if the thing be examined, I believe it will be found, that the
pretense to Conscience in the matter we are talking of, is, as in many other
Cases, extended much farther than it ought to be. My meaning is, that of all
those who think fit to withdraw from our Communion, and to live in Disobedience
to the known Laws of the Church, and pretend Conscience for so doing; in a
great many of them it is not Conscience, but some other thing mistaken for
Conscience, which is the Principle they Act upon. So that if the true Plea of
Conscience be separated from those counterfeit ones, which usually usurp that
Name; we shall not find either the Persons to be so many that refuse Communion
with us, upon the Account of Conscience truly so called; nor the Cases to be so
many in which they do refuse it upon that Account.

Now in Order to the making such a Separation or Distinction between Conscience
truly so called, and the several Pretenses to it, in this business of not
conforming to the Established Worship, I lay down this general Proposition;
That, if the Principles I have laid down about Conscience be admitted; then it
is certainly true, that no Man among us can justly plead Conscience for his
Separation from the Church of England; or can say that it is against his
Conscience to join in Communion with it; but only such a one, as is persuaded
in his own mind, that he cannot Communicate with us without Sinning against God
in so doing.

For since, as we have said, Conscience is nothing else but a Man's Judgment
concerning Actions, whether they be Duties, or Sins, or Indifferent: And since
the Law of God Commanding or Forbidding Actions; or neither Commanding them,
nor Forbidding them; is the only Rule by which a Man can Judge what Actions are
Duties, and what are Sins, and what are Indifferent: It plainly follows; that
as a Man cannot be bound in Conscience to do any Action which it does not
appear to him that Gods Law has some way or other Commanded, and made a Duty:
So neither can it go against a Man's Conscience, to do any Action which he is
not convinced that Gods Law has some way or other Forbidden, and so made a
Sin. And therefore in our present Case. That Man only can justly plead
Conscience for his Nonconformity that can truly say he is persuaded in his
Judgment that Conformity is Forbidden by some Law of God: Or which is the same
thing; No Man can say, it is against his Conscience to join in our Communion,
but only such a one as really believes he shall Sin against some Law of God, if
he do join with us,

If against this it be excepted; that it is very possible for a Man to be well
satisfied that there is nothing directly Sinful in our Worship; but yet for all
that it may be against his Conscience to join with us in it: As for instance,
in the Case where a Man takes it really to be his Duty to hold constant
Communion with some other Congregation, where he believes he can be more
Edified, or to which he is related by some Church Covenant: To this I answer,
that in this Case, I grant, Conscience is rightly pleaded for Separation
(though how justifiably I do not now Examine:) But then I say this Plea
proceeds upon the same grounds I just now laid down. For if the Man (as is
supposed in the Case) be convinced that it is his Duty by Gods Law, (as there
is no other measure of Duty) to hold Communion with others, and not with us;
then he must at the same time be convinced that he cannot without Transgression
of Gods Law, (that is, without Sin,) join with us; And that is the same Account
which we give, of its being against any Man's Conscience to hold Communion with
us.

Further, If it be urged against our Proposition, that not only in the Case
where a Man is persuaded of the Unlawfulness of our Communion, but also in the
Case where he only doubts of the Lawfulness of it, a Man may justly plead
Conscience for his Nonconformity, so long as those doubts remain: And therefore
it is not truly said of us, that in Order to the Pleading Conscience for
Nonconformity, one must be persuaded in his own mind, that Conformity is
Forbidden by some Law of God. I Answer, that if the Man who thus doubts of the
Lawfulness of Conformity, has really entertained this Principle, that it is a
Sin to do any thing with a doubting Conscience; I grant that it must go against
his Conscience to conform so long as he doubts. But then, this is but the same
thing we are contending for; for therefore it goes against his Conscience to
Communicate with us, doubting as he does; because he believes he shall Sin
against God if he should. But if the Man we are speaking of, do not think it a
breach of Gods Law, to Act with a doubting Conscience; then I do not see how it
can in the least go against his Conscience to Communicate with us upon that
pretense. So that notwithstanding these two Exceptions; which are all I can
think of; it will still remain true, that no Man can justly Plead Conscience
for his Separation from the Church, but he that is persuaded that he cannot
join with it without Sinning against God.

Now if this Proposition be true, as certainly it is; then how many Men's
pretenses to Conscience for their Separating from us, are hereby cut off: And
indeed how few (in Comparison of the multitude of Dissenters among us) will be
left, that can be able with Truth to say that it is against their Conscience to
Communicate with us in our Prayers, and in our Sacraments.

In the first Place, it is Evident that all those who Separate from us upon
Account of any private grudge or pique; because they have been disobliged, or
have received some disappointment in the way of our Church, or by the Men that
are favorers of it; and therefore out of a Pet will join themselves to another
Communion. All those that think they can serve their own turns more
effectually, by being of another way; as for instance, they can thereby better
please a Relation from whom they have expectances; they can better advance
their Trade, or increase their Fortunes; they can better procure a Reputation,
or regain one that is Sunk. In a word, all those that to serve any ends of
Pride, or Interest, or Passion, or out of any other wordly Consideration, do
refuse us their Company in the Worship of God, I say, all such are certainly
excluded from Pleading Conscience for their Separation.

In the second Place, all those Lay People who refuse our Communion upon
Account that the Pastors, and Teachers, whom they most Love, and Reverence, are
not permitted to Exercise their Function among us; whose Pretense it is, that
if these good Men were allowed to Teach in our Churches, they would come to our
Congregations; but so long as that is refused, they will hear them where they
can: I say, all these are likewise excluded from Pleading Conscience for their
Separation. For, however it may really and truly be against the Conscience of
their Ministers to conform, (there being other things required of them, than of
ordinary People,) yet it is not against their Conscience so to do; for they
know no ill in Conformity, but only that so many good Men are silenced.

In the third Place, all those that refuse our Communion upon a mere dislike of
several things in our Church Offices: They do not for instance, like a Form of
Prayer in general, and they have several things to Object against our Form in
particular; they do not like our Ceremonies, they do not like the Surplice, or
the Cross in Baptism; and sundry other things they find fault with: Not that
they have any thing to say against the Lawfulness of these things; but only
they have an Aversion to them: All these Men likewise are cut off from Pleading
Conscience for their Separation. For they do not pretend that it is unlawful,
or a Sin against God to join with us in our Service (which is the only thing
wherein their Conscience can be concerned;) but only they are not pleased with
many things in our Service; as fancying them not to be so decent, or
convenient, or not to be so prudently Ordered as they would have them. But what
of all this? Admit the things to be so as they fancy them; yet still so long as
they do not think there is any Sin in them, it cannot go against their
Conscience to join with any Assembly in which they are Practiced. Because
Conscience as we have often said is not touched, is not affected where no Law
of God is Transgressed.

In the fourth Place, all those that are kept from our Communion, purely upon
the Account of Education, or acquaintance with Persons that are of another
persuasion. Those that have nothing to say against our Worship; but only that
they were bred in another way; or those that would join with us in it, but that
they know a great many Religious Godly Persons that do Condemn it, and
therefore they dare not come at us. These now may be very well meaning Men, but
yet they cannot reasonably Plead Conscience upon this Account for their
Separation. For it is not a Man's Education, or the Example, or Opinion of other
Men, that makes any Action to be a Duty, or a Sin, but the Law of God
Commanding or Forbidding that Action. And therefore before I can say that this,
or the other Action, is against my Conscience, I must believe that Gods Law
has either in general, or in particular; either directly, or by Consequence,
made that Action unlawful. I grant the Opinions of other Men, especially those
that are Learned, and Pious are always to be listened to in doubtful Cases. But
then, no Man's Opinion can be the Rule of my Conscience; nor am I at all
concerned in Conscience to follow it, any farther than I am convinced that it
declares Gods Law to me. And therefore sure in this Case of Church Communion, I
can be but very little concerned to follow any Man's Opinion; when, both there
are so many Persons, and those as Learned and as Pious as any others, that are
of another Opinion; and when also the Public Law, which has much more
Authority than any private Opinion, has determined what I am to do in the
Case. So that it is great weakness, and sillyness; and not Conscience, that
prevails with these Men I am speaking of, to live in disobedience to the Laws.
If indeed they be really persuaded in their own Minds, that our way of
Worshipping God, is in any part or instance of it Unlawful or Forbidden, (let
that Persuasion be upon what grounds it will,) then they may truly say it is
against their Conscience to join with us. But if they be not convinced of this;
I do not see how the Example, or the advice of their Friends and Acquaintance,
can in the least give them a Title to Plead Conscience for their refusing our
Communion.

Fifthly, those that withdraw from the Church upon this Account, that our
Governors in their Laws and Prescriptions about Gods Worship, have not rightly
used the Power which they are entrusted with, but have exceeded their bounds;
have made perhaps too great Encroachments upon Christian Liberty; or laid more
stress than was meet upon Indifferent things: These likewise are excluded by
the former Rule from Pleading Conscience for their Separation. For admit the
Lawgivers have been to blame in the Exercise of their Power in these matters,
(which yet is sooner said then proved,) and have really done more then they can
answer to God for; yet what is this to them? The Conscience of the Governors
is indeed deeply concerned about these things; and they must give an Account to
God for the abuse of their Authority if there be any. But how this does concern
the Conscience of the Subject, is not easily understood: So long as what is
Commanded or Enjoined, does not appear to interfere with any Law of God. But
having said this; I fear there is too much reason to add; that those who so
much stand up for Christian Liberty, and would be thought the great Patrons of
it; do by their endless scruples about Indifferent things, and refusing to Obey
Authority in such matters, in all appearance, take the most Effectual Course
to destroy all Christian Liberty, in the true Notion of it; and to bring in a
Religion that shall consist of Touch not, Taste not, Handle not; and such other
Uncommanded things.

Sixthly, and lastly, (to name no more instances) All those that can
Communicate Occasionally with us, in our Prayers and Sacraments: As for
instance, those that when they have a turn to be served, when there is an
Office or some such thing in the Case; can come to Church, and receive the
Communion, but at other times they do not afford us their Presence: These are
also excluded from pretending to Conscience, for their not constantly joining
in Communion with us. For if indeed they did believe, it was a Sin in them to
join with us in our Prayers and Sacraments; with what Conscience dare they do
it at all? They ought not for any worldly good, to venture upon such an Action
as they do believe to be forbidden by Gods Laws; But if they do not believe
that to join in our Communion is a Sinful thing, (as I dare say none of these
Persons do) then I will be bold to make the Inference; that it cannot be more
against their Conscience to do it Thrice, than to do it Once; and do it
constantly than to do it Thrice.

But let us leave the false Pretenders to Conscience, and come to the Case of
those who can justly Plead Conscience for their Separation; or that can truly
say it is against their Conscience to join in our Communion.

Of this sort are all such, and none but such, as do really believe that our
Communion is unlawful, or that they cannot Communicate with us without Sin, as
I have before proved.

As for those that only doubt of the Lawfulness of our Communion, but are not
persuaded that it is unlawful; I do not here consider them; because they cannot
say that it is against their Conscience to Communicate with us; any more than
they can say, that they are bound in Conscience to Communicate with us: For
they are uncertain as to both these things, and are not determined either way.
But however because these men may justly Plead Conscience upon this Account;
that they think it is a Sin to join with us so long as they doubt of the
Lawfulness of our Communion: I shall consider their Case afterward in a
particular Discourse upon that Argument.

Those that I am now concerned with, are such, as do believe, or are persuaded,
that there is some thing in our Worship which they cannot comply with without
Sinning against God.

And my business is to Examine whether such a Belief or Persuasion of the
Unlawfulness of our Communion will justify any Man's Separation from us? Or how
far it will do it? And what is to be done by such Persons, in order, either to
their Communicating, or not Communicating with us, with a safe Conscience? This
is our second Point, and I apply my self to it.

There are a great many among us, that would with all their Hearts (as they
say) Obey the Laws of the Church, and join in our Worship and Sacraments; but
they are really persuaded that they cannot do it without Sin: For there are
some things required of them as Conditions of Communicating with us, which are
Forbidden by the Laws of God.

As for Instance, it is against the Commands of Christ to appoint, or to use
any thing in the Worship of God, which God himself has not appointed. For this
is to add to the word of God, and to Teach for Doctrines the Commandments and
Traditions of Men.

It is against the Commands of Jesus Christ to Stint the Spirit in Prayer;
which all those that use a Form of Prayer, must necessarily do.

It is against the Commands of Jesus Christ to use any Significant Ceremony in
Religion: As for Instance, the Cross in Baptism, for that is to make new
Sacraments.

It is against the Commands of Jesus Christ to kneel at the Lords Supper, for
that is directly to contradict our Saviors Example in his Institution of that
Sacrament, and Savours besides of Popish Idolatry.

Since therefore there are these Sinful things in our Worship; and those too
imposed as Terms of Communion; how can we blame them, if they withdraw
themselves from us? Would we have them join with us in these Practices which
they verily believe to be Sins? Where then was their Conscience? They might
perhaps by this means show how much they were the Servants of Men: But what
would become of their Fidelity to Jesus Christ.

What now shall we say to this? They themselves are so well satisfied with
their own doings in these matters, that they do not think they are in the least
to be blamed for refusing us their Communion, so long as things stand thus with
them. They are sure they herein follow their own Conscience; and therefore they
cannot doubt but they are in a safe Condition; and may justify their
Proceedings to God, and to all the World; let us say what we please.

This is the Case. Now in Answer to it, we must grant them these two things.

First of all, that if indeed they be right in their Judgment; and those things
which they except against in our Communion be really Unlawful, and Forbidden by
Jesus Christ; then they are not at all to be blamed for their not Communicating
with us. For in that Case, Separation is not a Sin but a Duty: We being for
ever bound to Obey God rather than Men. And Secondly, supposing they be
mistaken in their Judgment, and think that to be unlawful, and Forbidden by God
which is not really so: Yet so long as this persuasion continues (though it be
a false one) we think they cannot without Sin join in our Communion. For even
an Erroneous Conscience (as we have showed) binds thus far, that a Man cannot
without Sin Act in Contradiction to it. These two things I say we grant them,
and let them make the best advantage of them.
But then this is the point we stand upon, and which if it be true, will render
this whole Plea for Nonconformity upon account of Conscience, as I have now
opened it, wholly insufficient, viz. If it should prove that our Dissenters are
mistaken in their Judgment; and that our Governors do indeed require nothing
of them in the matter of Church Communion, but what they may comply with,
without breach of Gods Law: Then I say it will not acquit them from being
Guilty of Sin before God in withdrawing from our Communion; to say, that they
really believed our Communion to be unlawful; and upon that Account they durst
not join with us.

It is not my Province here to Answer all their Objections against our Forms of
Prayer, our Ceremonies, our Orders and Rules, in Administering Sacraments, and
other things that concern our Communion: This has been done several times; and
of late by several Persons which have treated of all these particular matters;
and who have showed with great clearness and strength, that there is nothing
required in our Church Appointments, which is in the least inconsistent with,
or Forbidden by any Law of Jesus Christ: But on the contrary, the
Establishments of our Church, are for Gravity, Decency, Purity, and
agreeableness with the Primitive Christianity; the most approvable, and the
least Exceptionable of any Church Constitutions at this day in the World.

These things therefore I meddle not with, but this is the point I am concerned
in: Whether, supposing it be every Man's Duty to join in Communion with the
Established Church; and there be nothing required in that Communion, but what
may be Lawfully Practiced? I say, supposing these two things; whether it will
be sufficient to acquit any Man from Sin, that withdraws from that Communion,
upon this Account, that through his mistake, he believes he cannot join with us
without Sin? Or thus, whether will any man's persuasion that there are Sinful
Terms required in our Communion (when yet there are not any) justify his
Separation from us.

This is the general Question truly put; And this I give as the Answer to it:
That in general speaking a Man's Erroneous Persuasion does not dissolve the
Obligation of Gods Law, or justify any Man's Transgression of his Duty. So that
if Gods Law does Command me to hold Communion with the Church where I have no
just cause to break it: And I have no just cause to break it in this particular
Case, but only I think I have: My misperswasion in this matter does not
discharge me from my Obligation to keep the Communion of the Church; or acquit
me from Sin before God if I break it.

The Truth and Reason of this I have fully showed before, in what I have said
about the Authority of Conscience. I shall now only by way of further
Confirmation ask this Question: Was St. Paul guilty of Sin or no, when he
Persecuted the Christians; being verily persuaded in his own mind that he ought
so to do, and that he Sinned if he did not? If any will say that St. Paul did
not Sin in this, because he did but Act according to his Conscience; they
contradict his own express words. For he acknowledges himself to be the
greatest of Sinners, and that for this very reason because he persecuted the
Church of Christ. If they say that he did Sin in doing this: Then they must at
the same time acknowledge, that a Man's persuasion that a thing is a Duty, will
not excuse him from guilt in practicing it; if really and indeed it be against
Gods Law: And on the other side, by the same reason, that a Man's persuasion
that a thing is unlawful, will not excuse him from guilt in not Practicing it;
if indeed Gods Law has made it a Duty.

So that it infinitely concerns all our Dissenting Brethren to consider very
well what they do, when they withdraw from our Communion. Schism undoubtedly is
a great and crying Sin. A Sin, against which, there are as many hard things
said in the Discourses of our Lord and his Apostles; and in the Writings of the
Ancient Christians; as against any other Sin whatsoever. And therefore let
those that forsake our Communion; and set up, or join with other Assemblies in
Opposition to ours: I say, let them look to it that they be not involved in the
Guilt of this dreadful Sin. They must be sure that their Separation proceeds
upon good grounds, if they would free themselves from the imputation of it. It
is not always enough to excuse them; that they do believe there are Sinful
Conditions imposed in our Communion, and consequently it is their Duty to
withdraw. For unless the thing be so indeed; their believing so will not cancel
their Obligation to our Church Communion; or make it cease to be Schism to
withdraw themselves from it.

This may perhaps at the first hearing seem very strange Doctrine to many, but
yet it is true for all that; and will appear a little more Evident, if we put
the Case in another instance, wherein we are not so nearly concerned.

Here is one of the Roman Catholic persuasion, (as they call it,) that has
been trained up in Popery; and heartily believes it to be true Religion, and
the Only one, wherein Salvation is to be had; and therefore in Obedience to the
Laws and Customs of that Church, does pay Religious Worship to Images; does
pray to Saints and Angels; does give Divine Adoration to the Consecrated Bread
in the Sacrament; as really believing it to be turned into the Body of Christ,
to which his Soul, and Deity is personally United.

Is now such a Person as this Guilty of Idolatry in these Practices or is he
not? He does verily believe that he is not. He would abhor these Practices, if
he did in the least believe, that God had Forbid them as Idolatrous. Nay he is
so far from believing that they are Forbid, that on the contrary he has been
taught to believe that they are necessary Duties; and he cannot be a good
Catholic, unless he thus Worship Images, and Saints, and the Bread of the
Host. Well, now the point is, Whether such a Man, believing as he does, be upon
that Account acquitted from the Sin of Idolatry? We all grant, that if he had
such clear Information about these things as we Protestants have; he would
certainly be an Idolater if he should contitinue in these Practices: But
whether his belief, and Opinion, and persuasion concerning these things, do not
excuse him; and make that cease to be Idolatry, that would otherwise be so;
This I say is the question. But yet none of us make any great question of it.
For we do charge the Papists indiscriminately, with Idolatry in their Worship;
notwithstanding their disclaiming it; notwithstanding their Profession to
Worship God, no otherwise than according to his own Will; notwithstanding they
do really take themselves Obliged in Conscience to give Divine Worship to the
Consecrated Elements, and those other Objects. And we charge them rightly in
this. For if it be really Idolatry by Gods word, to do these things; then it
will be Idolatry in any Man to do them, let his Opinion about them be what it
Will. A Man's Ignorance, or mistake, or false Opinion does not alter the nature
of things; it can neither make that cease to be a Duty, which God has
Commanded, nor that cease to be a Sin which God has Forbidden. All that it
will do, is, that according to the Nature and Circumstances of it, it may more
or less Extenuate the Transgression that is committed upon the Account thereof.

And the Case is just the same in the matter before us. For any Man to withdraw
his Communion from that Church, with which he ought, and with which he may
Lawfully Communicate; That is as properly the Sin of Schism, as it is the Sin
of Idolatry to give Divine Worship to that which is not God. For any Man,
therefore, to break the Unity of the Church; though it be upon this very
Account, that he does believe it is his Duty so to do; or that he cannot
Communicate with that Church without Sin: Yet if this persuasion of his be
false, and Erroneous; he is no less a Schismatic for all this; than the other
Man is an Idolater that thinks it his Duty to adore Images, and those other
undue Objects of Divine Worship among the Romanists. It is true, the Man's
Ignorance or Misperswasion will according to the greater or less Culpability of
it; more or less excuse the Man's Person before God, as it does in the other
Case. But it cannot in the least make that which God has made to be Schism to
be no Schism; no more than in the other Case, it makes that to be no Idolatry
which Gods word has declared to be Idolatry.

Well now admitting all this; here comes the pinch of the thing. It will be
said, What, would you have a Man do in this Case? He cannot conform with a safe
Conscience; and yet he is a Transgressor if he do not. If he comply against his
Conscience, you grant he is guilty of Sin in so doing: If he does not Comply;
then you say he is a Schismatic; and so is a Sinner upon that Account. Why to
this I say, that both these things are often true; and here is that Dilemma,
which Men by Suffering their minds to be abused with Evil Principles, and
Persuasions, do frequently run themselves into. They are reduced to that
Extremity that they can neither Act, nor forbear Acting: They can neither Obey,
nor Disobey without Sin.

But what is to be done in this Case? I know nothing but this: That all
Imaginable Care is to be taken that the Error and false Principles which misled
the Man be deposed; and that his Judgment be better informed; and then he may
both do his Duty which Gods Law requires of him, and avoid Sinning against his
Conscience.

But how is this to be done? Why no other way, but by using Conscientiously all
those means which common Prudence will Recommend to a Man, for the gaining
Instruction and Information to himself about any point that he desires
thoroughly to understand. That is to say, Freeing his Mind from all Pride, and
Passion, and Interest, and all other carnal Prepossessions; and applying
himself seriously and impartially to the getting right Notions and Sentiments
about his Duty in these matters: Considering without prejudice what can be said
on both sides: Calling in the best assistance of the ablest and wisest Men that
he can come by: And above all things seriously endeavoring to understand the
Nature and Spirit of the Christian Religion; and to practice all that he is
undoubtedly convinced to be his Duty: And for the matters in question, most
earnestly imploring the Assistance of Gods Spirit to guide and direct him.

Well, but supposing a Man has endeavored to inform his Judgment as well as he
can, and has used all those Prudent means that were in his Power, to satisfy
himself of the Lawfulness of our Communion; But yet after all, he is of the
same persuasion that he was, viz. That he cannot join in our Worship without
Sin: what will we say to such a Man as this? Will we still say that this Man
must either Conform, though against his Conscience; or he is a Schismatic
before God? This is the great difficulty, and I have two things to say to it.

In the first place, we do heartily wish that this was the Case of all, or of
the most of our Dissenters, ( viz. that they had done what they can, to
satisfy themselves about our Communion.) For if it was, I do verily persuade
my self that there would presently be an end of all those much to be lamented
Schisms, and Divisions, which do now give so much Scandal to all good Men, and
threaten the Ruin of our Reformed Religion; And this poor Church of England,
which has so long Labored and Groaned, under the furious Attacques that have
been made upon her, by Enemies without, and Enemies within her own Bowels,
would in a little time, be perfectly set free from all apprehension of Danger,
at the least from the one sort of her Adversaries.

If all our Brethren of the Separation would most seriously follow after the
things that make for Peace, and walk by the same Rule as far as they were able,
and in things where they were otherwise minded, would Religiously apply
themselves to God for direction; and to the use of Prudent means for
Satisfaction: I doubt not but the Face of things would presently be changed
among us; and we should hear no more of any Division or Schism in our Nation,
that was either dangerous to the Church, or to the Salvation of the Men that
were concerned in it.

But alas, we fear we have too great reason to say, that the generality of our
Dissenting Brethren, even those of them that Plead Conscience for their
Separation; have not done their Duty in this matter; have not heartily
endeavored to satisfy their Minds about the Lawfulness of Conformity in those
Points which they stick at.

If they had; one would think that after all their endeavors they should,
before they pronounced Conformity to be unlawful, be able to produce some one
plain Text of Scripture for the proving it so, either in the whole or in any
part of it; but this they are not able to do. They do indeed produce some Texts
of Scripture which they think do make for them: But really they are such, that
if they had not supinely taken up their meaning upon trust; but would have been
at the pains of carefully examining them; and using such helps as they have
every where at hand for the understanding them: It would have been somewhat
difficult for them, to have expounded those Texts in such a sense as would
infer the unlawfulness of our Communion.

But further I say, it is not probable that the generality of our Dissenters,
who condemn our Communion as unlawful, have ever anxiously applied themselves
to the considering the Point, or gaining Satisfaction about it; because they do
not seem to have much consulted their own Teachers in this affair, and much
less those of our way. If they had, they would have been disposed to think
better of our Communion; than they do: For not to mention what the Churchmen do
teach and press in this matter; the most Eminent of their own Ministers, are
ready thus far to give their Testimony to our Communion. That there is nothing
required in it, but what a Lay-Person may Honestly and Lawfully comply with;
though there may be some things inconvenient, and which they wish were amended.
Nay they themselves are ready upon occasion to afford us their Company, in all
the instances of Lay-Communion.

But I desire not to enlarge upon this Argument, because it is an Invidious
one. All that I say is, that we wish it was not too apparent by many Evidences,
that most of those who separate from us, are so far from having done all they
can to bring themselves to a compliance with our Church Constitutions; that
they have done little or nothing at all toward it: But have taken up their
Opinions, hand over head, without much thinking or enquiring; and having once
taken up an Opinion, they adhere to it, without scarce so much as once
thinking, that it is possible for them to be in the wrong.

If you speak of a Man that may with reason be said to have done his endeavor
to satisfy himself about the Points of his Duty in this matter: Give us such a
one; as has no end, no interest to serve by his Religion, but only to Please
God, and to go to Heaven; and who in the choice of the way that leads thither,
has the Indifference of a Traveller; to whom it is all one, whether his way
light on the right Hand, or on the left; being only concerned that it be the
way which leads to his Journeys end.

Give us a Man, that concerns himself as little as you please, in the
Speculative Disputes, and Controversies of Religion: But yet is wonderfully
Solicitous about the Practice of his Duty; and therefore will refuse no pains
or trouble that may give him a right understanding of that.

Give us a Man, that in the midst of the great Heats, and Divisions, and
different Communions of the Church; is yet modest, and humble, and docible:
That believes he may be mistaken, and that his private Friends may be mistaken
too, and has such an Esteem and Reverence for the Wisdom of his Governors in
Church or State; as to admit that it is probable they may see farther into
matters of State and Religion, than he does: And that therefore every Tenent,
and Opinion that was inbibed in his Education; that was infused by private Men
of his acquaintance; or that was espoused upon a very few thoughts, and little
Consideration; ought not to be so stiffly maintained; as to control, or to be
set in Opposition to the Public Establishments of Authority.

Lastly, give us a Man, that where the Public Laws do run counter to his
private Sentiments; and he is at a loss to reconcile his Duty to Men, with his
Duty to God: Yet does not presently upon this, set up a Flag of Defiance to
Authority; but rather applies himself with all the Indifference, and Honesty he
can, to get a true Information of these matters: And to that end he Prays to
God continually for his assistance, he calls in the best helps, and consults
the best guides he can; his Ears are open to what both sides can say for
themselves; and he is as willing to read a Book which is writ against his
Opinion, as one that defends it: In a word if he be prejudiced, or biassed any
way; it is on the side of Authority; being rather desirous to find himself
mistaken, and his Governors in the Right; than himself in the Right, and his
Governors mistaken. I say show us such a Man as this; and we readily grant,
you have produced a Person, that does sincerely use his endeavors to satisfy
himself about the Lawfulness of our Communion. But then we must say this also;
that as the Case stands between the Church of England, and the Dissenters; we
can hardly believe, that such a Man will long continue in Separation from the
Church; but will in a little time gain the Satisfaction of seeing, not only
that he may Lawfully join with us, but also that it is his Duty so to do.

But let us admit, that a Man may have endeavored to Inform his Judgment as
well as he can; and yet be so far from being convinced that it is his Duty to
join with us in our Worship; that he is still of Opinion that it is his Duty to
Separate from us: What will we say of such a Man? Will we still brand him for a
Schismatic, notwithstanding he has done all he can, to bring himself over to
us; but cannot?

To this I answer in the second Place, according to the Principles I have
before laid down, that if such a Case do ever happen; though the Man cannot be
excused from Schism, as to the matter of it (because wherever there is an
Actual Separation from a Church, with which we ought, and with which we may,
Lawfully Communicate; there is an Actual Schism Commenced; let the pretense for
the Separation be what it will:) yet I trust he shall not be charged before
God, with the Formal guilt of the Schism; any farther than the Error that led
him into it, was contracted by his own fault.

Though Schism in it self (as we have said) be a great Sin: yet we do not say
that all those who are engaged in the same Schism, are equally Guilty before
God.

In the first place, those that separate from the Church, to serve any private
secular turn; these are most horribly guilty of Schism, and there is nothing to
be said in their excuse.

In the second Place, those who separate from the Church, through
misperswasions, and mistakes of Judgment, which they groundlessly, and
foolishly took up; and might have avoided; and would yet still certainly
correct in themselves, if they were but so Careful, and Conscientious about
their Duty as they ought to be: These Men, have indeed far more to say for
themselves, than the former; but yet they are very blameable, and are bound as
they Love their Souls, to take more Care of Informing their Conscience aright;
that so they may leave that Sin they are engaged in.

But Thirdly, those that separate from the Church of God, because they know no
better, nor never had means to know better: Or those that have sincerely
endeavored to understand their Duty as much as could be expected from one in
their Circumstances; yet through weakness of understanding, or want of
Opportunity, light into wrong Paths: In a word, those that are unhappily
engaged in a Schism; but God Almighty who searches the Hearts, knows, that
it is not through the Fault of their Wills, but the misfortune of their
Circumstances: I say, if there be any Man among us that is in this Condition;
though he be a Schismatic Materially; yet he is Innocently, at least,
Pittiably so. And if he be as free from blame in the other parts of his Life;
be may be a good Christian for all that. And God Almighty we hope who Judges
of Men by their inward Sincerity, and not by their outward Circumstances; will
impute that Schism (which in others perhaps is a wilful Crime) to this Man, no
otherwise then as a pure Sin of Ignorance, which shall not (upon a general
Repentance for all Sins known and unknown,) be accounted for at the last day.
Especially if this Innocently mistaken Man we speak of, do to the other
Regularities of his Life, add a diligent Care in these four following Points.

First, that he be not Obstinate, and Pertinacious in his way, but that he keep
his mind readily prepared and disposed to receive any Conviction, which God by
any Means or Instruments shall offer to him.

Secondly, That he Separate no farther from the Church, of which he ought to be
a Member, than he needs must; but do cheerfully comply with the Public Laws,
and Establishments in all those Instances, where he is Satisfied he may do it
with a safe Conscience.

Thirdly, that where he cannot give Active Obedience to the Laws; he do in
those Instances Patiently, and Christianly, submit to the Penalties, which
those Laws inflict: Neither exclaiming against his Governors, or the
Magistrates, as Persecutors; for enacting, or Executing those Laws: Nor using
any undue, Illegal means to get himself more ease and Liberty: But in all
things behaving himself as a quiet and peaceable Subject to the Government he
lives under.

And Fourthly, and lastly, that he show himself a good Neighbor as well as a
good Subject; in avoiding all peevish and bitter Censures of those that differ
in Opinion, and persuasion from him; and Exercising Humanity, and Friendliness,
and Charity to all his Fellow Christians.

Whosoever I say, of our Brethren, of the Separation make good these Points:
That is to say, are in the first place, very sincere in their endeavors, to
inform their Conscience aright in the matter of our Communion: And in the next
place, when they cannot Satisfy their Conscience about our way; do yet in
their Dissent from us, Observe the four Particulars I have now named: I should
be loath for my part to Censure them either as ill Men, or ill Subjects, or ill
Christians.

But then all that I have said in this matter, does no more justify the Sin of
Schism, or Extenuate the hainousness of it in its own Nature; Than it would
serve to justify or Extenuate the Sin of Idolatry; if all that I have now
said, was applied to the Case of an Ignorant, well meaning, devout Papist. For
I do verily believe that what I have now represented by way of Apology for an
innocent mistaken Separatist; will hold true, mutatis mutandis, in the Case of
a deluded Romanist, who is invincibly, and without any fault of his, entangled
in the Practice of their Idolatries. But I-believe for all that, the Sin of
Idolatry is in it self a most grievous Sin, and so I believe is the Sin of
Schism and therefore notwithstanding all that may be said;; concerning the
Innocence, or Excuseableness of some Men's mistakes about these matters; yet
nevertheless, it infinitely concerns every Person, to have a care how he be
engaged, either in the one, or the other.

To come to a conclusion, that which I would most seriously press from what
has been said is this. It appears from the foregoing Discourse, how absolutely
necessary it is; that every Man should endeavor to inform his Judgment aright
in the matters that offend his Conscience; before he withdraw his Obedience
from his Lawful Governors, and his Communion from those that Worship God in
Public under them. It appears likewise that it is not enough to justify a
Man's Separation; that this or the other thing in our Worship, is really against
his Conscience; for he may be a great Sinner notwithstanding that, for leaving
our Assemblies, if it should prove at last that he is mistaken in his Notions.

What therefore should every Dissenter among us do, that has any regard to his
Duty, and would preserve a good Conscience? I say, what is there that more
concerns him to do? than presently to set about the true informing of his
Judgment in the points where he is now dissatisfied; for Fear he be found to
live in a grievous Sin all the time he Separates from us.

And therefore, let no Man that Lives out of our Communion, satisfy himself
with such frivolous pretenses as these: That as for all the Substantials of
Religion, the matters of Faith and Good Life, they do agree with us; and that
as for the other matters which concern Ceremonies and Discipline; these are
Nice, Controverted Points; Points disputed pro and contra amongst the Divines:
And therefore why should they trouble their Heads about them; nay perhaps if
they should, they have neither Abilities nor Opportunities to understand them.

It must be confessed that something of this is true; But yet it is nothing to
their purpose. It is very well, that we all agree in the Rule of Faith, and
Manners; and it would be happy if all the Christian World did so too: But still
Schism is a dreadful Sin: And a Man may as certainly, without Repentance, be
damned for that, as for being an Heretic in his Opinion, or a Drunkard, for
instance, in his Manners. Sure I am, the Ancient Christian Fathers thought so.

It is true likewise, that the business of Church Government and Discipline,
and other Points of Ecclesiastical Conformity, is a matter of Dispute, and
Controversy among us: But who is it that made it so? The Church of England
without doubt, would have been very well pleased, if there had been no dust
raised, no dispute or contentions moved in these matters; but that every Member
would have done his Duty peaceably, and quietly in his Station: Or that if any
Controversy had arose; it should have been debated among Learned Men; and never
have proceeded to Separation from the Communion.

We do not pretend to lay any stress upon Skill, and Knowledge about these
matters, in Order to a Man's Salvation. We believe, and teach that a Man may be
a very good Christian, and go to Heaven; that never understood how to justify
the Cross in Baptism, or to defend the Common Prayer Book against all the
Exceptions that are made against it. All that we say is, that if any Man will
scruple, and except against the use of these things; it lies upon him, nay he
is bound as he would keep a good Conscience, to use the best means he possibly
can, to get Satisfaction about them: Or if he do not; at his own Peril be it,
nay even at the Peril of his Salvation, if he breaks the Churches Peace, and
Communion upon that Account.

And as for those that pretend, that these are Subtle Points, and above their
Reach, and Capacity; and they have not understanding, and Wit enough to dive
into them: Why, in Gods Name, who desires them? We say that they might
Innocently enough, and with a good Conscience, comply with their Governors in
these Points, as they do in a hundred others, without ever diving into them;
But since, it seems, they have Wit, and Understanding enough, to cavil and find
fault with these things, and upon that Account, to deny their Obedience to
those Lawful Powers, which God has set over them: One would think they should
at the same time have so much Honesty, as seriously to endeavor to give
themselves Satisfaction as to those things they find fault with: And this is
all we desire of them: And it is for their own sakes too; as well as ours, that
we desire it. For otherwise they will never be able to answer either to God or
Man, for the horrible Inconveniences, and mischiefs, that arise to the Church
of Christ, by the Division, and Separation which they are engaged in.

To conclude, if in any Instance, that Famous Precept of the Apostle, of
proving all things, and holding fast that which is good, do Oblige Christians;
it does especially in this. If ever it be a Man's Duty to satisfy himself,
about the goodness, and Lawfulness of a thing, that he is apt to doubt of; it
is certainly in the Case, where his Superiors have laid their Commands upon
him: For there he cannot disobey without Sin; unless he can assure himself that
he has done all that he can, to reconcile their Commands with his Duty to God;
but upon the best means he has used, he finds them irreconcilable. For a Man
to disobey till he has done this, is an unwarrantable thing, and in the Case
that I now speak of, it is no less than the Sin of Formal Criminal Schism.

FINIS.

