A SERMON Preached before the King and Queen, AT WHITE HALL, The 12th. of
November, 1693. Being the Day appointed for a Public Thanksgiving To Almighty
God, for the Gracious Preservation of His Majesty, And His Safe Return. By
JOHN, Lord Archbishop of YORK.

Published by Their Majesty's special Command.

LONDON, Printed by T. W. for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1693.

THE ARCHBISHOP of YORK's Thanksgiving-Sermon, BEFORE THE King and Queen, At
Whitehall, November. xii. 1693.

A SERMON Preached before the King and Queen.
PSALM. xcvii. 1. The Lord is King, the earth may be glad thereof: yea, the
multitude of the isles may be glad thereof.
THAT is to say, it ought to be Matter of exceeding Joy to all the Inhabitants
of the World, that amidst all the Uncertainties, and Hazards, and Variety of
Fortunes, which they here find themselves exposed to, there is One Above that
governs All.

GOD that made the World is the King of it. All the Beings of the Universe,
Angels, Men, and Devils, with all the other Animate or Inanimate things in
Heaven and Earth, as they are His Creatures, so are they truly and properly His
Subjects, and act entirely in subordination to Him, as Ministers and
Instruments do under the Guidance of the Principal Agent.

GOD does as truly Reign in the World, as any King does in his Kingdom: He does
as truly order the Affairs of it, as any Master does those of his own Family.
Nay, a Man's own Thoughts and Actions are not by a thousand times so much
attended by himself, are not so much his Care, as the Affairs of the Universe
are attended by, and are the Care of God Almighty.

This is the notion of the Lord's being King; and, Do you not think it ought to
be matter of Rejoicing to all Reasonable Creatures?

O Lord, what a gloomy dismal Scene of things do they present us with, that
give other Accounts of these matters?

To banish God's Providence and Government out of the World, is to banish all
Joy, all Peace, all Hope, all Comfort for ever, from all those that have the
power of Thinking.

A Brute indeed is not much concerned how Matters are ordered: An Ox may grow
fat in his Stall, and a Colt frisk in his Pasture, let the Hypothesis of the
Government of the World be what it will. But to one that is made with a Faculty
of Reasoning, that has Hopes and Fears, and can reflect on what is past, and
has a prospect of what is future; what black and melancholy Apprehensions must
it cause in such a one, to suppose that no care is taken of Human Affairs; but
that we sail in the tempestuous Ocean of this World, every minute in danger of
Rocks and Quicksands, without any Pilot to steer us?

Take what Hypothesis you will; either that there is no God, but that all
things come to pass by Chance, or inevitable Necessity; Or, that there is a
God, but that God having once put things into this Frame, never meant to
trouble himself more about them, but left them to shift for themselves, Natural
Events falling out from necessary Causes, and Civil Affairs being left to
Mankind, who are to shuffle and divide the World among themselves as well as
they can! I say, proceed which way you will, if you exclude God Almighty's
Government, you make this World so dark and miserable a place, that no
serious-c^^^idering man can tolerably enjoy himself in it.

For here, upon the former supposition, you are left without Counsel or Advice.
You have nothing to propose, nothing to design in the course of your Lives. It
is all one how you behave your selves, whether honestly or wickedly; whether
you mind your Business, or mind it not, for the Event will be the same. You are
obliged to no body for any Benefits; you can complain of no body for any ill
usage. If you be in ill circumstances, you have none to apply to for Remedy;
and if you be in good ones, you may be stripped of them without Remedy the next
moment: for all things are carried on by a whirl of Fate.

And you are not much bettered by the latter Hypothesis, That God has trusted
the Government of the World with Mankind, who are endowed with Reason and
Understanding.

For, if we consider how Mankind do sometimes use their Reasons, it is as good,
if not better, to be exposed to the Hazards of Chance or Necessity, as to be
subject to their Wills.

The truth of it is, if this Systeme of the World be well considered, it will
appear a more uncomfortable one than the other; for it does not remove from us
the Iron Ban^^ of Fate, we are still under that Yoke as much as we were before.
Yet besides these, it puts upon us another Yoke, the arbitrary Pleasures of
those of our own kind, which if they be not governed by Reason, are ten times
more unsupportable than the other.

We are by this Hypothesis as much exposed to Natural Evils as we were before,
and there is no help for them; but over and above, we must bear the Indignities
and Insolences, the Ravages and Cruelty of every one that is stronger than our
selves, and has the will to oppress us.

O hard Lot of Mankind, if this was their Constitution! better by far were it
for them to be Brutes, and think of nothing, than to be Men upon such Terms as
these.

Happy therefore are the Inhabitants of the Earth, happy are the remotest Isles
thereof, that there is a King that reigns both over Fate and Men. Happy are we,
that there is a wise and intelligent Being, that superintends all our Affairs,
and so governs both the Powers of Nature, and the Powers of Mankind; that
nothing can be done by either of them, but what is designed by, and pursuant
to, his Counsels.

Upon this Supposition we may live like Men, and enjoy our selves with some
Comfort in this World. We may propose Ends and Designs to our selves, and hope
that with our diligence and good management they may take effect.

Upon this Supposition we may and ought to look upon all our good Successes, as
the Blessings of God to us, and particularly that which we are this day met
together to thank Him for; I mean, the wonderful Preservation of His Majesty
from all the Dangers to which he has so often been exposed, and his safe
Return to us.

Upon this Supposition, we may hope, that though all things have not yet
succeeded according to our Wishes, yet in due time they may, since the King of
the World has, by the frequent and unexpected Deliverances he has wrought for
us, and the strange unusual Providence that have attended our King, given us
some Encouragement to believe (provided we do our parts toward it) that He
has reserved Us for better Times, and Him for the executing those Glorious
Designs, which Good Men hope will at last be accomplished in the World.

Lastly, Upon this Supposition, every Honest Man will find reason enough both
to bear contentedly whatever uneasy Circumstances he lies under, and to trust
in God's Mercy for the removal of them; and in the mean time to possess his own
Soul in a cheerfu^ dependence on God's Providence, and a hearty Thankfulness
for all the innumerable Blessings he has received, and does daily receive from
his Hands. And therefore, since the Lord is King let the earth be glad: yea,
let the multitude of the isles be glad thereof.

Now, That the Lord is really thus the King of the World, there are all the
Arguments to persuade us that can be desired:

It is the Voice of Reason: It is the Voice of all Mankind: It is the Voice of
GOD himself, both in His Works, and in His Word.

Give me leave to give you a Specimen in all these ways of Arguing, and but a
Specimen, because it would be rather the Work of a Book than of a Sermon to
dilate upon these matters.

First, I say, Reason tells us it must be thus. For admitting that the World
did not make it self, but was made by God; it will follow, that the same God
that made it must still govern it: For, the same Ends, and Designs, and Motives
(whatever they were) that induced God to make the World at first, will oblige
Him for ever to take care of it and look after it. Unless we suppose God to
contrive and act as uncertainly and unstedily, and with the same inconstancy
and levity of Mind that some of us Mortals here upon Earth do.

Secondly, It is the Voice of all Mankind. For, otherwise how comes it to pass,
that among all Nations, and in all Ages, there has been some Religion or other
practiced.

I pray, what is the meaning of worshipping God, of putting up Prayers and
Supplications to Him for the things we need; of returning Thanks for the
Benefits we have received; of appointing Religious Rites and Methods for the
expiation of Guilt, or the averting of impendent Calamities (all which things
have been practiced in all Nations, from the beginning of the World to this
day)? I say, what is the meaning of all this, unless it was hereby meant to be
signified, That there is a God which does concern himself in the Affairs of
Mankind, and who does dispense Good or Evil to them, as they well or ill behave
themselves toward him?

The Truth is, To say that God does not govern the World, is to say, that all
Religion is a Cheat; and, that all Mankind, except a few debauched Wits in the
more polite Countries, and a few Brutes in the very barbarous ones, (who are of
no Religion at all) have been, and are a company of credulous Fools. For this
is certain, whatever Argument either Jew, or Turk, or Pagan, or Christian, can
suggest to himself for the convincing him, that it is his Concernment, or his
Duty, to worship God, or to be of any Religion at all, nay, or to make any
conscience of any Action he does; I say, all these Arguments do not only prove,
but suppose, that God both knows and orders the Affairs of the World.

Thirdly, It may likewise be as strongly proved from Effects; from the tracks
and footsteps of a Divine overruling Providence, which are to be seen in the
Events that happen in the World, which is that I call the Voice of God in his
Works.

These are indeed so many and so visible, that whosoever has either read
History, or has made Observations, must needs have taken notice of them.

If ever there were any extraordinary Deliverances vouchsafed to Kingdoms, or
Cities, or particular Persons; or ever any remarkable Judgments inflicted upon
any of these, which so carried the Marks and Signatures of God's Hand in them,
that the one could not in reason but be attributed to the Care that he had,
that Religion or Innocence should not be oppressed; and the other must in
reason be interpreted as a Divine Vengeance, that pursued the Guilty for their
Crimes:

If ever there were any Prophecies that did punctually foretell a Particular
Event that came not to pass till many Years after, and such an Event as was
perfectly contingent, and depended upon the Wills of Men:

If ever there were any Notices given of Approaching Calamities, by Voices from
Heaven, by strange Appearances in the Air, and such other like Presages, not
naturally to be accounted for:

If ever there were any Apparitions, any Witchcraft, any effects of a
Diabolical Power, by which it may appear, that there are a sort of Invisible
Beings in the World, which do bear ill will to Mankind, but yet are so curbed,
that they cannot do all the Mischief they would:

If ever there were any Miracles wrought either by Moses and the Prophets, or
by Jesus Christ and his Apostles, for the confirmation of the Jewish or the
Christian Religion:

Lastly, If ever any Good Man did ever receive any Blessing, or avoid any
Misfortune, which he might rationally look upon as an Answer to the Fervent
Prayers that he had put up to God, or others had put up for him:

I say, if any of these things that I have now named be true (as all Histories
give us a World of Instances of the truth of all of them, and as for some of
them, I do not doubt but they fall within the compass of our own Observation
and Experience.) I say, if any of these things be true, then have we a
convincing Proof, that there is a Power that does interpose in the Affairs of
the World, superior both to that of Nature, and to that of Mankind, and which
moderates all things, according as it seems good unto him.

But in truth, we need not go to supernatural Events, or to particular
Providence for the Truth of this: For, in my Opinion, the daily effects that
every one of us sees and feels; the very Subsistence of the World for so many
Ages, in that regular frame that it was at first; and the fair Treatment and
Encouragement (how unequally soever things seem to be distributed) which
virtuous and religious men have always found in it, and do yet find,
notwithstanding that far the greatest number of men are of another stamp: I
say, these very things seem an Argument beyond exception, That there is a God
that presides over us, and takes care of us.

But, Fourthly and lastly, God has yet given us a further Proof of this, by his
own many Authentic Declarations in the Holy Scriptures (which we call his
Word.)

One of the main businesses of which is, to assure us, That He rules in the
kingdoms of men, Dan. 4. 17.
and disposes of all their Affairs.

There He is set forth as the Author of all Events, both good and bad; Amo* 3.
6.
so that no evil happens in a City, but the Lord does it.

There He is represented as the searcher of all hearts, the Judge of all men's
Designs and Actions, the Avenger of all Evil Practices, and the Refuge of all
Good Men.

There we are told, Psalm. 33. 16
that He is the God of battles, and that no King is saved by the multitude of
his armies, nor any mighty man delivered by his own strength: but salvation is
from the Lord. And so are Disappointments also.

There we are assured, Psalm. 33. 14
that He from his habitation looks down upon all that dwell on the earth. He
fashioneth the hearts of them; he understands all their ways. Prove. 19. 21
And though many are the devices that are in their hearts, yet it is his
counsel only that shall stand.

In a word, it is God (as the Apostle tells us) that works all things, Ephesians.
1. 11.
and he works them all according to the counsel of his own will. So that
nothing comes by chance, nothing is done in vain; but all Events are in
pursuance of a Design.

Nay, not so much as the Event of casting a Lot (which seems the most
fortuitous contingent thing in the whole World) is left at random: For even in
that Case the disposal of the Lot (as Solomon tells us, Prove. 16. 33.) is from
the Lord.

All this is not only the Doctrine, but in a great measure the very Language
and Expression of those Holy Books. And, what can we desire more? Or, what
words can we invent that shall declare more fully the thing we are speaking of?

None can that I know of, except perhaps those of our Savior, with which I
shall shut up this point. Fear not, (says he to his Disciples) Are not two
sparrows sold for a farthing? Matt. 10. 29
yet not one of them falls to the ground without the will of your Father. Nay,
I say unto you, the very hairs of your head are all numbered. O wonderful this!
what! God Almighty number the very Hairs of our Heads! Lord, what is man, that
thou should have such respect unto him, and do that for him which even the
nicest and most delicate of Men never yet did for themselves? But thus art thou
pleased to express thy particular regard to the Sons of Men. Thus art thou
pleased to let us see, that none of us are so inconsiderable, but that we are
within the Verge of thy Providence, and Objects of thy Care. And therefore much
more are Cities, and States, and Kingdoms so, wherein the Fortunes of so many
Individuals are wrapped up.

O, blessed be God for his Love to Mankind. O, for ever adored be his Name for
thus humbling himself to take notice of us and our Affairs, and likewise for
giving us such abundant Assurance that He does so. Since therefore we have such
mighty Evidence of all sorts, that the Lord is King, let the earth be glad:
yea, let the multitude of the isles be glad thereof.

And we shall still see greater reason thus to be glad, if we consider a little
more particularly the Rules and Measures by which God administers the Affairs
of his Kingdom: Which are not, as too often happens in Human Governments,
Arbitrary Will or Humor, but perfect Wisdom, and Justice, and Goodness.

Though it be true what the Psalmist says, That Whatsoever the Lord pleases,
Psalm. 135. 6
that does he in Heaven and in Earth, and in the Sea and all deep places: Yet
it is as true, that the Lord will never be pleased to do any thing, either in
Heaven or in Earth, but what is suggested by Infinite Goodness, and in such
ways as are the Result of Infinite Wisdom. For, as the same Psalmist tells us,
He loves righteousness and judgment; Psalm. 33. 5.
the earth is full of the goodness of the Lord. He is holy in all his ways, and
righteous in all his doings: Psalm. 145. 17, 9.
and his tender mercies are over all his works.

To say, That God deals arbitrarily with any of his Creatures; or, that He
dispenses Good or Evil to them merely because He will, without any other
Reason, is in truth to disparage His Nature, and gives us such a notion of Him,
as we have perhaps of some of the Great Monarchs of the World, but whom we are
far from esteeming the Best Men.

No certainly, if we Mankind find in our selves, that the wiser and better we
grow, the less are we led by Humor and Will, and the more do we shake off our
Indifferency to Good and Evil, and the more steadily do we cleave to the
eternal Laws of Reason and Righteousness in all our Actions: We may be sure
that God, who is Wisdom, and Justice, and Goodness it self, can never in any of
his Actions or Dealings with his Creatures, depart from these Principles.

The true Scheme of God Almighty's Government is plainly this.

His Infinite Mind clearly understood all the Possibilities of things long
before they were in actual being. He knew what things were possible to be; and
how they would act if they were put into being; and what the Events of all
their Actings would be.

His Infinite Goodness moved him to put into actual being every thing that he
saw was Good to Be; and to give them all those powers of Action that they have;
and withal, to look after them so, as that both they and all their Motions and
Actions should at last be to the Praise and Glory of the same Goodness that
first inclined him to create them.

His Infinite Wisdom contrived the Methods in which all this should be brought
to pass, and so laid the Scheme and Platform of things, that nothing could
happen in the whole Creation, from the beginning of the World to the end
thereof, (though it was in it self never so bad, never so mischievous) but what
both might and should be so ordered, as to be subservient to that end.

And lastly, The Scheme of Things being thus laid, His Infinite Power first
produced All things, and still upholds All things, and from time to time, in
their several seasons, actually brings to pass every thing, according to the
Determinations of his eternal Wisdom. And though it does it in ways secret to us,
yet it does it certainly and surely, and withal, most easily and gently, with
the least violence to the established Laws of Nature, and without any force at
all upon the Free Wills of Intelligent Beings.

This, I say, is the Account that both Reason and Scripture give us of God's
Making and Governing the World. Infinite Knowledge is the Foundation of All.
Infinite Goodness is the Author and Mover of All. Infinite Wisdom is the
Contriver and Director of All. And Infinite Power executes All.

Admit now these Principles, and see what will follow from them.

It will follow from hence, in the first place, that every Event that happens
in the World, is beautiful in its season; as Solomon expresses it. That is to
say, How unaccountable soever it may appear to us, yet there is a good Reason
to be given, both why it happens at all, and likewise why it happens at that
time, and with those circumstances that it does. It helps to adorn the Great
Drama and Contrivance of God's Providence, and ministers to excellent Ends,
though we poor Creatures do little apprehend how it makes for them. As indeed it
is impossible we should, unless we had the whole Comprehension of Things in our
Minds, and saw the entire Scheme of God's Government, from the beginning to the
end. This must needs be so, if we be Governed by Infinite Wisdom.

Secondly, It follows from hence, that both Good and Evil are measured to
Mankind according to their respective Capacities. If we be fit for Good, Good
will come. If we deserve Punishment, we must expect that likewise. For, All
God's ways are equal, though Ours be unequal.

And therefore it is the most unreasonable thing in the World to impute our
Successes, whether they be Good or Bad, so wholly to the immediate Hands that
managed our Affairs, as not in the first place to take notice of the Hand of
God in them.

There is a Divine Power that governs all these matters. And though it be true,
that no Misfortune, no ill Success ever happens, but there is a Human Reason to
be given for it; it may be found out upon what occasion, or by what neglect, or
through what ill management that Misfortune happened: Yet it is as true, that if
those that managed for us had the Wisdom, and the Conduct, and the Strength of
the very Angels of God, yet their Endeavors would not be effectual, for the
making us happy, unless we our selves were in a capacity of being so, by being
proper Objects of God's Mercy and Favor. This must likewise be true, if
perfect Justice govern the World.

Thirdly, It follows from hence, that even the severer Dispensations of God's
Providence toward us; the things we complain of, and are uneasy under; our
very Calamities, and Misfortunes, and Disappointments; even these are the
effects of God's Kindness, though at the same time they may be likewise Instances
of His Justice. That is to say, they are meant really for our Good, and will
prove so, if we make that use of them we should do.

The very Nature of God is to do all Good, at all Times, to all his Creatures.
For, He had no other End in making them, nor has he any other End in looking
after them. But God cannot do good to All in the same way. Correction, and
Chastisement, and Punishment is in some cases more expedient for the bringing
People to Rights, and promoting their true Interests, than the giving them all
that their own Hearts can wish. In such cases therefore God must deal with his
Creatures as every wise Parent deals with his Children. And though these
chastisements (as the Apostle tell us) are Heb. 12. 11
not joyous, but grievous, yet are they designed for the bringing forth the
peaceable fruits of righteousness in all them that are exercised thereby.

The truth is, we do not know what is good for our selves. We often wish for
things, that perhaps, if our wishes were granted, would undo us. But our
Happiness is, that God knows all, and so tempers all, that all Events, even
those that we are apt to look upon as the greatest Judgments, shall at last
appear most visibly to have been the wisest methods that could possibly have
been contrived for the doing the Greatest Good to us. And if they do not
succeed accordingly, it will be our own fault.

This must likewise needs be true, if perfect Goodness govern All: For even
Justice it self is but a different way of expressing Goodness. And all that
which we call Judgment and Vengeance is unaccountable, unless it serve for the
doing Good to the World.

Fourthly, and Lastly; From hence it follows, that all Events whatsoever, that
ever did, or do, or shall happen in the World, either with respect to Nations,
and Kingdoms, or with respect to particular Persons, are really the Best that
could or can happen. And if things were ordered otherwise, it would not be so
well.

A strange Paradox you will say this is; that not only the Mischiefs and
Calamities that fall upon Mankind, but even their Faults and Mismanagements,
nay, their very Sins and Wickednesses, should be for the best. But really so it
is, and so it must be, if both Infinite Wisdom, and Goodness, and Power govern
the World.

Not but that a particular man's Sins may be the occasion of his Ruin, nay, and
certainly will be so, if he persist in them.

And likewise the Faults of a People may and will have such an ill influence
upon the Community, as if they be not amended, the Desolation of the Nation may
at last ensue thereupon.

But still, though every thing that happens do not prove for the Good of that
particular Person, or that particular People, that is immediately concerned in
the Event; yet it will certainly prove for the General Universal Good.

So that take all the whole Series of Events together, that have or shall come
to pass all the World over, we may undoubtedly affirm, that All things have
been as well managed, as it is possible they could be, and will be so to the
end of the World. And this we our selves shall be satisfied of, when we come to
be in a condition of making a just estimate of things.

For indeed, to suppose otherwise, is to say, either that Infinite Wisdom does
not act so wisely as it might do; or, that Perfect Goodness might do more Good
than it does do; or, lastly, that Omnipotent Power cannot do every thing that
is possible. All which Suppositions are plainly absurd and contradictious.

And now, if all these things be true (as they certainly are) how natural is
the conclusion of my Text? Since God is the King of all the World, and such a
King likewise, that the Measures of his Government are exact Goodness, and
Wisdom, and Righteousness; what have all Mankind to do, especially Good Men,
but to Rejoice and be glad?

This is the Psalmist's Inference from this Doctrine. And this is the present
Business of the Day: And therefore let us all practice accordingly. That is the
only Application I desire to make of what has been said.

And Two ways we ought to express our Rejoicing.

First, In a hearty sense of all God's past and present Mercies to us, and an
actual giving Him our Thanks for the same.

Secondly, In a cheerful dependence upon Him for his Future Blessings. Give me
leave to speak a little to these two Points, and I have done.

First, Let us be heartily sensible of All God's Kindness to us, both past and
present, and unfeignedly thank Him for the same.

It is very remarkable, that not only David, but the Prophets likewise, when
they are treating of God's Kingdom, call upon the Isles in a particular manner
to take notice of it; [See Isa. xxiv. 15. xlii. 4, 10, etc.] as here in my
Text, Let the multitude of the isles be glad thereof: As if the Isles in a more
peculiar manner were to have a share in the Blessings of his Government. And,
no doubt, it was so intended, and accordingly has so come to pass. For, it is
the Isles of the Gentiles, by which Name the Scripture expresses those
Countries that were at the greatest distance from the Continent of Judea; I
say, it is these Isles, which now at this day (God's ancient People the Jews
being for their Infidelity long ago rejected) are the principal Seat of his
Church and Kingdom, and to which He vouchsafes the Light of his Gospel, and
the Means of Salvation; so true is God to all his Promises.

But now, of all the Isles of the Gentiles, if any one above the rest has felt
the benign and gracious Influences of the LORD's being our King, certainly Ours
is that Island.

How wonderfully bountiful has God been to us in a continued succession of
Public Blessings, even from the first beginning of Time, that we have had any
Memorials of Events among us?

We had the Happiness to be early made a Province of the Roman Empire, and by
that means were trained up to Civility, and Arts, and Good Manners.

That made way for the greatest Blessing that Heaven could bestow upon us, even
the receiving Christianity: And that Blessing we had with the most early, being
the first among the Nations that embraced it.

When through the just Judgment of God, Barbarism and Ignorance overspread the
face of Europe, and by the occasion thereof Superstition and Idolatry made its
way, and all the Western Kingdoms gave up their Power to a Foreign Usurper;
even then this Island made the longest stand; nay, and was never so perfectly
subdued, but that Popery was here a different thing, from what it was in the
Southern Climates.

When the happy time came, that God thought fit to set on foot the Reformation,
(having first made way for it, by the restoring of Learning) such was His
particular Care of us, that this was one of the first Kingdoms that was brought
over to it.

And we have this Advantage above all other Reformed Churches, that as our
Reformation was regularly made, and by just Authority, so it was made most
agreeably to the Pattern of the Primitive Churches of Christ.

And, God be thanked, according to the goodness of it, such has been its
Success ever since; for we have all-along, from that time to this, (except the
interruption of a few Years in the late Times) served God in Peace and
Happiness, under the same Establishment. And we trust we shall do so to the end
of the World.

Many indeed have been the Oppositions and Disturbances, that have been given
us by our Adversaries, both at home and abroad; but as manifold likewise have
been our Deliverances, and that in a most wonderful manner.

I need not mention them, for they are known to us all.

How many Secret Conspiracies against our Protestant Kings and Queens, has God
Almighty's Mercy detected and defeated?

How many Open Attempts against our Laws and against our Religion has He by
strange Providence brought to naught?

More than once has He by wonderful methods preserved us, when we gave up our
Church and our Liberties in a manner as lost, and that in so easy and quiet a
way, that there was no concussion of the Nation followed thereupon.

Are not these Extraordinary Instances of God's Kindness to a People? And,
ought not we, who have received, and do yet enjoy the Benefit and the Comfort
of them, to remember them with Thankfulness all the Days of our Life?

But some of us, perhaps, are not now in a Humor to think of these things; our
present Circumstances fill our Minds, and Those are difficult enough. Let our
past Deliverances have been what they will, yet we are sure we are now in a
Hazardous Condition, notwithstanding all the Prayers we have put up for better
Successes.

That is too true: And I pray God make us all sensible of it; and especially
make us sensible of the things that have caused it, namely, our Ingratitude for
God's former Mercies; our Lewdness and Debauchery; the Spirit of Atheism and
Profaneness, and Irreligion, that still reigns among us as much as ever; and
above all, our unaccountable dividing our selves into Parties, and pursuing
particular Piques and Quarrels, not only to the neglect, but to the plain ruin
of our common Interests.

These are the things that have hindered our Successes, and provoked God's
Displeasure against us; and till these things be amended, I am afraid, we shall
never be a happy Nation.

But yet, notwithstanding our high Provocations, yet so gently has God
corrected us, and even in his Judgments so much has He remembered Mercy, that
we have all reason to rejoice at the Benignity and Kindness of His
Dispensations toward us; nay, and to render Him our most hearty and solemn
Thanks, for the Mercies that He has bestowed upon us, even with respect to the
Matters we complain of.

For God has really so far heard our Prayers this Year, that He has given us
the most important Successes, though not the Successes we desired.

He has kept the War at a distance from us; and we have, under the Happy
Government of Her Majesty, lived free from all Disturbance at home; every man
sitting under his own Vine, and his own Fig Tree, (as the Prophet speaks)
enjoying his Religion and Rights in perfect Peace; and with a bountiful
Provision likewise, from God's Hand, of all the Things that were either needful
or convenient.

And as for our Successes abroad, though it is not proper for me to talk of those
matters, yet I believe thus much I may decently and truly say, That though the
King had not the Victory, being overpowered by Numbers; yet he gained more
Honor, and sustained less Loss than those that boasted of the Victory.

And which is yet more, God has not only Preserved his Person, amidst the
infinite Hazards he was continually exposed to, and Returned him safe to us,
but returned him likewise with such Reputation for his Courage, and Vigilance,
and Conduct in the Difficulties he had to struggle with, as has gained him the
highest Esteem among his Enemies, and therefore ought much more to endear him
to his own Subjects.

And now, let all this be considered, and then let any man say, that really
loves the Interest of his Country, whether we have not reason to look upon
these things as Great Blessings; and as such, to return our Solemn Thanks to
God for them.

And then, in the Second place, as to our Future Successes, let us all
cheerfully depend upon God's Providence, and trust in his Mercy for them.

This is all the Rejoicing that we can express as to Future things; and this is
that which the Apostle calls Rejoicing in Hope.

And surely great Reason have we thus to do, when we consider who it is that
orders our Affairs; One, whose Kindness we have no reason to doubt of, having
had so many Experiences of it, even beyond our Hopes and Expectations: And One
likewise upon whose Power we may securely depend, since His Arm is not
shortened, nor ever can be, how much soever our Arm of Flesh may.

God Almighty is our King, and He both certainly knows, and will certainly do,
that which is best for us, provided we take care to do that which becomes us.

Away therefore with all Fear, and Distrust, and Despondency; it is an Argument
of Infidelity and Irreligion, as well as Cowardice, to despair of the
Commonwealth.

We are in as good Hands as it is possible for us to be: Nay, we our selves
cannot wish to be in any other.

Let but us do our Parts, by qualifying our selves for God's Mercies; and that
is to be done by contributing our best Endeavors, every man in his Place and
Station, to the Service of the Public; and then we may safely cast all our
care upon him who cares for us, and we may be sure we shall not be
disappointed.

This Method, as it is much more easy, so we shall find it much more conducing
toward the obtaining the Successes we desire, than Complaining, and
Fretfulness, and a tormenting Anxiety about our Affairs.

We may indeed, by our Peevish and Querulous Humor, disquiet our selves, and
put others into a Ferment, nay, and at last, perhaps, may contribute a great
deal to the Glory of hindering and defeating the most wise Counsels that are
proposed for our Safety; but that is the greatest Point we gain.

God Almighty will not alter his Methods for any of our foolish Passions; but
there is a way to prevail upon God himself, to do for us all that our own
Hearts can desire, provided that which we desire be good for us; and that way
is, to own Him and his Government; to love him, and to serve him; to be
thankful for his Mercies; to be easy and cheerful under all his Dispensations
to us; and lastly, to referr our selves entirely to his Wise Counsels, and to
trust in his Mercy for all that is to come.

Great indeed, and wonderful, are the Promises that are made to those that put
their Trust in God. Cursed (says the Prophet) be the man that trusts Jer.
17. 5.
in man, and makes flesh his arm: But, Blessed is he that trusts in the
Lord, and whose hope the Lord is. Many sorrows (says the Psalmist) shall be to
the wicked: Psalm. 32. 10
but whose trusts in the Lord, mercy shall embrace him on every side. And
again, O taste and see, how 34. 8.
gracious the Lord is: blessed is the man that trusts in him.

If now we believe these things, (and if we be Christians, we do and must
believe them) consider I beseech you, the Use we are to make of them.

What have we All to do? Let our late Disappointments have put us into never so
bad a Humor; let our present Circumstances be entangled with never so many
Difficulties; yet what have we All to do, but to Rejoice in GOD, and to Trust
in his Mercy?

All is well, and All will be well for ever to them that Love God, and put
their Trust in Him.

Sing we therefore unto the Lord a new song: let the congregation of saints
praise him. Let Israel rejoice in him that made him: and let the children of
Sion be joyful in their King. God is the King of all the earth, let us sing
praises with understanding. The Lord has pleasure in his people: he will for
ever help the meek hearted: for his delight is in them that fear him, and that
put their trust in his mercy. He is our help and strength, a very present help
in Trouble: therefore will we not fear, though the earth be moved, and though
the hills be carried into the midst of the sea: Though the waters thereof rage
and swell, and the mountains shake at the tempest of the same. Even, in that
case, the rivers of the flood thereof shall make glad the city of God. All the
Blusterings and Storms that threaten God's People, shall turn to their
Advantage, and shall really at length prove matter of rejoicing to them, how
terrible and dreadful soever they appeared at first: For, as it there follows,
God is in the midst of her, therefore shall she not be removed: God will help
her, and that right early. God will be with his Church, and will deliver his
People whenever it is proper and seasonable so to do.

Nay, let the Worst come; though we were reduced even to the utmost Extremities;
which yet, God be thanked, we neither are, nor, I hope, ever shall be; yet
even, in that Cafe, the Consideration that God is our King, ought not only to
support us, but to fill us with Joy. Even in that Case every Good Man should
bear his part in the Song of the Prophet Habakkuk, (3. 17.) with which I
conclude.

Although the fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the vine:
Although the labor of the olive shall fail; and the fields shall yield no
meat: Although the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there be no herd
in the stalls; yet will I rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my
salvation.

FINIS.

