A SERMON PREACHED Before the QUEEN AT WHITEHALL, On the 11th of April, 1690.

By JOHN SHARP, D. D. Dean of Canterbury, and one of Their Majesty's Chaplains.

Published by Her Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1690.

A SERMON Preached before the QUEEN.
GAL. V. xiii. Use not liberty for an occasion to the flesh.
ANY one that uses to make reflections upon his own actions, cannot but
observe, That one of the great occasions of the sins he is guilty of in the
course of his Life, is the too free use of his lawful Liberty.

I do not say, that any Man does commit sin by using his lawful liberty (for
that would be a kind of contradiction): But I say, the using our liberty to the
utmost pitch and extent of that which we call lawful, is the occasion of a
great many sins that would otherwise not have been committed.

If one should offer to tempt a Man that has any sense of Virtue or Religion;
to do a thing, that at the first sight appears sinful or wicked; it would
certainly be rejected. Every one that has any regard to God or goodness, would
start at such a proposal. But here is our infelicity. A Temptation comes on by
degrees. And at the first we are engaged in nothing but what is lawful and
honest; and accordingly we use that liberty which nature and religion allows
us; and so we proceed on insensibly in the use of that liberty, till at last we
become uncertain, whether we have not exceeded the bounds of what is lawful:
And by this means we are often caught. Nay indeed nothing but this could betray
well meaning persons, and such as are virtuously disposed, into sin. Licitis
perimus omnes, said a devout Man: It is by lawful things that we commonly
miscarry.

With great reason therefore does St. Paul give this advice in the Text:
Brethren (says he) ye have been called unto liberty, only use not liberty for
an occasion to the flesh.

There is no doubt but the Apostle writ these words upon occasion of, and with
reference to, the great Controversy that was then on foot among Christians,
touching the Obligation of the Jewish Law.

Some then thought themselves bound in Conscience to observe all the Precepts
of Moses his Law. Other Christians thought they were freed by the coming of
Christ from all legal Observances. The Apostle determines the Case in favor of
these latter, and declares, that by the Gospel they were called unto liberty,
and were free from all the Mosaical Impositions. But yet nevertheless he tells
them they ought to be careful in the exercise of that liberty; that they do not
use it for an occasion to the flesh.

That is to say, that this liberty to which they were called, should not
minister to any sin. That they should not so use it, as to be a snare, either
to themselves or others. To themselves, by running into licentiousness, and
taking unlawful liberties. To others, either by affrighting the unbelieving
Jews from the embracing Christianity, or discouraging those that already
believed the Gospel in the profession of it.

This is the strict sense of the Apostles words, as they come in here in the
Text, and as they do relate to that occasion upon which he writ them. But, that
sense, with reference to that occasion, is now out of doors among us. Though
the general advice that is here given, will eternally be good and useful; nay,
and always needful to be insisted on in all Ages of the World.

We have none now that use their liberty for an occasion to the flesh, as to
the point of the Iudaical Ceremonies: But we have abundance that do use it so
as to other matters. Nay, as I said before, this too free use of our liberty in
lawful things, is one of the great Sources and Fountains from whence most of
our irregularities do proceed. And therefore I do not know how I can entertain
you more usefully upon this Text, than by endeavoring to give you the best
Rules I can, for the reducing the Apostle's Exhortation into practice, as it
does concern us at this day.

But that you may see plainly what I drive at, I will yet state the matter a
little more particularly.

Our Case in this World is this. The Laws of Virtue and Religion, do allow Men
all reasonable liberties in the gratification of their natural Passions and
Appetites, and in the use and enjoyment of all the good things of this Life.
But all unreasonable gratifications, all excesses and immoderate liberties, are
forbidden by Religion, and therefore are sinful and criminal.

If now in all Cases a Man could readily and certainly fix the precise bounds
and landmarks of what is reasonable and moderate, and what is unreasonable and
excessive in the use of his liberty* so as that upon all occasions, and in all
emergencies, he could say within his own mind, Thus far I may lawfully and
innocently go in the gratification of such an appetite, or in the enjoyment of
such a pleasure, or the like; but if I proceed a step further, I become a
Transgressor: I say, if this was the case of a Man in the use of his liberty,
it would be no hard matter for any well disposed person, to take all that
liberty that was moderate and lawful, and to forbear all that which is
excessive and unlawful.

But now this is not always an easy matter to be done. For many Cases happen in
which a Man cannot precisely determine where it is that his lawful liberty
ends, and where it is that it begins to be extravagant and excessive. So that
while a Man is only designing to gratify his desires in lawful instances, he is
often carried beyond his bounds, and proceeds to excess.

This now, I say, is one great occasion of sin to Mankind; and yet there is no
avoiding of it, because it is such a one as does necessarily arise from the
nature of things.

Thus for instance: It is certainly very lawful for a Man to drink Wine and
strong drink, not only for his Healths sake, when his Constitution does require
it; but also for Cheerfulness, and the enjoyment of his Friends. But on the
other side, Drunkenness and Intemperance, are grievous Crimes, and utterly
forbid by our Religion. Whilst now a Man on one hand has a desire to take that
liberty that is allowed him, and to gratify his natural inclination to mirth
and pleasantness, or to show Civility, as he terms it, to his Company: And on
the other hand, he has no certain unalterable measures to proceed by, for the
stinting himself in this Case; (as surely it is a very hard matter to prescribe
or define, either to a Man's self or others, the exact pitch or limits where
Temperance ends, and Intemperance begins): by this means, I say, he is often
betrayed into sin. Thinking with himself, that there is a great latitude and
compass in the exercise of Temperance and Sobriety (as indeed there is,) and
that therefore he may go on some time longer with the Company; the Wine by this
means steals upon him, and he is, before he was aware, fallen into the sin of
Intemperance and Excess.

And thus it is, not only as to the use of our liberty in things allowed, but
as to the performance of our duty in things commanded.

Every Man is sensible, that it is a principal Law of our Religion to be
Charitable, and to give Alms out of our substance. But now it is not so easy a
matter for any Man to define, and set out the quantum, or the precise
proportion of Alms, which every one is bound to give; so as to be able to
pronounce, that if a Man give so much, he performs his duty, and is a
Charitable Man, for one in his Circumstances; but if he gives less than that,
he is Covetous and Uncharitable. Now, I say, because this duty of Charity is
thus indefinitely left, and there is such an affinity and undistinguishableness
between the least measures of Charity, and the sin of being uncharitable; Men
do from hence often take occasion to fall short in the performance of it. And
as in the former instance I gave about drinking, they are apt to take more
liberty than is allowed them; so in this they are apt to do less than is
commanded them. For if they do but give something to the poor out of their
yearly Income, they think they give enough to satisfy the Command of Charity;
and so they make no Conscience of saving and hoarding without end or without
measure.

There are a hundred more instances besides these two that I have named,
wherein there is such a latitude left to our practices, and the difference
between lawful and unlawful: duty and sin lies in so small a compass, that it
is hard to separate and distinguish them, unless a Man be both very wise and
very honest.

We have not any Law of God which defines how often we are to pray; Or when it
is our duty to fast; Or to what degree we may be angry; Or how we are to govern
our selves as to the quantity or kinds of our meat and drink; Or how far we may
comply with the Customs of the World; Or how splendid we may be in our apparel
and equippage: Or what games and recreations may be used, and how often; Or
what Rules we are to go by in buying and selling, and our other dealings with
Men; Or how far we may seek our own, when our right cannot be obtained without
prejudice to our Neighbor.

In these, I say, and abundance of other Cases, we have no express particular
Laws of God to steer and measure our actions by; nor indeed is it possible we
should have: Because what is fit and reasonable to be done in these Cases,
admits of so great a difference from the infinite variety of the circumstances
of particular Men.

What now must we do in these Cases? How must we order our selves, that we may
perform our duty, and keep out of sin?

Why in answer to this I say, We have only general rules to direct us in these
matters; and those rules we are to apply to our own particular cases.

In this latitude that things are left in, we are to use our liberty as
carefully and as prudently as is possible; taking our measures from the
principles of reason, and the general rules of the Gospel. Now what those
general rules and measures are, it is my business at this time to treat of.

And three things I have here to propose for the use of our liberty, which
will, I think, be a sufficient direction to us in all cases of this nature; and
which if we do carefully observe, we shall never use our liberty for an
occasion to the Flesh; but we shall both come up to what is our duty, and shall
likewise avoid all those sins which Mankind are so frequently betrayed into,
through the too great affinity that there is between Virtue and Vice, and the
indiscreet exercise of their liberty upon occasion thereof.

And the first thing I would possess you all with, and which indeed, as it is
the most general, so it is the best advice that can be given in this matter, is
this: That we would endeavor to be heartily honest and serious in the business
of Religion: That we would sincerely devote our selves to the service of God:
That we would purify our minds as much as may be from all sensual and selfish
Principles; and in all our actions and pursuits, have more respect to the doing
our duty, and the approving our selves to our great Lord and Master, than to
any other consideration.

This is that which St. Paul so often exhorts us to. Whether (says he) you eat
or drink, or whatever ye do, do all to the glory of God. And again, Whatever ye
do, do it heartily as unto the Lord, knowing that of the Lord you shall receive
the reward of the inheritance.

If we could once get our selves possessed of this Probity, this Purity of mind
and heart, it would better instruct us in the use of our liberty, and teach us
to distinguish between good and evil; what is fit to be done, and what ought
not to be done, in all cases and emergencies we are concerned in; than all the
dry Rules of Casuistical learning, be they never so carefully and accurately
laid down.

When a Man is once arrived to that holy temper of mind, that he heartily loves
God and his Neighbor, and has such a lively sense of the truth and the
excellency of Christ's Religion; that he is resolved, that that shall influence
and govern the whole course of his Life, and that he will do all his actions,
as much as he can, for the honor of our Lord, and the advancement of his
service in the World: There can hardly any particular case occur to such a Man
in which he will not have rules and measures ready at hand to steer and direct
him in his proceedings.

Nay this general Principle alone of doing all his actions to the glory of God,
that is to say, to the honor of his Religion, and the edification of his
Neighbor: I say this alone will afford him sufficient light and direction for
the government of his actions in all Contingencies. Because there is no action
he can be engaged in, but it is at the first sight discernable, whether the
doing of it, or the not doing of it, does more tend to the honor of his
Religion, or the good of others.

That which makes the conduct of a Man's self in this World, so nice and
difficult a matter, and has given occasion to the discussion of so many cases
of Conscience about the lawfulness or unlawfulness of Actions, is this; That
Men are not thoroughly honest, but halt between God and the World. They have a
great mind to serve their pleasures and their ambition, and their secular ends;
and yet to serve God too, and this puts them upon tampering and trying to
reconcile these interests together.

Whence it comes to pass, that the usual questions that arise about their
actions, are not, what is best to be done, or what is most agreeable to their
duty in this or the other case? But, how far they may go in the gratification
of such an appetite or passion, without transgressing the Laws of God? How far
they may satisfy their covetous desires, without being unjust? Whether they may
use such arts or tricks, in getting or saving, without being knavish? How far
they may drink, and not be drunk? How far they may gratify their humor of
decking and adorning themselves, and yet do no unlawful thing? How far they may
indulge wantonness, and yet be chaste?

Now, as I said before, such Questions as these are not easy to be resolved
(nor indeed is the Gospel of Christ so contrived, as if it had taken much care
whether they were resolved or no.) But they are really Cases and Problems that
require both Judgment and Learning, and likewise the consideration of abundance
of particular circumstances, to have a good account given of them.

But now the Man that does entirely give up himself to the conduct of the
Spirit, and proposes nothing to himself in all his actions but the pure Glory
of God: Such a Man having none of these Worldly sensual designs to serve in his
actions, can rarely be supposed to have any of these questions to put to
himself. And consequently he can never be at a loss or uncertainty, how he is
to act for want of a resolution of them, much less can he be in danger of
transgressing the bounds that God has fixed to his Actions.

All the point that such a one has to consider in any action is, whether will
his doing or not doing such an action better serve the ends of Religion? Which
will tend most to his own spiritual benefit, and the profit of his Neighbor,
to pursue this design, or to let it alone? Whether will be more conducive to
the honor of his Lord, to gratify such an appetite, or to deny it satisfaction?

This I say is the only question that such a Man has to put to himself, and
there is no difficulty in giving an answer to it. For there is scarce any case
to be put concerning an action, but it is very obvious, without an instructor,
to find out which side of the case, if it be chosen, will most minister to the
ends of Virtue, and Religion and Charity. Or if it be not obvious, then it is
very certain, the Man needs not much deliberate about it, but may choose either
side indifferently.

It is a very hard matter oftentimes to determine concerning the necessity and
obligation of Actions; that is, whether a Man be bound to do them or no. It is
likewise often a hard matter to determine concerning the lawfulness of Actions,
whether a Man may do them or no. But it is a very easy matter in most cases to
determine, concerning the expedience of Actions; that is to say, whether it be
best and fittest for a Man to do them or no. Now this last, I say, is the point
that a thoroughly good Man will consider and steer himself by in all his Actions.

Thus for instance, It may perhaps bear a dispute, Whether a Man be precisely
bound by God's Law, to pray solemnly twice a day, so as that he sins if he do
not: But it will bear no dispute, that it is much better, and more acceptable
to God, and beneficial to our selves, to pray at least thus often, than to pray
seldomer. And therefore such a person as I am speaking of, will upon this
consideration put it in practice (nay and pray oftener too as he has occasion)
without concerning himself whether he be strictly bound so to do or no.

It may bear a dispute among some Persons, whether painting the Face be not
allowable to Christian Women. But it can bear no dispute among any, that it is
more agreeable to the Sobriety, and Modesty and Chastity, of a Disciple of
Jesus Christ, and better serves the ends of Religion to forbear all such
suspicious Ornaments. (There being rarely any good end to be served by them,
but abundance of evil often arising from them.) Now this conderation alone is
enough to set the heart of every serious Christian against those practices, and
to make them wholly to refrain them.

Thus again, it is argued both ways about Play or Gaming, whether it be lawful
or no: (especially when sums of money are played for; and the thing becomes
rather an avaritious Contention, than a Recreation and Divertisement) some
believing that it is innocent; others that it is a grievous sin. But there is
no Man, even of those that use it most, but will readily acknowledge, that it
exposes a Man to great and dangerous Temptations of sundry kinds; that it is
the occasion of abundance of sin, and abundance of mischief; and that it seldom
fails to produce intolerable consequences, both as to Men's Souls, and Estates,
and Families. Now to a Man that loves God, and has a tender sense of his duty,
this is enough in all Conscience to deter him for ever from the practice of
Gaming, though it be not made to appear to him, that it is expressly and
explicitly forbid by any Law of Jesus Christ.

So that you see, that in those points where there are disputes on both sides,
when the consideration is concerning the obligation, or the lawfulness of an
action; there is no difficulty, no dispute at all, when the consideration is
only concerning what is best and most fitting to be done; concerning what is
most agreeable to our duty, and most conducive to the honor of God and
Religion, as to that action. That is evident enough in all Cases; nor is any
Man at a loss for finding it out. And that is the Principle which I say every
sincere lover of God, governs himself by; and which I would have us all to
propose to our selves for the rule of our actions, in order to the securing us
from those snares and stumbling blocks, to which the affinity between Virtue
and Vice, lawful and unlawful, will otherwise expose us.

Let us not stand upon points with God Almighty, as if so much was his, and so
much was our own; as if we were to share our selves between his Service, and
our own Pleasures and Profits, and the like; and were resolved not to pay him
any more respect or love, than what some express letter of his Law does exact
at our hands. But let us so entirely devote our selves to his Service, as to do
not only all those things which we are strictly bound to do, or else we are
transgressors; but all those things that are acceptable to him, all those
things that are praiseworthy, and tend to the perfection of our nature, and
the reputation of Christ's Religion.

Let us make it the end of our actions, not to seek our selves, but his glory;
every day to grow better and better, and in every Occurrence to consider, not
what may lawfully be done, but what is most becoming a Disciple of Jesus Christ
to do. In a word, what ever is best in any action; what ever most serves the
ends of piety; what ever tends most to the credit of our Religion, and the
benefit of others, let us consider that, and act accordingly.

And thus I am sure to design and act, is most suitable to the nature and
genius of our Christian Religion; nay indeed, it is the principal Law and
Commandment of it.

The design of Christianity is not to adjust the precise bounds of Virtue and
Vice, lawful and unlawful, which is that that a great many among us so greedily
hanker after. For the best that could have come from such a design, had been
only this, that Men by this means might have been fairly instructed, how they
might have avoided the being bad; though they never became very good. But the
design of Christianity, is to make Men as good as they can possibly be; as
devout, as humble, as charitable, as temperate, as contented, as
heavenly-minded, as their natures will allow of in this World.

And for the producing this effect; the exact distinguishing the limits of the
several Virtues, and their opposite Vices, signifies very little.

The Laws of our great Master are not like the Civil, Municipal Laws of
Kingdoms, which are therefore wonderfully nice and critical, and particular in
setting bounds to the practices of Men, because they only look at overt
actions; so that if a Man do but keep his actions within the compass of the
letter of the Law, he may be accounted a good Subject, and is no way obnoxious
to the penalties which the Law threatens.

If our Religion had been of this strain, we should without doubt have had a
World of particular Laws and Precepts, and directions about our actions, in all
emergent Cases, more than we now have: And we might as easily have known from
the Bible, what was forbidden unlawful anger, what was excessive drinking, what
was pride and luxury in Apparel, and the like; as we now know by the
Statute-Book, what is Burglary, or Murder, or Treason. But there was no need of
these particularities in the institution of Christ Jesus. His Religion was to
be a Spiritual thing: And the design of it was not to make us chaste, or
temperate, or humble, or charitable, in such a degree; but to make us as chaste
and temperate, as humble and charitable, as pure and holy in all our
Conversation, as we possibly can be.

This I say was the design of Christ's Religion. It was to be the Highest
Philosophy that was ever taught to Mankind. It was to make us the most
excellent and perfect Creatures, as to purity of mind and heart, that humane
nature is capable of. And therefore it has not been so accurate and particular
in prescribing bounds to our outward actions, because it was abundantly enough
for the securing them, to oblige us to the highest degree of inward purity.

And this it has done above all the Laws and Religions in the World. It
teaches us to abhor every thing that is evil or impure in all the kinds of it,
in all the degrees of it, and in all the tendencies toward it; And to lay out
our selves in the pursuit of every thing that is honest, that is lovely, that
is praiseworthy, and of good report among Men.

If this now be the design of our Religion, and these be the Laws of it, I
leave it to you to judge of these two things. First, Whether it does not highly
concern all of us that profess this holy Religion, to endeavor, in all our
Conversation, to be as holy and as virtuous as we can, and to do as much good
as we can; and not to content our selves with such a degree of honesty and
virtue, as is just sufficient to the rendering us not vicious. And then
secondly, Whether, if we do thus endeavor, we can easily be at a loss in
distinguishing between good and evil, duty and sin, in any instance; And
consequently, Whether we can be much in danger of ill using our liberty, and so
transgressing upon that account.

I have been longer upon this first head than I intended, but I shall make
amends for it, by dispatching the two following, in so much the fewer words.
And indeed after so large an account as I have given of the general Rule, there
is less need of dwelling upon particular ones.

II. In the second place, In order to the right use of our liberty, and so
securing our selves from falling into sin, through mistaking the measures of
good and evil; This will be a good rule to propose to our selves, namely, That
in matters of Duty, we should rather do too much than too little: But in
matters of Indifferency, we should rather take too little of our liberty than
too much.

First, As to matters of Duty my meaning is this: That where the Laws of God
have generally and indefinitely commanded a thing, but have not set down rules
about the particular measures and proportions of it; in that case it is
advisable rather to do more than we are perhaps precisely bound to do, that so
we may be sure we have performed our duty; than by being scanty in our
obedience, to run the hazard of falling short of our duty.

Thus for instance, Our Lord in the New Testament, has often and solemnly
commanded us to pray. But neither he nor his Apostles, have any where told us
how often we are to pray; only they have bid us pray frequently. In this Case
now a Man that makes a Conscience of performing his duty, will take all
occasions and opportunities of lifting up holy hands, and devout affections to
his heavenly Father: However, he will not fail, at least once every time he
rises, and once every time he goes to rest, to offer up a solemn Sacrifice of
Prayer and Praise. Less than this, I say, he must not do, for fear he break the
Commandment of praying frequently, praying continually. But more than this it
will become him to do, in order to the giving himself satisfaction, that he
has fully performed it.

Thus again, To give alms to the poor, is an indispensable Duty of our
Religion. But what proportion of our substance we are to give away in Alms and
Charity, is no where set down; but is wholly left to our discretion. Now in
this case, it is certainly much more advisable to give liberally, and largely,
and plentifully; even as much as our condition in this World, and the
necessities of our Families can allow: though by so doing, we should prove to
have given in greater abundance than we were strictly obliged to: Than by
giving stingily and pinchingly, now and then a little pocket money or so, to
run the hazard of being Transgressors of the Commandment, and having our
Portion among the covetous and unmerciful.

There is no damage comes to a Man by doing the former; but on the contrary, a
great deal of good. For God never fails bounteously to reward the bountiful
hand. But there is both damage and infinite danger in the latter. And thus we
are to practice in all other Duties.

Only this caution we must take along with us: That we are always so to
proportion the measures of every single duty, as to render it consistent with
the performance of the other duties of our lives.

As for instance, we must not spend so much time in Prayer, as to hinder the
pursuit of our Callings, and necessary business. We must so give Alms, as yet
to leave our selves enough to pay every one their own, and to make a competent
provision for our Families. But let us but take care to secure this, and then
we cannot easily exceed in the measures of any duty. The more we pray, and the
more we give alms, still the better. And so in all other instances of duty.

But now in the second place, the quite contrary to this are we to practice in
matters of liberty. There the rule is, rather to take less than is allowed us,
than to take all. Rather to abridge our selves of our lawful liberties, than by
doing all that we may lawfully do, endanger our falling into sin.

There is no harm at all in departing from our Rights and Privileges which God
has indulged us: But there is a great harm in extending them beyond their
bounds. There is no evil in not gratifying our desires and appetites in all the
things they crave, which are allowable, and which we are permitted to gratify
them in: But there is an infinite evil in gratifying them in unlawful forbidden
instances. And therefore every wise and good Man will be sure to keep on the
safe side; and to prevent the danger of doing more than he should do, he will
not always do all that he may do.

The truth is, that Man that makes no scruple of using his liberty to the
utmost stretch and extent of it upon all occasions, and regards nothing more in
his actions, than just that he do not fall into some direct sin: That Man
cannot always be innocent, but will be drawn into a hundred irregularities and
miscarriages.

Thus for Example, he that uses himself to eat or to drink to the utmost pitch
that can be said to be within the limits of Temperance, it is impossible but
such a one will now and then be unavoidably overtaken in the sin of Gluttony or
Drunkenness.

He that will use all the liberties that the Law allows him, for the making
advantages to himself in his Trade, or his dealings with other Men: Such a one
will not be able to avoid the just imputation of being in many instances an
Oppressor, or a hard Conscienced Man.

The safest way therefore if we mean to preserve our Virtue amidst the
multitude of snares and Temptations that we meet with in the World, is to set
bounds even to our lawful liberties; to keep our actions within such a compass,
as not to come even near the Confines of Vice and Sin.

Though it is but a point, and that often an undiscernable one, that
distinguishes between what is lawful, and what is unlawful. Yet there is a
great latitude in what is lawful. That is, if I gratify my Appetites but a
little, I do that which is lawful; and if I gratify them more, I may do that
which is lawful likewise. But he shows the most honest and virtuous Mind, that
in his actions takes but a little of this Latitude, and by that means keeps
himself at a good distance from that which is vicious and criminal.

III. But thirdly and lastly, To what degree soever we may think fit to make
use of our liberty; yet at all times, As Soon as we begin to doubt or fear we
have gone as far as we lawfully can go; it is then high time to break off, and
to proceed no further. This is the last Rule I have to offer upon this
occasion. And thus also, wherever we have a just ground of suspicion or doubt,
whether a thing be lawful or no; this doubt or suspicion, is of it self reason
enough to make us forbear that thing. Unless indeed there be a Necessity, or a
great Charity to be served by the doing of it, which may in reason over-balance
the suspicion of its lawfulness.

Thus in matters of Recreation. If we have the least doubt, whether this or the
other Pleasure or Divertisement be innocent and lawful; why, that is Argument
enough, without more ado, to make us forbear it; though perhaps we see others
use it without scruple.

Thus in matters of Temperance, when we first begin to suspect that we have
drunk as much as is convenient for us: Let us by all means leave off, and break
from the Company.

Thus in matters of Sobriety, when we have reason to doubt, that we are come up
to the full bounds of the Christian gravity and modesty; and that any degree
more of pomp or bravery in our garb, or in our attendance, or in our Equipage,
will relish of Pride, or Vanity, or Affectation: It is high time rather to
abate something of our sumptuousness in these things, than to proceed any
further.

And thus lastly in matters of Equity and Justice, when we first begin to have
a suspicion, that such a practice is an indirect or knavish trick, or that we
are too severe and hard upon a Man, upon whom we have got an advantage: Why
this suspicion alone is enough in reason to check us in our cariere, and to put
us upon more fair and moderate courses.

This is a Rule that will for ever be fit for us to practice, for it is
grounded upon Eternal Reason. Indeed it is as old as Morality. Quod dubitas ne
feceris. Do nothing that you doubt of, is a Maxim that obtained among the
Heathens as well as among us Christians.

I dare not indeed say, that this Rule holds universally, in all Cases. For
Cases do sometimes happen, wherein it will be advisable for a Man to act even
against his doubts. But in such matters as I am now speaking of, matters
wherein a Man is at perfect liberty to act or not to act: In all such Cases, it
will always, without exception, be a true, and a safe, and a wise Rule. And I
am sure, if Men would seriously charge themselves with the practice of it, they
would hereby prevent a multitude, of Sins and Transgressions, with which they
usually inflame their Accounts against the Day of Judgment.

And thus much of the Rules I had to propose, as to the use of our Liberty, in
such cases where a Man is at a loss in finding out the measures and bounds of
duty and sin, and upon that account is in danger of Transgressing. I have only
two things more to add upon this Argument, by way of Application, and I have
done. The one as a Caution to prevent the misapplying these Rules; the other as
an encouragement to put them in practice.

That which I have to say by way of caution is this: That what I have been now
recommending, especially under the two last heads, is not intended to be a rule
or direction to any Hypochondriack, or Melancholy Persons, or such as are apt
to be over-scrupulous about their actions: For indeed to such persons it is the
worst advice that can be given.

For they are apt to doubt and boggle at every thing, be it never so innocent
and free from blame. They dare not eat a hearty meal for fear of being
Intemperate. And for fear of not being devout enough, they exhaust their
Spirits, and spoil their health, through the continual intention of their minds
to serious things.

Now Persons that are of this temper, are rather to be encouraged to take more
liberties than they do; than to abate any that they make use of.

But their case is of another consideration, and foreign to my present purpose;
and therefore I here say no more about it. It being sufficient to have given
this intimation to such people, that they do not make an ill use of any thing
that I have now represented; for assuredly, what has been now said, does not
much concern them.

2. The other thing I have to say, and that by way of Encouragement, is this: I
doubt not but some will be apt to think, that the Rules I have now given about
the exercise of our liberty, are much too strict and severe; and that if they
must be tied up to such measures, then farewell all the joy and pleasure, and
comfort of their lives. But to such People I would crave leave to say, that
they have very wrong notions of this matter.

The using of their liberty in such a manner as I have been recommending, would
not rob them of one true pleasure or comfort that this World affords. So far
from that, that I am very sure, whoever frames his life according to these
measures, shall live a hundred times a happier Life, and shall enjoy the World
and all the pleasures and advantages of it, much more to his own content and
satisfaction; than if he put no check to the craving of his Appetites, but
always indulged and gratified them in every thing, and as much as they desired.

Assure your selves, Virtue and Religion will never hinder you from enjoying
any pleasure or satisfaction that is natural. On the contrary there is great
reason to believe, that the practice thereof will extremely heighten and
advance the satisfactions you can receive from your Worldly Enjoyments. I doubt
not in the least, but to a sincerely pious and virtuous Man, and that has a
regard to God in all his actions, even the very pleasures and comfotts of this
Life are more gratifying and affecting, than to any sensual or wicked Man. For
such a one, as he is more capable of enjoying them, so do they come to him
likewise without the mixtures of those uneasy, troublesome, bitter reflections,
that other Men feel in the very best of their Enjoyments.

Let no Man therefore apprehend any loss of his pleasures by entirely devoting
himself to God's Service, and using his liberty in that careful way I have been
recommending. Let him not think that he shall hereby be too much straightened and
confined. For certainly this is the true means, not only to keep him for ever
from being a Slave to any thing, but also mightily to improve and increase his
liberty.

For by thus exercising himself, all the powers of his Soul will be vastly
enlarged, and he will hereby attain both leisure and will to employ all his
rational Faculties about the best and the noblest objects in the World, which
will yield him the greatest pleasure that is to be had on this side Heaven.
Whereas if he had given up himself to be governed by any of his sensual
Appetites, he had been a poor narrow confined Creature indeed; not capable of
any greater satisfactions or pleasures, than what the Brutes do enjoy as well
as himself, but with less uneasiness, and fewer disturbances.

It is true indeed, a sensual Man has no notion of this kind of pleasures, no
more than a Beast has of the pleasures of a Man. And therefore it is no wonder
that such Men entertain all talk about them as little better than mere Cant and
Iargon. But I seriously appeal to all Men that have ever made any trials in the
way of Religion and Virtue, whether the Contentments and satisfactions they
have received from the rational use of their liberty, and the thoughts and
reflections that hereby they do approve themselves to God, and live in hopes of
his Favor, and have a fair prospect of a glorious Immortal State in another
World: I say, whether they do not find the pleasures and contentments that
arise from hence, to be infinitely more solid, and substantial, and durable,
than any of those that they receive from the gratification of their sensual
Appetites in a vicious unreasonable manner.

Oh therefore, Let none of us make any scruple of devoting our selves entirely,
and without reserve, to God Almighty's Service. Let none of us be afraid to put
reasonable restraints upon our Passions and Appetites. Assuredly the thus using
our liberty, is the certain way to preserve and increase it, and with it, the
pleasure and comfort of our Lives; and not only so, but to render us
Everlastingly Happy and Blessed in the other World. Which that we may all be,
God of his infinite mercy grant, etc.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's-Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
THE Theory of the Earth: containing an Account of the Original of the Earth,
and of all the general Changes which it has already undergone, or is to
undergo, till the Consummation of all things. The two first Books concerning
the Deluge, and concerning Paradise. The two last Books concerning the burning
of the World, and concerning the new Heavens and new Earth. fol.

Bishop Overal's Convocation-Book, MDC VI. concerning the Government of God's
Catholic Church, and the Kingdoms of the whole World. 4 to.

A discourse concerning Conscience; the first Part: wherein an account is given
of the Nature, and Rule, and Obligation of it. And the case of those who
separate from the Communion of the Church of England, as by Law established,
upon this pretense, that it is against their Conscience to join in it, is
stated and discussed.

A discourse of Conscience: The second Part; concerning a doubting Conscience.

A Fast-Sermon before the House of Commons, April 11. 1679. on Revel. ii. 5.

The Duty and Happiness of doing good, in two Sermons, the former Preached at
the Yorkshire Feast, Feb. 17. 1679. on Eccl. iii. 10. the other before the Lord
Mayor at the Spittle, Apr. 14. 1680. on 1 Timothy vi. 17, 18, 19.

A Sermon at the Election of the Lord Mayor, Sept. 29. 1680. on Psalm. cxii. 4.

A Lent-Sermon at Whitehal, March 20. 1684. on Luke xvi. 31. These seven last
by the Reverend Dr. Sharp, Dean of Canterbury.

Mr. Ieffery's Religion the Perfection of Man. 8 vo.

Mr. Raymond's Pattern of pure and undefiled Religion. 8o.

-- 's Exposition on the Church Catechism. 80. The Faith and Practice of a
Church of England Man. The third Edition. 12o.

Dr. Pelling's Sermon before the King and Queen, Dec. 8. 1689.

Mr. Lamb's Sermon before the King and Queen, Ian. 19. 1689.

-- 's Dialogue between a Minister and his Parishioners, about the Lord's
Supper, 8o.

Mr. W. Allen's Nature, Series, and Order of Occurrences, etc. 8o.


