A SERMON Preached before the QUEEN AT WHITE HALL, ON EASTER DAY, March 27.
1692.

By the most Reverend Father in GOD, JOHN, Lord Archbishop of YORK, Primate of
England and Metropolitan.

Published by Her Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1692.

The Archbishop of YORK's SERMON Before the QUEEN On Easter Day, 1692.

A SERMON Preached before the QUEEN.
Philip. iii. 10. That I may know him, and the power of his Resurrection.
WE shall easily see the Design of these Words, and what use we are to make of
them, if we look at their Connection with the Discourse that goes before. St.
Paul in this Chapter, sets himself to show the Excellency, and the great
Advantages of the Knowledge of Jesus Christ, and how inconsiderable, how
unworthy to be named in comparison therewith, all those things were, that the
Jews his Countrymen so much gloried in. His Discourse upon this occasion is so
very remarkable, that it will be worth our while to run over the particulars of
it.

I also (says he in the 4th. verse) might have confidence in the flesh. If any
other man thinks that he has whereof he might trust in the Flesh, I more. As
if he had said, Think not, O Philippians, that I therefore speak lightly of
those Privileges and Advantages which the Jews among you so much boast of,
upon this account, because I have none of them my self: No, on the contrary, if
I would value my self upon such outward carnal things, I have as much reason as
any. Nay, there is not a Jew among you that perhaps can say so much on his own
behalf in this respect, as I can.

For (as he goes on in the 5th. and 6th. verses.) I was circumcised the eighth
day, of the Stock of Israel, of the Tribe of Benjamin, an Hebrew of the
Hebrews: as touching the Law, a Pharisee: concerning Ze^l, pe^secuting the
Church: touching the Righteousness whi^ is by the Law, blameless.

That is to say, I have not only the Character of a Son of Abraham upon me,
being circumcised; but I am also of the Race of Israel, which all the
circumcised Children of Abraham are not.

Nay further. I am an Israelite of the Tribe of Benjamin; that Benjamin which
our Father Israel so dearly loved, and that Tribe which together with Judah*
kept firm to the house of David, and the true Religion, when the other ten
Tribes revolted.

Nay more, I am an Hebrew of the Hebrews. Not sprung from Proselytes, as many*
among you are, but all my Ancestors, both by Father and Mother, being natural
born Jews.

And then as to my Profession in Religion, it was the strictest among the Jews,
for I was a Pharisee. And you all know that Sect of all others to be the most
eminent for the Reputation of Preciseness and Sanctity.

Neither did I in my Zeal for the Law of Moses come short of the strictest
Pharisee that is among you; for who was more busy, more eager, more violent in
persecuting Christianity than I was?

And lastly, To sum up all, as to the Righteousness which is by the Law I am
blameless. So punctual have I always been in observing the Precepts of Moses
his Law, that none can reprove me in that point; but I may truly, in the Jewish
notion of Righteousness, be accounted a Righteous Person.

But now am I much the better for all these things? Have I any great reason to
glory upon the account of them? No, verily, (as he goes on in the 7th, verse)
but what things were gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ. All these
outward Advantages, my Birth, my Profession, my Sect, my Reputation, my strict
way of living, which might have proved very beneficial to me in all worldly
respects; when I once came to the knowledge of the Christian Religion, I
despised them all: For in truth I found that they were so far from being real
Advantages to me, that they were rather hindrances in the way of Virtue and
Piety.

Yea doubtless (as he goes on in the 8th. verse) I account all things but loss
for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have
suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung that I may win
Christ. That is to say, Not only the abovenamed privileges, but all other
things whatsoever, Wealth, Greatness, Fame, Friends, and Life it self, I
account them all very pitiful things if they be compared with the inestimable
advantages of being a Christian. As I have once, so I will again readily
forsake all, part with all things that the World holds most dear and valuable,
nay, I will trample them under my feet like dirt and dung; provided I may
obtain the Favor of Christ.

And (as he goes on in the 9th. verse) that I might be found in him, not having
my own Righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is by the Faith of
Jesus Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by Faith. This passage has
been frequently misunderstood, and interpreted to a sense that I believe St.
Paul did not think of. St. Paul does not here oppose an inherent Righteousness
to an imputed one; but an outward natural legal Righteousness to that which is
inward and spiritual, and wrought in a Man by the Spirit of God. The
Righteousness which the Apostle here desires to be found in, is not the
Righteousness of Christ made his, or imputed to him; but a real Righteousness
produced in his Soul by the Faith of Jesus Christ.

The plain Sense of the Verse seems to be this. That which above all things I
desire is to be sound in Christ, i. e. to be found a Disciple of his; ingrasted
into him by being a Member of his Church, not having my own Righteousness which
is of the Law, i. e. not being content with those outward Privileges, and that
outward Obedience which by my own natural Strength, I am able to yield to the
Precepts of the Law, which is that Righteousness in which the Jews place their
Confidence, and by which they expect to be justified before God; But that which
is by the Faith of Jesus Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by Faith; i.
e. that Righteousness which I desire, and in which only I shall have the
Confidence to appear before God, is an inward Principle of Holiness; that
Spiritual renewed Obedience to God's Laws which he does require as the
condition of his Favor and Acceptance, and which I can never attain to but by
the Faith of Christ; by becoming a Christian. This is none of my own
Righteousness but God's, it being wrought in me by his Spirit, accompanying the
preaching of the Gospel; and as it is his Gift, so he will own it, and reward
it at the last day.

This is the full importance of that Verse, and then it follows by way of
Explication of what he now said, That I may know him and the power of his
Resurrection, etc. This is the Righteousness that I aspire after, that I may
know Christ, not only by a notional belief of his Doctrines, or Profession of
his Religion, but by a spiritual experimental Knowledge of him, such a
Knowledge as transforms me into his Spirit and Temper; And that I may know the
power of his Resurrection, i. e. that I may experience in my self all the good
effects, that his Resurrection has a power to work in me; that I may feel the
Virtue and Efficacy of it in my daily dying to Sin, and rising again to a new,
holy, and heavenly Life. This is that Righteousness I long for, and in
comparison of which, I account all things in the World but as loss and as dung.

Thus have I given you a full Account of the Text, and of all the Apostles
Discourse that it depends upon. I now come to treat more particularly of it
with reference to the solemnity of this Day.

We all here present do profess to believe the Article of our Savior's
Resurrection, and our business at this time is to celebrate the memory of it.
But we must not rest here. We are not to look upon our Lord's Resurrection
merely as a thing to be believed, or professed, or commemorated; or as a matter
of Fact that only concerned himself: But there is a great deal in it which does
nearly concern us. The Apostle tells us, there is a great Power in it; even a
Power of raising us from Sin to a Holy and Virtuous Life. It is so ordered, as
to be capable of being, and it* ought to be, a Principle of new Life in us, as
it was the beginning of a new Life in our Savior. Now this Virtue, this Power,
this Efficacy of it, as it is that, which with the Apostle we ought all most
earnestly to endeavor the experiencing in our selves; so it is that which will
be fittest for us at this time to apply our Meditations to.

My Work therefore at this time shall be to give some Account of the Power of
Christ's Resurrection in order to the making Men good, which the Apostle here
speaks of; to show how, or in what respects it does influence upon the Lives of
Christians.

Now if we look into the Holy Scriptures, we shall find that there is a
fourfold Power attributed to it; or that it has an influence upon our Lives
in these four respects. That is to say,

I. As it lays an Obligation upon Christians to Holiness and Virtue.

II. As it is the Principal Evidence of the Truth of our Religion, the Design
of which is to make Men Holy and Virtuous.

III. As it is the great Support of our future Hopes, or our Hopes of another
Life; which indeed is the main Encouragement we have to apply our selves
seriously to the business of Holiness and Virtue.

IV. And Fourthly, As to it we do principally owe all that supernatural Grace
and Strength, by which we are enabled to live Holily and Virtuously. Of these
four Points, I shall Discourse very briefly.

I. And First of all, Our Savior's Resurrection has an influence upon our
Practice, as it lays an Obligation upon Christians to lead Holy and Virtuous
Lives. As it is in it self an incirement to Piety, and heavenly Mindedness.

This is indeed the lowest instance of its power; but yet we ought not to pass
it by, because the Writers of the New Testament do frequently insist on it. For
thus they argue. If Christ was crucified for our sins; then ought we to
crucify them in our members. And if Christ rose again the third day; then are
we engaged in conformity to him to rise again to newness of life, to lead a
spiritual, divine, heavenly life, such a life as he now lives with God.

And this in the ancient times was taught every Christian in and by his
Baptism. Whenever a person was baptized, he was not only to profess his faith
in Christ's Death and Resurrection, but he was also to look upon himself as
obliged in correspondence therewith, to mortify his former carnal affections,
and to enter upon a new state of life. And the very Form of Baptism did
livelily represent this Obligation to them. For what did their being plunged
under water signify, but their Undertaking in Imitation of Christ's Death and
Burial, to forsake all their former evil courses: As their ascending out of the
water did their Engagement to lead a holy, spiritual life. This our Apostle
does more than once declare to us.

Thus, Romans vi. 4. We are buried (says he) with Christ by Baptism unto death,
that like as Christ was raised up from the dead, by the Glory of the Father,
even so we also should walk in newness of life. Thus again in the 10th and 11h
verses of that Chapter, In that Christ died, he died unto sin once, but in that
he lives, he lives unto God: likewise reckon ye your selves to be dead indeed
unto sin, but alive unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord. That is to say,
After the example of Christ's Death and Resurrection, account ye your selves
obliged to die to sin, and to live to Righteousness.

Lastly, To name no more Texts, the same use does the Apostle make of Christ's
Resurrection in Coloss. iii. 1, 2. If ye then (says he) be risen with Christ,
seek those things which are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of
God. i. e. You by entering into the Christian Covenant are incorporated into
Christ, He is your Head, you are his Members; and therefore since he no longer
leads a life of this World, it will by no means become you to live like
Worldlings or Epicures, but being risen with him (as the Members ought to do
with the Head) to mind those things that are above where he is, to set your
affections (as he goes on) on the things above, and not on the things of the
Earth. For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God.

These things plainly show that the Apostles delivered the Doctrine of Christ's
Resurrection, as a Practical Doctrine; as a point, which, if Christians
believed as they should do, it would engage them to mortify their lusts, to
die to the World, to place their affections on spiritual things, to have their
conversations in Heaven, where Christ our Head, our Life, now sits at the right
hand of God.

II. Great will the influence and Power of Christ's Resurrection upon our lives
appear to be, when we consider that it is indeed the principal Evidence that we
have for the Truth of our Religion, the very design of which is to make us
Virtuous and Holy.

If any thing in the World can make a man good, it must be a hearty belief of
the Gospel. And if any thing in the World can make a man heartily to believe
the Gospel, it must be the Resurrection of our Savior from the dead. All that
Power therefore, that the Gospel of Christ has to make men good; all that
force and efficacy that its Arguments, its Promises, its Precepts, its
Encouragements, its Threatenings, have upon the Understandings and Wills of men
in order to the bringing them to Virtue and Holiness; I say, all this may in a
great measure ultimately be resolved into the Article of Christ's Resurrection.
For this Resurrection of his was the thing that did from the beginning, and
does now, and ever will ascertain mankind of the Truth of Christ's Religion.
This was, and will be for ever, the convincing Evidence, that what Jesus taught
was true Doctrine, that what he commanded was of perpetual obligation, that
what he promised or threatened he was able to make good.

If Christ had not risen from the dead, but had for ever been detained in the
Grave, notwithstanding all that might be urged from the Goodness of his
Doctrine, and the Innocence of his Life, and the multitude of his Miracles, for
the Proof of the Truth of Christianity (though yet very strong and concluding
Proofs these are) I doubt it would hardly have met with that ready
Entertainment in the World, that we find it did. But a great many, both then
and now, would have made the same Objection against Jesus Christ and his
Gospel, that the Pharisees did of old; that is say, That all his great Works
and Miracles were done by Sorcery and Magic. And that as for the Innocence of
his Life, and the great Virtue and Strictness that he expressed in his
Conversation; that was only used as a Trick and an Artifice the more easily to
impose upon the World. But now when it appears that that Jesus, who taught this
holy Religion, who did those Miracles, who lived that virtuous Life; did, after
he was put to a cruel death, rise again to life, and conversed upon earth for
forty days together, and after that, in the presence of many Spectatours did
ascend into Heaven: I say, when this appears (as God be thanked it is evident
beyond all contradiction) here is no room left for any suspicion of this
nature; but all pretenses of Imposture do perfectly vanish. It is impossible
for any considering man to believe Christ's Resurrection, and at the same time
to doubt of the truth of his Religion.

For thus let us reason. Christ over and over again told his Apostles that he
should be put to death, but after that, he would within three days rise again.
Matthew. xvi. 21. xvii. 22. John xvi. 16.

Nay, he told this not only to the Apostles, but to all the People; nay, more
than that, he gave this as a Token, as an Evidence to them whereby they should
know and be convinced that he was what he gave himself out to be, the Son of
God and the great Prophet and Savior that was to come. John ii. 19.

Nay, in the last place, he not only refers the Jews to his Resurrection as an
Evidence of his being the Christ, but as the last and greatest Evidence that he
had to give. And such as if they were not convinced by, they must expect no
other. Matthew. xii. 39, 40.

Our Savior now laying such a mighty stress upon this point of his
Resurrection, putting his whole cause (as I may speak) upon this Issue: I ask,
How is it possible to imagine, that God Almighty should make these predictions
of our Savior, good; if he was not really what he pretended to be?

If Christ had been an Impostor, it had been the easiest matter in the World to
have stifled all his pretenses for ever. It had but been to have let him
mouldered to dust in his Grave, as all other men do, and as He, without the
help of Omnipotency, would have done; And then all the World would have seen
that he was a Deceiver. But now when in stead of perishing in the Grave, he was
after three days restored to life again, as he had foretold the People; nay, to
a glorious, immortal Life; What are we to conclude from hence?

Did not God in this, appear with a witness as a Voucher and Approver of his
cause? Was not this a demonstration to all the World, that Christ Jesus was no
Deceiver, but that he came from God; and that whatever he delivered was the
Truth of God, and to be received as the Oracles of God? Certainly it was.

For that a man should be raised from the Dead by any other Power, than the
very Power of God; all the World knows to be impossible. The Devil, though he
can do very strange Feats in the natural World: Yet I never heard or read, that
either he or any of his Agents or Ministers, so much as pretended to raise the
dead to life again. And certainly if he could have done it, he would have done
it often before this, (as in the case of Apollonius Tyanaeus, Mahomet, and
others) if it had been for no other reason than to baffle thereby the Evidence
of our Savior's Resurrection, and render it unconcluding.

It must therefore certainly be the Power of God that raised up Jesus from the
dead. But then to suppose that God should employ this Power for the giving
Testimony to a Falsehood, that he should set his own Seal to attest an Untruth,
as he must be supposed to have done, if Jesus was not his Son: What an
unaccountable thing is this? No man that believes that God is faithful and just
and true, and that he governs the World, can possibly imagine such a thing. For
this had been to have contradicted all his own Attributes, and to have laid an
invincible temptation and snare before all mankind to believe an Impious Lie.
You see then what an unexceptionable Proof, (nay Demonstration I may call it)
the Resurrection of Christ does afford us of the Truth of his Religion; which
is the second Instance of the Power that is in it to bring men over to Holiness
and Virtue.

III. But, Thirdly, the Power of Christ's Resurrection for the making us holy
and virtuous will further appear in this respect. Namely, as it is in
particular, the great support of our Future Hopes; the great Pledge and
Assurance of our own Resurrection and Immortality.

For if Christ be risen, then may we also be certain that we shall at last be
raised by him. Because Christ is not risen for himself only, but as the
first*fruits of them that slept, 1 Cor. xv. Good reason therefore had S. Paul
to argue as he does in that place, If Christ be preached that he is risen from
the dead; how say some among you, that there is no Resurrection? On the
contrary (as he urges) If we believe that Jesus Christ died and rose again:
Even so them also that sleep in Jesus will God bring with him. 1 Thessalonians. iv. 14.

For how can we desire to be better assured that our Bodies shall not for ever
sleep in the Grave, but shall at last be reunited to our Souls, and both Soul
and Body live eternally in unspeakable bliss and happiness; I say, How can we
have greater assurance of this than by what was on this day brought to pass in
our Savior?

We have hereby a clear demonstration that the Resurrection is possible. For
Christ who was once dead, is alive again, and lives in unexpressible Glory, at
the right hand of God. And at the same time that he rose, he raised up other
Bodies also of Holy Men to accompany him in his Triumph over Death.

But that is not all. He that raised up himself and them, has given us his
solemn Word and Promise, in as express terms as is possible, that he will by
the same Power raise up us also; and exalt us to the same Glory that he is
possessed of. He has told us that he is the Resurrection and the Life. And
that whosoever believes in him, shall not perish, but have everlasting life;
and he will raise him up at the last day. There cannot be a stronger Proof of
any thing; than our Savior's Resurrection is of the happiness of good Men in
another State.

Which being so; How powerful a means must we needs conclude it to be, for the
Reforming the manners of Mankind, and making them truly Holy and Virtuous?

Since we have thereby such a Demonstration given us of a glorious Immortality
to be expected by us; what is it that can be able to hinder or divert us from a
serious pursuit of those things that lead to it? What could God do more by way
of Motive and Argument, toward the Proselyting the World to Religion and
Righteousness, than he has done by thus ascertaining our future Happiness by
the Resurrection of his Son Jesus?

To be certain, that if we seriously apply our selves to a life of Piety here,
we shall be crowned with everlasting Felicity hereafter! To be certain, that if
we follow the steps of our blessed Savior, we shall for ever shine in the same
Glory and Luster that he now does at the right hand of his Father! To be able
positively to say, I know that my Redeemer lives, and I know that if I live as
he did, I shall for ever live with him; and though it does not yet appear what I
shall be, yet this I know, that when he shall appear I shall be like him! O
what noble Thoughts, what brave Resolutions is this able to inspire us with?
What Difficulties shall we be afraid of? What Labors shall we not willingly
undertake? What Temptations shall we not easily vanquish in the Prospect of
such an eternal Crown of Glory, as awaits us, and is secured to us by our Lord
Jesus?

O happy we Christians that have so clear a Revelation of those things which
God has prepared for them that love him, those things which eye has not seen,
nor ear heard, neither did they enter into the heart of man. Blessed, for ever
blessed be our Lord Jesus Christ, that has begotten us again to this lively
hope by his Resurrection from the dead.

O what mighty Encouragements have we to set our selves against our Sins, and
to labor after the Perfection of Virtue, in comparison of what those have who
are ignorant of our Savior's Resurrection, and who know nothing of the other
World but by the uncertain conjectures of their natural Reason?

If we had no other assurance of the Immortality of the Soul, and the rewards
and punishments of another life, but what is afforded us by the light of
Nature, and the deductions of Philosophy; I doubt we could never expect to see
any great Reformation in our manners.

Some of the Philosophers have indeed to their immortal Fame, asserted the
truth of these things: But then others of them have as much made it their
business to run them down. And as for those of them that spoke the best
concerning the other World, yet God knows, their Discourses upon this Argument
(as will appear to any that reads them) are generally very uncertain, and
altogether conjectural.

But admitting their Reasons to be strong and conclusive (as I am far from
denying that the Souls Immortality is demonstrable by the light of Nature) yet
there are generally these two Inconveniences in the Arguments they make use of
for the Proof of this matter, which render them in a great measure ineffectual
for the reforming men's lives.

First, They are generally of so great Subtilty, so Nice, so Metaphysical, so
much above the reach of ordinary Capacities, that they are useless to the
greatest part of Mankind, who have not understandings fitted for them.

And Secondly, They have this inconvenience likewise, that a Man does not see
the Evidence of them, without actual attention to a long Train of Propositions;
which attention, it may be, when a Man most stands in need of their Support, he
shall neither have the leisure nor the humor to give.

But now the Christian Method of proving another Life, is quite of another
strain, and wholly free from these inconveniences. That Demonstration which
Christ has given us of a glorious Immortality by his Resurrection from the
dead, as it is infinitely certain and conclusive; so it is plain and easy,
short and compendious, powerful and operative. No Man that believes the matter
of Fact, can deny the Cogency of it: Men of the meanest Capacities may
apprehend it. Persons in a crowd of business and in the midst of temptations
may attend to it. And it has this Virtue besides that, it leaves a lasting
impression upon the Spirits of those that do believe and consider it.

Thanks therefore to our Lord Jesus Christ for this excellent Instrument of
Piety, that he has given us by his Resurrection. Everlasting Praises to his
name, that he has thus brought Life and Immortality to light by his Gospel.
This very thing alone was there nothing else to be said for the Christian
Revelation, would sufficiently justify both the Gospel it self, and our Lord
Jesus the Author of it, to all Mankind; nay, and effectually recommend his
Religion, above all others that ever were taught, to all Persons in all Nations
of the World.

IV. Fourthly and Lastly, There is still a further Blessing comes to us by our
Savior's Resurrection from the dead; and in which indeed is chiefly seen and
expressed the great Power of it for the making us Holy and Virtuous. That is to
say, Unto it we do principally owe all that supernatural Grace and Assistance
by which we are enabled to vanquish our Corruptions, and to live up to the
Precepts of our Religion.

As Christ by his Resurrection, did oblige us to lead new lives: As Christ by
his Resurrection did demonstrate the truth of the Christian Religion, which is
wholly in order to our leading new lives: As by his Resurrection he cleared up
to us the certainty of our future State, and thereby gave us the greatest
Motive and Encouragement to lead new lives: So in the last place, by the same
Resurrection he acquired a Power of conserring Grace and Strength and Influence
upon us, by the Virtue of which we are in fact enabled to lead new lives.

Though Christ by his death reconciled us to God, and procured the Pardon of Sin
for us; yet the actual benefit of this Reconciliation, the actual application
of this Pardon, did depend upon our performance of certain Conditions. Which
Conditions were, that we should mortify all our evil affections, and frame our
Lives suitably to the Laws of the Gospel. But now the Grace and Power by which
we are enabled to do this, was not the effect of Christ's Death, but of his
Resurrection.

It was when he ascended up on high and led Captivity Captive, that is, when he
had vanquished Death which had vanquished all the World before: It was then,
(as the Scripture assures us) and not till then that he was in a capacity of
giving gifts unto men. It was not till he was glorified, as S. John observes,
that the holy spirit was given.

Hence it is, that we every where find the Apostles attributing the business of
Man's Justification and Salvation, as much, or more to Christ's Resurrection,
than to his Passion. If Christ be not risen (says St. Paul, 1 Cor. xv.) your
Faith is vain, ye are yet in your Sins. Indeed, if Christ had perished in the
Grave, we had still had all the load of our sins upon us; because we had had no
assurance that God had accepted the Atonement and Propitiation which he had
made for them. And much less could we have promised to our selves, that we
should have been assisted by any Divine Power for the subduing of them.

Again, the same St. Paul tells us, Romans iv. that Christ was delivered for our
sins, and raised again for our justification. Christ's Death was the Sacrifice,
the Satisfaction for our Sins. But it was by the means of his Resurrection,
that that Sacrifice and Satisfaction is applied to us, and we for the merits of
it become justified before God.

Lastly, To name no more Texts, Who (says the same Apostle, Romans viii.) shall
lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is God that justifyeth: Who is
the that condemns? It is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen again;
who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for us.

Here then is the great Power of our Savior's Resurrection to make us good.
Christ being risen from the dead, has all Power given him both in Heaven and
in Earth. God, as St. Paul expresses it, has put all things under his feet,
and has given him to be head over all things to the Church, Ephesians. 1. 22. Now in
the fullness of that Power that he is invested with; as he does on one hand,
with neverfailing efficacy make continual Intercession for his Church and every
Member of it: So he does on the other hand, out of the fullness of that Power,
derive and communicate so much Strength and Grace and Assistance of the Divine
Spirit to all Christians; that if they make a good use of it, they shall not
fail to perform all those Conditions of Faith and Repentance and a Holy Life,
that are required of them, in order to their being made actual partakers of all
those unspeakable Benefits, which he purchased for Mankind by his Death and
Sufferings.

Christ by his Resurrection is become both our High Priest and our King; both
our Advocate and our Lord. By that Power which he then obtained, as our Priest
and Advocate he does with Authority recommend us and all our concernments to
his Father. As our King and Lord, he rules and governs us; he takes care of us;
he provides for us; he represses the insults of his and our Enemies, and
defeats all their attempts against us; And, lastly, he supplies us from time to
time with such a measure of Grace and Strength, and influence of his Divine
Spirit, as he sees is needful or proper for our Condition.

If all this now that I have said be the effect of our Savior's Resurrection,
as it certainly is: Must we not needs own that there is a mighty power in it
for the making us good? What can any man among us, that professes to believe
that Jesus was raised from the dead, say for himself, if he leads a wicked
life? What Apology can he make for the continuance in his sins? Will he say
that the Temptations to sin are too strong for him; that he wants Grace, and
Strength to overcome his evil Habits; and that through the corruption of his
Nature he must of necessity remain a slave all his days to his Passions and
Appetites whether he will or no? Why in saying this, he forgets that Christ is
risen from the dead. For if he did remember that, he would remember also, that
there is a Virtue and Power, above that of corrupt Nature, which he as a
Christian may easily come by, if he seriously seek after it: Namely, The Grace
and Strength of the Holy Spirit of God, which I have been speaking of, which
Christ upon his Resurrection obtained the disposal of; and which he never fails
to send down upon every Soul that heartily prays for it; and when ever he gives
it, he gives it in such measures, that a man may certainly, by the influence
thereof, overcome all his evil and corrupt Affections; or if he do not, it
shall be entirely his own fault.

O what a mighty Comfort and Encouragement ought this to be to all those that
heartily desire and endeavor to be good! All such may with boldness approach
to the Throne of Grace, and confidently open their wants, not doubting of such
Relief as is most convenient for them. Our Savior is risen, and sits at the
Right hand of God. He that loved us so dearly as to die for us, is now entered
into his Kingdom, and is able to grant us whatsoever we ask.

Do we find our selves burdened with our sins? Do we want strength to resist
Temptations, and to master our strong Corruptions? Our Savior is risen, and
now ever lives to make intercession for us. Let us fly to him for succor, let
us beg a portion of that Grace and Holy Spirit be has purchased for us. We may
rest satisfied he will hear our Prayers, and derive such vigor and influence
upon our Souls, that we shall in due time, by the means thereof, vanquish and
triumph over every thing that opposes us.

We cannot in any wise doubt of his Power, for God by raising him from the dead
has made him both King and Priest, has exalted him to the highest Authority
and Dignity both in Heaven and Earth. We cannot doubt of his good will, for he
that underwent so many Difficulties and Agonies for us in the days of his
Flesh, cannot forget those whom he has ransomed with so great a price, nor
suffer that Power which God has given him, to lie by him unimployed.

To conclude, Let us not saint; Let not our hearts be troubled; Let us not
despair of any thing. Our Savior is risen. Our High Priest is entered within
the vail, has taken possession of the highest Heaven, where he continually
makes intercession for us. Such a High Priest as is kind and compassionate, and
tenderhearted; that knows our frame, and remembers that we are but dust;
that pities our weaknesses, and is sensible of the difficulties we have to
conflict with, as having himself had sufficient experience of them. And withal,
such a High priest as is able to save to the uttermost all those that come unto
God through him.

Thus have I given some account of the Virtue of our Savior's Resurrection, in
order to the making us sincerely Good. What remains? But that as we should
heartily thank God for these benefits of it; so we should especially endeavor
to be partakers of them; not contenting our selves with a notional, ineffectual
Faith, but laboring with S. Paul experimentally to know Christ Jesus and the
power of his Resurrection.

Now the God of peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus that
great shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant;
make you perfect in every good work, to do his will, working in you that which
is well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for and
ever,

Amen.
FINIS.

