ADAM ABEL: OR, Vain Man.

A DISCOURSE Fitted for Funeral Occasions, BUT Serviceable to Men in all Ages
and Conditions of Life, to make them humble and Heavenly-minded.

By SAMVEL SHAW, Minister of the Gospel.

PSALM. XXXIX. 5. (...) London: Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and 3
Crowns in Cheapside, 1692.

Reverendo in Christo Patri, THOMAE TENNISONO, D. Episcopo Lincolniensi. (...)
ERuditionem multifariam, and virtutes, quae D. Opt. Max. Gr. in te plurimae
sunt (ornatissimae praeses) celebrare vel celibratum ire, esset culpa deterere
ingeni. Gratias agimus Deo misericordi, and vicegerenti ejus serenissimo
Guilielmo, qui te tuique similes Ecclesiae nostrae praefecerint. Diu intersis
and praesis populo Anglicano (...), and serus in coelum redeas. Visum sit
humanitati and benignitati tuae, lucubrationibus hisce qualibuscunque
patrocinari: Quae licet non olent lucernam, coelum tamen and immortalitem
spirant, and genium licet non ingenium sapiunt. Dulce and decorum est pro
patria mori: At multo certe dulcius and decentius, moriendo ad patriam
remigrare. Oh quam juvat videre animam (origin plane divina) in carceratam
pulvere, vanitatem suam agnoscentem, mundanas sordes excutientem, patriae suae
coelesti (...) inhiantem, and in intimos and artissimos centri sui amplexus
trepidantem. Habeat Ecclesia Romana suos Quietistas: Sed habeat Ecclesia
reformata animas plane inquietas, donec revertantur in sinum patris coelestis!
Cujus amori suavissimo, and omnipotenti gratiae, quam humilime commendat
reverentiam tuam

Cultorum tuorum summus licet infimus, S. SHAW.
Ashby de la Zouch, Mar. 16. 1691/2.
Adam Abel, OR, VAIN MAN, etc.
PSALM. xxxix. 6. (...) Profecto vir ambulat in imagine. Surely every man
walks in a vain show. (...).
I Do not know of any one Temptation, that in all Ages has more solicited and
perplexed the Minds of Good men, than that which springs from the Prosperity of
the Wicked; a Scandal that the best of Men have been ever apt to take against
the Dispensations of God himself; Quod malis been fit, and bonis been; it has
therefore pleased God, in compassion to the^ (...), frequently to obviate this
Temptation, by causing many parts of holy Scriptures to be written purposely
upon this Argument, amongst which this 39th Psalm is one, the main Proposition
of which is, an Exhortation, that we beholding the Prosperity of the Wicked, do
not doubt of the Divine Care and Providence: Be not broken in our Minds, do not
murmr against God, nor fall away from him, but patiently endure Adversity,
and hold fast our Profession. I shall not spend time to analize the Psalm, and
show the methodical and artificial Composure, but directly fall upon the
Illustration, Confirmation, and Application of the Words.

(...), Profecto, surely or verily; an Adverb of Asseveration. But what, is not
every Word of God sure and true, and equally true? What then needs any Note of
Asseveration to one more than another? Though every Sentence of Scripture be
equally true, yet some Sentences are harder to be received and believed than
others; Durus hic sermo, said the Disciples, Joh. 6. 60. concerning the
Doctrine of spiritual Manducation; and some are of greater weight and
importance than others. In these two Cases especially the Adverb of
Asseveration is wont to be prefixed, as may appear by many Texts, both in the
Old Testament and the New; you have an Example of the first Case in Mat. 26.
34. Peter was confident of his own faithfulness and stedfastness, and would not
believe any thing to the contrary; Though all men should be offended because of
thee, yet will I never be offended: To whom our Savior answers with this
Asseveration, Verily I say unto thee, that this night, before the cock crow,
thou shall deny me thrice. Of the latter Case there are abundance of Examples;
in the Old Testament, take that famous Text, Psalm. 58. 11. Verily there is a
reward for the righteous; verily he is a God that judges in the Earth. And in
the new take that as famous, Mat. 18. 3. Verily I say unto you, except ye be
converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven. This most important Doctrine is twice again ushered in with the same
asseveration, Joh. 3. 3, 5. Verily, verily, except a man be born again, etc.
And upon both these accounts it is well used here, for there is no Doctrine
that vain Man is slower to believe, nor more necessary to be believed; than the
Doctrine of his own Vanity.

[Man] i. e. every man. By a Hebrew Idiom Man is put to signify any man, or
every man. Thus both the words, Ish and Adam, are used. So that Man here is no
less than Mankind, or, as it is rightly translated in the Text, Every man. So
Job 14. 1. Man that is born of a Woman is of few days, and full of trouble. The
Greeks imitate the Hebrew Idiom in this, as in many other things. What is a man
profited if he should gain the whole world and lose his own Soul? Mat. 16. 26.
And again, Mar. 8. 36. What shall it profit a man, etc? In short, it cannot be
better expressed in English, than by every man, or by Mankind, which comprehends
Women as well as Men. Surely all Mankind walks in a vain show, Betselem, in
imagine, in a show or shadow. This word is put in opposition to substantialness
or to duration; in both senses, man walks in a vain show. He seems to be
something when indeed he is nothing. We talk much of Apparitions of the Dead;
certainly every living man is but an Apparition, he comes upon the Stage of the
World, and acts one part or other, but he is not that which he seems to be: And
as to his duration, he is a show or a shadow too, soon passing away Apparentia
subito evanescens, says the learned Ravanellus, He flees as a shadow, and
continues not. That Text of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7. 31. comprohends both these
senses, (...), the Fashion or Scheme of this World passes away. It is but a
Scheme, a Draught, a Resemblance of something, and that soon passes away too:
So that there is neither reality nor durability in Mankind.

[Walketh]. This in the Hebrew Idiom signifies lives or converses, and the word
here is of a conjugation that makes it signify very briskly; it is verbum, not
only efficax, but frequentativum, and is as much as to be busy, and make a
great bustle, even as when Jupiter, in Homer, looked down upon Men conversing
upon Earth, and saw them buying, selling, working, playing, trading, fighting,
etc. thought they resembled a company of Pismires running to and fro about a
Hillock: So indeed it is, Man bustles, and makes a mighty stir about just
nothing, and wearies himself in very Vanity.

This word Walking comprehends the whole Way and Work of Man, and may be
reduced, for method sake, to three Heads, to what he is, to what he has, to
what he does.

There are a great many men in the World, concerning whom every one that sees
them may say, They walk in a vain show. The fool, says Solomon, Eccles. 10. 3.
when he walks by the way, his wisdom fails him, and he says to every one
that he is a fool: So I may say of these men, they proclaim their own Vanity.
There are those, says Solomon, that make themselves rich, and yet have
nothing, Prove. 13. 7. There are a great many confident Pretenders to Piety,
Learning, and other Accomplishments, who indeed are but a sounding Brass, or a
tinkling Cymbal, as the Apostle phrases it, 1 Cor. 13. 1. There are many bold
Huffs, that look big, and talk loud, and run down the modester sort of Mortals,
when indeed vox sunt praetereaque nihil; or, in the Apostle Peter's Phrase,
Wells without Water: But I speak not of these, who do loudly proclaim their own
Folly and Vanity, to make it notorious to all men; but I am speaking of the
Condition of Mankind in general; surely every man walks in a vain show, or,
as it is in the Verse going before my Text, Verily, every man at his best
estate is altogether Vanity. Every word has an emphasis with it: In the Hebrew
it is very elegant, Col hebel col Adam, omnimoda vanitas est omnis homo. Adam
called his Son Abel, but David here calls every. Adam an Abel, elsewhere he
speaks more particularly, That so neither great nor small may excuse
themselves, Surely men of low degree are Vanity, and men of high degree are a
Lie; to be laid in the balances, they are altogether lighter than Vanity, Ps.
62. 9. Solomon the Son, is of his Father David's Mind, Eccles. 1. 2. Vanity of
Vanities, says this Preacher, Vanity of Vanities, all is Vanity. See also
Eccles. 6. 12. All the days of his vain life, etc.

But, let us a little more distinctly view Man in the several Ages and
Conditions of his Life.

Every Age of Man is vain, and walks in a vain show.

Childhood. We are born into the World like wild Asses Colts, rude and
ignorant, nay, more infirm, naked, and helpless than they; when we have, to the
great toil, trouble, and weariness of our Nurses, past our Infancy, how light
and vain, toyish and unprofitable is our Childhood, how fickle and unconstant
are we, hugging and rejecting in the same instant, -- Hodie mihi Jupiter esto,
cras mihi truncus eris ficulus, inutile lignum; we hug that in our Bosoms to
day, which we despise and are ready to throw into the Fire to morrow.

Youth is nothing but a further degree of Childhood, grown yet more vain, by
the addition of wildness, wantonness, and untractableness.

And, what is Manhood but a little graver sort of Childhood? There is no more
real solidity in Bags and Lands, in order to true Happiness, than there is in
Pins and Points: There is but little more consistency in the Delights of Men,
than in the Raptures of Children. He was past a Child, that confessed his own
Levity in these words, Romae Tybur amo ventosus, Tybure Romam.

We laugh at Children running after Butterflies, and following Crows, testaque
lutoque, with Clods and Stones. And what is building and planting, fighting and
toyling, but a graver sort of Vanity, commonly attended with a great deal of
Sin and Wickedness.

Old Age is Childhood of the second Edition, and that oftentimes auctior, much
augmented, for this frequently adds Morosity to Vanity, and Wilfulness to
Unsatisfiedness.

But Decrepit Age, what is it but the mere Carcass of Man, Life drawn off to a
caput mortuum.

Every Condition of Men is also Vanity.

Rich men indeed do think themselves to be something real; they sure are more
than a show, they are substantial parts of the Creation, they therefore call
their Estates Substance; as if nothing but Riches were substantial: But indeed,
these Riches are so far from being Substance, that they are in Scripture Phrase
a kind of a Non-Ens; the Spirit of God does not allow them so much as a Being,
before a man can well say they are, they are gone, Prove. 23. 5. Will thou set
thine Eyes upon that which is not? For Riches certainly make themselves Wings,
they fly away as an Eagle toward Heaven. Our Savior indeed ranks Riches
amongst the least of good things, Luke 16. 10, 11. He that is faithful in that
which is least, etc. and then he explains himself, ver. 11. If therefore ye
have not been faithful in the unrighteous Mammon, who will commit to your trust
the true Riches? But Solomon goes further, and disparages them much more now,
by discarding them out of the number of Beings, Will thou set thine Eyes upon
that which is not?

Honors, Grandeur, and Pomp, what! they are but a bubble, a mere shadow. The
Honor that is received from Men is but popularis aura, the Breath of the
People, and that commonly a stinking Breath too, proceeding from Inwards
corrupted and putrid, which is the rotten Constitution of all those, who, as
the Apostle phrases it, have men's persons in admiration because of advantage.
That which we call Grandeur, and translate by Pomp, Acts 25. 23. the inspired
Penman of that Book calls (...), with much Fancy, much Appearance. It could not
have been more fitly translated, than by the words in the Text, with a vain
show: And the Apostle Paul uses a word much like it, (...), the Fashion of this
World: As if all sublunary things were nothing but Apparitions. A Scepter has
really no more substance in it than an ordinary walking-Staff; fine and costly
Apparel are but a show, and indeed for that end are they mostly made and wore.
A splendid Retinue is a fine Show too, but it is a vain one, to maintain them
and command them is more Cost and Trouble than Worship: And the meanest ragged
or leathern Saint that goes abroad continually with his Lifeguard of Angels,
those menial and ministering Servants of the Almighty is better guarded. What a
vain Show was Herod's Royal Apparel, when it could not stave off the Lice and
Vermin from eating him up alive? What a vain show was the Gospel-Rich-man's
Purple and fine Linen, which could neither preserve him from Death nor Hell;
when Lazarus, notwithstanding his Rags and Sores, has a Convoy of Angels into
the Bosom of Abraham? And is not a Table richly furnished with costly Dishes
and variety of delicious Fare a vain show, when it serves no more for Health,
nor the strengthening of the Constitution, than the Prophet's Cake and Cruise
of Water, in the strength of which he traveled forty days and forty nights, to
Horeb, the mount of Gad, 1 Kin. 19. 7. King Solomon is the most competent Judge
in this case of any man that ever lived; for, besides the great Ingenuity he
had to contrive, and the vast Power and Wealth he had to purchase all the
Delights of the Sons of men, (such as stately Houses, fruitful Vineyards,
pleasant Orchards and Gardens, abounding with all sort of Fruits, Pools of
Water, Servants, and Maidens, great and small Cattle, Men-singers and
Women-singers, as you may read in Eccles. 2. and 2 Chronicles. 9.) I say he not only
had all these things, and many more, but also a vast largeness of Soul, and
Wisdom put into him from above, beyond all men upon Earth, whereby he was able
to make a right estimate, and give a right Judgment of things, and yet after
all this, passes this Verdict upon them all, they were all Vanity and vexation
of Spirit, Eccles. 2. 11, 15, 17, 19. -- And now having proved, that the Rich
and the Grandees of the World, with all their Wealth and Grandeur, do walk in a
vain show, it is no great matter for speaking of the Poor, for if the Rich be
Vanity, certainly the Poor are lighter than vanity; they stand for Ciphers in
the World, whereas the Rich seem to make some Figure: Poor men are the Picture
of men, without the Respect of men. There is no Advantage (alas!) for which men
should have their persons in admiration. Where is the man that honors God in a
poor man? Where is the man that regards or reverences an immortal Soul, if the
same happen to be caskt up in an unseemly Body, especially if that also be
hoop'd in filthy Rags? Let the poor man be industrious and laborious, he is
therefore valued as an Ox or an Ass is valued, and no more: Let him be stout
and courageous, he shall meet with no Preferment but what the valiant Vriah met
with, to be set in the forefront of the Battle: Nay, let him be wise and
ingenious, so wise as to preserve the Island, so wise as to deliver the City,
yet he shall be rewarded as Solomon's poor wise man was, in Eccles. 9. 15. the
poor man's Wisdom is despised, and his Words are not heard.

Men in a conjugal state walk in a vain show, molested with Family Cares,
distracted with domestic ill Accidents or Broils, and a man is at variance
with his Father, the Daughter with her Mother, the Daughter-in-law with her
Mother-in-law, and a man's Enemies are frequently those of his own House; there
is either Disloyalty, Undutifulness, Idleness, Profuseness, Unagreeableness of
Tempers, Unsuccessfulness of Undertakings, or one thing or other, that
imbitters that state also. At best it is but a poor and a mean Union, in
comparison of what the rational Creature is capable of.

The Single Life is no less molested with Desires, than the Conjugal is with
Cares; yea, this does with as much Vanity seek to get into the Net as the other
to get out of it. If that Precept of the Apostle's, 1 Cor. 7. 27. (Art thou
bound to a Wife, seek not to be loosed: Art thou loosed from a Wife, seek not a
Wife;) were to be accommodated to these times (as I suppose it is not) I
believe it would be as hard a Command to observe as any in the Gospel.

Kings and Princes are not exempted from Vanity. King Solomon complained of the
vanity and emptiness of things more than any man: Our Savior, a man of
Sorrows, and acquainted with Grief, wore a Crown wholly made up of Thorns. But
I suppose there is no man upon Earth wears a Crown, but there are Thorns in it:
If they be severe in ruling, they will be feared, and consequently hated; if
gentle and merciful, they will be contemned and disobeyed: If they make
chargeable Wars, perhaps they may get the Necks of their Enemies, but then they
lose the Hearts of their Subjects: If they be peaceable or cowardly, they may
possibly preserve the Persons of their Subjects, but then they betray their
Liberty and Estates, and make them a Prey to foreign Princes. In a word, all
Crowns are lined with Cares, and edged with Fears, and perhaps an ordinary Felt
sits easier upon the Head. At best, men's ruling over one another, whether they
be Kings or other inferior Masters, is but a semblance, a show of Rule; the
meanest Saint whom Christ Jesus has washed in his Blood, and made a King and a
Priest to God and the Father, has a more real, glorious, durable Dominion than
they upon that account.

When we consider the wise Counselors and profound Statesmen upon Earth, and
how often and strangely they are hallucinated, baffled, and infatuated, we
cannot but say they walk in a vain show. Let Achitophel the Gibonite bear
witness for this sort of men, whose Counsel was overthrown by Hushas, and
himself by a Halter. If you will, you may help out his Testimony by the
Examples of some late Judges and great Ministers of State of those amongst our
selves. How often have we seen these men falling by the fury of an enraged
People, whom they had for some time ridden, and been made a Sacrifice to those
to whom they had been a Terror.

The foolish and ignorant look like Men, when indeed they are excelled by the
Ox that knows his owner, and the Ass that knows his Master's Crib, Is. 1. 3.
The Psalmist therefore joins these two together, Psalm 73. 22. So foolish was I,
and ignorant, I was as a beast before thee. Sine doctrina vita, est quasi
mortis imago, without Wisdom men may rather be said to be dead than alive.

The wise and the learned walk in a vain show; they trouble their Heads with
many Thoughts, and disquiet themselves in vain, seeking to come to the
Knowledge of many things, and the Causes of things, which they shall never
attain to, and give themselves a great deal of Torment to little or no purpose.
If they do find out some things, they find them out to their cost, and to their
grief; He that increases Knowledge increases Sorrow; he comes to know many
things which afterward he could wish he had never known. Our Mother Eve
coveted to know Good and Evil, and so she did, but it was sorely to her Cost,
and to ours too; in her much Wisdom she found much Grief, which is entayled
upon Us her Posterity to this day. Eccles. 1. 18. Much study is a weariness of
the flesh, Eccl. 12. 12. That you will say is Vanity; yea, but there is
Vexation also added to it; for, Would it not vex any man, to study hard only to
know what abundance of things there are that he is guilty of?

The idle, slothful, and unconcerned, walk in a vain show, if indeed they may
be said to walk at all; these are unprofitable Burdens to the Earth, -- Numeri
sunt fruges consumere nati; They only serve for tale, to make up a Number, and
devour the Fruits of the Earth; they are asleep all their days, and what is a
man good for when he is asleep?

The active, brisk, and lusty walks in a vain show; he is up late and early,
makes a bustle and clatter in the World, disquiets himself and all his
Neighbors, defrauds his Carcass, troubles his House with restless Motion and
Business, and all this is but as Childrens sweating and running after a painted
Butterflye; he is always catching at something or other, in which he is
commonly disappointed, and cannot catch it; and if he do happen to catch it, he
opens his Hand to view it, and behold, it is a Fly.

Bad men are but like men, even as Nebuchadnezzar, who had the Heart of a
Beast, under the Shape of a Man.

Yea indeed, and Good men too, in this World, walk in a vain show. How ignorant
of many things are the wisest of men? How uncertain and fickle in their
Resolutions? how uneven in their Tempers? how ebbing and flowing in their
Devotions, are the Best of men in this World?

And although Religion be something solid, real, and substantial, yet it is but
a shadow of what is to come. The best men are but like good men in this World.
It is but a kind of typical Religion that we have here. What a scant
Resemblance is the holiest Life upon Earth, to the Life of the other World? We
rather make a show of performing religious Duties, than perform them. As Angels
sometimes make a show of eating and drinking, and sitting and walking, and
doing as we do, so we make a show of serving and praising God, and doing as
they do. This Knowledge of ours is but seeing in a Glass, like a Fable or
Parable, in comparison of the intuition and vision of the other World. Our Love
is but like a going Fire, in comparison of the Ardours and Amors of that
World. As men laugh at little Children when they measure heights, so shall we
hereafter disdainfully look back upon our dwarfish stature of this present
World. The whole Life of the best man upon Earth, is but a Dream in comparison
of that state that we shall be in when we awake in the Resurrection. Read 1
Cor. 13. 9, 10, 11, 12.

Every man walks in a vain show. Walks, I told you, according to the Hebrew
Idiom, is as much as lives or converses, and comprehends whatsoever a man is,
has, or does. I come now therefore to speak particularly to these.

First, It relates to what he is. Every man is but a Show, a Resemblance, a
kind of an Apparition. Tselem, the word in the Text, signifies the Image or
Resemblance of a Body, which does not exist truly and really, but in the Fancy
only. Thus the Psalmist uses it, Psalm. 73. 20. As a dream when one awaketh, so,
O Lord, when thou awakest, thou shall despise their image; i. e. them who are
rather a Resemblance of something, than truly or really any thing. To the same
purpose speaks Sophocles, in his Ajax, (...) We mortal men are nothing more
than Images or light Shadows. Man is a Shadow, as to any Reality or
Substantialness; and also as to duration, he is fickle and slitting, evanid as
a Vapor, Jam. 4. 14. as a Bubble, as a Person that comes upon the Stage, and
represents a King, or a Peer, or a Peasant, for a short space, and then
disappears. He is a Flower, a pretty thing to look on, for a time, but
heunimium breves rosae. Alas, how short lived are Roses! Man comes forth like
a Flower, that is sweet and is out down; that is sad, Job 14. 2. yea, he flees
as a shadow, and continues not. The eloquent Prophet uses the same elegant
comparison, Isa. 40. 6. The voice said. Cry; and he said, What shall I cry? All
flesh is Grass, and all the goodliness thereof as a flower of the field: The
grass withers, the flower fades, because the spirit of the Lord blows upon
it; surely the people is grass: The Apostle James applys the comparison to Rich
men, Jam. 1. 10. 11. As the flower of the grass he shall pass away; for the sun
is no sooner risen with a burning heat; but it withers the grass, and the
flower thereof falls, and the grace of the fashion of it perishes, so also
shall the rich man fade away in his ways: But the Apostle Peter applies it to
them in particular, and also to all in general, 1 Pet. 1. 24. For all flesh is
as grass, and all the glory of man as the flower of grass; the grass withers,
and the flower thereof falls away. The Heathen Sages used the same
comparison, (...) Poor Man is no better than a Garment fretted and half eaten
with Moths, which, you know, is then no better than a Rag; he dwells in a
House made of Clay, whose Foundation is in the Dust, and is crushed before the
Moths, Job 4. 19. he consumes as a rotten thing, as a Garment that is
Moth-eaten, Job 13. 27. The greatest Bravery of Man is but like a Moth, a thing
that men always kill by crushing it; it needs no Knife to shed its Blood, no
Halter to strangle it, no Ax to behead it, no, nor so much as a Woman's Nail to
dispatch it; do but catch it and crush it, and it ceases to be; Ps. 39. 11.
When thou with rebukes do correct man for iniquity, thou make his beauty to
consume away like a moth: Surely every man is vanity. They speak of the Apples
of Sodom, fair and beautiful to look upon, but touch them and they drop into
Ashes. Such a comely Vanity is Man, do but touch him, and he drops to Dust in
his Body, and his Soul takes its flight into another World; so vain a thing is
Man, as to his duration. But this Doctrine of Man's frailty, flittingness, and
undurableness, is so well known to all men, and so readily confessed by all,
that I think I need not further insist upon it, though it opens to any man a
great Field of Discourse, at the very first view. A little therefore to
reassume the former Argument concerning Man's seeming to be something, when
indeed he is nothing. I say therefore, there is no solidity, no consistency in
Man.

His Beauty is but a Paint, a Varnish, in comparison of true and substantial
Amiableness, and falls as far short of it as a patcht and painted Face falls
short of of the native loveliness and sweetness, which is to be discerned in
the Complexion of a pure uncorrupted Virgin, or the Virginity of a Damask Rose
The Beauty of this corruptible Body is no more to be compared to the sweetness
and luster of the glorified Body, than Moses's Sunburned Face, when he was
Shepherd to Jethro the Midianite, was to be compared to his shining Face, when
he came down from the Mount of God, and was fain to put a Veil upon it, that
the Children of Israel might behold him; or indeed, no more than the glistering
of a Glowworm is to be compared to the bightness of the Sun at midday.

His Strength, alas! it is but weakness and rottenness. Men, especially
youngmen, are apt to glory in their strength, and to pride themselves in their
running, riding, wrestling, and fighting; whereas the ablest, stoutest,
strongest of the Children of men, is a mere Child, in comparison of one of the
Angels of God, yea, or of one Devil either; yea, I may add, in comparison of
any Child of the Resurrection; for, these Bodies of ours are buried in
Weakness, but shall be raised in Power, 1 Cor. 15. 43. Besides, this Strength
of his, which he pretends to, has no duration with it, it vanishes away in a
moment, and Man as a rotten thing consumes, as a garment that is moth-eaten,
Job 13. 28. Who could choose but pity Peter, stretching out his Hands to be
bound and carried away whither he would not, who had formerly seen him girding
himself, and walking whithersoever he would; or Sampson grinding in the Prison,
who had formerly seen him carrying away the Gates of Gaza upon his Shoulders,
Doors, Posts, and Bar and all? Who, I say, can choose but bewail the vain show
that the strong man makes, who sees his Iron Sinews become like Straw, and his
Brass Bones turned into rotten Wood, as the Almighty loftily expresses it in
the 41st of Job. And as his Beauty is but a Paint or Varnish, his Strength but
Infirmity and Rottenness, so

His Valonr is but a Flourish, and a mere Vapor. The bombast words, and
profane brags of the Philistine-Champion Goliath, who defied the Armies of the
living God, and disdained the little Champion of Israel, Come unto me, and I
will give thy flesh to the fowls of the air, and to the beasts of the field,
proved to be nothing but the blasphemous Bravado of an uncircumcised Tongue,
which was presently silenced, and carried away with the wicked Head that
contained it, and his mighty brandished Blade was wrapped up in a Clout, and
laid behind the Ephod in obscurity. Besides, this Valor and Prowess will, in a
short time, be turned into such Cowardice and Dastordliness, that it will not
dare to encounter, no, not so much as the Worms, that will crawl and feed upon
the valiant Hero, and then he that sees it will wonder, and say, Lo, here is
all that remains of great Saladine; or, Lo here that Limb of a man, who is now
a Worm, and no Man. His Valor is but a Flourish and a mere Vapor.

His Constancy and Faithfulness is but a show of Stedfastness: Ten thousand
Instances do tell us how frail, fickle, and deceitful the Affections, Words,
Promises, Oaths and Vows of the Children of Men are; they love to day and hate
to morrow, and the Hatred with which they hate, perhaps, is greater than the
Love wherewith they loved. Ammon is sick for his Sister Tamar to day, to
morrow, having spoiled her of her Glory, he is as sick of her; Arise, be gone,
2 Samuel 13. 15. And again, Put now this woman out from me, and bolt the door
after her, v. 19. Though all the world should deny thee, cries Peter to his
Master, yet will not I deny thee, I will dye with thee rather, Mat. 26. 33, 35.
But before morning his note is changed, ver. 72. I know not the man: And ver.
74. He began to curse and swear, saying, I know not the man. Peter, I warrant
ye, thought he had a substantial stedfastness, but see what a vain show it
proved to be. It seems, by the Apostle Paul, that the Purposes and Promises
that are made according to the Flesh, i. e. according to men in the Flesh, are
doubtful and unstable, on and off; they are yea, yea, and nay, nay, 2 Cor. 1.
17. And indeed, there is so much lightness and unsteddiness in humane Minds and
Resolutions, and so much variableness in their Affections, that their Constancy
is no more to be compared to substantial Steddiness, than the levity of a
Feather to the stability of a Mountain. -- Besides, let men be never so firm,
faithful, and constant in their Affections, alas, their time comes presently,
when all their Thoughts perish: Let them be never so just, punctual, and true
to their Word, their Breath, and with that all their Words, will vanish into
Air in a short time; so vain a thing is Man: Surely every man walks in a vain
show.

His Patience is but a show of Patience, mingled with a great deal of
Impatience, and soon worn out too. Ye have heard of the patience of Job, says
the Apostle James; yes, so we have, and we have heard of his Impatience too,
witness the third Chapter of his History, when he opened his mouth, and cursed
his day; -- (read the Chapter). We have heard of the Meekness of Moses too, who
was the meekest man upon Earth, Numb. 12. 3. but we have heard of his Passion
too, and rash Anger, Psalm. 106. 32, 33. It went ill with Moses for their sakes,
because they provoked his spirit, so that he spoke unadvisedly with his lips.
And be Man's Patience never so pure, it is rare to find it have its perfect
Work; one Evil after another, one Battery upon the back of another, will shake
it, if not demolish it. Elijah long endured the Perverseness of Israel, the
Affronts and Gainsayings of Ahab and Jezabel; but when word was brought him,
that notwithstanding all his good Offices, Jezabel would have his Head to
morrow, he arose, and went for his Life, and prayed in the anger and anguish of
his Spirit, that he might dye, saying, It is enough, now, O Lord, take away my
life, 1 Kin. 19. 4. His Successor Elisha patiently endured many Provocations
and Persecutions from that idolatrous Generation in which he lived; but when
the wicked and ungrateful King of Israel, for whom he had done so many good
Offices, sent a Messenger to take away his Head, he falls into a sit of
Impatience, 2 Kin. 6. 32. See ye how this son of a murderer is sent to take
away my head: And still worse, in ver. 33. he said, Behold, this evil is of the
Lord; what should I wait for the Lord any longer? Loesa patientia fit furor.

And as the Patience, so the Charity of Man upon Earth is imperfect, it is but
a show of Charity, in comparison of the pure Kindness and Benevolence of the
Angels of God, or of the Spirits of just men made perfect. Alas! how great an
Allay, a mixture of Bitterness, is to be found in the sweetest Temper upon
Earth? The Children of Men indeed, so far forth as they are Children of God, i.
e. followers of him, are Children of Love, for God is Love. But alas, the most
God like, and the best-natur'd of them, do love but in part; they have Gall
mingled with their Honey, the root that bears gall, as Moses calls it, Deuteronomy.
29. 18. is not perfectly eradicated, no, not out of the Trees that are of the
Lord's own planting. Paul and Barnabas were men beloved of God and his Church,
Lovers of God and of his Gospel, great Lovers one of another, constant and dear
Companions in Travel, in Preaching, in Persecution, yet for a small matter (one
would think) this loving pair sell out, and the Controversy grew so hot and,
fierce, that they parted one from the other, when indeed they had more need to
have gone together, Acts 15. 39. -- Besides, this very Charity, as it is
imperfect, so it is evanid, and apt to decay, whilst men are in this Bodily
state. Be it a holy Fire, kindled from above in the Souls of men, yet the very
Fire of the Altar will decay, if Fuel be not administered to it. Distance of
Place, want of Interviews and Correspondence, the decay of that which we
apprehend lovely, any apprehension of Affront, or so much as a Neglect, with
many an other Accident, is apt to quench this Flame, or at least abate the heat
of the Passion. How often do we hear Men complaining of their conditions, which
sometimes they seemed well pleased with, Husbands saying to their Wives, and
Wives to their Husbands, I would we had never met together; the Father saying
to his Son, I would I had never begotten thee; and the Mother to her Daughter,
Woe is me, that ever I brought thee forth; so poor, impure, imperfect, and
unconstant is this Passion, which yet certainly is the noblest that belongs to
the human Nature.

View poor Man in any of his Ages, Conditions, Qualifications, Passions, or the
effects of them, and you will find him vain, and walking in a vain show: What Is
his Mirth, but a light and empty Jovialty, without any real Content or solid
Satisfaction? We may all justly say as Solomon said, Eccl. 2. 2. I said of
laughter it is mad, and of mirth what does it? What does it indeed? for the
very contrary to it is commended above it, and preferred before it, Eccles. 7.
2. It is better to go to the house of mourning, than to go to the house of
feasting: And then, v. 3. Sorrow is better than laughter: And again, v. 4. The
heart of the wise is in the house of mourning, but the heart of fools in the
house of mirth: And again, v. 5. It is better to hear the rebuke of the wise,
than to hear the song of fools; for, as the crackling of thorns under a pot, so
is the laughter of a fool; loud perhaps, but it is but a blaze, neither of any
use, nor for any duration. And if man's Mirth be so vain, that even Sorrow
itself is preferred before it, it might be worth the while to enquire wherein
lies the solidity of Sorrow, and to say of this also, What does it? For, what
does it profit a man to sorrow for the Losses that he cannot retrieve, the
Disappointments that he cannot amend, for things past that cannot be recovered;
for things present, that cannot be remedied; for things to come, which cannot
be prevented? Sorrow is an unhinging of the Soul, and why should Man disquiet
himself in vain? And how much of the strength of their Souls do men mispend in
sorrowing? They oftentimes grieve for an Evil which really was not befaln them,
and oftentimes for a thing, which though it was befaln them, was not really
evil. Did not old Jacob walk in a vain show, when he walked heavily and
mournfully many years, for the Death of his dear Joseph, who was at that time
Lord of all Egypt. And suppose he had known that he was sold into Egypt, I
warrant he would nevertheless have grieved, although really it was no evil to
Jacob that he was sold thither. Mary was troubled that she could not find her
dead Lord in the Sepulcher, when indeed it was good for her that he was risen,
and was not there: So vain, venturous, and foolish a thing is the Mirth and the
Sorrow too of the Sons of men.

Poor man, Is he awake? By Seeing or Hearing he is continually betrayed, or at
least molested: He is either apt to speak what he should not, or sure to hear
what he would not; he is either dissolved in Pleasure, distracted with Cares,
or tired with Business; either vexed with seeing other men do amiss, or envies
them doing well; he is either wearied with very Idleness, and having nothing to
do, or surfeited with doing the same things over and over again, all the days
of his life. He is (forsooth) ever and anon hungry or thirsty, or weary, and a
great part of the waking time of his life is spent in relieving these
Necessities. -- Well then, may some one say, Commend me to Sleep, for this
frees the poor Mortal from all these Inconveniences. True indeed; But then
(alas!) what is he good for? Then the Wise differs nothing from a Fool, nor the
Champion from a Child. As the Grave is, so is the Bed, and all lie down alike
in both, and Sleep like Death sweetly feeds upon them all. There is an old
Question in the Schools, An proestat miserum esse an non esse? One might almost
interpret and illustrate it by waking and sleeping, whether is better, to be
awake and be disquieted, or asleep, and not to be at all. That so great a part
of our little Age passes away so unsensibly, and is spent so unprofitably, must
needs trouble any wise man, who reflects upon it when he is awake. But, alas!
there is somewhat worse than Unprofitableness in it. If it were possible for
men to be asleep, and yet awake at the same time; I mean, if we did know how
our time is spent, and how it goes on when we are asleep, it would add Shame to
our Trouble, and Vexation to the Vanity. Many men do dream, even waking, the
whole life of the greatest part of Mankind is nothing but a Dream; but the best
and wisest of men dream sleeping, yea, and so dream, as that in the morning
they have cause with shame to confess, it was no part of their Goodness or
Wisdom either. Other while poor men are affrighted with Visions or strange
Apprehensions in the nightime, so as that their sleep itself is not sweet
unto them: The Inconveniences and Evils of the Night are so many, that it may
well be doubted whether any man living (if a man asleep may be said to be
alive) do pass any one night of his life in that Peace and Purity as he
desires, and as becomes his noble Nature.

And now I am speaking of Man, as to what he is, and that therein he walks in a
vain show. I may fitly consider also what he knows, he walks in a vain show as
to that also. As his Beauty is but a Paint, his Valor but a Flourish, his
Strength Rottenness, his Constancy, Patience, and Charity but a Resemblance of
some such things, so indeed that wherein he is so very apt to glory,

His Knowledge, is but a Conjecture: He thinks he knows many things, which
indeed he does but guess at; And if any man think that he knows any thing, he
knows nothing yet as he ought to know, 1 Cor. 8. 2. To know things is
properly to know the causes of things; and, alas! how little is there of this
sort of Knowledge, that a modest man dare pretend to? We all allow Solomon to
have been a wise and knowing man, and yet who is there that confesses his
Ignorance more plainly and frequently than he, as appears by that form of
speech that he so often uses, Who knows, and who can tell? Who knows
whether his heir shall be a wise man or a fool, Eccl. 2. 19? Who knows the
spirit of a man that goes upward, and the spirit of the beast, that goes
downward to the earth, Eccl. 3. 21? Who knows what is good for man in this
life, Eccl. 6. 12? Who knows the interpretation of a thing, Eccl. 8. 1? Who
can tell a man what shall be after him under the sun, Eccl. 6. 12? Who can tell
him when it shall be, Eccl. 8. 7? And what shall be after him, who can tell.
Eccl. 10. 14? Our knowledge of things past is by Tradition, of things present
many of them by Hearsay, and of things to come by mere Conjecture: And is not
all this very uncertain? How vastly do the Sentiments of the men of this Age
vary from the Sentiments of the men of the last Ages? and it is very likely,
that many of the Opinions and Doctrines, both in Philosophy and Divinity, which
this present Generation embraces, will in the next Age be rejected and
exploded: Nay, the same man, in different stages of his own Age, and different
circumstances of his own Life, varies from himself. Who can choose but wonder
and confess, that man walks in a vain show, as to his Knowledge, who shall
look into a Church in the beginning of an Age, and find it wholly
Calvinistical, and look upon it again toward the end of the same Age, and find
it almost wholly Arminian, or Bellarminian, the Schools then wholly
Aristotelian, and now mostly Cartesian. How easily and suddenly does Worldly
Interest alter the Minds of men, who force themselves to believe certain
Propositions or Doctrines, because it is for their secular advantage to profess
them. Add to this Vanity the Vexation that attends Man as to his Knowledge;
this might be made out in many particulars, some few of which I touched upon
before. To say nothing therefore of those, consider a little the vexatious
Vnresolvedness that attends the most ingenious and inquisitive of the Sons of
Men; and this Vexation does most haunt the finest Heads, and the tenderest
Hearts. They that are most conscientious, are careful to act judiciously, that
their Consciences may not condemn them, as to the things wherein they allow
themselves; which whilst they seek to do, that they may approve themselves to
God, they make many Enquiries, beat their Brains, turn over their Books, summon
all the Powers of their Souls to give a right Verdict in the case. In this
Contest many poor Souls spend all their days, and can come to no Resolution,
but fluctuate to and fro, like Waves tossed with the contrary Winds, and never
arrive at true Rest, Resolution, and Satisfaction of Mind all their life long.
When after all (if after all) they seem to arrive at some satisfaction, and as
King Agrippa says, are almost persuaded, then presently arises some Storm, some
Blast from some Author or Argument or other, and shakes their not well fixed
Resolution, ravels all again, and drives them back into the same Perplexities
as before; so that their Minds are restless and raging, one while affirming,
another while denying, but always in some degree doubting. And is not this
Vnresolvedness a vexatious Vanity, wherein men, yea, the best of men, do walk:
Which so troubled the modest Philosopher of old, that he cried, Hoc tantum
scio, me nihil scire.

A man may, upon the whole matter rather be said to seem to be, than to be any
thing that is good.

In short, if there be any thing solid or substantial in Man, it is that
whereby he denies himself to be any thing, and empties himself of himself.

And yet this is but very imperfect neither; for, our very Self-denial is
mingled with much Pride and Selfishness, whilst we are in this poor Pilgrim
state.

And so I come to consider, that Man walks in a vain show, as to what he has
or possesses. The Possessions of this World are but a show, a shadow of good
things, in both the forementioned respects, but empty and fleeting; they are
thin and meagre, have no bulk, weight, nor substance in them, nor any
considerable duration. In short, they have neither solidity nor stability. All
Earthly Possessions, even the finest, sweetest, and bravest of them, are cried
up, or cried out on rather for Vanity, by the most competent Judge that ever
lived upon Earth; read Ecc. 2. And what can be lighter and emptier than Vanity?
And it is but an imaginary kind of Happiness, which the Rich, the Honorable,
the Learned, the Valiant, and Victorious do enjoy. So then both the Possessions
themselves, and the delight that is taken in them are both Vanity; Surely every
man walks in a vain show.

The Possessions themselves.

Riches are but a shadow of some substantial and durable Good; they are but a
Fancy. Abstract them from the Love of God, separate them from their End and
Use, and they are as mere Husks, as those that the Prodigal in the Parable fed
upon, in comparison of the Bread of his Father's House: I say, separate them
from their End and Use, for what is a Coffer of Gold better than a heap of
Counters, if no body may touch it nor use it? What is a rich Palace better than
a heap of Rubbish, or a Castle in the Air, if no man may be permitted to
inhabit it? What is costly Apparel better than rotten Rags, if no one may be
suffered to put it on? Well, suppose this Wealth to be used, it is a thousand
to one but it is abused and misspent upon vain Pleasures, unprofitable
Curiosities, or needless Superfluities. The Paint and Pictures of a House
render it never the more safe nor strong: The costly Apparel of Scarlet and
Velvet keep the Body no warmer than the Prophet's Girdle of Leather, or the
Baptist's Coat of Camels Hair. -- Again, abstract Worldly Wealth and Riches
from the Love of God; i. e. Suppose a man to have much Gold and no Grace, much
Wealth and no Virtue, much of Earth in his Hands and nothing of Heaven in his
Heart; suppose his Riches to be gotten by Fraud or Violence, by wicked Cunning
or Covetousness; suppose them to be given him for a Curse and a Snare, and an
aggravation of his Condemnation, does not this man walk in as vain a show as
those Slaves that are continually emyloyed in the Mines of Silver and Gold,
carrying many a heavy load for the service of their Masters, themselves all the
while remaining miserable Slaves for all that? -- Again, compare this Worldly
Wealth with the true Riches, with Grace and Glory, which do enrich and adorn
the Mind; and, what shall we call it then? Let the Prophet speak for me, and
tell you, Hab. 2. 6. it is thick Clay; Woe to him that ladeth himself with
thick clay. Thick Clay! this is Substance indeed, but it is dirty and nasty for
a Soul to wallow in, fitter for a Swine than for a Soul. Let another Prophet
speak, Zech. 9. 3. Tyrus heaped up silver as the dust; and fine gold as the
mire of the streets. Or, let holy Job speak, Job 27. 16. He heaps up silver as
the dust, and prepares raiment as the clay. -- Nay again, we will suppose that
Riches be made use of, yea, and good use of, (which is the best that can be
supposed) yet when Goods increase, they are increased that eat them; and What
good is there to the owners thereof, saving the beholding of them with their
eyes, Eccl. 5. 11? In a word, there is a Curse entailed upon all that covet
after Riches, which does unavoidably light upon them all, viz. they shall go on
still hungring and gaping after more, and shall never be filled, Eccl. 5. 10.
He that loves silver shall not not be satisfied with silver, nor he that
loves abundance with increase. And then he adds, as with good reason he might,
This is also vanity. The worth of these things is placed principally in the
Fancies of Men. You have heard perhaps of some Rich men, who under a
melancholic Distemper have fancied themselves to be very Poor, and I wonder
then what good their Riches do them. And I have read of a poor man, who in his
merry Melancholy would stand upon the Shore and clap his Hands, and laugh and
rejoice at the coming in of the Merchants Ships, fancying them all to be his
own. And I wonder what he could have done more, if they had been all his own
indeed: And is not that a Vanity, that a man may fancy himself into, or out of,
when he pleases? -- Besides, in the latter sense, these Riches are Vanity too,
because they soon vanish; They take to themselves wings, and fly away, as
Solomon, expresses it, yea, and that swiftly and irrecoverably, as an Eagle
toward Heaven. Now these Wings are made up of many sorts of Feathers, such as
Thieves, Knaves, violent Enemies and Oppressors, false and deceitful Friends,
Fire, Sword, Wind and Tempests, Suits at Law, Forgery, Perjury, Moths and Rust,
and I know not how many more. I will quit this point, leaving with you that
good and grave Advice of your best Friend, Mat. 6. 19, 20. Lay not up for your
selves treasures upon Earth, but lay up for your selves treasures in Heaven,
where neither moth nor rust does corrupt, and where thieves do not break
through nor steal.

Friends are a Worldly Possession, highly prized by some, and indeed needed by
all: They are a very precious Possession, a very great, but a very rare
Treasure. True Friends are seldom acquired, hardly kept, and with great Grief
parted with. There are so many things go to the making up of a true and
rightly-accomplish'd Friend, that it may well be doubted, whether every
thousandth man in the World have one. They that live in populous places have
many Neighbors, the Rich have many Servants, the Eloquent have many Auditors,
the Learned have many Pupils and Clients, the Honorable and the Worshipful
have many Flatterers, and perhaps not one of these has a true Friend; for
neither Affinity, Riches, Eloquence, Learning, Honor, or Grandeur can purchase
true Friendship: And indeed, there are few men in this depraved state of
Mankind fit to make Friends of. If a man be foolish or false, if he be covetous
or selfish, if he be cowardly, proud, or passionate, if he be (...),
self-conceited, humerous, inconstant, or an intemperate self-lover, he cannot
be made a Friend of. And (alas!) where is the man that is not some of all this?

To keep a Friend is no less difficult than to get one. The tenderer any part
of the Body is, the sooner it is hurt, and the easilier-offended. Friendship is
a tender and delicate thing, and easily grieved; every small Infirmity,
Passion, or so much as Neglect, is apt to wound, if not to violate it, and
Friendship, when it comes to be suspected is half broken. If no man can be
properly called a Friend, but such an one as Solomon describes, Prove. 17. 17.
Who loves at all times, I doubt there will very few be found, so inconstant is
all human Love, so apt to be abated, if not abolished. Is this thy kindness to
thy friend, said Absalom jeeringly to Hushai, because he did not willingly go
with his Friend David into Banishment, why wentest thou not with thy friend, 2 Samuel 16. 17? How often have all men cause to reflect as tartly upon their
pretended Friends, upon the account of some Commission or Omission or other? Is
this your Kindness to your Friend? Why did you not go hither or thither? Why
did you not do this or that? Why did you not speak thus or thus for your
Friend? Friends were ordained for a time of Adversity, but (alas!) they will
not abide it, few of them are Adversity-proof. -- But, at best, Friends must
part. If they have lived lovingly and faithfully all their days, (which is rare
to be found) yet Death, worse and crueller than the Whisperer that Solomon
speaks of, will separate the chiefest Friends that ever loved or lived
together, and then behold what Lamentation and Mourning; The beauty of Israel
is slain; O Jonathan, thou wast slain in thy high places: I am distressed for
thee, my brother Jonathan; very pleasant have thou been unto me, thy love to me
was wonderful, passing the love of women, 2 Samuel 1. The taking away of such a
Friend, is like the rending of Limb from Limb, or the violent tearing of Soul
from Body. Oh the desire of mine Eyes, cries one; Oh the delight of my Soul,
cries another; how art thou taken away as with a stroke, and have left me to
grapple with the Misfortunes of an injurious and vexatious World alone! Surely
every man walks in a vain show.

Children are a pleasant Possession. With what Ardours of Soul, with what
unparalled Ravishments are these embraced? These are Images of our selves,
nay, Parts indeed rather than Pictures; these are, in a sound Sense, Bone of
our Bone, and Flesh of our Flesh; in them we enjoy our selves whilst we live;
in them we live when we are dead. Well, all this, and a great deal more may be
said concerning this Darling of human Nature, but does not poor Man walk in a
vain show as to this Possession too? After they are begotten and born in Sin
and Sorrow, and nursed up with much Wakefulness and Wearisomness, they become
pretty Playfellows, and enchant the fond Parents with their sweet Smiles and
lisping Rhetoric, and every little Trick, that is any thing akin to Wit or
Ingenuity. In the midst of these Charms, it may be, comes some Disaster or
other, and breaks a Leg or an Arm, an Ague, or the Worms, and deprave the
Constitution, or the Small Pox, and quite spoil the Complexion; nay, it is
great odds, but some of these prove fatal and mortal, and the Child never lives
to see itself a Man or Woman, but is quite taken off the Stage of the World,
before it was able to take a turn upon it, or knew how to walk before the
Living: Oh then, what bitter lamentation, mourning, and weeping is there! If
the Child be sick, we have David fasting, and lying upon the Earth, and in the
anguish of his Soul refusing to eat Bread, 2 Samuel 12. 16, 17. If the Child dye,
then you have Rachel weeping and wailing, ready to tear her Hair, yea, her very
Heart, and refusing to be comforted, Jer. 31. 15. -- Well, but suppose they
escape this first Rencounter, and grow up to be young Men and Women, then
behold what Perplexity follows, about their Education, and disposing of them
into a settled Condition in the World; what perpetual Care and Fear for them,
lest they should be infected, ensnared, depraved, lest they should take bad
ways, or come to any bad end. Alas! how many prove to be the greatest
Heartbreaking to their Parents, in their Manhood, who were the desire of their
Eyes, and delight of their Hearts in their Childhood? They please our Eyes when
they are Children, and when they are grown up, are oftentimes as Smoke to our
Eyes. We play with them at Two or Three, and it may be weep over them at Twenty
or Thirty: We dandle them in our Hands at first, and afterward wring our Hands
over them. Children are commonly said to be the Staff of their Parents Old Age,
and yet how often do we see Men beaten with this Staff of their Old Age? If
they prove bad and useless, we are ready to wish we had never been the
Instruments of their Being. If they prove good and useful, oh then how are we
tormented with Fear, lest they should dye before us, lest the Increase of our
House should fall in the Flower of their Age. If they be wicked, and yet live
on, it is but to consume the Parents Eyes, and grieve their Hearts: If they be
cut off in their Wickedness, Enemies to God, and unprepared for another World,
then, O my son Absalom! O Absalom my son, my son, 2 Samuel 18. ult. If they be
good and useful, and yet cut off in the flower of their Age, then there is the
greatest Complaint, and the bitterest Cry of all, I will go down into the grave
unto my son mourning, Genesis 36. 35. If Children dye before the Parents, there is
a sad loss and disappointment; if they survive, yet the Parents are not free
from Fears or Jealousies, so long as they live, For who knows whether he
shall be a wise man or a fool that shall be after me, yet shall he have rule
over all my labor? This is also Vanity, Eccles. 2. 19.

Yet on the other hand, As to be full of Children is to be full of Folly, Fear,
Care, and Anxiety, so to be Childless, is to be full of Envy and Discontent,
and Unsatisfiedness: This is also Vanity. There is one alone, and there is not
a second, says Solomon, he has neither Child nor Brother; q. d. he has no body
to take care of, or to provide for, yet there is no end of all his labor,
neither is his eye satisfied with riches, neither says he, for whom do I
labor, and bereave my soul of good? This is also Vanity, yea, it is a sore
Travel, Eccles. 4. 8. See the grievous Vanity of Humane Life in that one
Instance of Rachel; before she had Children, she was carried away with Envy and
Anger, Give me children, or else I dye, Genesis 30. 1. Well, she has them, but
take them away, and then she is transported with bitter Grief and inconsolable
Sorrow; she weeps for her Children, and would not be comforted for her
Children, because they were not. To have Children puts us to trouble to get
Estates for them, whilst we live: To have none, puts us to trouble how to
dispose of our Estates when we dye. -- Surely every man walks in a vain show.

And what shall we say of Victory and Success in Warlike Actions? Why, I say,
it is a pretty kind of Pageantry, a vain show, like all the rest. What a rare
sight is it to see one man beat another? a rare thing for a rational Soul to
contemplate, two silly Mortals striving upon the Stage of the World, and one
too hard for the other. That which one man carries away from another is but a
shadow of Victory, in comparison of that Victory which the diligent and
watchful Soul gets over itself and its own Passions and vile Affections: And in
a short time, the brave victorious Hero, that now carries his Head so high,
must lay down Head and Hands and all, at the Feet of Worms and Vermin.

And what shall we say of Reputation and Credit? Solomon indeed says, A good
name is better than precious ointment, Eccles. 7. 1. Well, be it so; yet
precious Ointment itself is but a Vanity: Let but a few dead Flies fall into
it, and it makes it send forth a stinking Savor: So does a little Folly, a
small Mistake, quite spoil the man that is in much Reputation for Wisdom and
Honor, Eccles. 10. 1. One false Step taken, one Error committed, one malignant
But clapped in, spoils the Beauty and Braveness of a man's Character. Naaman the
Syrian Prince had a brave Character, Naaman Captain of the host of the King of
Syria, was a great man with his master, and honorable, because by him the Lord
had given deliverance unto Syria; he was also a mighty man in valor. This was
a noble Character indeed, and yet all blurred with one mischievous But, But he
was a leper, 2 Kin. 5. 1. What pity was it that this fair Portraicture should
all be dashed with one Blot, But he was a leper? This very good Report or
Reputation is so ensnaring a Vanity, that the Apostle Paul, found there was
need to watch against it, as well as against bad Report, 2 Cor. 6. 8. It is so
vain a show, that our Savior tells us, that the more universal and
uncontrollable it is, the more dangerous and mischievous it is, Luke 6. 26. Woe
unto you when all men shall speak well of you. The Approbation and Praise which
is solid, and makes men happy, is of God, and not of men, as the Apostle
phrases it, Romans 2. 29.

In a word, whatever Solidity or Substantialness may be fancied to be in any of
these Worldly Possessions (as certainly some do bid fairer for it than others,
yet their flittingness, vanishingness, and want of Duration, renders them a
vain show after all. The things, all the things that are seen are (...),
temporary; but the things that are not seen, these are eternal, 2 Cor. 4. 8.

I told you, that both the Possessions themselves, and the Delight and Content
that is taken in them, are a vain show. Having spoken to the first of these, I
now come to speak a word or two to the latter, viz. the Delight of the Sons of
men do take in these Possessions. I am wont to distinguish between Possessions
and Enjoyments, though in ordinary Discourse men are apt to confound them; for
I can make good these two Propositions, viz. That many men possess many things
which they do not enjoy.

As the covetous Worldly-minded man possesses Bags of Gold and Silver, which he
dares not touch, except it be to count it, and lay it up again, and many other
sorts of Riches, which he dare not make use of, either for his own Relief, or
the Relief of the Poor. -- Secondly, That some men enjoy many things which they
do not possess. He that is so refined and spiritualized, as to view all things
in God, and to take notice of the Goodness, Sweetness, and Bounty of God in the
whole Creation, and has such an Interest in Christ Jesus, and in the Love of
GOD, as to enable him to say, All things are mine; and so much Charity, as to
delight in the Good of his Neighbor as his own, enjoys even the very
Possessions of other men, and all that is sweet and excellent in them, as
truly, and more purely, than if they were his own. As the little Be, that
flies from Flower to Flower in any man's Garden whatsoever, and sucks out the
sweetness thereof, so does the Chemical Soul extract true sweetness out of all
the Works of God, though they be the Possessions of other men, and by this rare
Art makes them his own, at least takes more Pleasure in them than the Owner.

But this is a Digression not here to be handled, and perhaps too curious to be
well understood; to return therefore,

The Delight and Pleasure that is taken in Worldly Possessions is but fanciful
and imaginary; the Fancy is tickled, but the higher Powers of the Soul are not
really satisfied, nor indeed pleased. As the Sports and Delights of Children
are inferior to the Sensations and Satisfactions of grown Men; and as the
Laughter of Fools differs from the Pleasure and Contentment of Princes; as the
crackling of Thorns under a Pot differs from a Fire made of a good substantial
pile of Coals; as the uncertain, unsteddy, and smoaky light of green Wood
differs from the strong, steady, and pure flame of the dry Tree; so much do the
Relishes, Pleasures, and Delights which men have and find in sublunary
Vanities, fall short of the true, pure, perfect Satisfactions and Ravishments
which are the Entertainment of the other World. As the crackling of thorns
under a pot, so is the laughter of a fool: this also is vanity, Eccles. 7. 6.
Yea, Solomon was no Fool, yet he said in his Heart, Go to now, I will prove
thee with mirth, therefore enjoy pleasure; and behold, this also is vanity,
Eccles. 2. 1. In the midst of this fanciful Laughter the Heart is often sad,
sorrowful, pincht, and pined; and generally the occasion of our sensual
Merriment, if it were well considered, deserves indeed to be the cause of
serious Grief and Sorrow.

And this imaginary kind of Pleasure and Delight that we take in Earthly
Possessions, is flitting and evanid too. The Pleasure that the greatest
Sensualist in the World takes in his Meat or Drink, or any other sensual
Entertainment, lasts no longer than whilst the Necessitys of Nature are in
supplying, or the Appetites are gratifying. When the Appetites and Cravings of
Nature are once gratified, then farewell all Pleasure, no more Delight, no more
Relish remains: And till these Appetites and Cravings are renewed, all sensual
Pleasure and Delight is wanting; and, Who would desire to be hungry on purpose,
only that he might have the pleasure of eating? Surely every man walks in a
vain show. As to what he possesses, and as to the Delight he takes in those
Possessions, they perish with the using.

And so I come to the third Head, Every man walks in a vain show, as to what
he does or undertakes.

Under this Head I comprehend all humane Plots, Projects, and Contrivances, as
to all which one may safely say, Man walks in a vain show. There are many
Devices in the Heart of Man, which ought not to be there, and there are many
there that never prosper, many that do take effect, and it had been better they
had been abortive: And after all, in a short time, this plotting Head is laid
in the Dust, and all Man's Thoughts do perish with him.

There are many proud, revengeful, ambitious, covetous Devices in the Heart of
Man, which ought not to be there. I am resolved what to do, says the Rich man
in the Gospel, I will pull down my barns, and build bigger; and I will say to
my soul, Soul, thou have much goods laid up for many years, take thy ease, eat,
drink, and be merry, Luke 12. 18. q. d. I am resolved now to lead a merry Life
for many years. What a vain Conceit, what an infirm Device this was, the next
words declare; Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be required of thee, etc.
Therefore we read of an heart that devises wicked imaginations, Prove. 6. 18.
and of the Heathens, that were vain in their imaginations, Romans 1. 21. and of
imagining a mischievous Device, Psalm. 21. 11. Such a mischievous Device was
that of Esau against his Brother Jacob, The days of mourning for my Father are
at hand; then will I kill my Brother Jacob, Genesis 26. 41.

Again, There are many Projects and Devices in the Heart of Man, which never
prosper; according to that of Solomon, Prove. 19. 21. There are many devices in
a man's heart, nevertheless the counsel of the Lord that shall stand. Balaam
plotted and conspired, and used all Charms imaginable against Israel, to curse
and destroy them, and yet it came to this at last, Surely there is no
enchantment against Jacob, nor divination against Israel, Numb. 23. 23. Nay,
honest Plots, and innocent Contrivances, which men, yea, good men, employ their
Heads and Hearts about, often prove abortive; yea, when they are, as one may
say, come to the birth, there does not prove to be Strength enough to bring
forth. Jonathan set his Heart upon making David King, and promised himself a
great Contentment in it, because he loved him, and knew that he was wonderfully
and passionately beloved of him; Thou shall be King, and I shall be next unto
thee, 1 Samuel 23. 17. A very fair and probable Plot, a very likely Conjecture;
but alas, it miscarried: David indeed lived to be King, but Jonathan never
lived to see it. Let a Project be spun as fine as a Spider's Web, a little
Accident, some small Circumstance no bigger than a Be may break it.

Again, There are many Projects and Devices in the Hearts of the Sons of men,
that do take effect, and it had been much better they had been abortive, and
these purposes frustrated. Who knows, says Solomon, what is good for man in
this life, all the days of his vain life, which he spends as a shadow,
Eccles. 6. 12? Who knows? Indeed many men have thought they have known, but
they have been miserably mistaken. It had been a thousand times better for many
men to have had their Plots and Contrivances frustrated and disappointed, than
gratified or performed. Amnon consulted with his Cousin Jonadab, and subtly
contrived to fulfill his incestuous Lust upon his Sister Tamar; And Jonadab,
says the Text, was a very subtle man, 2 Samuel 13. but Jonadab had better have
been a Fool, than to have given such Counsel; and Amnon was a Fool for
following it, verse. 13. Thou shall be as one of the fools in Israel. And indeed
by this subtle Plot he lost not only his Reputation, but his Life too, ver.
28, 29. Haman the Agagite plotted and contrived cunningly against Mordecai, by
obtaining a Decree from the King for the murdering of a whole Nation at once,
for so he knew that Mordecai could not escape. Well, he obtained the Decree,
and thought to glut his Eyes with their Blood, little thinking that the Queen
herself was a Jew, and that unhappy Mistake brought him to the Gallows. What
Contrivances and Plottings are to be found every where, for the procuring of
Places, the getting of rich Matches, the establishing of Trade, the increasing
of Riches, which after a short time the Projectors wish had rather been
frustrated and disappointed than accomplished.

And lastly, After all, vain Man lays his plotting Head in the Dust, and then,
at least then, all his thoughts perish, Psalm. 146. 4. His Breath goes forth,
he returns to his Earth, in that very day his Thoughts perish. Sennacherib
plots against poor helpless Judah, and makes himself sure of her; With the
multitude of my chariots I am come up to the height of the mountains, to the
sides of Lebanon, and will cut down the tall Cedar trees thereof; and I will
enter into the lodgings of his borders, and into the Forest of his Carmel, 2
Kin. 19. 23. Well, the next News is, It came to pass that night, that the Angel
of the Lord went out and smote in the camp of the Assyrians an hundred
fourscore and five thousand, ver. 35. The King himself returned (with shame
enough you may imagine) and whilst he was at his Idolworship, his Sons smote
him with the Sword; ver. 37. Thou fool, this night shall thy soul be required
of thee, and then, etc.

And so I come to consider Man as to what he enterprises and undertakes, and to
show, that therein also he walks in a vain show. Solomon was a man of the
greatest Undertakings that the Sun ever saw: You may see an Epitome of his
Labors and Undertakings, and the many things that he set his Hand unto,
Eccles. 2. and after all, he turned himself, and looked on all the Works that
his Hand had wrought, and on the Labor that he had labored to do, and behold,
all was Vanity, and there was no profit under the Sun, ver. 11. As to that
which Man undertakes, he disquiets himself in vain, says the Psalmist here in
the Text; the Verb is of the plural number in the Hebrew, because of the
Collective Ish, or every man, going before, and is translated tumultuantur,
turbantur, perstrepunt: They make a great deal of bustle and clutter, and
disquiet themselves, and indeed they disquiet the neighboring World round
about them, as Alexander the Great did of old, and Lewis the Fourteenth does at
this day, and all in vain. Surely every man walks in a vain show, they
disquiet themselves in vain.

It would be endless to run through all the Actions, Undertakings, and
Enterprises of men in the World in particular. In general, there is a great
deal of bustle, commotion, disturbance, distraction, made by this silly Animal
called Man, upon the Stage of this World, and all to no purpose.

One arms himself and all his Vassals cap-a-pee, and goes out into the Field,
to amaze and affright the impotent and on-looking World, he wins Towns and
Countries, he adds Kingdom to Kingdom, enlarges his Dominions, spreads his
Language, advances his Name, erects Statues and Trophies, and yet this great
Undertaker obtains no real Interest, Love, or Honor in the Hearts of his
Fellow Creatures, he does not approve himself to God, he has no Favor from his
holy Angels; His exalted Name will soon be forgotten, his stately Trophies in a
short time demolished, and himself to the end of the World confined to a few
feet of Earth; and after all, the great Hero shall be judged as another man, as
the meanest private Sentinel.

Another is continually contriving for his Appetite, how to gratify that; he
searches the Air, the Earth, the Seas; he ransacks the World for Meat for his
Belly, or Sauce for his Meat, or curious Cookery for both. These Dainties are
hard and costly to be gotten; when they are gotten, they gratify but for a
Meal, they perish with the using, and lose all their sweetness, after the
cravings of this silly whining Appetite are once gratified. After these, fresh
Entertainments must be sought out, and after those still new ones, or else the
childish whimpering Appetite cannot be quieted: In all which much Money is
spent, many Hands employed, much of Man's vain short life wasted, and great
Estates many times exhausted, many men feeding their Capons with Currants so
long, till themselves have not a Capon nor so much as a Hen to feed upon. In
the mean time the Stomach is rather cloyed than truly gratified, and the
Constitution rather surfeited and depraved, than nourished or strengthened; and
after all, that heavy Doom of the Apostle takes place, 1 Cor. 6. 13. Meats for
the belly, and the belly for meats, but God shall destroy both it and them. And
the Worms will make no distinction, nor find no difference between their
Carcasses and the Flesh of meaner Mortals.

Another runs up and down the World, catching here and there, goes into this
City, and that Country and Kingdom, to buy and sell, and traffic, and get
Gain; where there is any Market, or Fair, or concourse of People for Trade,
there is he. His whole Enquiry is, Who will show us any Good? and his whole
business to acquire it. The whole design and business of his vain and vexatious
Life is to gather Riches, and yet (see how he walks in a vain show!) perhaps he
can no more catch these Riches than a man can catch a Shadow; or if he do catch
them, they are but a Shadow still: And to whom he shall leave them he cannot
tell. Perhaps (I say) he can no more catch them than a Man can catch a Shadow.
Riches in this respect are much akin to Honor, of which it uses to be said,
Sequentem fugit fugientem sequitur; it flees him that follows it, and follows
him that flees from it. They look for Riches; they look for much, but lo, it
comes to little; and if they bring it home, the Providence of GOD, the Blast of
the Almighty blows upon it! Haggai 1. 9. Or, as the same Prophet speaks, ver.
6. They sow much and bring in little, eat and have not enough, cloth them, but
there is none warm, earn wages, and put it into a bag with holes. Laban the
Syrian, a plodding Mammonist, left no Stone unturned, no way unessay'd to
multiply his Flocks, and grow very pecorose; he changed his Servants Wages ten
times; he required the stolen and the torn at the Hands of his Shepherd; but
Heaven found out a way to frustrate him, and after all, his Shepherd died as
rich as he.

Or if he do catch them, they are but a shadow still, no substance, weight, or
solid worth in them, no Virtue to fill the Soul, to satisfy the Desires, to
still the Cravings, or allay the raging Appetites of a Worldly Mind. It is with
vain Man in this respect, as the Prophet elegantly expresses it, Isaiah 9. 20.
He snatcheth on the right hand, and yet is hungry; he eats on the left hand,
and is not satisfied. The Desires and Cravings of Minds and Spirits can be no
more satisfied with Gold and Silver, than the Hungerings of the Body can be
allayed with Words, or satisfied with Notions and Speculations. Solomon, that
had all things, was satisfied with nothing, but still cries out, All is vanity;
and there is no profit under the sun. He that loves silver, shall not be
satisfied with silver, nor he that loves abundance with increase, Eccles. 5.
10. Nay, it is a thousand to one but Vexation is added to the Vanity. Worldly
Wealth does only not satisfy, but oftentimes molesteth the Owner, tempts him
to Pride, Security, Forgetfulness of God, and disdaining of Men; exposes him to
Envy, and that lays him open to Thieves, and abundance of Snares and Dangers,
makes him lead an unquiet life, anxious days, and wakeful nights, whilst he is
sollicitous how to keep them whilst he lives, and how to bestow them when he
dies: And it is ten to one, he is as much hated or laughed at when he is dead,
as he was envied whilst he lived; which brings me to the third thing.

To whom he shall leave them he cannot tell. If he have no Child of his own
Body begotten, he is all his Life time solicited by his own, or it may be his
Wives Relations, and at his Death he is sollicitous how to distribute his
Wealth; if he give all to one, the rest will judge him unnatural, and be ready
to curse his Ashes; if he distribute it amongst many, it spoils the great
design of making one only very great and rich, and the pretty Plot of keeping
up the Name and Grandeur of a Family. If he have an Heir of his own Body to
transmit his Wealth to; then if it be a Daughter, he fears her great Portion
will betray her to some idle swaggering Gentleman or other, that will first
impoverish her, and then hate her; first get rid of what she has, and then seek
to be rid of her too. If it be a Son, still (alas!) who knows whether he shall
be a Wise man or a Fool, whether he will be industrious or profuse? This
fretted King Solomon whilst he was alive, Eccles. 2. 18, 19. I must leave it
unto the man that shall be after me; and who knows whether he shall be a wise
man or a fool? And indeed (as Job speaks) the thing that he feared came upon
him; for his Son and Heir Rehoboam foolishly forsook the Counsel of the grave
Senators, and followed the rash Advice of his giddy beardless Courtiers, and in
one day lost ten parts in twelve of that great Estate which his Grandfather
with so much Hazard and Courage had purchased, and his Father with so much Care
and Prudence had so long preserved. Was not this a foolish Prodigal Son, who at
one sitting rent off ten parts in twelve of a Kingdom, which his Father had
kept together forty years? And does not this sort of men walk in a vain show?

Another plods day and night, spends his Time and Strength in endless Enquiries
after Knowledge, which Enquiries are sometimes bootless, commonly painful, and
always imperfect.

They are sometimes bootless; for, how often do poor Mortals search for the
hidden Treasures of the knowledge of many things both in Nature and Divinity,
which they find out even as they find out the Philosopher's Stone, sought by
many, but found by none; who whilst they seek an Art to turn all things into
Gold, only find a way to turn all their own Gold into nothing. The Apostle, I
remember, speaks it to the reproach of some silly Women, that were always
learning, and never yet were able to come to the knowledge of the Truth, 2 Timothy
3. 7. I believe the Character may as well be applied to foolish and vain men,
as to silly Women; for how many industrious men are to be found in the World,
who by the most diligent search could never arrive at the knowledge of many
things which they desired; and because God did not reveal it to them, resolved
to consult the Devil, and make him their Intelligencer and Interpreter?
Certainly the Thirst after Knowledge is no less vehement than after Silver and
Gold: I doubt not, but that many curious, inquisitive, and fine Minds are as
earnest and vehement in this Case, as the Merchant that we read of in the
Parable, who sold all his Possessions to buy the Field in which was the Pearl
of great price: As appears by the Saying of a young Nobleman of this Kingdom
(not then Two and Twenty years old) in a Book entitled Seraphick Love, that he
would gladly exchange all the Honor and Estate that he had in this World, for
the knowledge of Natural things, and their Causes.

These Enquiries after Knowledge are commonly painful; to which I may add
costly. The knowledge of things indeed by Inspiration, may seem to be easy,
(and yet the inspired Priests and Priestesses of the Heathen gods labored
under great Distress and Difficulty, whilst they were pleni deo, as they called
it, and in plain English, besides themselves). This Knowledge (I say) by
Inspiration, may seem to be easy; but yet Solomon, who himself was also
sometimes (at least) inspired, tells us, That much study is a weariness of the
flesh, Eccles. 12. 12. And the expense of the Animal Spirits, and the fatigue
of the Brain, is confessed by all men skilful in human Bodies, to be greater than
the travel of the Feet, or the labor of the Hands. To speak nothing of the
costliness of enquiring after Knowledge, in some respects, (though the charge
of Education, Books, and Travels might be reasonably suggested) the most
studious and inquisitive men do find to their Cost and Vexation of Mind, many
things, which they may wish they had been ignorant of, and by the pretense of
knowing many things, come to this miserable pass, to be forced to confess their
own Ignorance, and to acknowledge, that they know nothing. But of all the
Painfulness and Vexation which belongs to the Enquiries after Knowledge,
nothing seems to me to be a greater, than the Vnresolvedness and
Vnsatisfiedness of men's Minds, after they have made all these Enquiries. After
all, to hesitate and be doubtful, and to cry out in the anguish of ones Mind
with Solomon, Who knows, and who can tell? Lord, what a Disease is this in the
human Nature, and what a state of Vanity does it argue! but this I pass by, as
having spoken something of it before.

Lastly, This Knowledge we get by all our Enquiries is very poor, mean, and
imperfect, in comparison of the Visions and Intuitions of the other World, when
we shall see as we are seen, and know as we are known, feast upon Truth itself,
and behold all things in God, and him in the pure Rays of his own Divinity. The
Apostle Paul knew much, but he did not know the whole, and that which he did
know he knew but in part, 1 Cor. 13. 9, 10. We know in part, but when that
which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away. But
this also I touched upon before.

What shall I say of vain Man? It is impossible to enumerate his Fatigues and
Vanities. In short therefore,

Does he work? Then he wearies himself, and exhausts his Strength. Does he
play? Then he forgets himself, and emasculates his Spirits.

Does he Trade by Land? Then he is either tempted to cheat, or liable to be
cheated, either to get another man's unduly, or to have his own got from him
deceitfully.

Does he Traffic by Sea? He may indeed see the Wonders of the Lord in the
Deep, but no greater Wonder, than that he himself is not there. Who but vain
Man would expose his Life to so eminent Dangers, for things not necessary to
Life, yea, some that are more hurtful than useful; and all the Sweets of his
Family and Country for a few foreign Spices?

Does he go into Wars? He lies at the Mercy of every random bit of Lead, shot
by a Fool, or a Child, or a Madman: If he conquer and kill, here is no cause
of glorying, one would think, to have sent his Brother's Body to the Grave,
and, it may be, his Soul to Hell.

Does he purchase? He is either mistaken in the Title, abused by the Law,
envied or hated by his Neighbor. However, would he but be patient, and stay a
while, he should have Earth enough to serve his turn, without any Cost or
Charge at all.

Does he marry? He does certainly fall into Encumbrances. Does he vow a single
life? He does as certainly fall into Snares. If he marry, he is fain to endure
the Yoke; if he do not, he has much ado to endure to be curbed.

Does he study Day and Night? Poor man! with a great deal of Pain and Weariness
he comes to understand, that all things are Uncertainty and Vanity, a thing
that one had better never to have known. And after all, How dies the wise man?
even as the fool dies, Eccles. 2. 16. Does he arbitrate differences, and make
peace? blessed is he, says Christ: But for all that, he shall be sure to meet
with many a Curse. To go about to please both Parties, is as if a man should
undertake to serve two Masters; which no body can well do.

Does he court the Favor of great men by Fawning and Flattery? It is a great
Slavery to an ingenuous and generous Mind; the Favor of wise Princes will not
be so gotten: And if they be foolish and inconstant, it will be soon lost.

Is he active, and brisk, and a lover of business? He disquiets himself; yea,
active Tempers, that cannot manage their own Metal, many times disquiet the
World about them. He that does much, will certainly sometimes do amiss; if he
should do all things well, he will yet be accounted a Busiebody.

Is he idle, careless, and unconcerned? He is then a selfish Sot, an
unprofitable Member of the Universe. He that regards nothing, does not himself
deserve to be regarded.

In a word, Cast your Eyes over the World, and behold the Diseases and
Distresses of some, and what will you call it but an Hospital? Behold the
Distractions and Disorders of all the rest in one kind or other, and what will
you call it but a Bethlehem?

And so I come, in the last place, briefly to consider Man in the highest acts
of Human Life, viz. his religious acts, and to show, that even in them also he
walks in a vain show; or, to give it you in the Psalmist's words elsewhere,
Every man at his best estate is altogether vanity.

Now, these Religious acts are either outward or inward. As to outward acts;
Men do not only work and trade, but even pray and come to Church in a vain
show. Not only Markets and Fairs, but even religious Assemblies and
Congregations are a show too, which men walk in, whilst they pretend to walk
with God. Those make a great noise in the Ears of Men, and these are little
better than a noise in the Ears of Heaven. Who can deny, but that the Worship
of the Profane is a vain show, who to day swear by the Name of God, and to
morrow call upon the Name of God; to day eat unto Gluttony, and drink unto
Drunkenness, to morrow eat the Flesh and drink the Blood of the Son of God; to
day pray to God to damn them, and to morrow pray him to save them; to day
behave themselves so reverently, as if God were in the Head, and to morrow live
as if there were no God in Heaven? Who can imagine but GOD and Men too must
loath such impious Vanity as this is? Who can deny, but that the Idolatrous and
Superstitious Worshippers walk in a vain show, who worship either they know not
what, or they care not how, offering up strange Fire to God, and indeed
affronting him, whilst they pretend to adore him? Who can deny, but that the
Worldling, who has set up the World in his Heart for his Idol, walks in a vain
show, who sits before God as an attentive Hearer of his Word, and makes much
love to him with his Lips, when his Heart is far from him, and runs after his
Covetousness? Who can deny, but the Hypocrite walks in a vain show, who comes
with his God I thank thee, in his Mouth, when he has no love for him in his
Heart, who confesses the Sins which he has no mind to part with; who begs the
Grace which he has no mind to receive, who seems to condemn and humble himself
before God, in the mean time is great in his own Eyes, and ceases not upon all
occasions to magnify and applaud himself before men.

But some one will say, All men are not profane, worldly, idolatrous,
hypocritical, there are some substantial Worshippers, that worship the Father
in Spirit and Truth.

Answ. It is true indeed, The father seeks such to worship him, Joh. 4. 23.
but I doubt he finds few; for (not to strain the Apostle's words to the
utmost and most uncharitable sense, 1 John 5. 19. Totus mundus positus est in
maligno) though Profaneness may be easily discerned, yet sure I am,
predominant Worldliness and Hypocrisy are in many Hearts, where they are not
discovered; nay, it is to be feared, the false Heart itself will not be
convinced of them. And as for Idolatry, though the foreign Reformed Churches do
all put it off from themselves, to the Heathen and Antichristian Nations, yet I
fear, concerning some of them, one may take up Samuel's words to Saul, If ye
have indeed destroyed Idolatry utterly, what* means this bleating of the sheep,
and lowing of the oxen which I hear? If any one should answer as Saul did, we
have reserved these innocent, safe, and significant Ceremonies, to sacrifice to
the Lord, to adorn and grace the Worship of God; it will perhaps be replied, as
Samuel replies, Obedience is better than Sacrifice; or, as another Prophet
expresses it, Quis ne quisivit hoec?

I answer further, What man is there upon Earth, in whom these Sins are not
found in some degree or other? And so far as they are found, they do pollute
the Worship, and subject it to the denomination of Vanity.

But I answer, thirdly, That the word Tselem in the Text does not signify a
vain show properly, but a show, a resemblance, a representation, or image, in
opposition to substantial; as the Picture which we see in a Looking glass is
the representation or resemblance of the Face that looks into it. And so every
man, without exception may be said to walk betselem in imagine, in a show, as
to his religious acts; which I shall further explain under the next Head, viz.
his inward religious acts.

The internal actings of Grace are but a show, a resemblance of some such
thing, in comparison of what they were in Man innocent, or shall be in Man
glorified. The inward pious acts of our Minds do make us approach the nearest
to Substance of any thing that we have or do: For as a man thinks in his
heart, says Solomon, so is he. If any thing will denominate a man a
substantial Christian, it is these inward Acts of the Mind, the Acts of Faith,
Hope, and Love, the Acts of Self-denial and Contempt of the World, and of the
whole Creation in comparison of the Creator: And yet even these are but a show,
a resemblance of something rather than any thing substantial.

The Love that the most affectionate, devout, and refined Soul exercises
toward GOD in this mixed state, is but a shadow, a resemblance of Love, in
comparison of the Ardours of another World. I love thee, said Peter, I love
thee, yea, Lord thou know that I love thee, John 21. 15, 16, 17. Poor Peter!
I believe in a degree he did love him; yet I believe he was grieved that he
could love him no better. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,
with all thy soul, with all thy mind, with all thy strength, Mark 12. 30. This
is the first and great Commandment; a great one in deed! (...); And who is able
to perform it? How many Alls are here? All and All, and All and All. Lord, what
mortal man can with any Modesty pretend to such a generous Love as this is?
Every man that has his Senses exercised, to discern between Good and Evil, will
confess that this Command is just, equal, and reasonable, yea, and very
pleasant too, (for what is, what can be sweeter than a Life of Love?) But yet
the most devout, the most amorous and ardent Soul that this day inhabits a
mortal Body, must needs confess his Straitness, and bewail his
Unaffectionateness; and though he may seem to be drenched in this holy Passion,
yet has cause to pray, Lord, shed abroad the Love of God in me. Perfect love
(says the loving and beloved Apostle) casts out fear, 1 John 4. 18. Alas! Where
is this perfect Love then? for Fear, yea, some degree of slavish Fear, is found
in every Heart of Man; yea, though he love GOD sincerely and ardently too, yet
he is apt to fear he does not love him enough: The hottest of our Love is cold,
the strongest is weak and faint, in comparison of what Adam's once was, and
Abraham's now is. We call it Love indeed, but it is rather Liking than Love,
rather hankering than either. It is but a going Fire, a Glowworm, at best but
a Blaze or a Blazing-Star, in comparison of the Fervors, the Delights, the
Complacencies of the Spirits of Just men made perfect. The greatest zeal of
mortal Man for GOD, (which yet is the Flower of Love) is in comparison of the
angelical Ferver, but as a Fire painted upon the Wall, in comparison of that
which burns upon the Hearth. The Apostle Paul was as zealous for his Lord,
and did and suffered as much for him as any of his Disciples whatsoever, so
that in nothing was he behind the chiefest Apostles; yet he esteemed himself as
nothing, which is not so much as a show, 2 Cor. 12. 11.

How weak and tottering is the Trust and Confidence in GOD, which the most
steady Soul can pretend to in this World, in comparison of the unmixt and
unshaken Affiance in him, which constitutes the Joy and Security of the other
World? The three unmartyr'd Martyrs in Dan. 3. are renowned for their Faith and
firm Dependence upon their GOD, ver. 17. He will deliver us out of thy hands, O
King. This was their Confidence in GOD; but it had its If for all that, ver.
18. But if not, be it known to thee, O King, etc. But the Affiances and
Assurances of the other World are above all Buts and Ifs: The stoutest of our
Confidence here, is but a shadow of that Confidence, which shall have no shadow
of turning. What fear of miscarrying can there possibly be to him, who
perpetually walks in the light of God's Countenance? what Danger, what
Suspicion can there be of being plucked from thence, to a Soul folded in the
Arms, and wrapped up in the Bosom of the Almighty?

And what is our Hope in this mortal state? A poor languid thing, a faint
Velerity, a dull yawning, rather than a greedy gasping, a lifeless stretching
forth the Hands toward, rather than an eager laying hold upon Eternal Life. It
ought to be an earnest and vehement Longing, and alas! it scarce amounts to a
sincere Desire or Expectation.

And what are our Acts of Selfdenial, in comparison of the exinanition of the
glorified Saints, who cast down their Crowns before the Throne, Rev. 4. 10. --
What is our Contempt of the World, in comparison of that Disdain with which
refined and glorified Souls behold all earthly Possessions, eying and enjoying
all things in GOD alone? Alas! what mortal man can oculo irritorto spectare
acervos, with an Eye altogether undazzled, or with a Heart altogether
unaffected and disengaged, contemplate the Bravery and Grandeur, the precious
and glistering Possessions of this World, (whether his own or other men's)
perfectly free from Enchantment; I mean, who can do it, and neither dote nor
envy? But they that are got above the Sun, and look down with the Eyes of
Angels, do see all things under the Sun to be a contemptible Vanity, a sore
Vexation and Labor, and that there is no Profit in them, as Solomon expresses
it.

How pinched and narrow are the most enlarged and capacious Souls upon Earth in
their Thanks and Praises to the Almighty Goodness, in comparison of the noble
Raptures and Ravishments of glorified Spirits, who never cease to chant forth
the Praises of God, singing the Song of Moses, and saying, Blessing and honor,
and glory, and power be unto him that sits upon the throne, Rev. 5. 13.
Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honor, and power, and
might be unto our God for ever and ever, Rev. 7. 12.

In a word, How poor and insipid, how dull and stagnant are the Joys and
Delights of the best assured and most satisfied Souls upon Earth, in comparison
of the pure, strong, active, and ravishing Complacencies which are the Portion
of the Spirits of just men made perfect; when all their Faculties are filled up
to the very brim of their respective Capacities, with the Communications of
Divine Grace, Light, Life, and Love, and the blessed creature is made all that
which the ever blessed Creator is, so far as his finite and limited nature
will permit. How mean is the Satisfaction that imperfect Souls do reap, who sit
down by the Streams, and drink a little to allay their Thirst, in comparison of
the Solaces of glorified Souls, who are always in an ecstasy of fresh and
unfading Joys, who are still drenching themselves in Fullness of Joy, and
bathing themselves in Rivers of Pleasure, which are at God's right hand for
evermore. It was properly said therefore to the good and faithful Servant, Mat.
25. 21. Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord, because it was impossible that the
infinite Joy of his Lord should enter into him.

But here some one will be apt to cry out with the passionate Psalmist,
complaining of his own and the Churches Afflictions, Psalm. 89. 47. Lord,
wherefore have thou made all men in vain?

To this I answer, GOD made Man upright, holy, blessed, and substantial, but
Sin has brought Vanity upon Mankind; yea, the whole Creation is thereby
subjected to Vanity. Man, in departing from his GOD, who is Life and Substance,
is become vain, and whatever he is, has, or does, is but imperfect, is but a
show. But yet GOD has not made all Men in vain neither, because he has yet
ordained for all believing Souls a substantial and durable state of Happiness;
so that though they be mean and imperfect in this World, they shall be perfect
and complete in another.

Let us rather cry out with the same Psalmist, when he was in a more serene and
undisturbed Temper, Psalm. 8. 4. Lord, what is man, that thou art mindful of
him, or the Son of man, that thou visitest him? What is poor Man, whom his Sin
and Apostasy has made so vain and despicable, that thou after all this
should think Thoughts of Love toward him, and prepare such excellent Honor
and Happiness for him? How great cause have all the poor crippled Souls of Men
to admire the infinite Bounty of the Great King, and to cry out with lame
Mephibosheth, in 2 Samuel 19. 28. we were all but as dead Souls before God, yet
has He set us amongst the Angels of Heaven, and will entertain us with them
that eat at his own Table.

And this indeed might serve for one use that I would make of this Doctrine,
but this is not all; therefore,

Secondly, This may serve to humble the Children of Men, to pull down their
proud Crests, and to reduce them to a sober Temper. This is one of the most
notorious and odious Vanities of vain Man, that he does think highly of
himself, and magnifies himself in his own Eyes, and is ambitious to be Great in
the Eyes of other men. There is nothing more miserable than the Devils, and yet
nothing prouder than they. Even Simon Magus himself, the Sorcerer, that Child
of the Devil, was desirous to be accounted (...), some great one amongst his
Neighbors. It is a common and true Observation, that by how much the less worth
any man has, the more he is conceited of his own Worthiness, and seeks to put
off himself in the estimation of the World: Whereas the Wise and the Good, sua
se virtute involvunt, are satisfied in and from themselves, and are
sufficiently defended by a conciousness of their own Worth and Innocence, and
goodness of their Cause, and had rather be accounted to have nothing to say,
than to answer Fools according to their Folly; had rather forseit their
Reputation than their Discretion. Now, what can be thought of more effectual
for the correcting the Insolence of vain Man, than to be thoroughly convinced of
his own Vanity? If the Bubble could be persuaded it was but a Bubble, surely it
would swell no more. If Man could be persuaded, that he was a Worm, and no Man,
he would be content with a humble crawling upon the Earth, and not magnify
himself, as if he were not a creeping thing. If any thing in the World can
enoble Man, and make him something, it is Humility; and if any thing in the
World can humble him, it must be the consideration of his own Vanity and
Nothingness. (...) was justly esteemed by the wise Greeks as a Voice from
Heaven, as an Oracle of God, e coelo descendit; and I think the Christian
Divinity acknowledges the same. When the noble Souls of men do consider their
own original, how pure and excellent it was, how they are now sunk into Prisons
of Flesh, and inverst in Sense and Sensuality, how dark they are in their
Apprehensions, how unsteddy in their Resolutions, how uncertain in their
Knowledge, how irregular in their Affections, how boisterous and unreasonable
in their Passions, how easily carried away to Vice, how imperfect in Virtue,
how weak, distempered, and diseased in Body, how disappointed in Relations, how
vexed, tired, deceived, or oppressed in their Estates, how perplexed in this
World, and how doubtful of a better; in a word, what a bundle of Vanity Mankind
is become, how can it be, but that it must needs make him sober and humble, and
consequently contribute something to the restoring of him to his primitive
Excellency; Nam quo minus sibi arrogat homo, eo evadit clarior and nobilior;
The less Man arrogates to himself, the more excellent he is.

Thirdly, Let this Doctrine of Humane Vanity affect our Hearts compassionately
toward the miserable apostate Sons of Men. Of all Sights in this World, this
is the saddest, and most to be lamented; Nations unhinged, Kingdoms weltering
in Blood, the most devilish Plots, the most unnatural Wars, the most barbarous
Persecutions that ever the Eye of a Spectator beheld, or the Pen of an
Historian recorded, if they were all registered, would not make up such a
tragical Volume, as the third Chapter of Genesis alone does. We pity the
Wounded when we see their Wounds bleeding, and their Limbs broken; we pity the
Sick, when we see their restless and painful state, and hear their lamentable
Shrieks and deadly Groans; we pity the Poor and the Forlorn, the Fatherless,
Motherless, Friendless, Harbourless, Helpless, when we see them with naked
Feet, and half-naked Bodies, in the pinching Severity of Frost and Snow,
seeking their Bread in desolate places; we pity poor Prisoners, that lie in
Dungeons, are bruised with Irons, sink in the deep Mire, or else are made fast
in the Stocks, sed with black Bread and cold Water, lodged on a little Litter
amongst Toads, and Newts, and noisome Vermin; we pity poor banished men, driven
out of their own sweet Country, and from amongst their dear Relations, wandering
amongst wild Beasts, or barbarous men, more savage than Beasts, enjoying no
Liberty, except it be that of wandering from one Cave or Den or Desert to
another; we pity unhappy Princes, whose Crowns are fallen from their Heads,
and the Children of prodigal Gentlemen, Lords of Towns, who come to be relieved
by the Towns whereof their Fathers were sometimes Lords. Oh! but how much more
reason have we to pity and bewail vain Mankind, the miserable Posterity of
Adam, wounded in Soul with a most deadly wound, all their Bones broken, sick of
the most painful Disease and loathsome Leprosy, poor and desolate, naked and
forlorn, Slaves and Prisoners in the Dungeon of the Body, and under Satan
their Jayler, bunisht from Paradise, estranged from God and his holy Angels,
and wandering in the Wilderness of this World in a thousand Wants, Necessities,
Dangers, Uncertainties, and Perplexities, degraded from their excellent Honor
and Dignity, and now feeding upon Husks ordained to be Meant for Swine! When
Peter and John saw the lame man that could not walk at all, they pitied him
and healed him. When we consider poor Mankind walking in a vain show, though we
cannot heal them, let us pity and pray for them, and bewail our own and their
Degeneracy. Nay,

Fourthly, Let us not only bewail the Vanity of Mankind, but be in a godly
sense weary of our vain Life. The highest pitch which most men aim at, is but
this, to be desirous to live, and content to dye: But the Apostle Paul was of a
higher form, he was only content to live, but desirous to dye, desirous to
depart, and to be with Christ, because it was far better, Phil. 1. 23. Possibly
you will not allow me to argue from the Prophet Elijah, 1 Kin. 19. 4. Lord,
take away my life; nor from holy Job, chap. 7. 15, 16. My soul chooses death
rather than life; I loath it, I would not live always, for my days are vanity.
Perhaps you will say, these holy men were either in a Passion not to be
justified, or in a Rapture not to be imitated; but yet sure, in good earnest,
and in sober Temper, without either Passion or Ecstasy, the consideration of
our poor imperfect state, and vain life, ought to beget in every Pilgrim Soul a
holy and comely weariness of this state of alienation and elongation from its
GOD; I dare not venture to call it the Grace of Coffeehouse, because the
Grace and Art of Contentment has obtained so great a Name in the World, but
methinks a degree of Weariness or Coffeehouse, may well enough stand with a
predominant submission to, and satisfaction in the Will of God. One thing
cannot be desired, (especially not with such a desire as (...) imports) but the
contrary to it, must be in some degree rejected or undervalued: So that I
suppose the Apostle Paul's desire to depart comprehends in it a kind of
weariness of Commoration in the Body. And indeed, who can reasonably blame a
man that is weary of a state of Bondage, Banishment, Imprisonment, Poverty, and
Vanity, and desires a state of Liberty, Enlargement, and Perfection? Which
brings me to the last thing.

Fifthly, Study, covet, love and long after things durable and substantial. As
we ought with a holy kind of Weariness to lead (...), a life void of Pleasure
in things here below, so ought our life to be (...), a flight of our Souls to
God alone. The whole Creation is subjected to Vanity, but the Creature shall be
delivered from the Bondage of Corruption; therefore the whole Creation groaneth
and travaileth in pain, Romans 8. 20, 21, 22. And shall not we much rather long
to be delivered from our state of Vanity? Can we seriously think of our Vanity,
Misery, and Indigency, and not cry out, Oh that we were as in times past, when
we came out of the Hands of God at first! or, Oh that we were as we shall be in
time to come, when we shall be put into the Hands of God again. It is lawful,
it is reasonable, it is safe, it is seemly, to look for and long after a state
of Purity and Perfection, a state of complete Health and Liberty, a Reunion
with our God and Center, to be absent from the Body, and present with the Lord.
It is most natural and comely, for every thing to tend to its own Perfection;
and the most healthful Constitution of a Soul, is to be sick of Love. The
description of regenerate and sanctified Souls is, that they love the appearing
of Christ, 2 Timothy 4. 8. that they look for his appearing, Tit. 2. 13. that they
look for, or long for the Mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto Eternal life,
Jude, ver. 21. that they look for, and hasten to the coming of the day of God,
2 Pet. 3. 12. And so we find they have done, Paul desiring to depart and to be
with Christ, and David longing for the Salvation of God, Psalm. 119. 174. his
Soul breaking for very longing, Psalm. 119. 20. waiting for the Lord more than
they that watch for the Morning, I say, more than they, Psalm. 130. 6.

To conclude, Lament not intemperately the removal of any out of this state of
Vanity and Vexation of Spirit, into a state of satisfaction and perfection of
Spirit. Rejoice not immoderately in the fairest and sweetest Circumstances of
this present life, but live under a painful sense of your own Indigency,
breathing after a state substantial and durable, blissful and eternal: And God
of his infinite Mercy grant, that we always endeavoring to perfect Holiness in
the fear of God, at our removal hence, may have an abundant Entrance
administered unto us, into the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ;

To whom, with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be all Praise, Honor, and Glory,
for evermore. Amen.
ERRATA.
PAge 1. line 8. read (...); p. 2. l. 4. r. male; p. 29. l. 19. r. in 3 p. 100.
l. 7. r. requisivit; p. 106. l. 8. 8. velleity.

A Catalogue of Books printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns
in Cheapside.
Books in Folio.
RIchard Baxter's Catholic Theology, plain, pure, peaceable, for pacification
of the Dogmatical Word-Warriours. In three Book. Methodus Theologiae
Christianae: By Mr. Richard Baxter. Sixty one Sermons, preached mostly on
public Occasions. By Adam Littleton D. D. Rector of Chelsey in Middlesex, etc.
One Hundred select Sermons upon several Texts, Fifty upon the Old Testament,
and Fifty on the New. Choice and Practical Expositions on Four select Psalms.
These two by the Reverend and Learned Tho. Horton, D. D. late Minister of Great
St. Hellens, London. A third Volume of Sermons preached by the late Reverend
and Learned Tho. Manton, D. D. In two parts, the first containing Sixty Six
Sermons on the Eleventh Chapter of the Hebrews: With a Treatise of the Life of
Faith. Part the second* A Treatise of Self-denial; with several Sermons on the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, and other occasions; with an alphabetical Table
to the whole.

