A LETTER WRIT TO AN Atheistical Acquaintance UPON His turning Papist IN HIS
OLD AGE.

By a Person of HONOR.

LONDON: Printed for John Tailor, at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1691.

A Letter, etc.
'TWAS the saying of a great Prelate, That a Man of no Religion, might easily
be of any; and though I remember your ill Living, and this Bishop's true saying,
yet I could not but be surprised at the News of your turning Papist, especially
considering you had attained, not only to the full Years of Discretion, but the
Old Age of Experience, which still is, or ever ought to be, the Parent of
Wisdom and Consideration, both great Enemies to Popery.

But upon more serious Thoughts, I find Old Age to be the fittest Season of a
Man's whole Life to turn Papist in, because it is nearest to that of Dotage; and
since you are upon losing your Senses, (as I conclude you are by turning
Papist) I can assure you, you could not have picked out a Religion so fit for
one that has lost his Senses, as that of the Roman Church, because you must
necessarily be out of them, before you can be admitted into it, since none can
be a through paced Papist, who does not believe the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, and none can believe that Doctrine, who does believe his own
Senses, since if you credit them, you cannot believe it; a strange Article of
Religion where to urge the Testimony of Sense is an Offense, and to produce the
Arguments of Reason, is no less than High Treason against the Royal Dignity of
this Majestic Popish Miracle, called Transubstantiation.

But since I remember you never before owned your self to be of any Religion,
(still living as if you had none;) I cannot say you have now changed your
Religion, but chosen it, and indeed considering how many Years of Deliberation
you took before you did it; in my Opinion after all, you have culled out the
very poorest of all the Flock; for Amsterdam could not have given you a worse,
I mean as to the true Direction of your Soul to Heaven; nor yet a better to
convey it thither, if you will believe your Priest's false Promises of
Salvation; for if you have much Money, no matter how little Religion; since you
may with it purchase a whole Bundle of Absolutions and Indulgencies sufficient
to keep your Soul out of Purgatory, which is the Parent of Indulgencies
invented by the Roman Church, merely to frighten and cozen the Rich out of
their Estates.

And though our blessed Savior bid the young Man in the Gospel, who had great
Possessions, To sell all and give to the Poor and follow him, (for it is as hard
for a Rich Man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, as it is for a Camel to pass
through the Eye of a Needle,) yet the Popish Clergy will not allow the Rich to
sell any thing, but they must convey all they have to the Patrimony of the
Church, and then they shall be sure to purchase Heaven for their Money; for, as
the Roman Church can by their Miraculous Art, Transubstantiate a small Piece of
Wafer into the full bulk of a Man's Body; so they can with the same Ease, and
by the same Art, Transubstantiate and stretch the small Eye of a Needle, to the
large Size of a Door, wide enough to let you into Paradise without stooping,
though you were as big as a Camel; for they will tell you, St. Peter left with
them the Keys of Heaven, and they have Power to keep out and let in whom they
please; so that if you can but pay your Priest Money enough on Earth, he will
never fail to promise you a good purchase in Heaven; for he is so good a
Christian, that he will give you Heavenly Treasure for your Earthly, by Bill of
Exchange on the Virgin Mary, upon the Credit of so many Masses he will make to
her, for your Soul on Earth; but be not deceived by them, as you must certainly
be if you rely on them.

For this false pretended Heavenly Wealth he tells you he will furnish you with,
is but mere fairy Treasure, which only lasts till it be discovered, and then
vanishes as soon as it is; it being not more against the Course of Nature, that
the Money you pay for those Masses should ascend to Heaven, than it is against
the Stream of Reason to believe, that they should carry your Soul there; such
common Sail-Masses for the Souls of the Dead, being but like fine bright Clouds
in the Sky, which though they look high, and make a great show, yet they have no
real Substance, being but mere Airy Apparitions,

Therefore, though I was ever an Enemy to your Religion, yet I am still so much a
Friend to your Person, as to wish, that as you have had always a great share of
natural Wit, so you may now have so much Heavenly Wisdom, as to pray to God to
open your Eyes before Death quite closes them, that you may through his Grace
clearly see the foppish Religion you have now chosen, and the ungodly Life you
have still led, and that you may seriously reflect and truly repent of both,
and often remember that Death will soon seize you, and Judgment will soon
follow it; therefore pray to God for your own Soul, whilst you are in this
World, and trust not to the Money you leave with your Priest to pray for it
after you are gone to the next, for then such Masses can only cheat you of your
Money, but can never rid you of your Sins.

And did I not certainly know that you had much rather (in Point of Religion)
read a dull Lay-man's Letter, than a Learned Divines Book; not that you can be
ignorant, but that such a good Book must be much better for your use, than such
a short Letter; but because this Letter, is so much shorter than such a good
Book, and consequently less troublesome to read, for all Troubles you esteem
Evils, and of Evils the least is best, or rather less ill; And therefore had I
not known this sort of Logic to suit exactly with your lazy and unzealous
Humor, I should have rather recommended to your reading, a Sermon writ by that
Pious and Learned Divine Dr. John Tillotson, for many Writers do but in a
manner fence with their Arguments against Popery, but this Dr. makes all his
home thrusts, and wounds the Papist in the very Vitals of their Religion; and
as a skilful Painter may draw exactly well a great Beauty in small Proportions,
so this Learned Person has largely confuted Popery in one short Sermon.

And as none can be said to steal from the Bible, though he takes and quotes
never so many Verses out of it. So none can be justly accused for having stolen
or plundered this Reverend Doctor of any of his Arguments against the common
Enemy the Papists, because he designed them freely for the benefit of all such,
as will employ all or any of them, to that use, they being bestowed by him, on
that public and charitable Design, as the Lands they call Commons, are left to
certain Parishes, who are never to be fenced in for private use, but still left
open for public Benefit.

Nor did I ever hear of any Man that valued Money the less, because it passed
through many hands before it came to his, nor a good Receipt the worse, because
'twas given him by another, and not found out by himself; and therefore, since
you now find your self infected with a foul malignant Inclination to Popery,
and since I can here give you a Sovereign Medicine against it; never trouble
your self to examine who found it out, where the Drugs grew, or from whence they
came, or from whom I had them, so they can cure you. And this I am sure I can
truly say, That what I have taken out of Doctor Tillotson's Sermon, was not to
show my own good reading, but to set out your bad Religion, which is chiefly
made up of Ceremony and Show.

But the Papist bids the Protestant Heretics hold their prating, for they have
an Argument and a Question, that is able to knock them all in the Head, (sure
they mean only such a have no Brains in them.) Their Argument is as very
common, as it is highly irrational, which is this; The Protestant Church holds a
Papist may be saved, the Roman Church denies that a Protestant can, therefore
it is wiser and more safe to be of that Church, to which Salvation is granted on
both sides: But this is a weak sophistical kind of reasoning, and only fit to
take such as have no Reason; for by this Argument the then Donatists that held
the Baptism of the Catholics was not good, and the Catholics that held the
Baptism of the Donatists was good should make it reasonable to infer, that
therefore St. Austin, and the other Catholics ought according to this Rule, to
have gone and been re baptized by the Donatists, because both sides acknowledged
their Baptism to be good.

St. Paul also owned a Possibility of Salvation, though with great Difficulty to
those, who built with Straw and Stubble on the Fouudation of Christianity, that
is, who built upon the Jewish Ceremonies, and Observances, but they denied a
Possibility of Salvation to St. Paul and his Followers, saying, Unless they
were circumcised and kept the Law of Moses they could not be saved; so that by
this worthy Argument, St. Paul and his Followers, ought to have gone over to
those Judaizing Christians, because it was acknowledged by both sides, that
they might be saved; but St. Paul was too wise, to leave a certain way of
Salvation, only for a mere Possibility of being saved.

Their Question is a Twin-Brother in Ignorance to this their Argument; for the
Papists ask the Protestants, Where was their Church before Luther? who answer,
Where their Church was never since the Council of Trent, in the Bible, where I
am sure the Papist will find none of the Councils Twelve New Articles of Faith
recorded; as being never taught by our Blessed Savior, or ever so much as
mentioned by any of his Apostles, in any of their Epistles or Writings; and yet
forsooth, these are the Old Apostolical Doctrins, which (none who does not
believe) can be saved; yet I shall beg your Patience to give me leave to name
and look a little into some of these new Trent Articles of Faith.

The first shall be on that Unchristian Doctrine, (as Doctor Tillotson justly
styles it) called Transubstantiation; and the reason the Reverend Doctor names
it Unchristian is, because it is a Doctrine that undermines the very Foundation
of Christianity, as will plainly appear (says he) if we but consider the grand
Argument, the Apostles used to convince the World of the Truth of Christianity,
and that was this, That our Blessed Savior, the Author of this Doctrine,
wrought such and such Miracles, and appeared to them, and conversed with them
after his Death, which they confirm by an Infallible Testimony, (which the
Papist will not allow as such, because they will believe no Infallibility out
of their own Church;) That they themselves were Eye witnesses, both to his
Miracles and Resurrection.

So that it is absolutely necessary to rely on the Testimony of the Senses; for
if the Apostles Eyes had failed them, then they were not sure they saw his
Miracles, or himself after his Resurrection, and then the main Assurance of
Christ's being risen falls to the Ground, and all the Christian Doctrine was
buried with him in his Grave; for if there be no assurance in the Testimony of
the Senses, there is no Assurance of Christianity, because no assurance of
Christ's being risen from the Dead; so that the Buisiness is brought to this
fair Issue, If the Testimony of the Senses are to be trusted, then
Transubstantiation is false, and if they are not to be trusted, then no man can
say that Christian Religion is true; for the Apostles seeing Christ after his
Resurrection, is the great proof we have that he is risen.

Farther granting the Scripture to be a Divine Revelation, and that these
words, This is my Body, must be necessarily taken in a strict literal Sense, I
ask the Papist, What greater Evidence has any Man, that these words are in the
Bible, than every Man has that the Bread is not changed in the Sacrament? Nay
none has so much, for we have only the Evidence of one Sense, that these words
are in the Bible, but that the Bread is not changed into the Body of Christ, we
have the concurring Testimony of several of the Senses together.

How erroneous then must the Doctrine of the Church of Rome be in this point,
that holds it to be a principal Article of the Christian Faith, and so preached
by the Apostles, by which they throw a great Contradiction and Absurdity on
their Doctrine, that they should give for the great proof of the Truth of
Christianity, That the Senses are to be trusted, and at the same time give it
for one of the Articles of the Christian Faith, that the Senses are not to be
trusted, as the Apostles must do, if they did Preach the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, which is an utter denying that the Testimony of the Senses
are to be relied on.

In a word, if it once be admitted, that the Senses of all Men may be deceived
in the most plain and sensible Matters that can be, (for there can be no
greater difference, than between a little bit of a Wafer, and the whole Body of
a Man,) there is no way left to convey or prove a Divine Revelation.

But the Papist in answer to this, ask's us, Whether God cannot impose upon the
Senses of Men, and represent to them things otherwise than they are? Yes
surely, if he has revealed that he would, we are undoubtedly to believe him;
but then we ought to be assured that he has made such a Revelation, which
assurance no Man can have, the certainty of Sense being taken away.

But to show you that this Doctrine of Transubstantiation is far from being
Apostolical; it was brought into the Roman Church by the Lateran Council, under
Pope Innocent the Third, and with it that Reverend Doctrine of deposing Kings in
case of Heresy, and absolving their Subjects from their Allegiance; These are
two Twin-Doctrins that hunted in Couples; and for the last, though they are now
ashamed to own it, yet the Popes were not formerly shy to practice it.

Next their worshipping of Images, which practice, notwithstanding all their
subtle Distinctions and Evasions about it, is but the very same the Heathens
used in the same Case, and is as point blank against the Second Commandment, as
wilful Murder is against the Sixth, which the Popish Teachers are so sensible
of, and so afraid the People should be so too, that therefore in their ordinary
Catechisms, and Manuals of Devotion, they leave out the Second Commandment, and
divide the Tenth into two to make up the Number; That the Infallible Church of
Rome might not appear so fallible as to act so contrary to the Commands of God.

I shall pass by their taking away the Cup in the Sacrament from the Laity,
though our Savior ordered it to be given in both kinds; and they might as well
take away the Bread, as the Cup, and both as either.

And for the Papists praying in an unknown Tongue; do but read St. Paul on that
Subject as to the great Error of doing it, and he will satisfy you, though he
cannot convince them.

Next let us refiect a little upon that part of the Romish Doctrine of praying
to, and worshipping of the Virgin Mary, which has been now for some Ages past,
a principal Part of their Religion; for they build Chapels, erect Altars, and
sanctify Holy Days to her; in short, she makes the greatest Part, both of their
Public Worship and private Devotions, they praying to her more than either to
God, or our Savior, the Papist using ten Ave Mary's, for one Pater Noster.

Indeed one who considers this, and had never read the Bible, might well have
concluded, that there had been more said of her in the New Testament, than of
God, or Christ; and that it had been full from one End to the other of Precepts
and Exhortations, for the worshipping of her; yet I defy any Papist to show me
(as to this Doctrine of praying to the Virgin Mary) where she is so much as once
named by the Apostles in any of their Epistles; or where there is one Verse in
the whole Bible, that savours in the least of paying Worship to her, but rather
the contrary, our Savior seeming to take all Occasions to restrain us from it,
as when they told him, Your Mother and your Brethren are without, who, says he,
are my Mother and my Brethren? he that does the Will of my Father, the same is
my Mother, my Sister, and my Brother. And when the Woman broke out in a
Rapture, concerning the blessed Mother of the Lord, blessed is the Womb that
bare thee, and the Paps that gave thee suck, our Savior diverts it to another
thing, by saying, Yea rather blessed are they that hear the word of God and
keep it; does our Savior, or his Apostles in any of their particular
Directions and Precepts concerning Prayer, and the Manner of it, and by whom we
are to address our selves to God, give the least hint, or intimation of praying
to the Virgin Mary, or making use of her Mediation for us? or is there one
Verse in the whole Bible, that orders us in the least to pay her Worship?

In short, did God ever command it? did ever our Savior teach it? did ever the
Apostles Preach it? or did ever the Primitive Christians practice it? Nay, did
any of the Writers of the first three hundred Years, ever name any such thing
as paying her Worship, or making her any part of their Religion? Indeed about
the middle of the fourth Century it begun to creep in among some superstitious
Persons; and therefore Epiphanius, who lived about that time, called it the
Heresy of Women.

And since it is so much taught, and commonly practiced in the Roman Church,
without the least Color of a Command in God's Word for it; give me leave a
little to reflect on the Infallibility that the Roman Church pretends to;
because I am sure, this is a Doctrine that is able to bring into her as many
Errors as she thinks convenient to receive, (which is more than a few,) and
yet this infallible Church cannot yet tell where this Infallibility is seated,
whether in the Pope alone, or in a Council alone, or in both together, or in a
diffusive Body of Christians, but they are sure they have it, though they know
not where it is.

Indeed I cannot imagine, how they, or any can think it reasonable, that this
Infallibility was confirmed on the Church of Rome, and that all the primitive
Christians did believe it, and had recourse to it, and yet that this very Roman
Church should be still at a loss where it is, and that should make a difference,
which should be the End of all Differences. That not one word should be
intimated in all the Bible of this high and peculiar Privilege above all other
Churches, and that the Apostles in all their Epistles, should give no notice or
caution to Christians, to appeal to the Bishop of Rome for determining any
Difficulties, which even in those Times happened among them, and that they should
then never speak of it, though there were so many occasions for it. Nor that the
Ancient Fathers in all their Disputes with the Heretics, should never appeal
to this Judge; nay, that they should not do it in all Cases of difference, it
being such a sure and speedy way of ending them all among Christians. And so I
have done with Doctor Tillotson's Arguments, and 'twere well for the Papist he
had done with their Religion too; for his Reasonings and Arguments like skrew'd
Guns, they carry farther, and pierce deeper than any others which are of the
ordinary level among us.

And now by this Infallible Churches leave, though I pretend not in the least to
be a Scholar, much less a Divine, yet I doubt not without being either, to
prove the Roman Church, since her adding twelve New Articles of Faith to the
Old Apostolical Creed, which were coined in the Mint of Trent, and published by
Pope Pius the Fourth, to be very false, and erroneous in her Principles, though
she does with so much Confidence, but no Truth, say, that she holds at this
time the old, true, Catholic and Apostolical Faith, and yet declares her self
to believe at the same time, the new Trent Creed to be the true Catholic
Faith, without which no Man can be saved; which are the very words in that
Creed.

But before I make any farther Progress on this Subject, I will recommend to
you two Remarks well worth your Observation on this worthy Council; The first
is its heedless contradicting and forswearing in the very first Article: The
second is the want of Christian Charity, by damning all the Churches before
Trent Council; Two foul Crimes very unbecoming a General Council, whose
business is not to perform, but reform Sin. Now you must first know, that the
Observance of the twelve Trent Articles of Faith, are bound upon all by Oath,
and in the very first Article they declare to embrace the Apostolical and
Ecclesiastical Tradition, and yet at the very same time swear to observe all
that is decreed by that Council, which orders that the Holy Communion shall be
administered to the Laity but in one kind, when for above a thousand Years after
Christ, it was given to them in both, in all the Christian Churches over the
whole World; and the Roman Church cannot deny, but that it was our Savior's
Command, as well as all the Churches practice, for so many years; Nay, in the
fourth Article of the Trent Creed, they use these very words; That they receive
and approve the Rites of the Catholic Church, in the solemn Administration of
the Sacraments; and yet though the receiving it in both kinds, is both
Apostolical Tradition and Ecclesiactical Practice, yet they positively forbid
it to the Laity: The Conclusion makes it self.

My second Observation is, how uncharitable this Council is, and all its
Disciples in their condemning all other Churches; for surely, these Trent
Creed-makers have not so much Impudence, (though I know they have a great deal)
as to pretend to follow our Blessed Savior's charitable Doctrine, who commands
us to pray for our Enemies; but this worthy Council is so very far from praying
for their Enemies, as they damn their very Friends, the old Roman Church, with
all the Christian Churches dispersed over the Face of the whole Earth; for she
no more than the rest, did ever hear before the Council of Trent, that its
twelve New Articles, was the old true Catholic and Apostolical Faith, without
which no Man can be saved; all I shall say to this is, that as Charity covers
many Faults, so the want of it discovers many Vices, which is apparent in the
Church of Rome more than all, because she shows less Charity than any.

My next business is to show you, that from the days of the Apostles, to the
Time of the Trent Council, among the many Creeds named by Athanasius, Eusebius
and others; none of them ever made the least attempt of altering, or much less
of adding any one new Article of Faith, but only explained the Old, esteeming
the Apostles Creed to be fully sufficient; being as Tertullian elegantly styles
it, A Little Body of great Truths, The Rule of Faith, instituted by Christ, and
transmitted from him to his Apostles.

I could here for the Confirmation of this Truth, produce you the Testimonies
of all the Eminent Fathers of all Ages of the Christian Church; but that would
not only tire your Patience, but swell this Letter above the moderate Bounds of
one; to prevent which, I shall only quote you some few of the many, which will
be enough to justify, that all acknowledged this great known Truth; that there
was never added any new Article of Faith, to the old Apostolical Creed before
the Trent Council.

Therefore, I shall only here name you the first four General Councils, those
of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus, and Chalcedon. And as to the first of these
Councils, when the Nicene Fathers met to settle the Controversy about the Son
of God, they were so far from making any new Creed, or adding any New Article
to the Old, that they expounded only the meaning of one of the Articles, the
Sense of which the Arians had perverted, and had therefore little Design of
changing or adding to the Christian Faith, contained in the Apostles Creed,
when at their meeting they read no other Creed but it.

And St. Austin, before he began his Explication on the first Book of Genesis,
sets down what the Catholic Faith is, which he says is nothing else, but what
is contained in the Nicene Creed.

But what need I allege more than the words of the great Athanasius, on this
Subject, in the Letter which he and some other Bishops with him writ to the
Emperor Jovian; where they tell him, that the Faith professed by the Nicene
Fathers, was the very same which was Preached from the beginning, and unto
which all the Churches every where consented to, whether in Greece, Africa,
Spain, France, Italy, etc. with all the Churches of the East, (a few Arians
excepted;) and then setting down the Nicene Creed, they conclude, in this Faith
it is necessary for all to remain, as being Divine and Apostolical, and
therefore not to be changed; which is a most plain Declaration, (by the Council
of Trens's leave) that the Faith contained in this Creed, is not at all
defective and short, as the Trentonians did believe it was, by their adding
more to it.

And Irenaeus says, that the true Church throughout all the World, has but one
and the same Faith, she had from the beginning, which I Am sure plainly
concludes, that the now Roman Church cannot be the true Church, because it
holds not the same Faith now, she did in the beginning, having enlarged her
Creed by twelve new Articles of Faith, coined in the Council of Trent, and
never heard of in any Christian Church in the whole World, before that late
worthy Council.

For the second general Council of Constantinople, I shall not need name here,
since it contained the same of the first general Council of Nice.

And for the third general Council assembled at Ephesus; all the Fathers of it
were so fast united together in this Persuasion, that the Apostles Creed
contained all things necessary to be believed, as that Council decreed, that it
should not be lawful for any to write, compose, offer, or produce any other
Article of Faith, than those defined by the Nicene Council; and if any were so
bold as to dare the doing of it, if they were-Lay-men, they should be
Anathematized, and if they were Clergymen or Bishops, they should be deposed;
which plainly informs us, what would become of the present Pope and his Clergy,
if he and they had attempted then, what they profess to do now, which is to add
no less than twelve new Articles of Faith, as if the old Apostolical Creed was
not sufficient and complete enough to make up the new Romish Church Faith,
without the new Trent Addition.

And for the fourth general Council of Chalcedon, it renewed this Canon of the
Council of Ephesus, decreeing in a manner the very same words, only with this
difference, to Laymen is added Monks, against whom the Synod decreed an
Anathema, if they pretended to teach any other Faith.

I could also here name the fifth general Council held at Constantinople, under
the Emperor Justinian; which Council professed in their third Session, that
they embraced the same Faith with the four foregoing Councils of Nice,
Constantinople, Ephesus, and Chalcedon, and so did all the other general
Councils sing the same Note, that no new Article of Faith should be added to
the old Apostolical Creed. Yet the late pretended general Council of Trent,
added no less than twelve new Articles; which was but a declaring that they
esteemed the Apostles Creed defective and light by twelve Grains, or else
surely they would never have added that Number to make it weight, as they
thought and pretended to do; by which that Council does in effect declare
themselves to be more knowing in what is necessary to true Faith, than the
first four General Councils, and the very Holy inspired Apostles themselves:
And this that Council says, (but with great impudence and falseness) is the
true old Catholic and Apostolic Faith, without which no Man can be saved, for
it is the very words of Pius the Fourth's Creed.

This is indeed a princely Doctrine, fit for such a princely Pope, of whom I
must beg leave, (or else I shall be so bold as to take it) to let slip a Lease
of Popes, and four General Councils against his twelve new Articles of Faith.

The First Pope shall be Pius the Second, against Pius the Fourth; for this
Pius the Second confesses, that before the Time of the Nicene Council, little
regard was had of the Roman Church, which is a plain contradiction to Pope Pius
the Fourth, and all Popes, since that she is the Mother of all the Churches;
for sure all the Churches did know the Duty they owed their Mother, so well, as
not to have neglected the paying it, if they had believed it truly due to her;
but it appears by their not paying, they esteemed it not truly due.

My Second Pope is Gregory the Great, whose Character is, That he was the worst
Bishop that ever went before him, and the best that ever came after him; sure
it cannot be upon the Account of upholding, or enlarging the Power of the Court
of Rome; for I am very confident, and I believe my Confidence is grounded upon
this good Reason, that had Pope Gregory lived in the Time of Pope Pius the
Fourth, and had been assured that he had taken upon him to add twelve new
Articles to the old Apostolical Creed, he would have said the very same of him,
as he did of John the Patriarch of Constantinople, when he was told he had
taken upon him, the Title of Universal Patriarch or Bishop; That whosoever
should usurp to himself that Title, was a forerunner of Anti Christ: And for
his part he pretended to no other Title, than that of being a Servant to the
Servants of God, though he was not only then Bishop of, but Resident in Rome.

But Pope Boniface, who soon after succeeded him in the Papacy, though he had a
less humble Christian Mind, yet he had a much higher Papal Spirit; for he
presently changed that Note, and swallowd greedily that sweet tempting Bit of
Universal Bishop, choosing rather the great Power of being the Head, and Master
of all the Bishops on Earth, than the humble Character of being Servant to the
Servants of the great God of Heaven. By which he showed the Pride of a bad
Pope, but not at all the Humility of a good Christian, by esteeming the Office
of a Pope more perfect freedom, than that of God's Service.

But this Title of Universal Bishop is attended with such great Dignity, and
accompanied with such a large Revenue, that all Pope Boniface's Successors,
would never since abandon that proud Usurpation; for though the doing it may be a
Sin, yet that is nothing to the Pope; for he that has Power to forgive other
Men's Sins, may easily absolve himself of his own; and indeed I believe, he has
as full Power to pardon his own Sins, as much as any others.

But now to return to the Point I was about; this Pope Gregory concurred in his
Opinion with the first four General Councils, that no new Articles of Faith
were to be admitted, but what were professed by them: And in his giving an
account of his Faith, as the Custom was for every Pope upon the Advancement to
his Papal Dignity; he speaks of the first four General Councils in so high a
Style, as he professed to receive and reverence them, as the four Books of the
Holy Gospel: How vastly differing was the Faith of this Pope Gregory, from that
of Pope Pius the Fourth, and the now Roman Church, who, though we Protestants
embrace all the Doctrins of our Savior contained in the Apostles Creed, and
confirmed by the first four General Councils, yet the Church of Rome will not
allow, that the Performance of these, with a strict virtuous Life, can afford
us so much as a Possibility of Salvation; To which unchristian and uncharitable
Doctrine of theirs, I shall only answer, That the Papists by this plainly show,
that they forget that Charity is an essential Mark of true Christianity; and
what the Apostle says of particular Christians, is as true of whole Churches,
That though they have all Faith, yet if they have no Charity, they are nothing.

The third Pope I shall here produce is, Pelagius, who being elected to the
Papacy, was demanded, if he held the Definitions of the Council of Chalcedon,
(which contained that of Nice, Constantinople and the Ephesine Creed) To which
he made answer in a Letter, which is in the Body of the Canon Law, that he
received the Definitions of the first four General Councils, concerning the
Catholic Faith, and then beginning to rehearse his Creed, as the fashion was
upon being made Pope; he repeated the Apostles Creed, This is my Faith (said
he) and the Hope that is in me, by the Gift of God's Mercy, of what St. Peter
commands us to be ready to answer every one, who asks us a Reason, and an
Account of it. Of which I am sure the Trentonian Fathers, with their twelve new
additional Articles, can give no good Account out of Scripture, because there is
not a word mentioned of them in it.

Therefore I shall conclude with St. Austin, Since the Just live by Faith, the
greater care must be taken, that Faith be not corrupted, and then adds, Now the
Catholic Faith is made known to the faithful in the Apostles Creed; which
plainly argues, that since the Trent Articles are in no part of the Apostles
Creed, or in God's Word, they can be no part of the Catholic Faith.

And now to conclude this Point, I shall leave it to the Popes for a
Memorandum, the Example of their Brother Pope Honorius, who was condemned by
two Councils as an Heretic, and also anathematized by Pope Leo the Second; And
pray, why was this great Scandal and heavy Punishment laid upon his Holiness?
the reason Pope Leo tells us, was, because he consented to violate the Rule of
Apostolical Tradition, meaning as it was contained in the Apostles Creed. And
surely if declaring a Defect in this Creed be a Violation of it; then certainly
nothing can be more plain, than that Pope Pius the Fourth, and the Council of
Trent, have defiled the Apostolical Creed, for they have declared it to be too
short and defective, by their adding twelve new Articles of Faith to it, since
it is gross folly to add to a thing, what one believes does not want any
Addition.

And now I have given you a Lease of Popes, against one Pope, and four General
Councils, against one only pretended one, for I can esteem that of Trent no
other, being made up of a Pack of Italian Bishops, and so in effect was no more
general, than the single Roman Church is Catholic, and Universal, And though the
Papists know, there was a Catholic Church before a Roman; yet they will now
include the Catholic in the Roman, and upon that account call themselves Roman
Catholics, a singular Universal Church; But Popish Bulls are so very common in
Rome, as they are to be the less wondered at for it.

And so, I hope, I have sufficiently proved, that this Question of the Papist
to the Protestants is very impertinent, Where was your Religion before Luther?
To which Question we can truly answer, (as we did before,) Where I am sure the
Popish Creed never was since the Council of Trent, in the Bible. And therefore
since the Papists will attempt casting Novelty on the Protestant Religion, they
ought not to wonder I here speak Truth of theirs: For this their Question to
us, will but prove to them, like a Gun very much overcharged, which instead of
hitting the Mark it is shot at, flies about the Ears of him that shoots it. For
I can safely say, because truly, that the present Roman Church with her Train
of Trent Additions, cannot be the same true Old Catholic, and Apostolical
Church, that she was before the Time of that Council, because she has taken a
New Creed, and a New Creed must make a New Church, as well as a New Faith must
make a New Religion, and therefore she cannot be altogether the Old Catholic
and Apostolical Church, she now so confidently pretends to, and vainly boasts
of, as being the Mistress and Mother of all Churches, when in truth she is far
from being so to any one of them; except that of Trent, of which we yield her
to be the true Mother, as will here appear upon a short Examination into this
Matter.

First, the Roman Church cannot justly call her present Faith to be altogether
Old, because a great part of it is altogether New, as only taking its Date from
the Birth of the Council of Trent; and all know it is not much more than a
hundred Years since that Council was hatched; so that the Trent Creed, making
now a main part of the Romish Faith, (which is a Truth the Papists dare not
deny, without denying a main part of their present Faith;) how is it possible
she can pretend her Faith is altogether Old; when she must yield at the same
Time, that no less than twelve Articles of the now Roman Church Faith is in (a
manner) altogether New? and how well new Cloth agrees with an Old Garment, the
Scripture tells us.

Nor has the Roman Church any better reason for stiling her self altogether
Catholic, because a main part of the Faith of her Church, is not universally
believed, no not by half the Christian Churches, (I wonder for my part it is by
any;) so that until the Papists can make the lesser part to contain the
greater, they must not expect to make the Protestants believe the single Roman
Church, can contain the Catholic, that is, the universal Church.

And for the Roman Church stiling her self altogether Apostolical; I cannot at
all find she has the least Color of Reason for it, since the Date of the Trent
Creed, which is the present Romish Faith;) for it is most certain that Creed was
never so much as heard of, much less taught by any of the Apostles, in any of
their Epistles or Writings, or ever named in any Christian Church over the
whole World, for more than fifteen hundred Years after Christ; so that an
Infant may as well pretend to be as old as Methusalem, as the New Trent Creed
can, to be the old Apostolical Faith. Therefore to sum up all in a word, Since
the Trent Creed makes a main part of the Romish Faith, all the Reasons the
Papists can give (in my opinion) for their Faith being altogether Apostolical,
and their Church the Mother of all Churches, is but that poor weak Womanish
kind of reasoning, She is so, because she is so.

But for the Protestant Religion, I can here easily and truly prove it to be
altogether Old, altogether Catholic, and altogether Apostolical. The
Protestant Religion is truly altogether Old, because we believe the old
Apostolical Creed, which contains the Doctrins of our Blessed Savior, given by
him to his Apostles, and confirmed by the first four General Councils, which
Creed we continue steadfast to, without the least taking from it, or adding to
it, which the Papists with their additional New Trent Creed, cannot justly, nay
so much as pretend to.

So that it is most certain, that unless the Papists will deny the Apostolical
Religion to be the Old Religion; they cannot truly say, the Protestants is the
New. And let the Papists but seriously reflect on the Trent Creed they believe
now, and on that of the first four General Councils, which was the Faith, the
Romish Church held then, and I am sure, they may as reasonably attempt to prove
a Son may be elder than his natural Father, as to pretend to justify that the
Trent Creed (of not much more than a hundred Years standing) to be elder than
the Apostles Creed, which was made above fifteen hundred Years before it.

And therefore surely the Roman Church cannot, or least ought not to deny, that
since the Protestant Faith is still contained entire in the Apostles Creed, it
must be so many degrees elder than the Roman Faith, as the Roman Church has
built new Stories, on the old Protestant Foundation, since at the Time of the
first four General Councils, (for then Protestant and Papist were all one
Faith;) so that if the Roman Church will allow, (what they dare not deny) that
their Religion was good at that Time, they cannot justly say the Protestants is
bad at this Time, since we profess the very same Creed now, they did then, the
Protestant Church having, (as I said before) not in the least taken from, or
added to the Apostolical Creed, as I am sure the Papists cannot deny but that
they themselves have: And though the Court of Rome, has caused the Church of Rome
to differ much from what she then was; yet praised be God, the Protestants have
not altered from what they then were, and therefore we cannot be truly said, to
differ more from the Church of Rome, at this Time, than she has differed from
her self since that Time. I mean of the first four General Councils.

Next I say, the Protestant Faith is altogether Catholic, because 'twas the
Faith, that all the Christian Churches over the whole World professed, (a few
Arians in the East only excepted) for above fifteen hundred Years together, as
the Papists themselves can no more justly deny, than they can truly prove, that
the new Roman Creed, with its Trent Addition, was the Faith of all the
Christian Churches in the World, for so much as one day, no nor what is worse,
is ever like to be to the last day.

And lastly, for the Protestant Church being now altogether Apostolical, the
Papists may with the same reason and Justice deny the Apostles Creed to be
Apostlical, as to deny our Faith is not so, since the Protestant Faith is
contained in the Apostles Creed, which we never at all varied from, but
continued altogether firm to, without the least Alteration or Diminution; a
hapyy Truth, which I Am sure the Roman Church dares not now pretend to, without
having no less than twelve new Articles of Faith to fly in her Face, and
giving her as many Times the Lie for pretending to it.

And now there remains only to add, That if the Church of Rome has any
Inclination to bring the Protestant Church into a hearty Unity, and firm
Community with her; the best and only way will be to take the first four
General Councils as the Judge and Standard to measure all our present
Differences by, and if the Protestants have deviated in the least from them, to
reform in what they have differed; and let the Papists but do the same, and
retrench all their idle new supernumerary Trent Articles of Faith, and disband
all their vain superstitious Ceremonies, neither of which was ever taught or
indeed heard of by the Apostles, or primitive Christians, and reduce their
Creed to the same it was in the Time of the first four General Councils, and
then the Papist as well as Protestant will become of the same Apostolical Faith
now, as we were both of us then, that is, be again both of one and the same
Religion.

But the Pope's Power is too high, and his Revenue too great to admit this
mortifying Spirit; light Money can never agree with true Scales, nor Deformity
like a true Glass; no more can the new Additions of the Romish Creed endure the
true Touchstone of the old Apostolical Faith: Therefore to conclude in a word;
unless you are resolved to choose superstitious Doctrine before Gospel Truths; a
false Religion before a true one; Darkness before Light, the Trent new Articles
of-Faith, before the old Apostolical Creed, Never choose the Popish Religion
before the Protestant.

FINIS.

