The Government of the Thoughts:

A SERMON PREACHED before the KING and QUEEN, AT WHITE HALL.

The 4th of March, being the 2d Sunday in LENT, 1693/4.

PROVE. iv. Ver. 23. Keep thy Heart with all diligence, for out of it are the
issues of Life.

By the Most Reverend Father in GOD JOHN, Lord Archbishop Of YORK.

Published by Their MAJESTY'S Especial Command.

LONDON: Printed and Sold by Hen. Hills. in Black-Fryars, near the Waterside,
for the Benefit of the Poor.

PROVE. IV. Ver. 23. Keep thy Heart with all diligence, for out of it are the
issues of Life.


THE Argument with which this Audience was entertained the last Lord's Day,
being the Government of the Tongue; I cannot think it improper or unseasonable
for me, who have the Honor to come next, to treat labor the Government of the
Thoughts; there being a near relation between these two, and a necessary
dependence of the one upon the other.

Our Words indeed are more easily governed than our Thoughts, because they are
more in our Power. But it will be impossible either to govern our Words or our
Actions, as we should, unless we first bring our Thought: in some measure under
Government.

I must confess this Argument of the Government of the Thoughts, though it be a
very useful, yet it seems also a very nice and difficult one, through the great
variety of Cases, arising from Men's different Tempers, which will not come
under the same Rules, and yet ought to be provided for. But however, this shall
not discourage me from undertaking this Argument; it shall only make me more
careful as to what I say about it. That is, to have respect, as much as I can
to all sorts of Tempers, and to deliver what I have to say with so much
Plainness, that everybody may go along with me.

The Words, upon which I ground my Discourse, are those of Solomon, which I
have read unto you, and which contain one of those Precepts that he lays down
for the Religious Conduct of our Lives. Keep (says he) thy Heart with all
diligence, for out of it are the issues of Life.

Not to trouble you with what others have said upon this Text, I take the true
Meaning of it to be this.

By the Heart here, which we are exhorted to keep, we are to understand the
Inward Thoughts and Motions, and Affections of our Souls or Spirits; all which
in the inspired Writings are constantly said to be seated in the Heart. This
undoubtedly is the Scripture Notion of the Heart.

And when we are here bid to keep our Hearts with all diligence, I think there
is no question to be made, the Meaning is, That we should diligently attend to
the Thoughts and Motions, and Affections of our Minds; that we should watch
them narrowly, lest at any time we should give our Consent to something we
ought not. This is the Meaning of Keeping our Hearts with all diligence.

And then a Reason is added why it concerns us thus to keep them. And that is
this: Because out of the Heart are the issues of Life. What is the Meaning of
that Phrase? Plainly this: The Issues, the Fruits, the Effects hat are shown in
our Lives and Conversation, do certainly proceed from he Heart; and therefore,
accordingly as that is well or ill guarded or kept, so will our Lives and
Conversations be. The Goodness or Badness of our Lives does altogether depend
upon the Attending or not Attending to the Thoughts, and Motions, and
Inclinations of our Minds. As our Caution and Watchfulness in this Point is
greater or less, so will our Course of Life be better or worse. And therefore
it concerns us all, that mean to live well, to be infinitely careful in this
Matter.

This is a plain Account of the Advice that is here given us. So that you see,
if I mean to discourse pertinently to my Text, my Argument must be (what I
said) the Care, and Management, and Government of our Thoughts, as they fall
under a Religious Consideration.

In treating of this Argument, there seem to me Two Things needful to be done.

First, To give an Account what Power a Man has over his own Thoughts.

Secondly, To show wherein the Art of Governing of them does consist.

It is indeed this Second Thing which my Text naturally leads me to speak to:
But I cannot speak to that to any purpose, till I have made way for it by
clearing the First. It is in vain to give Rules about the Government of our
Thoughts, till we know how far we have Power over them; how far they fall, or
do not fall under our Conduct and Management.

And I must needs say, that most of those I have met with, that have discourse
about the Government of Thoughts, by not enquiring into, and settling this
Point, have been so far from benefiting all their Hearers, that desired to
receive Benefit by their good Advices, that to several of 'em they have done
harm; because as to them their Advices have been perfectly unpracticable. Now
those that by their own Experience found them to be so, instead of considering
that that Teacher might be in a mistake, or that he did not sufficiently weigh
and examine the Case of all Persons be gave his Advice to, have peremptorily
concluded that they themselves were in the fault, and therefore they were in an
evil Condition; because they found themselves not able to live up to what was
advised them.

The First Question then is, How far a Man has power over his own Thoughts.
There is not indeed any single Answer to be given to this Question, that will
fit all Men. For that is impossible. It would be as unreasonable to demand it,
as it would be to require of a Workman to make a Garment, that should fit all
sorts and sizes of Men.

Some Men by the very Principles of their Make and Constitution, are much
better able to govern their Thoughts than others. Some that are naturally
weaker, have by long use and many trials obtained a greater power over their
Thoughts than others. Again, the same Persons that at some times have a greater
power over the motions of their Minds, may at other times have a less command
over them; and this according to their Health, or their Business, or a hundred
Contingencies of outward things do affect them. So that all that can be done,
as to this matter, is to lay down some general Propositions, which everybody
is to apply to himself as there is Occasion. And Five of this kind I have to
offer, and which, I think, will take in all, or the greatest part of what
belongs to this Argument.

The First Proposition I lay down is this, That the first motions of our Minds
are very little, if at all, in our power.

By the First motions of our Minds, I mean those sudden Thoughts, or
Apprehensions, or Passions, or Desires, which are excited in our Minds by any
Object that is at that time presented to our Imagination. As to these, I say,
we are not so much Masters of our selves as to be able to stop them; nay, though
perhaps they be very irregular. And the Reason is, because they are produced so
quick, that there is not time enough given for Reason to interpose.

There is no necessity indeed that a Man should give Consent to these Motions;
but as for their coming into his Mind, he can no more help it, than he can help
this present Temper, or the present Circumstances he is engaged in.

Thus for Instance. Do you think it possible for a Man that is of a fiery
passionate Temper, to avoid the feeling a sudden resentment of Anger arising in
his Mind, if he meets with any unexpected Affront, or other great Provocation?
Or for a Man that desires to be well though of, not to entertain some Vanity of
Imagination, when he hears himself commended or flattered? Or for a Man that is
addicted to Pleasures, not to feel some irregular Inclinations in himself
toward the gratifying his Appetites in those things, when he has all the
Temptations before him? And thus in all other Cases.

I grant indeed, that a Man by long consideration, and a serious exercising
himself in the ways of Virtue and Piety, may bring himself to that Temper, that
he shall not have so many irregular undecent motions in his own Mind, upon any
occasion whatsoever, as he was wont to have; and that those that were formerly
Temptations to him, will at last be none: but still I say, the first motions
and workings of his Mind, however they be occasioned, are in a great measure
out of his power; he cannot stop them; and therefore the Art of Governing his
Thoughts does not lie there.

The Second Proposition I lay down is this, When a Man's Mind is vigourously
affected and possessed, either with the outward Objects of Sense, or with
inward Passions of any kind, in that Case he has little or no Command of his
Thoughts. His Mind at that time will be in a manner wholly taken up with that
it is then full of: nor will he be able, till those Impressions be worn off, to
think freely of what he pleases.

Thus for Instance, When a Man is under a sharp, tormenting Pain; as he cannot
avoid the Feeling of the Pain; so neither can he avoid the Thinking of it. When
one is full of Grief for the loss of a dear Relation; or transported with
Passion for some unworthy usage he has met with: It is in vain to say, Pray,
think not of these Matters; for these things must and will in a great measure
employ his Thoughts, till his Passions do cool, and the Impressions that caused
them be vanished.

Thus for a Man to come from Business in which he is more than ordinarily
concerned, or from the hearing some very good or very bad News; I say, to come
fresh from this to the saying his Prayers: I do not, I cannot wonder, that in
this Case his Mind will be much upon his Business, or his News, notwithstanding
all his Endeavors to the contrary.

For the Nature of Man in such, that he cannot so of a sudden turn his Mind
from one Business to another; but that if he did closely and vigorously apply
himself to the first Business, his Thoughts will for some time run upon it,
even after he has applied his Mind to the other.

I do not deny, but that a Man may often so order his Affairs, as to be able to
keep his Mind clear and free from such Propossessions as I am now speaking of,
so as that when he comes to apply himself to any Business he has a mind to, he
may intend it with his whole might. But this I say, if our Minds be once
engaged with warm Thoughts about any thing; it is very hard, if not impossible,
to get them disengaged on a sudden. So that the Art of Governing our Thoughts
does not much lie in that neither.

Thirdly, There are some Cases likewise, where a Man's Thoughts are in a manner
forced upon him, from the present Temper and Indisposition of his Body. So that
though he be in no Passion, though there be no unusual Objects of Sense that excite
those Thoughts in him; nay, though he never so much resolve not to think upon
those things; yet so long as that Habit of Body lasts, he cannot avoid those
kind of Thoughts: So that in this Case also, there is little room left for the
Government of Thoughts.

That which I now say, happens frequently, not only in all sort of Distempers,
where the Brain is visibly disturbed, as in Fevers, and the like; which often
cause a thousand delirous Fancies, and sometimes downright Madness and
Distraction: But also in other Cases where there seems to be no Fevers, or
other visible Distemper; nor does Brain, as to other matters, seem to be at all
disordered; but the Persons in all appearance, are sound both in Body and Mind.

And this is the Case of some deeply Hypochondriac Persons; many of which will
be haunted with a Set of Thoughts and Fancies, that they can by no means get
rid of, though they desire it never so earnestily.

Sometimes they cannot get it out of their Heads, but that they are Atheists
and Infidels; they neither believe in GOD nor in Jesus Christ, nor have any
Sense at all of Religion.

Sometimes they are tormented with blasphemous Thoughts, and they cannot set
themselves to the Performance of any Office of Devotion, but a thousand impious
Fancies will come in and spoil all.

Sometimes they fancy they are guilty of several grievous Crimes, which it is
to be hoped, it was hardly possible they should be guilty of; nay, you cannot
convince them but that they do every day commit some of these Crimes, because
they imagine they give consent to them.

And while these sorts of Thoughts fill their Imaginations, there is not a
Passage in the Bible that they read, nor a Sermon that they hear, but they find
something in it, which they do so perversely apply to their own Case, as thereby
to increase their trouble, but not to get any relief.

I have known several well disposed Persons, and some of them sincerely Pious,
that have been in this Condition.

What now is to be said to this? Why, it is very certain that all these
Thoughts and Fancies are thrust upon them, and are not the free, natural,
voluntary Operations of their own Minds; but the effects of Vapors or
Hypochondriac Melancholy. Nor can the Persons themselves any more help their
thus thinking, or fancying, than they can help the Disturbances of their Dreams
when they have a mind to sleep quietly. Indeed we may properly enough call
these Fancies of theirs, Their Waking-dreams; as their Dreams are their
Sleeping-fancies.

Well, but now of all Persons whatsoever, these People are most desirous to
have Rules given them for the Government of the Toughts. And I cannot blame
them, because their Thoughts are certainly very troublesome. But truly if we
would speak pertinently to their Case, instead of giving them Advices for the
regulating their Thoughts, they should rather be advised to look after their
Bodies, and by the help of good Prescriptions to get rid of those Fumes and
Vapors which occasion these Fancies. When the Cause is removed, the Effect
will soon cease. I do not in the least doubt, whatever these People may think
of their own Case, but that this is as properly a bodily Disease, as a Fever
or fits of the Falling Sickness.

In the mean time, while they are in this Condition, whatever Rules are proper
to be given to other Persons for the Government of the Thoughts, of all People
living those Rules do the least concern them. For those Thoughts which they
complain of, do not at all fall under Regulation or Government, because they
are suggested to their Minds whether they will or no. And for my part, I think
it a great deal more advisable (if it could be) to neglect and despise them,
than to be perpetually struggling and disputing with them, and vexing
themselves about them.

But, you will say, If Men be such Slaves to their Thoughts, and are thus
necessarily passive under them, where is the Freedom of Thoughts? To this I
answer,

In the Fourth Place, out of these Three Cases I beforementioned, we have
Liberty of Thinking, and may choose our own Thoughts. And that Liberty and
Freedom we have in Thinking, does, to my apprehension, mainly consist in this,
viz That all of us (who are not in the Circumstances I have been hitherto
speaking of) can, if we please, apply our Minds more vigorously to one sort of
thing than to another; and accordingly as we do thus apply our Minds, so will
the most of our Thoughts be.

It is in our power among the multitude of Objects which present themselves to
our Mind; (as for Instance, GOD, Virtue, Holiness, Heaven, Wealth, Power,
Greatness, Preferments, Fine-cloaths, Splendid-equipage, Sensual-pleasures,
Recreations, Divertisements, Knowledge, Learning, Arts, and the like; I say,
that among all this Multitude of Objects that present themselves to our Minds)
it is in our power to determine our selves, which of them we will dwell upon,
and make a Business of. And accordingly, when at any time we have pitched upon
any of them, as a Business, it is in our power to mind that Business, either
more or less diligently. And if it be such a one, as that we mean in good
earnest to concern our selves about it, it will then so fill our Minds, as that
by attending to that, we shall either prevent in a great measure other Thoughts
from coming into our Heads; or if they do come in, they will not long stay
there, but will very speedily give place to that which is our main Business at
that time.

And the Reason of this is plain: Because our Natures are of that make, that
two things at once cannot well possess our Minds; and therefore if we be intent
about one thing, we cannot have much room or leisure for Thoughts of another
Nature.

But then Fifthly and lastly, Though this that I have said be the true Nature
of that Power we have over our Thoughts, as to the directing them to a
particular Object: Yet there is another power we have over them that ought here
more especially to be considered; because in it are laid the very Foundations
of Virtue and Vice; and upon account of it, all our Thoughts become either
morally good or evil.

That which I mean is this. Though we cannot in many Cases, think always of what
we would; nay, though we cannot hinder abundance of Thoughts from coming into our
Minds against our will: yet it is always in our power to assent to our
Thoughts, or to deny our consent to them. And here it is that the Morality of
our Thoughts begins. According as we Assent or Dissent to the motion that are
made in our Mind; so will our Thoughts have the Notion of virtuous or sinful
Thoughts.

When any Temptations are presented to us from without, we cannot perhaps (as I
said before) avoid the Feeling an irregular Passion or Motion, or Inclination
stirring within us, upon occasion thereof: But yet at that very time it is in
our power, whether we will comply with those Passions and Inclinations, or not;
whether we will consent to them, or not; whether we will pursue them further or
not. Now if we do not consent to them, but endeavor to stop, and stifle, and
resist them as soon as we are aware of them; there is yet no harm done. Our
Thoughts, how undecent or irregular soever they were, are rather to be
accounted the Infirmities of our Corrupt Nature, than our Sins properly so
called,

And thus it is likewise as to our Wandering Thoughts in our Prayers. If we
strive against them, and endeavor to keep our Minds in a Devout composed
Temper, and attend as well as we can to the Duty we are about: I say, if we do
this, I hope those Distractions and Wanderings will never rise up in Judgment
against us.

And as for the frightful Blasphemous Fancies, which as I told you, some, even
Pious Persons, are tormented with: As to them, I say, they, of all other
irregular Thoughts, have the least danger of Sin in them, though they be not so
solemnly and formally disputed with, and contested against. Because indeed they
are so terrible in their own Nature, that no Man in his Wits, and that has any
sense of GOD or Goodness, can be supposed to consent to them. They are indeed
great Infelicities, but by no means any in, any farther than we approve of
them; and to approve of them for any tolerably good Man is impossible.

But then on the other side, If we consent to any wicked motion or Inclination
that we feel in our selves; let it come in how it will, never so suddenly,
never so unexpectedly; if we close with any Thought that prompts us to Evil, so
as to be pleased with it, to delight in it, to think of pursuing it, till it be
brought into Action: in that Case we are no longer to plead our Original
Corruption; for in that very instant we become Actual Sinners, Actual
Transgressors of the Law of GOD, the Obligation of which reaches to our very
Hearts and Thoughts as well as our Actions. Though yet we are not so great
Transgressors, so long as our Sin is only in thought, or desire, or purpose; as
if it had proceeded to outward Action.

All this is taught us for true Divinity, by no less an Author than St. James,
in the first Chapter of his Epistle, Ver. 13, 14, 15. Let no man say when he is
tempted I am tempted of God; for God tempts no man. But every man is tempted
when he is drawn away of his own lust, and enticed. Then when lust has
conceived, it bringing forth sin; and sin, when it is finished, brings forth
death.

Which Passage of the Apostle does plainly contain these Three Propositions.

First, That no Man is drawn to commit Sin by any State or Condition that GOD
has put him into; no, not by any Temptation, either outward or inward, that is
presented to him, It is not a Sin to be tempted; no, nor to feel that we are
tempted by some disorderly Inclination that arises in our Minds thereupon.

But, Secondly, Then our Sin begins, when we yield to the Temptation, when we
are drawn away by our own Lusts; and enticed, when they get the Victory over
us, and we do consent to them. Then Lust has conceived, and brings forth Sin.

But, Thirdly, Though the very consent of our Wills to a Temptation, be a Sin in
us; yet that Sin is not so great as it will be afterward, if it be brought to
Action. Sin in the Desire or Purpose, is but an Embryo; it is but the first
Rudimen^s of Sin; but when it comes to be acted, it is then a Sin in its full
Dimentions; and the Consequents of it may be fatal without Repentance. Sin,
when it is finished, brings forth Death.

Having thus given some Account, how far our Hearts and Thoughts do fall under
Government; I now come to my Second Point, that, is to treat of the Art of
Governing them; or to lay down the necessary Rules and Directions, which are to
be observed in order thereunto.

And we shall not need to go far for these Rulles, for they will all naturally
flow from the Principles I have already laid down. And I think, they may
conveniently enough be reduced likewise to these Five followng.

First, From what has been said, it appears, That the First and great Point to
be done by us, if we would keep our Hearts in a good Frame, and order our
Thoughts to good Purposes, is, that we rightly pitch our main Designs; that we
choose that for the great Business of our Lives, that really ought to be so.

Now what that is, can bear no Dispute with any Man that will fai^ly use his
Reason: For certainly, that which is our greatest Concernment in the World,
ought to be our greatest Business and Design in the World.

And it is evident to every one, that believes he has a Soul to save, that his
greatest Concerment of all, is, to approve himself to that GOD who made him,
and disposes of all his Affairs; and who accordingly as we sincerely endeavor,
or not endeavor to serve Him, will make us either very Happy, or very
Miserable, both in this Life and the other. So that there can, as I said, be no
dispute about what ought to to be the great Business and Design of our whole
Lives, and to which all other Businesses must yield.

Now if we be so wise, as really to propose this as our main End, and resolve
to mind it, and follow it as such; I say, if we be so wise as to do this, we
have made a very great step toward the obtaining a Security to our selves,
that the greatest part of our Thoughts, and Desires and Affections, will be
such as they should be; such as will be acceptable to GOD, and satisfactory to
our selves.

For, as I told you before, whatever is our main Business, be it what it will,
it will in a great measure, draw all our Thoughts to it. Our Natures are so
contrived, that we must always be thinking of some thing or other. But then
they are so contrived likewise, that we think most of that, which is most in
our Eye, most in our Esteem, most in our Pursuit. And this is that which our
Savior tell us; Where you Treasure is, there will your Heart be also. Whatever
it be that you place your Happiness in, upon that will your Thought run; upon
that will your Desires, your Inclinations, your Affections be fixed.

We have a world of Instances of the truth of this every day before our Eyes.
If a Man has set his Heart on Money, and proposes it to himself, as the
Business of his Life, to be Rich: Why, I dare say, such a one will own to you,
that most of his Thoughts are upon that Project; and that he finds it so far
from being difficult to keep his Mind close and steady to his Main Interest, as
he calls it; that it is rather difficult to him to think of any other matters.

If a Man be given up to Pleasure, and thinks nothing worthy his living for,
but Wine and Women, and good Eating and good Company; is it not natural to such
an one to bend all his Thoughts that way? Or does he put any force or violence
upon himself, in thinking and contriving all the day long, how to bring to pass
the gratification of his Lusts or his Appetites.

Why, my Brethren, if we did all of us in good Earnest make the Service of GOD,
and the purchasing Heaven and Happiness to our selves, as much our Business,
our End, our Design, as these Men make Wealth or Pleasure to be theirs, we
should certainly be thus affected. The common Course of our Thoughts, would
naturally and easily without the least constraint, run upon those Objects: And
we should take as great delight in thinking of our Treasure, and contriving for
the obtaining of it; as they do in thinking and Projecting for theirs.

I say, Thus it would be with us. For I cannot for my Life apprehend, what
Charms there can be in Worldly or Sensual Things, to attract a Man's Mind; what
Fetters there can be in them, to bind his Thoughts, and tie them to themselves;
but that there are the same, or greater in Virtue and Goodness; in the Love and
Favor of GOD; in a pure Conscience here, and Eternal Glory hereafter: Always
provided, that they are as much made the Objects of our Choice and Pursuit, as
the other.

And therefore I cannot but suspect, where we see Men so very cold and backward
to Spiritual Things; and so apt to spend all their Thoughts upon trifling, vain
or worldly Matters, that it is with a great deal of Pains and Reluctance, that
they can bring themselves to think of their Everlasting Concernments: I say, I
cannot but suspect that these Persons have not yet laid up their Treasure in
Heaven, as our Savior expresses it; they have not yet so wholly devoted
themselves to the Service of GOD, as to make it their Main Business. When once
they have done that, I dare assure them, they will find it so far from being a
force upon them, to think of good things, that will be natural to them; and
they will find the greatest pleasure in the World in so doing.

Secondly, Whoever would keep his Heart always in a good Frame, and be able to
give a good Account of his Thoughts to GOD, must have an especial care to avoid
Two Things, viz. Idleness and loose Company. For both of these do stangely
unhinge a Man's Mind; and disarm it of that Severity, which is its best guard
and defense against Evil Thoughts, and make it become an easy prey to every
Temptation that will attack it.

A wise Man should never be at such a pass, as to say, I have nothing to do, I
do not know how to spend my next hour: But should so order the Course of his
Life, that all the Portions of his Time, as much as is possible, may be filled
with some useful, or at least some innocent Employment.

It is Idleness, and having nothing to do, that is the Mother of most of those
vain, and unprofitable and sinful Fancies, in which some Men spend their days.
And whereas Temptations do now and then come in the way of other Men; the Idle
Man is forced to seek out Temptations for the Shipwreck of his Virtue. And
therefore no wonder, if he that seeks them, finds abundance of them.

And truly Loose and Impertinent Conversation, which was the other thing I
named, though it looks something with a better Grace, yet is not much better than
Idleness. For wherever it is much used, it will so emasculate a Man's Mind,
and take off the edge and vigor of it, as to serious things, that he cannot
easily get it into a good Frame again. Evil Communication (says St. Paul) does
corrupt good Manners. And therefore those People, a great part of whose Life is
taken up in gadding up and down; in Play, in merry Meetings, in telling or
hearing idle Stories, and the like: It is impossible but their Thoughts and
Inclinations, and the whole Frame of their Hearts will be suitable; that is to
say, very frothy; very light and foolish; not to say profane, and wicked, and
Atheistical too, if the Company they much converse with be of that strain.

Thirdly, Another thing of great moment, for the Keeping our Hearts, is, to be
as attentive as is possible to the First Motions of our Minds; and whenever we
find that they tend toward something that is forbidden, to stop them as soon as
we can.

We cannot, as I told you before, often prevent irregular Desires, or Passions,
or Inclinations from arising in our Minds, upon sundry occasions. But this we
can do: As soon as we are aware of them, we can refuse our Consent to them;
(and in that case I hope they will not be imputed to us as Sins;) Nay, not only
so, but we can refuse their breaking out, or showing themselves in our Words,
or our Actions. For the motions of our outward Members are all at our command,
though the first motions of our Minds be not.

Here therefore will lie a main Point in the Art of well-governing our Minds
and Thoughts. You cannot perhaps, for Instance, prevent a sudden Passion of
Anger from rising in your Minds upon Twenty Accidents: But as soon as you feel
this Passion, you can thus far stifle it, you can seal up your mouth, so that
the Passion shall not vent it self in unseemly words: And if you will withdraw
that fuel from the new-kindled Fire, it will soon be extinguished, and die.
Whereas if you suffer it to break out in bitter Speeches and Expressions, it
will flame beyond measure.

Thus again, If any undecent, impure Fancies or Desires should be excited in
you upon any occasion: It was not perhaps in your power to keep them from
coming into your Minds; but it is in your power to withdraw from the Temptation
that caused them, and to endeavor to direct your Thoughts to some other
Object: at least not to proceed one step in any outward Action toward the
Accomplishing of those Desires. If you take this Course, the Disturbance of
your Mind will soon cease, and you will return presently to your ordinary
Temper.

And let me tell you this further, That by your being thus careful to resist
and smother the first beginnings of Sin, you will not only preserve, in a great
measure, the Innocence of your Minds under the present Temptation; but you will
also have this farther advantage, that by this means you increase your Power
over your Thoughts, against the next time that the Temptation returns. Every
check you give to the first motion of Sin, makes the next assault of them the
less furious. And if you do constantly use your selves thus to Guard and Watch
over your Hearts, you will in time obtain such a Command over them, that you
will not be troubled with a quarter of those irregular Desires and Passions,
which heretofore upon several occasions used to be kindled in you. By this
Method you will strengthen your Faculties, and enlarge your Powers; and by
degrees bring your selves to that happy Temper of Soul, that there will be no
great War between the Law of your Members, and the Law of your Minds: But the
World and the Flesh will be Crucified to you, as you are to them; that I may
use St. Paul's Expressions.

But then Fourthly, That you may be able not only to keep bad Thoughts out of
your Minds, but also to have a constant spring of good ones; there are some
particular Exercises very proper for this purpose to be recommended. Such I
mean as these; Converse with discreet and pious Persons who read good Book,
especially the Holy Scriptures, taking times of Meditation and Recollection;
and above all, Fervent and Constant Prayer to GOD.

It is not to be told how every one of these things does help to inspire us
with good Thoughts and Purposes.

A little Passage now and then, though but occasionally dropped in a Conversation,
that is to the business of Virtue and Goodness, will supply us some times with
Matter for good Thoughts for a considerable while after. What lasting
Impressions then, do ye think, would be left upon our Minds, if we made it our
constant Exercise every day, to read or hear something out of the Bible, or
some other Good Book, with a design to grow Better thereby?

But above all things, we must take care to be diligent and serious in our
Applications to the Throne of Grace: It is hearty Prayer and Devotion, that
when all is done, will prove the most Effectual Means, for the keeping ourt
Hearts steady to that which is Good, and securing them from the pollutions of
the sensible Earthly Objects that do surround us.

O therefore let us be constant in our Religious Offices. Nay, let us take
every Opportunity that our Affairs will allow us, of raising our Minds to GOD,
and thanking him for his Infinite Love and Goodness to us; and imploring the
continual Influences of his Grace and Holy Spirit, and re-inforcing our Vows
and Purposes of persevering in his Service.

By this means we shall come to lead Spiritual Lives indeed. Our Souls will be
a perpetual Fountain of Good Thoughts. And while we live here, our Conversation
will be in Heaven. For GOD and Christ, and the things above will have our
Hearts, though the World has our Bodies.

But then in the Fifth and Last Place, Notwithstanding what I have hitherto
said, concerning the Diligence with which we are to keep our Hearts; yet this
is always to be remembered, That with our Diligence we must be careful to join
Discretion.

My Meaning is this, We must have a care not to intend our Thoughts
immoderately, and more than our Tempers will bear, even to the best things: But
we must so keep our Hearts, as at the same time to preserve our Healths, and
keep up the Vigor of our Minds.

And the way to do that, is, Not to put them too much, or too long, upon the
stretch at any one time: But to relax them when there is occasion, and to let
them run out, and entertain themselves upon any thing that comes next to hand,
so long as it is Innocent.

It is a vain thing to imagine, that we can always be thinking of our great
Business; or that we can always be a Praying. or Reading, or Meditating; or,
that, as our Condition is in this World, even the greater part of our Thoughts
should be such as we call Devout and Religious Thoughts.

GOD has provided a great deal of other Business for us to apply our Minds to,
so long as we live in this World. And by minding that diligently and
conscientiously, we do serve GOD as acceptably, as if we were Reading or
Praying.

Nay, even then, when we have no urgent Business upon our hands to take up our
Minds, it is not necessary that we should be always thinking of Religion.
Norwould I call every Thought a vain, or an idle, or a sinful Thought, that
has not GOD, or our Spiritual Concernments for its Object. Even the most
Spiritually-minded among us, must oftentimes be content to be entertained with
such Thoughts as our Company, or our Temper, or the present Circumstances we
are in, do suggest to us. And provided those Thoughts be innocent, and do not
entrench upon the Laws of Piety, and Purity, and Charity; be they otherwise
very trifling and impertinent: I say, I would not look upon them as ill
Thoughts, nor have any one angry at himself upon account of them.

The truth of it is, So long as we consist of Bodies and Souls, we cannot
always be thinking of serious things. They indeed are the wisest that think of
them most, but it is even dangerous to attempt to think of them always. For, as
most Men's Constitutions are, that is the ready way to spoil the Habit of our
Bodies, and by that means to render our Minds perfectly unfit for Thinking at
all to any good Purposes.

Thus have I laid before you the Main Things wherein, as I do believe, the
right Governing our Thoughts does consist. And I doubt not, they are so safe,
and so effectual, that whosoever will sincerely practice them, as far as he
can, will so keep his Heart, that the Issues from thence in his Life and
Conversation will be Happy and Prosperous. I conclude all with the Collect of
this Day.

Almighty GOD, who see that we have no power of our selves to help our
selves; Keep us both outwardly in our Bodies, and inwardly in our Souls; that
we may be defended from all Adversities which may happen to the Body, and from
all EVIL THOUGHTS which may assault and hurt the Soul, through JESUS CHRIST our
Lord.

FINIS.
A CATALOGUE of Sermons Printed and Sold by Henry Hills in Black-Fryars near
the Waterside. Pride One Penny each.
TWO of Sir William Daws, Bar. one at Cambridge, on the 5th of Nov. 1706. and
the other before the Queen, Nov. 19. 1704. One of the Bishop of Norwich before
Her Majesty, March 8th, 1705. on her happy Accession to the Crown. Two of the
Bishop of Lincoln's, one December, 31, 1705. and the other November. 5. 1705. One
of Dr. Willis's Dean of Lincoln, on the 5th of Nov. 1705. One of Dr. Blackhal,
his Commencement Sermon before the University of Cambridge, June 30, 1700.
Three of Dr. Parsons's, called The First Fruits of the Gentiles, etc. at
Salisbury. Two of Dr. Moss, one before the Queen, April 22d, 1706. The other a
Spittle-Sermon Wednesday in Easter-week, 1706. One of the Bishop of York,
before the Queen, at Her Coronation. One of Dr. Clarke, before the Queen,
December. 30, 1705. Two of Dr. Stanhope, One before the Bishops, etc. October. 25,
1705. The other before the Queen at St. Paul's, 1706. One of Dr. Blackburn's
before the Queen, December 9, 1705. A Sermon called The Royal Mercant, before his
Majesty King Charles the Second, at Whitehall. One of the Bishop of
Gloucester's at Gild-Hall, the 7th of September. 1704, being a Thanksgiving for
overcoming the French and Bavarians. Two of Mr. Knagg's, one a Persuasive to
Contentment, the other God with us. One of Dr. Hoadly before the Lord Mayor,
etc. Sept. 29, 1705. Three of Dr. Kennet's; Two upon the Murder of King
Charles the First, Jan. 30, 1703, 1705. The other before the Queen, June 23,
1706. One of the Bishop of St. Asaph, before the House of Lords, January 30,
1705 6. One of Mr. Stubs, on May 26, 1706. being a Preparatory to the General
Thanksgiving. One of Dr. Manningham, before the Queen at Windsor, Aug. 4, 1706.
One of Mr. Sprint, The Bridewoman's Counselor, at a Wedding, 1799. One of his
Grace John late Archb of Canterbury, 1694, Of evil speaking.
An Epitome of the Protestant Religion, showing when it began, why the People
so called, of the 3 Creeds, wherefore People stand when one is said: How and
when Infant Baptism came to be used; when and wherefore Godfathers and
Godmothers came to be ordained, and the Sign of the Cross used, when and how
Sprinkling came to be used instead of Dipping: Also, the Presbyterians what
they hold, what Scriptures they use. The Independents and Baptists, what
Scriptures they produce: The Quakers, their Principles, and what Scriptures
they produce. By Jo. Axford, of Lacockin in Wiltshire.


