A TRUE REPRESENTATION OF THE RISE, PROGRESS, AND STATE OF THE PRESENT
DIVISIONS OF THE CHURCH OF SCOTLAND.

LONDON, Printed in the year 1657.

A TRUE REPRESENTATION OF THE Rise, Progress, and State OF THE PRESENT DIVISION
IN THE Church of SCOTLAND.
much the more averse from representing these our differences, divisions, and
the consequences which have followed thereupon, and the effects they have
produced; that this cannot be done without some, yet too just reflection upon
brethren, and their practices; with some of whom we have walked to the house of
God in company, and whom we do still love and respect, sincerely wishing from
our hearts, (as the Lord knows) that we might with them serve the Lord with
one consent. Nevertheless, considering how much we, and the truth through our
sides have suffered, through mis-representations that are made of the state of
our differences, and the foul asperosins cast upon this Church, and the
servants and Ministers of Jesus Christ, who adhere to the public judicatories
thereof; and contend for the preservation of the government of the Church, in
the due authority and subordination of judicatories, as by the good hand of our
God in his great mercy, they have been settled amongst us, according to the
Word of God: And perceiving that it is our Brethrens design in all this, either
that they may find ways to prosecute some extraordinary and irregular course
for remedying of evils amongst us; or at least may keep matters in the
confusion and disorder wherein they are, that men may do as seems good in
their own eyes, in matters Ecclesiastic, without controulment from the
Authority of the Ecclesiastic judicatories: We are necessitated for the
undeceiving of these who desire information, and for the exoneration and
freeing of our selves of all consequences that may follow in this Church, upon
the continuance of our confusions through their misinsformations, to give a
true information, and lay open the state of our differences and present case of
our Church.

Rise of our Division, and what were the matters of our differences, that so
the true state of the controversy betwixt us and our dissenting brethren, may
be known. 2. Some of the irregular courses they have run into, and do practice,
for strengthening of their party and faction. 3. What means we have used, and
what we have condescended unto, to gain them to union and conjunction with us
in the judicatories of the Church, but without any success.

Sect. 3. As for the first head, We shall not trouble men with ripping up the
secret actings of that spirit of Division (which at last appeared in its own
colors openly amongst us) in some of them, while as we were yet going along
together, and there was no breach between our brethren and us. Albeit it is
most certain, that before, even long before, that godly understanding men, who
were upon public judicatures, and had occasion to observe more nearly the
ways of some of our brethren; discerned therein principles and designs tending
to that which afterward brake forth. But we shall not rip up these things; The
conception of the spirit of Division was too long a being looked to, that it
might have been crushed; it was now come to such maturity, that it wanted but
an opportunity to break forth; which, for the punishment of the provocations of
a sinful generation, was by the holy dispensation of divine providence, quickly
brought to pass: For shortly after the flroak upon this Nation at Dumbar,
comes forth that Remonstrance, entitled, The Remonstrance of the Gentlemen
Officers and Ministers, attending the Western Forces, containing matters of
great importance, and which was the first matter of our public
Church-differences, and did produce the first open rupture and Division in the
judicatures. Concerning which, these things would be observed and considered.

concurrence of the Commissioners of the Assembly in presenting it to the
State: And albeit it did contain many points of highest concernment, and
contrary unto the constant resolutions of both Church and State (as is after to
be cleared) yet they would not lay it aside for any entreaty, and join with
their Brethren, and the rest of the Nation; but did prosecute it with
eagerness and insolence, and upon that account did act in a separate way, from
the judicatories and Forces of this Nation, till themselves were broken, and
the Church and State cast upon all the difficulties which after followed, and
particularly upon these resolutions which our Brethren do so much condemn.

of the Supreme Authority of a Church or State, concerning matters of greatest
concernment to both; nor content themselves with the exoneration of their own
consciences, if they be not satisfied; but when themselves have agreed to these
things, and have been chief contrivers of them, there can be no security given,
but they will retract their judgments, and overturn them again: Which
principle and way is inconsistent with the safety or standing of any humane
society whatsoever. It is true, in their Remonstrance, and since, in their
emissions to the world in print, they would lay the great stress of this
alteration in their judgment and way, upon after discoveries of crooked ways
in managing of Transactions in pursuance of these principles, and of some
particulars in these Transactions which were kept up from the judicatories;
upon the knowledge whereof, they did see the evil and sin of these conclusions
of Church and State. But if it were to any purpose to trouble the world with
stories of matters of fact, we could easily demonstrate what a gaining trade
they have made of misrepresentations of this kind; and in particular, that it
is more then evident to all who are acquainted with these affairs, that these
resolutions were faithfully managed, and full satisfaction obtained in all that
was required previous to a conclusion, and that no particular (though in
matters only upon the by, and that whereof they make so much noise, was only a
person who was bred in the Church of England, his taking the Communion once
kneeling, after he had entered on a Treaty) was kept up from these who now
complain of it; nay, or from the Assembly it self, as will appear from the
report given in to the Assembly, and is now in public record. But waving all
these, it is clear from their Paper emitted to the world, Entitled, The Causes
of the Lords wrath against Scotland, that they do hold out the very resolutions
and determinations of Church and State in these matters, previous to any
conclusion, as the cause of the Lords controversy against the Land. So that,
assert what they please to gloss the matter, they have made a defection from
the principles of this Church, and prosecuted the same with a rupture and
separation.

to change any thing in it: They answered, that though some expressions might
be changed, yet they had no power, and were not to alter any thing of the
matter of it, which was in effect, to obtrude their determinations upon the
Church-judicatorie; As these things did evidence their small respect to the
government of this Church, and their stretching themselves beyond their line,
by determining in their private capacity, not only antecedently, but contrary
to the conclusions of the Supreme judicatories; so diverse of these who went a
long with them in it at first, perceiving shortly after how divisive and
destructive to al order that course was, did quickly withdraw from them,
repenting that ever they had engaged with them.

Sect. 7.4. What ever charity might have been allowed them, in presenting their
thoughts upon these Transactions, or of other faults, for a testimony and
exoneration of their own consciences, and desiring to have them redressed in an
orderly way by the competent judicatories: yet this can no ways be justified,
that not only they second their Testimony with a separation, but in the close
of the Remonstrance, they hold forth a Declaration, and avowing of engagements
upon their hearts (these are the very words) before God, if he shall lengthen
their days, and take pleasure in them, to make them any way instrumental in
his work, and for his peoples good and safety; That they shall, to the utmost
of their power, endeavor to get these things remedied, according to their
places and callings: Which was a real and plain engaging, and banding of
themselves together, to prosecute the matter of their Remonstrance by arms and
force, it being certain that the most part of the Remonstrators then were in a
military place and calling. And this, several passages in their carriage,
before they were broken, did clearly enough evidence to be their purpose and
intention. And the judgment of this Church of such divisive bandings of
parties, has been so well known, especially since the general Assembly, 1642.
That our Brethren cannot free themselves of walking contrary to the established
order of this Church in that their practic.

the prosecution thereof, had made a broach upon our sweet harmony and unity,
and laid the foundation of all our following breaches; yet the Commission of
the general Assembly was most tender and careful to prevent any breach upon it,
as may appear by their tender carriage before they proceeded to give any sense
upon the Remonstrance and from the sense it self which they were afterward
necessitated to give.

As to their carriage before, This in general may speak their tenderness, that
notwithstanding their just dissatisfaction and offense at these proceedings;
and notwithstanding the present hard condition of the times did call for their
present appearing against these dividing courses; yet they suspended from
October 24. (which day the Remonstrance was given in) to declare their sense of
it till November, 28. More particularly, when they were frequently convened,
November. 14. to cognosce upon it at Sterlin, and had spent three days in
conference and debates about it. They offered to our Brethren, That provided
they would not require nor press an answer to the Remonstrance from the State,
but be coutent to leave it with and before them, as a Testimony for themselves
of their mind and judgment of affairs; The Commission would forbear to give
any sense upon it, and should endeavor and interpose with the State, that they
would use the like forbearance; and accordingly one was sent to acquaint the
prime Ministers of State with this overture, and they did so relish it, as they
laid that business aside, till they should meet with the Commission. This
overture and cendescention agreed unto by our Brethren, as also that in the
mean time they should forbear meddling with that debate in public preaching,
was grossly violated by our Brethren. For not only did these Ministers for the
Remonstrance, who preached on the next Sabbath, publicly fall upon that debate
before the people; but before the Commissioners could reach Perth (to which
they had adjourned their meeting, on the Tuesday the easter, that they might
interpose with the State) they basted thither, and gave in a supplication to
the State, (denying any acknowledgement of, or respect to the Supreme
Ma^istrate, though there present) professing their adherence to the
Remonstrance, and pressing a satisfactory answer to it. Wherein albeit they did
neglect that peaceable overture, and walk contrary to their own condescentions;
yet the State for six or seven days did follow all peaceable ways of
preventing a rupture; offering that the Remonstrance might lie as a testimony
for these who had presented it, of their mind and judgment, and that if they
would join with the rest of the Nation, they should declare nothing against it;
but nothing prevailing with them, the State was necessitate to declare against
it, and yet in so fair terms, as it could hardly have been expected a State
should answer such a Paper in such a way.

they do acknowledge what truths are held out in the Remonstrance, though they
were not clear that they held them out in an orderly way: they do not at all
reflect upon persons nor offer to censure them, nor declare them censurable;
but do only declare their judgment of things contained in the paper; and
though they find in it some encroachments upon the determinations of the
general Assembly, as also their meddling with matters of State and Civil
government, and their engaging themselves to endeavor remedies in these things
they remonstrate against; with all which (and because it is apt to breed
division) they were dissatisfied; yet out of their tender respects to persons,
they content themselves with declaring so far, and do forbear all further
examination of it, expecting such satisfaction against their next meeting from
the Remonstrators themselves as might prevent all further debate.



December. 14. 1650. Wherein, after a repetition of the quaery propounded to
them, and a Narrative of the States obligation to use all lawful and necessary
means for the defense of the Land, of the broken and scattered condition of the
Forces of the Kingdom, and the subduing of a great part thereof, disabling the
rest from their own defense, unless there be a more general calling forth of
the people: The conclusion and resolution is this, In this case of so great and
evident necessity, we cannot be against the raising of all fensible persons in
the Land, and permitting them to fight against this enemy for defense of the
Kingdom; excepting such as are excommnicate, forfaulted, notoriously profane
or flagitious, and such as have been from the beginning, and continue still, or
are at this time, obstinate and professed enemies, and opposers of the Covenant
and cause of God; and for the capacity of acting that the estates of Parliament
ought to have, as we hope they will have special care, that in this so general
concurrence of all the people of the Kingdom, none be put in such trust or
power as may be prejudicial to the cause of God; and that such Officers as are
of known integrity and affection to the cause, and particularly such as have
suffered in our former Armies, may be taken special notice of.

May 24. 1651. Wherein after the repetition of several desires of the King,
Parliament, and Committee of Estates, renewed with great earnestness (for the
space of two Months) to the Commission for a clear and positive answer to the
quaery propounded concerning that matter: It is declared as follows, Least
any aspersion should be cast upon us of incroaching upon, or intruding our
selves unto the Office of the civil Power and Authority; we do declare, that we
do not assume to our selves, and that it is not competent to us but only to the
King and Parliament, to make or repeal Acts of Parliament; and therefore, that
as the Commission of the Kirk had not hand in making of the Act of Classes, so
neither do we take upon us, to derermine the keeping up, or rescinding, or
repealing of the same; yet being required by his Majesty, and Estates of
Parliament, to give our judgment and advice in point of conscience, whether or
not, considering the ground contained in the Narrative of the Act of Classes,
viz. The solemn league and Covenant, the solemn acknowledgement of sins and
engagements to duties, Declarations emitted by the Kirk, and the engagement and
pronnse made by the Committee of Estates, to the Kingdom of England; It be
sinful and unlawful to admit to be members of the Committee of Estates,
persons formerly debarred from the public trust, or to rescind and repeal the
Acts of Classes. We declare, that as for any engagement or promise made unto
the Kingdom of England, concerning not admitting unto places of power and
trust, persons accessory unto the sinful engagement, against that Kingdom, we
know nothing of the nature or grounds thereof, and therefore leaves it to the
Estates of Parliament themselves, to consider how it does oblige or not oblige
in the present condition of affairs in these Kingdoms: But for the solemn
League and Covenant, the solemn acknowledgement and engagement, and former
Declarations, we do find that they do not particularly determine any definite
measure of time, of excluding persons from public trust, for bypast
offenses, but only binds and obliges condignely to punish offenders as the
degree of the offense shall require or deserve, or the supreme judicatory of
the Kingdom, or others having power from them for that effect, shall judge
convenient, to purge all judicatories and places of power and trust, and to
endeavor that they consist of, and be filled with such men as are of known
good affection to the cause of God, and of a blameless and Christian
conversation (which is a moral duty commanded in the Word of God, and of
perpetual obligation) so that nothing upon the account of these grounds, does
hinder, but that persons formerly debarred from places of power and trust for
their offenses, may be admitted to be members of the Commit of Estates, and
the censure inflicted upon them by the Acts of Classes may be taken off, and
rescinded without sin by the Parliament, whose power it is to lengthen or
shorten the time of such censures, according as they shall find them just and
necessary; provided they be men who have satisfied the Kirk for their former
offenses, have renewed or taken the Covenant, and be qualified for such places,
with the qualifications required in the Word of God, and expressed in the
solemn acknowledment and engagement, viz. That they be men of known good
affection to the cause of God, and of a blameless and Christian conversation;
which ought always carefully to be observed and made conscience of, though
there were no such Act of Classes, to the effect that no persons get such power
and trust into their hands as may be prejudicial to the cause of God.

Scotland, from page 10. to 17. And it is not our work in this Representation,
to publish a Treatise in defense of these resolutions; yet we shall add a few
things for clearing of the matter.

December 14. 1650. we need not insist to declare; That this debate is
extrinsecal to our Doctrine, Worship, and Church Government; and therefore it
cannot be justified that such a rent should be made because of our differences
about it: That there was no question made by our Brethren, of the lawfulness
of the service wherein these Forces were to be employed, which might have added
weight to the grounds of their dissent: That the Country was really in that low
condition, supposed in the resolution (occasioned partly by our Brethrens
separation upon the account of the Remonstrance) which could not but put State
and Church into great straits, and warrant them in their stations, to improve
all ordinary means, not prohibited by the Word of God, and the use whereof is
not in it self sinful, for necessary self preservation; And that whatever
latitude may be taken in such a case, yet the commission in their resolution,
did use such caution, that if they be judged thereby (as they ought to be)
there can be no defection fastened upon them, even by them who condemn a
general concurrence of fellow subjects in cases of extremity; for in effect
they approve of none to be admitted, but such as are professed friends to the
cause of God, and who enter in Covenant for that effect. But passing all these,
we desire it may be remembered, that our Brethren did not content themselves
simply to condemn this resolution, or to assert that it was unlawful to take in
or employ such as they are qualified in the resolution; But running to another
extremity, did assert, that it was sinful and unlawful for any honest and godly
Subjects, to go forth and join in an Army, constitute according to the
resolution, albeit called and required thereunto by the Civil Magistrate, in
the case of necssary defense of the Nation, and every particular interest in
it. And in several papers did positively maintain this assertion, and by many
arguments labored to bear it in upon people. The gross absurdity of both
which assertions may be clearly seen in these few particulars.

ought to call them, and wherein they ought to concur; especially when their
conjunction altogether is in rational prudence, a mean necessary in ordinary
providence, for their preservation from the violence of the invading powers.

Germany; so we sind Christians and godly men in all ages and times have never
questioned the truth of it, but by their practice have gone along with it. To
pass the example of the primitive Church, where, in Christians were so far
from making question of this, that a great part of the forces of the Roman
Empire consisted of Christians, as Tertullian does affirm: As also of Orthodox
Christians in other Nations, who being joined in civil Society, with others
corrupt in Religion, do make no scruple of joining in Arms with them; and who
may justly resent the scandal cast upon Protestant Churches, by the starting of
such a debate: We shall only mention the example of our own worthy Reformers,
who in the case of foreign invasion made no scruple to join in Arms with
those who had been in bloody opposition to the people of God, so soon as they
were willing to come off from the contrary party, and profess repentance for
their former courses. Witness their joining with the Duke of Chattellarault
and his followers, who had been in opposition to the Congregation as they were
then called. Yea, after some disaster received by the French at Lies after
that conjunction, they did not look upon the receiving of him, as a cause of
that sad stroke, as some would make the world believe from Mr. Knoxes Sermon at
Sterlin: For in the heads of that Sermon, Printed in the History of the Church
of Scotland, Page 217. Edit. Edinburgh, 1644. in 4. there is no mention of any
such thing, but only of their carnal considence, that possibly they had not
sincerely repented their former opposition, and that they who were late come
in, were made to feel in their own hearts, how bitter a cup they had made
others to drink before them: nor does he (as our Brethrens Tenets now lead
them) press them to purge out such as were lately admitted, but does only
press repentance upon all of them.

French party, as will appear from the Declaration recorded in the History of
the Church of Scotland, Page 179. etc. Wherein as there are many things
remarkable to our present purpose, so their exhortatory close speaks thus,
Page 182, 183. If you tender true Religion ( i.e. if ye be Protestants) ye know
her Majesty bears her self plain enemy thereunto. If Religion be not
persuasive unto you ( i.e. if ye be Papists) yet cast not away the care ye have
over your Commonwealth, which ye see manifestly and violently ruined before
your eyes. If this will not move you, remember your dear Wives, Children and
Posterity, your ancient heritages, etc. Then Brethren let us join our Forces,
and both with wit and manhood resist their beginnings; let no man withdraw
himself; and if any will be so unhappy and mischievous (as we suppose none to
be) let us altogether repute, hold, and use him (as he is indeed) for an enemy
to us and to himself, and to his Commonwealth. All which does make it clear,
that they made no scruple of joining with Papists, being their Country men and
compatriots, and that even when the quarrel with the enemy was complexe, both
for the liberty of the Country and the interest of true Religion, they were
content, and desirous that their Country men, though disaffected to Religion,
should join with them upon the account of their common civil in terest, as they
also afterward express in another Declaration, recorded in the same History,
Page 197. at the beginning.

so clearly to the point in controversy, we shall only add the Testimony of a
late learned Writer, who in his Treatise, Entuled, Lex, Rex, Quest. 37. page
379. speaking of their opinion, who think, if the King command Papists and
Prelates to rise against the Parliament of England, That we are obliged in
conscience, and by our oath and Covenant, to help our native Prince against
them: He subjoins, To which opinion, with hands and feet I should accord, if
our Kings cause were just and lawful. And a little after in the same page, he
adds, I see no reason but the civil Law of a Kingdom does oblige any Citizen to
help an innocent man against a murdering Robber, and that he may be judicially
accused as a murderer, who fails in his duty, etc. And afterward, page 382.
after this supposition and assertion, If an Army of Turks and Pagans would come
upon Britam, one part of Britain would help another, which includes more then
the conjunction of fellow subjects of one Kingdom: He adds, as Jehoshaphat the
King of Judah did right in helping of Ahab and Israel, so the Lord had approved
of the war; which may give a dash to the many objections mustered up from the
Lords reproof to Jehoshaphat, against the Commissions Resolution.

Cor. 12. makes use of this beam of the light of nature, to enforce that there
ought to be no schism in the mystical body of Christ, or his Church, but all
the members ought have a care of the whole body, and one of another; so by
parity of reason it may be as strongly applied to the Political body and
incorporation of a Commonwealth, in things necessary for the preservation of
its being and safety, and to repel unjust violence. Nor will it suffice to
say, that as the Law of nature, when it obliges us to defend our selves for
self-preservation, does not allow us to make use of every mean for that end,
but only of lawful means, which cannot be said of conjunction and association
in arms with men corrupt in Religion, or ungodly in their conversation: For we
reason not from the Law of nature obliging to self-preservation and defense,
simpliciter, but from the Law of nature its obligation lying upon members of
one and the same body, such as is the incorporation of one City, Kingdom or
Commonwealth, in relation to the preservation of the whole, and of one
another, when under the hazard of unjust violence and invasion. And so the
argument speaks not only for the lawfulness of the end, or the defense and
preservation of the Political body, but for the lawfulness also of the means,
or the concurrence of all the members for that effect, which does strongly
infer our conclusion.



but such as were also members of the Church, and so professors of the true
Religion, as now under the Gospel it may be otherwise; Yet even then we will
find this truth, That albeit oft-times many of that Church did make defection
to wicked and (to speak so) malignant courses, yet were they never refused or
rejected from Church or camp-fellowship, when they professedly returned from
their evil courses, although there was no real evidence of true repentance and
godliness appearing in them. How often in the time of Moses did they turn
aside? and albeit he knew well the generality of them continued graceless,
notwithstanding their professions of returning, Deuteronomy. 29.2, 3, 4. yet were they
never excluded from joining with the rest in their military undertakings. So
also in the days of David, when Ten Tribes had for seven years shed much
blood, in cleaving to the house of Saul, and opposing his Kingdom (which was
an opposing of the Kingdom of the Messiah in the Type; and a fighting against
the cause of God) and afterward, when they joined in the unnatural rebellion
with Absalom, yet, upon relinquishing their former course they were readmitted
into fellowship of Council and arms, with the rest, who had adhered to the
cause of God. Many such instances might be produced from the History of the
Judges, and by succeeding Kings of Judah, which might abundantly clear this
truth, which we pass as studying brevity.

John Baptist, were professors, either Proselytes, or (as some think) native
Jews under the Roman pay; And as Orthodox Divines do from John's preaching to
them, and not enjoining them to quit their military employment, strongly argue
against Anabaptists for the lawfulness of war to Christians; So it will as
strongly conclude the lawfulness of Christians conjunctions in arms with men
of another Religion, yea, even Heathens, such as many of the Romish Soldiers
were. The like also may be concluded from the instance of Cornelius and Peter's
preaching to him. 2. It is an undoubted truth, that now under the Gospel, it is
lawful for godly, sound and Orthodox Christians to be of, and abide in one
civil incorporation with wicked Idolaters, Heathens and Pagans; We say not that
it is lawful for honest Christians to associate and embody themselves
voluntarily, and of new, with such people, being before free and distinct from
them; But that it is lawful to abide in such an Incorporation, we believe no
Orthodox Christian (though Anabaptists and fifth Monarchy men may) will deny:
as being agreeable to the tenor of the Epistles of the Apostles concerning
marriage-fellowship to be kept betwixt a Christian and an Infidel, if they be
not forced from it by violence, though it were not lawful for a Christian being
free, to enter into that fellowship; and Christians continuance in servitude to
Heathens, unless they be made free. Now if it be lawful to abide in one civil
Incorporation with such, It is also not only lawful for them, but their duty
which they may not neglect when need requires, to join and concur with their
co-members in such actings as are for their kind lawful, which essentially
belong to the relation, and are necessary for the preservation of the
Incorporation, and the just common interests thereof, such as conjunction in
arms to repel invasion is. 3. As Christ never came to a people with his Gospel,
to make that unlawful which was lawful before to them by the Law of nature (as
this conjunction in arms in the case already mentioned must be acknowledged to
be before a people embrace the Gospel) So we doubt not but understanding
Christians will find that the Scriptures speaking to Christians living under
Heathenish powers, and commanding them to perform to them all things lawful and
competent to the relations wherein they stood to them, does positively warrant
them to join with their fellow-citizens in this case. And particularly, that
passage, Romans 13.5, 6, 7, 8. does clearly evince this, where the Apostle
commands Christians to be subject to heathenish Magistrates, not only for
wrath, but conscience sake, and to pay tribute to them (whereby they maintained
their wars) and that is a voluntary and active way, upon the account that they
are the Ministers of God, attending upon that very thing, even to protect
Subjects and Commonwealths.



shall we enter upon a particular examination of these Scritures. Only this in
the general, most part of them are out of the Old Testament spoken to the
people of the Jews then by divine institution, as in their Religion, so in
their State, separated from all other people of the World; and relate to
entering into voluntary and elective confederacies and associations with other
Kingdoms or Nations: Yea, and some of them for active assistance unto the
Nations with whom the confederacy was made; and so do not at all touch our case
of joint acting in Arms for just and necessary defense of Subjects of one
Nation, habitually and antecedently incorporate and now in common hazard. And
for these alleged from the New Testament, They are such as are alleged by
Separatists for separation from Churches for the the sin of fellow members, (as
that 2 Cor. 6.14, 15. etc.) which yet we believe judicious Separatists
themselves will judge to be impertinently applied to a separation in the case
now in hand. As for that passage, Deuteronomy. 23.9. which was continually in their
mouths in this debate, it would be confidered that it was spoken in the first
instance to people so separate from all Nations, as has been said: And in so
far as it may contain a Moral rule for all ages, it does not hold out any rule
for regulating the constitution of an Army, but only the conversation and
carriage of a people in an Army going forth against an enemy, that they should
then especially keep themselves from sin and provoking God when they are
carrying their life in their hand, as the Scripture speaks. This appears
from ver. 10.11. where purity is required not only from gross open, and
formally voluntary sin, but also from secret sins and the involuntary issues of
natural corruption; which we believe fall not under the trial of men, nor can
be followed or looked unto in constituting of Armies.

to all Christian Nations; And we do for our selves disown and disclaim it
before the World; humbly obtesting all Civil Powers and Churches abroad, that
they entertain no such thoughts that ever such a Principle or Doctrine was or
is owned by this Church, what ever has been the judgment or practice of some
particular men, as to this matter.

May 24. 1651. concerning the rescinding of the Act of Classes, there is so
little said against the matter of it, that we need not insist on it. It is
true, not only those who were against the former resolution, but others also in
the State who were most active in the former, did with great eagerness impede
the asking or giving a resolution in this case. But they have their own hearts
to examine, whether it was (not dissatisfaction as to the sinfulness of the
matter, but) self interest that drove them so to do. It is true also much is
spoken to the complex business and prosecution of this Resolution; but the
Church cannot therefore be charged with defection upon the account of the
Resolution it self, which was only their deed; for it contains nothing else,
but a clearing of the Commission that they claim no right to have hand in, or
meddling with the making or rescinding of Acts of Parliament: An acknowledgement
of the power of the civil Magistrate to shorten or lengthen civil punishments,
constituted and inflicted by himself, as he finds just and necessary for the
good of the Commonwealth; And a resoluton in point of conscience (being
thereunto required that the State might without sin take off the censures
inflicted by themselves in the Act of Classes; with positive and express
provilion, that they should observe the most strict conditions and
qualification in the persons, that had been at any time formerly required, All
which are so justifiable that we believe no ingenuous and judicious Christian
will carp at them. And therefore our Brethren do but unjustly challenge us on
this account. They say, a design was carried on to advance Malignants, and to
crush these who had formerly been opposite to them; and yet no such design can
be fastened on the Commissions resolution; yea, before this resolution was
given, they interposed for obtaining security for all that were to be admitted,
in that very particular, and did not fail to bear witness against some who
were admitted by the State, against whom there was just cause of exception.
They cry out that many of these who were admitted upon this and the former
resolution, were but superficial in professing repentance for their former
miscarriages, and it was suddenly taken off their hands. But we need not
vindicate how injustly this imputation is cast upon many of them who were most
opposed by them, whose carriage has proved them more steadfast in the cause of
God, and less seekers of their own interests then those that opposed them. We
do only assert, that this cannot be laid to the charge of the Commission, who
as they walked justifiably in holding out the rule, so they did receive very
few themselves, but remitted them to the judicatories, charging them to be
accurate in the matter, and to proceed according to the order appointed by the
general Assemblies. Yea, it was some of our Brethren themselves, who did
receive some of the most eminent of those, upon profession of their repentance.

Andrews and Dundie in the year 1651. and the other at Edinburgh the year
thereafter. Against the first of which, our Brethren (apprehending that it was
likely the Commissions resolutions might be approved there) were pleased to
protest, and declined it as unlawful and evil, as to all authority; as they did
also against that which ensued, and ever since will have them to be accounted
no general Assemblies of this Church. The evil of this course being so notour,
and sensible in the sad consequences thereof, both at home among our selves,
and abroad also among all who hear of our differences, and do love that truth
and peace which once was amongst us, we shall say but a few things to it, And

Church-judicatory (and being ready and waiting on to have done it the third
time, had the Assembly 1653. been permitted to fit and constitute themselves)
have begun and continued a sad rent in this Church, destructive to the very
being thereof, if mercy prevent it not. Albeit before this Rent, one of the
leading men of that party had declared in a particular case, that protesting
against the act of a general Assembly, or of any delegates having their power,
deserved summary excommunication by the constitutions of this Church; yet they
have not spared when it was for their interests, and the times seemed to afford
them immunity, to protest against the very being of two Assemblies. Whereas had
they contented themselves to have protested against the approving of the
Resolutions, or any other acts of these Assemblies, (which might have been a
sufficient salve and exoneration to them) we are confident it had been born
with, as many such irregular practices and protestations of theirs are laid
aside without censure by inferior judicatories. But by their overturning the
very being and authority of these Assemblies, They have taught ill-affected men
too many criticisms upon all the Assemblies which have been in this Church;
They have learned others by their example, to contemn the Authority of
Church-judicatories, as we find by daily experience; They have laid down a
course how themselves (and others, if they please to follow their example) may
do what they list, and then decline the Judge who should cognosce upon their
carriage; They slight and oppose the resolutions of inferior
Church-judicatories, protesting and appealing to a lawful general Assembly, and
yet by their principles they are sure the Church of Scotland shall have none
lawful (had they never so many) till they be pleased to approve thereof. And,
they have cast themselves upon a snare very sinful and scandalous in a National
Church, that by their declinatures, they are engaged not only against what they
think sinful in the acts of these Assemblies, but that they cannot join in most
lawful things (were it humiliations upon incontroversed causes) which flow from
that authority. These are some few of the sad consequences necessarily
attending these protestations, which may abundantly evidence, the evil and fin
of such a course.

Secondly, The evil of this course may appear further, if we compare their
fact, with the Reasons upon which they ground it, no ways like these Reasons
upon which the general Assembly at Glasgow condemned some former corrupt
general Assemblies; but for the most part so false and irrelevant, that it is
to us strange, they should own them before the world, and publish them in
print. They give out there was no access to many to come to that first Assembly
by reason of the motions of Armies at that time, and yet (beside that this is
very extrinsecal to the freedom and lawfulness of the Assembly) Commissioners
came from places most infested. They say the Assembly was infrequent, and yet
the Roles of that Assembly will evidence it was as frequent as many of the
Assemblies which they do not question. They allege that the Assembly was not
free, but overawed, and yet some of themselves (who went along with that
Assembly till the end thereof, though afterward they joined in the
protestation) may bear witness, if they will speak truth, that never did
Assembly more freely and fully debate and reason upon matters, then this
Assembly did upon these Resolutions. They urge in their protestation against
the second Assembly, that many Presbtyeries refused to send Commissioners to
it, and yet they were but some, and that where they had power, for which the
Assembly could not be blamed, and some others who thought fit not to send
Commissioners, yet by their Letter to the Assembly did expressly declare they
were not against the Authority of the former Assembly, and consequently not
against that. To this may be added that our Brethren themselves did really
evidence their own sense of the weakness of their grounds, in that, though all
their Reasons were clear before the Assembly at St. Andrews and Duadie was
constitute, yet they forbear at first to give in their declinature, but with
some salvo's did sit and join in the Assembly choosing a Moderator, and acting
both in the Assembly and Committes, for several days, never appearing with
their protestation, till the day wherein a considerable part of the forces were
defeat, and the assembly were met late atnight to adjourn to Dundie, and then
very unseasonably they gave in it. Yea, it further appears from this, that the
most part of these who now join in that protestation refused then to go along
in it, nor did they after join with them, till the face of affairs were more
fully altered.

to be removed (as our Brethren know is the constant custom) and judged by the
Assembly, and if they were found culpable, the Assembly was free to inflict
what censure they deserved. And our Brethren know that in the Assembly, 1648.
such an exception was not accounted relevant in this Church, to hinder members
of a preceding Commission, from sitting as members in the succeeding Assembly,
and to voice (except in the matter of their own proceedings to be tried and
judged) until an account were taken of their proceedings. And if they should
have been removed before, we see not but our Brethren who continued in
opposition to them, should also have been removed with them, that the Assembly
might have judged of both, though the Assembly did freely allow such as were
opposite to the Resolutions, to sit and reason, and voice according to their
judgment in these matters, when the Commission was removed. 3. What over may
be said of these Resolutions, and the Assemblies approbation thereof, yet it
was but one act; and we believe one act (suppose sinful) does not make void and
null, the Authority of a judicatorie to all effects; otherwise all judicatories
might easily be overturned. 4. We desire it may be considered, how deep our
Brethrens principle will draw. For if these men's being in a course of defection
(as is supposed) do render the judicatorie unlawful where they are admitted,
and oblige men not to join with them in that judicatorie; Then by parity of
reason they must also overturn all inferior Church-judicatories, whereof they
are members; nor must they join in these with them. Nay we see not how their
principles will allow them to join with them in any lawful act of Religion and
worship, more then in an assembly.

were, and yet they protested against it. They allege prelimitations in it
also by the acts of the former Assembly. But their consciences cannot but tell
them, that any such acts (to say nothing to the matter of them, relating to the
public resolutions) were so far from being put in execution, that they were
wholly laid aside, and the Commission of the Assembly at St. Andrews and
Dundie, did at a meeting and conference with them, earnestly press and entreat
they would join with them in the ensuing assembly; which they refused to do,
upon the account of the Resolutions (even though the subject matter thereof,
and so all occasion of debate about them, was then extinct) and because that
Assembly had a dependence upon the former, they had protested against, and had
appointed time and place thereof, albeit legally they could no other way have
access to keep a new assembly, but by virtue of the former indiction and
appointment. 2. We think it strange our brethren should be against all
prelimitations in the matter of constituting assemblies, and that taking such
course as the Commission then took, about emergent scandals, or errors, should
render an assembly null and unlawful. We may say it, in our conserences with
our brethren we have found them averse from joining in an assembly with us,
without both prelimitations and pre-ingagements. And it is not unknown in this
Church, that such courses as that of the Commission have been followed, without
any reflection upon the freedom of assemblies. And to pass other instances
which may be, and are elsewhere produced, we shall pitch on that parallel of
the Commission 1648. Wherein some of our brethren had the chief hand, In which
by express acts, The Commission earnestly recommends to Presbyteries, to take
special notice and trial of every Brothers carriage in the public business;
That if any be found that do not declare themselves against the present
malignant course, nor come with their brethren in the common resolutions
against it, nor give public information to the people, that they be referred
to the next general assembly; And if any of them have already declared for it,
that they be presently censured. Here we will not only find a parallel to that
done by the Commission 1651. but somewhat that went beyond them: Here, such as
were silent or joined not with their brethren, nor informed the people, were
referred to the general assembly. The commission 51. did not meddle at all with
such, nay, nor with their continued dissatisfaction after conference, if they
did not actively oppose, and by their preaching and other actings, obstruct the
execution of the Resolutions for defense of the Nation. Here, such as declared
themselves, were to be presently censured by Presbyteries; but the Commission
51. did only appoint opposers after reference to be cited to the general
Assembly, that they might be accountable for their carriage, as the Commission
was for their proceedings, and that they might prosecute (if they had any thing
to say) these libels they had emitted, against the judicatories and their
proceedings. From which it is clear, that the Commission used more tenderness
in that case, then was usual and approven formerly in this Church. If our
brethren (as they do) recurre to this, that the proceedings of the Commission
1648. were right upon the matter as these in the 51. were not, and so the cases
are different: We hope what has been said of these resolutions, will refute
that imputation and clear there is a parity still. And however, we believe that
matters of formality in constituting judicatories must be still the same in all
matters, and what ever may be concluded from the matter, as to one act of the
judicatorie, yet it cannot be simply null, if it proceed in form but according
to former approven practices. 3. It would be impartially considered what effect
that Letter had as to prelimit the assembly in the election of its members,
wherein we hope the nullity of the allegiance will sufficiently appear. For 1.
It is known that Letter was sent but to a very few Presbyteries, and these
(most of them) after their elections were past. 2. It needed not to be sent to
many for that end they mention (viz. to prelimit them in their elections) for
many Presbyteries had none at all of their judgment among them, and others
very few, and however they have emitted to the world an account of some in most
of Presbyteries of their judgment, yet when they reckon again, they will find
they have wronged some, whom they name as theirs, and yet to this day they
continue opposite to their course, and that they could not make such an account
then of many, as they may do now; since diverse taking advantage of the times,
and seeking their own interests, have fallen to them. 3. Whatever they say of
the Commissions deed, or their active prelimitations thereby; yet if they shall
assert there was any passive prelimitation, either of Presbyteries in electing,
or the Assemblies admitting of such to be members (in which case only it can
plead the nullity of the Assembly) we may boldly declare that they speak
against clear truth; for nowithstanding that letter, the most part of the most
active opposers were chosen by Presbyteries, and admitted and acted in that
assembly, till it pleased themselves to protest and leave it. Yea, further, to
assert this passive prelimitation of Presbyteries, will strike not only against
the Commission, but against all the Presbyteries of the Land, as unfaithful
and betrayers of their trust, which were too heavy a charge against a National
Church. The truth is, the carriage both of the Commission, Presbyteries, and
General Assembly does make it clear, there was no prelimitation intended, nor
practiced in electing members to, nor admitting them to sit in the General
Assembly; for they not only might, but were actually chosen and admitted in
it. Only (as is said) the Commission thought it fit they should be cited
thither, and that however they might act and vote in other things, yet the
Commission and they should be tried together in that debate, which we believe
any unbyassed Christian will judge to have been their duty, and very far from
prelimiting of the Assembly, and an irrelevant ground, on which they should
have made a rent, and such an inlet of confusion upon this Church, as has
followed thereupon.

followed upon this rupture. It may be, and is the matter of our sad
lamentation before the Lord, and we might pour out abundance of complaints in
the bosoms of sympathysing Christians, who ever were sensible of the mercy of
a Churches enjoying the sweet of harmony, that by these divisions sad
prejudices have redounded to the Kingdom of Christ among us, that the work of
the Gospel is exceedingly retarded thereby, Atheism and irreligion increased,
true Religion and godliness exposed to hatred and reproach, because of the
carriage and way of many who professed it, the authority of Church-judicatories
enervate and rendered contemptible; their meetings, which some times were a
reviving now turned into occasions of grief to the lovers and friends of
Church Government and order; yea, and the work of purging (which our Brethren
do so much call for) exceedingly retarded and obstructed. But leaving these
before the Lord, who alone can apply an effectual remedy thereunto; we hold it
our duty to give an account of some of our Brethrens irregular practices
following upon their renting from the Judicatories; whereby (as by the effects)
it may appear what their spirit and way in these differences is, and it may be
discerned what accession they have to these sad distempers formerly mentioned.

liking then of all our Brethren; and we do account it not suitable to the
nature of these duties to make a noise of professing our own practice thereof
accordingly. But we do not see that our Brethrens way in these is at all
agreeable to the Rule, nor consistent with the peace of any constitute National
Church. And particularly we cannot but resent in their way, 1. That they should
make use of these religious exercises, as a subservient mean for carrying on
these courses, which we hope by what is said will appear to be most unlawful in
themselves. 2. That by giving out themselves in these meetings as the
generality of the godly throughout the Land, or delegates in a sort from them;
they do cast an imputation upon the bulk of the National Church beside, who are
against their way, and do not join with them in these courses, as not only
wrong in that matter, but as not godly, some very few excepted. Which as we
know to be a most false imputation; (not many of these, of any rank, who owned
the cause from the beginning, going along with them:) So it is an evidence of a
strange divisive and separating spirit in our Brethren. 3. That they should
take upon them in these meetings to determine upon matters of greatest
importance already determined both in State and Church, (as the first time
these conclusions agreed upon by both, mentioned in the matter of the
Remonstrance, were expressly condemned, was in their first meeting of this sort)
for not only does it reflect upon the established judicatories, as not worthy
to be trusted in these things: but neither have they any power of themselves to
determine in these things, nor have the generality of the godly whom they
pretend to represent, power to authorize them for that effect, unless they
will join issue with fifth Monarchy-men, in their opinions concerning the power
of Saints. 4. That by their determinations in those meetings, so contrary to
truth, and the received principles of this Church, and the results and
practices that flow from them, and all under the name of the generality of the
godly; they expose piety to hatred and contempt amongst us; while as men see
pretenders thereunto so absurd and irregular in their opinions and practices.
By this means (we may say it with regrate) impiety and irreligion have spread
more within these few years, than of a long time formerly.

October, or November, 1651. At which time, what they had agreed upon in their
meeting, concerning the causes of wrath, and the overturning of the settled
resolutions of State and Church, was published as the deed of that Commission,
hereby supposing to add authority thereunto; but in effect branding this Church
as infamous; while as they who pretend to have supreme power therein for
present, and give out themselves to be the only men who have adhered to the
principles of the Church of Scotland, do make null and void all the public
Transactions concluded in the view of the world, do maintain such inconsistent
principles, and do retract and condemn these things, which were held out as the
constant tenor of the Churches conclusions and declarations.

Quorum; yea, albeit not only that Commission was legally expired at the day of
the meeting of the next Assembly, which convened in the year 1651. But albeit
the generality of the Members thereof did give up their Commission and
proceedings to be tried in that Assembly, and were accordingly approved, and a
new Commission given (as was also done at the Assembly thereafter, 1652.) yet
our Brethren being but a small number of the members of that Commission, upon a
pretense of the nullity of these Assemblies, did judge upon the validity of
their own protestations against them, and set themselves down as a Commission,
which (for any thing we know) may be a perpetual court; seeing they allege the
continuance of their power till the next free and lawful general Assembly, and
none such can be had so long as they please to protest against it, even albeit
the Presbyteries and generality of the National Church should own it, as they
did at both these contraverted Assemblies. We know not what can be, if this be
not an usurpation upon the liberties of the Church; when some of these who are
entrusted with a deligate power till the next Assembly, do make themselves
perpetual Prelates, and usurp a negative voice over the Presbyteries, and their
Commissioners met in a general Assembly; yea, and over the major part of these
entrusted with them; and so do cast all who ought to call them to an account,
that they may still continue in power.

Saturday, the Lords day, and Monday) many of these Ministers do Preach
successively one after another, so that three or four and sometime more, do
preach at their preparation, and as many on the Monday following; and on the
Lords day, sometime three or four do Preach before they go to the action;
besides, these who Preach to the multitudes of People that cannot be contained
in the Church. These practices, as they are a clear violation of the Order
unanimously established in this Church, and do occasion great animosities and
alienations in simple People, against those Ministers who will not imitate
these irregular courses; so uninteressed observers, do perceive a clear design
in all this, to set up themselves, as the only pious and zealous people, worthy
to be trusted and followed in our public differences. Which if it be not an
injury to that sacred Ordinance, and an improving thereof (which is a bond of
unity and communion) to be a wedge to drive on and fix a rent, let the
judicious and sober judge.

dissatisfied with their way, are at work. And partly if we confider their way
in these Fasts, even such as they observe in their Communions; for they conveen
many Ministers, and multitudes of people from all corners about to that work.
2. We are not a little confirmed in our apprehension of a design in this, that
our brethren do refuse to join in humiliations and fasts with us, and that upon
most uncontraverted causes, such as our calamities, divisions, and contempt of
the Gospel, etc. Sometime they refused to join in them, because they flowed
from the authority of the Assemblies which they cannot own; which we do look
upon as a visible and woeful fruit of the needles Rent they have made, by
overturning these judicatories, as null in their authority to all effects; and
sometime when the fast is appointed by unquestioned authority of Synods and
Presbyteries, they have refused to join, because they alleged the causes were
defective, that is (according to our brethren) because the Resolutions of the
Church, and the owning the authority of these Assemblies, were not brought in
also as causes of fasting. We hope the judicious and godly will perceive this
not only to be unjust upon the matter, and an injurious reflecting upon their
brethren, who require no such thing of them in reference to their real
declinings; but also to be a very divisive principle, that men will not join in
causes of fasting, because that every cause (suppose true) is not held out in
them; and that they will not concur in lawful duties, on lawful causes, because
these with whom they join will not come up to their judgment in all other
things.

they pack up. We shall only point at some particulars of their actings, And





Scotland being divided into five Provinces, no Intrant was to have any stipend
allowed him, without a Certificate from (at least) four of Ministers and others
named for the respective Provinces where the Minister was to be planted. And
however some few were named as Certifiers who differed from them in judgment;
yet they conveyed the matter so, as in no one Province there were a competent
number of them to give Testimony to any Intrant, though they had been free to
act in a course so destructive to the order and government of this Church; yea,
in one of the Provinces (and that the largest) there were so many named, as
were a competent number of these who had separate from the communion of this
Church; from whom little favor could be expected to men cordially adhering to
the Presbyterial Government, and the procurers of that order testified small
affection thereunto, by endeavoring to put that trust in the hands of such.



Andrews and Dundie have never censured any upon the account of the public
differences; yet when information is given in against any of them as scandalous
and insufficient, they decline all trial of the matter, and sometime for that
end, decline the judicatories as corrupt. But their proceeding against any of
our judgment, where they have power, is most disorderly: For they cast out men
at their pleasure (and none but such as otherwise differ from them in public
matters) having nothing real or relevant against them; some of them being men,
who when they joined with them for a time, were good enough in their account.
And when those who are censured have recourse to superior judicatories for
redress; our brethren by their protestations and appeals do keep their cause
from being heard, and by their counter-actings (yea, sometime by tumultuary
ways of some of their followers, abusing these whom they unjustly censured,
and affronting Ministers who execute the Synods acts in their favors) do leave
poor men under oppression, without any possibility of a remedy in an orderly
way.

of the falsehood of the grounds upon which they are laid to our charge; so the
rest of them not being the cause of their first rent, cannot warrant them to
continue in it, And of all of them we may say, that we hope no judicious
Christian will like their cause the better, that they are so often put to make
use of personal reflections and calumnies to defend it. 2. What ever be the
clamours they raise of the general corruption of the Ministry, yet they have
been often put to it, and solemnly obtested to condescend upon particular persons
and their scandals, that they might be tried; yet for most part they have
always declined it, which is a clear evidence of a design in it, to keep
themselves in the general. 3. We have ofttimes told our Brethren, that their
continuing in their way, does obstruct the work of purging, and rendereth the
Authority of Church judicatories contemptible; and we have assured them that if
they will unite with us, we doubt not (through the blessing of God) to purge
the Church sufficiently in as exact a way as can be desired according to
justice. 4. Albeit our brethren neither do purge, nor will suffer us to try any
of their judgment, yet we are not wanting in that work to our power, but have
exactly tried persons upon informations given in against them by our brethren,
though ofttimes the reality or relevancy of their informations are not made to
appear when put to trial; others also we have in several places under process,
and diverse have been purged out in several parts of the Land.

of our trusts, if any private interest of our own should hinder an union; or
if we should not stretch our selves to the utmost, (keeping truth and a good
conscience) to have our breaches made up. But this we may say as rational men,
we were the greatest of fools, if we did not thirst and long after union upon
right terms, considering that all we meet within our opposition to their
courses, is reproaches, and many sad disadvantages our Brethren carrying on
most of all their designs and courses; and our endeavors to prevent or remedy
them, being all ineffectual and to no purpose, but the exoneration of our own
consciences.



First, Albeit we continued in our dissatisfaction with their principles and
ways, and wanted not competent Church Power generally throughout the Land, to
have reached them with censures, and did meet with greatest provocations from
them daily; yet (as we have said) since the Assembly 1651. we have never
censured one to this day upon the account of the public differences. Nay, we
hope it will appear to these who have observed us and them, that we have
forborne to render them evil for evil, or railing for railing.

Dundee to give them satisfaction in the matter of the Resolutions, and how it
was desired, that if they could not be satisfied, yet they would but forbear to
oppose, and actively to obstruct the execution thereof; but all to no purpose:
It is also known how unseasonably and abruptly they gave in their first
protestation and declinatour; and thereafter immediately did not only desert
the Assembly, but left the place of their meeting, retiring to their own homes:
So that the Assembly could have no opportunity to confer with them, that they
might fall upon amicable ways, to take them off that divisive course. Shortly
after that Assembly, when the condition of assairs was so altered, as they
needed apprehend no prejudice, had the judicatories been never so violent, some
of us did deal with some of them, that they would forbear to prosecute their
protestations, by counter-actings, or following any irregular course, but would
let the matter lie for a time, if so be spirits of men might now be calmed, and
there might be a healing of that rupture. But instead of harkening thereunto,
they proceeded immediately to convene in their extrajudicial meetings, to erect
their pretended Commission, and to publish such things to the world, and fall
upon such irregular actings as did widen the breach, and afford us too just
ground of fear, that nothing would satisfy them unless they had all their
will; and were invested with chief power to manage all Church matters and
govern the whole Church. Thereafter in May 1652. at a meeting of correspondents
from Synods, it was desired that they would join in the Assembly shortly after
ensuing, seeing the Assembly only could apply a sit and effectual remedy for
curing of that breach. But they did not only refuse to hearken to this desire,
but scattered their papers throughout the Land (some whereof are since
published in Print) persuading not only those who had protested against the
former Assembly, but all who were not satisfied with the public Resolutions,
not to join in electing or being elected Commissioners to this Assembly: a
desire (beside the iniquity thereof upon the matter) most divisive and
destructive to Church unity, and contrary to the Apostles rule, of keeping
unity in a bond of peace, where there may be differences in judgment about
some particulars; as we are persuaded learned and rational men will perceive
and judge: And albeit they did refuse to join with us, yet that Assembly being
constitute (and notwithstanding they did protest against the same, behaving
themselves so in that matter, as we have no pleasure to repeat) did not cast
off thoughts of peace, but made an Overture to them for peace, wherein all they
required was (not retracting of their judgments, nor an acknowledgement of the
offense they had given by their practices, which yet had formerly been required
of men who had not done so great disservice to the Church, but) only that they
would for peace sake, pass from their protestations and declinatures which had
made such a breach upon Church Government, and led so bad a preparative for any
who should please to trace their steps, (as a combined party of some Ministers
formerly desposed did in part at that same Assembly) and that they would
forbear to keep up debates upon the matters of our public differences as
those for the Assembly were also content to do. But our brethren did not so
much as once hearken to this Overture, but utterly rejected it as hoping
tospeed better another way in their designs, as indeed they did, some
particulars whereof are touched formerly.

non-approbation of their irregularities. And when we were hopeless of curing
our public differences, at least till we had a general Assembly; yet
considering the many disorders following upon these differences, we did at
meeting in June 1655. propound some Overtures to our brethren, for preventing
the total subversion of Church Government by these disorders, till an Assembly
might meet, which were rejected by them. Thereafter when they did profess a
desire of union (which how and upon what account it came on foot among them,
themselves best know) and accordingly there was a meeting and conference for
that effect, in November 1655. We gladly laid hold of the opportunity, and
laying aside all prejudices, did stretch our selves to the utmost (keeping
truth and a good conscience) to gain them if possible, to an union in the
judicatories of the Church. The Papers which passed at that conference are in
the hands of diverse, and will speak for themselves, and (we are confident) will
plead for us in this matter in the judgment of discerning and unbyassed men.
The particulars of our condescentions are too large to be here related. Only
let this suffice in brief; In order to peace and union, it was offered, that
(whatever was our own judgment of the censures inflicted upon any by the
assembly at St. Andrews and Dundee, yet) we were content that all these
censures should be taken off, and that in such a way as might neither reflect
upon the Assembly, nor our Brethren, or us; That any Acts ordaining censures
because of these matters should be sisted till an Assembly, wherein we should
endeavor the abrogation of them; that in our after-joynt-actings, we should
abstract from all reflection upon bypast differences; that as to the matter of
the Resolutions, and the two controverted Assemblies; however we could not in
our consciences condemn, nor be consenting to the annulling thereof, yet we did
not urge them to renounce their own judgment in either of these; nor that they
should pass from their Protestations as a standing Testimony of their
judgments (whatever we judged they ought to do) but were content that these
Resolutions and Acts and declarations concerning the same should never be urged
against them as the definitive judgment of this Church to any effect; that the
authority of these Assemblies should not be urged against them; that (however
we doubted not of the lawful constitution thereof, yet) ensuing Assemblies
should be constitute according to the constitution of general Assemblies
preceding our differences; and that we would not bind them up, if they pleased,
from propounding reasons to any ensuing Assembly against the public
resolutions, though we judge they would never be able to bring any sufficient
reason against them: Only we desired they would not urge us to renounce our
judgments in condemning these Resolutions, and declaring null the authority of
these Assemblies; and that they would declare that they should not at any time
hereafter make use of these protestations in any judicatory to call in question
and annull the constitution and authority of these Assemblies, so long as the
authority thereof was not urged against them; which if they did not grant, we
could not but foresee the ruin of the Government of the Church; We did also
(beside other particulars) offer unto them, that not only should Synods take
their determinations into a second consideration, concerning the irregular
plantations of Churches by our brethren, but should follow amicable ways of
arbitration by judicious brethren of both judgments antecedently to the Synods
recognition. As also that we should concur with them in all effectual and
orderly ways for purging out any insussicient or scandalous Ministers.

Of reserving the liberty of their judgment and practice in matters
controverted as may consist with Truth and Peace; upon which they would never
give a clear Commentary though desired thereunto. But leaving these, we shall
briefly declare what the particulars were upon which the union chiefly stuck.

contained therein: Which, however they gloss the matter in conference, was in
effect, that we should condemn these Resolutions in our judgments, and should
annul the authority of the Assembly which had determined them as the difinitive
judgment of the Church. This is no conjecture of our own, but clearly held out
in their last Paper at that conference, wherein they complain of our not
granting of this, as supposing and inferring not only the constitution and
authority of these Assemblies, but also (in show and appearance) the justice
and equity of these Resolutions. Whence any man may gather, that to grant their
desire was not at all to suppose any Authority of these Assemblies, but not to
leave the least show of the justice and equity of these Resolutions. Which if
it was to seek peace and union, and not rather that we should betray and yield
up our judgments and the truth (as we believe) let any judge.



all things beside, yet when they pleased, they might have stepped out again at
that door, and made the breach worse.



FINIS.

