A SERMON Preached before the Honorable Society OF THE NATIVES Of the most
Ancient County-Palatine and City of CHESTER, At St Mary le Bow, London,
December 7th 1699.

Published at the Request of the Stewards.

By PETER SHELLEY, M. A.

Rector of Woodford in Essex.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Warren, for Thomas Bennet, at the Half Moon in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1700.

TO MY Worthy Countrymen.
Treasurers.
Mr Richard Aston, Mr William Alexander,
John Hale, Esquire Mr Thomas As^croft Mr Samuel Leadbeater, Mr Carleton Vanbrug.
Mr Robert Mainwaring, Mr Daniel Green, Mr William Rutter, Mr Edward Brook, Mr
Richard Tyler, Mr Richard Goldsmith,
Stewards of the Honorable Society of the Natives in the most Ancient
County-Palatine and City of Chester.
Gentlemen,
YOur Earnest Request for the Printing of this Discourse, was no less
surprising, than your app^inting me to Preach it. For as my beloved retirement
(...) the place I now live in, together with my long (...) my ^ative C^^ntry,
had interrupted all Acquaintance with, and, as I thought, rendered me unknown
to you: So I did not imagine but the meanness of the Performance, would induce
you to avoid all further Reflections on your Choice, by Omitting a Customary
Complement; rather than to defend it by Obliging me to prefix your Names in its
Vindication. Though in this case the Printing your Approbation will be far from
publishing it: Since the Sermon is never likely to have so many Readers as it
had Auditors. But whatever it wants of Ornament, I am sure it is not defective
in an honest, plain, good Intent; and whatever influence it may have on others,
those great and unexpected Civilities I have received from you, upon this
Occasion, will for ever engage me to be,

Gentlemen, Your Most Obliged and Most Humble Servant, Peter Shelley.

A SERMON Preached at the CHESHIRE-FEAST.
1 Pet. ii. 17. Honor all Men; Love the Brotherhood; Fear God; Honor the
King.
WHAT the Holy Apostle urges in this Chapter as the most proper method for
Christians to observe, under the Persecution of the Roman Tyranny, and in the
Infancy of Christianity, that they might prevail against all Opposition; is no
less practicable for us at this time, though (God be Thanked) under far different
Circumstances. What was necessary to propagate the Christian Religion, will
undoubtedly protect it when Established; and those Lawful means which at first
promote, will as probably continue our welfare. Thus the advice of my Text is a
general and Summary comprehension of our Duty as Christians, and a sure guide
to our Prosperity as Men: Teaching us the most infallible means to attain, and
grow in favor both with God and Man. For if we Honor all Men, and Love the
Brotherhood; if we Fear God and Honor the King, undoutedly our Israel will
flourish; Peace will be within our Walls, and Plenteousness in all our Palaces.

The Words contain two general Parts. The first more particularly, relates to
the Alternate duty between private Persons, Honor all Men, but especially Love
the Brotherhood. The second enjoins the duty of Inferiors to their Superior,
viz. of Creatures to their Creator, and of Subjects to their King; Fear God,
and Honor the King.

For the better understanding of which I think is not improper, to give you the
import or meaning of the Word Honor; and

First, It signifies an outward Gesture or Reverence of the Body, by bowing the
Head; putting off of the Hat, or any other such like civil respect, according to
the Custom of the Nation we live in. Thus Lev. 19. 32. Thou shall rise up
before the Hoary Head, and Honor the Face of the Old Man.

Secondly, It signifies to censer Honor upon another, as God Himself speaking
of the Righteous Man, Ps. 91. 15. says, I will be with him in trouble, I will
deliver him, and honor him, i. e. I will advance him to honor.

Thirdly, It is taken for the joint Devotion of the Body and Heart, by paying
all External and Internal Reverence unto God, as we read of Nebuchadnezzar King
of Babylon, who (after God had Punished his Presumption, and restored him to
his Understanding and Kingdom) makes this Solemn Declaration: Now I
Nebuchadnezzar Praise and Extol, and Honor the King of Heaven, Dan. 4. 34.

Fourthly, It is taken for a Charitable distribution of some part of our
Estates, according to our Abilities and the Necessities of those who want. In
which sense Solomon advises us, To Honor God with our Substance, and the
First Fruits of all our increase. Prove. 3. 9. i. e. to give, what we can well
and Prudently spare, to such Charitable Uses, as may best tend to the
Advanc^ment of Piety, and the Manifestation of our Thankfulness to the
Almighty. And this is called Honoring of God, because in so doing, 1st. We, as
His Faithful Stewards, become Dispensers of His Bounty to the Needy. 2ly. We
tacitly acknowledge our Gratitude to Him for His Goodness toward us. 3ly. We
own Him for the Lord and Donor of all; and consequently that the Honor and
Glory of all is due unto Him; which Charity, Thankfulness and Humility, thus
united, is an acceptable Method of ascribing Honor unto Him.

Now though I must acknowledge, that the Honor here mentioned, is by the Apostle
more particularly intended of that, which we owe to the subordinate and deputed
Magistrates, who are set over us by Kings and Princes; yet the Words may very
well include a larger sense; especially since St. Paul advises us to be kindly
Affectioned one to another in Brotherly Love, in honor prefering one another,
Romans 12. 10. as also when He exhorts Timothy to Honor Widows, that are Widows
indeed; and to account the Elders, who rule well, worthy of double Honor. So
that in strictness of the sense, we are positively commanded in the first
Words, to Honor, Reverence, and Respect our Governors according to their
several Degrees and Qualities; not only in respect of their Persons, but their
Authority: rendering to all of them their dues; Tribute to whom tribute is due,
Custom to whom custom, Fear to whom fear, Honor to whom honor.

It Is not then an equal and indifferent behavior toward all Men (as some no
less proudly than ignorantly imagine) which the Words enjoin; but such an
Honor as admits of several Degrees according to the several Stations of
Persons; and even excludes some as altogether incapable or undeserving to have
any Honor paid unto them. For though with God, in regard of the Impartiality
of his Justice, there be no respect of Persons; yet in order to the better
Government of the World, He has placed some Men as Vessels of Honor above
others, of whom He Himself tells us, I have said ye are Gods. And certainly to
refuse to pay our Obliged honor to such, is as ridiculous and unseemly, as it
is to give it unto Fools or Beggars.

But besides those, whom God and the King have set over us, there is Honor due
to some by their Birth and Quality; to others upon the account of their Parts
and Abilities; and to a third sort, by Reason of some Obligeing kindness or
favor received from them. To all these (besides that due from near Relations
to one another, and from a Servant to his Master) there is an extraordinary
Honor and respect to be showed, void of envy and detraction. For assuredly it
is our undoubted Obligation to Reverence and Respect those before the rest of
Mankind, whom God has peculiarly raised above others, to be Instruments and
Promoters of His Glory, and the Public or even our Private Good.

As we say Love generally begets Love, so in this case the discreet Performance
of this Duty, by demeaning our selves lowly and reverently to all our betters,
will incite them to reward the Honor, with favor and Affection. Such
Behavior will Meliorate the Dispositions of those who otherwise might be
inclined to Oppression. It is also the most approved Method to prevail over the
haughty to look favorably upon the humble; It will improve and enlarge the
generous, Compassionate Soul, to continue his Bounty and Loving Kindness, with
the greater Cheerfulness and Alacrity. Thus one Duty will be a motive to
another; and Perpetuate a Reciprocal endeavor toward the obtaining of Peace,
Unity and Concord, which always produces Plenty and Prosperity.

But as the Apostle Commands this Honor in general to Persons of all Nations
and Religions, Good or Bad, as the Circumstances of those Christians who live
under them require: So much more are we engaged to do it to those of our own
Nation or Religion. We must and may Honor all Men according to their Estate
and Condition; but in a more strict and peculiar manner we are enjoined. Qly.
To Love the Brotherhood. Now as this Love contains in it the Honor before
mentioned: So over and above it includes in it such a mutual affection,
Alliance and Brotherly Love, as must Exert it self in all manner of Actions
which may lawfully and prudently tend to the Good of each other.

This is the very Characteristical and distinguishing Badge of Christ's
Disciples. A new Commandment I give unto you, says our Savior, That ye Love
one another. As I have Loved you, that ye also Love one another. By this shall
all Men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye have Love one to another, John 13.
3, 4, 5. He redoubles and repeats the Command, as it were thrice in the same
Breath, on purpose to urge it with the greater energy or force; and to make it
take the deeper Impression upon us. He plainly foresaw what dismal Persecutions
would oppress the Faithful; and that the strictest Obligations to Love and
Friendship would be of absolute necessity to support them in their sufferings;
and therefore He delivers this Commandment with such Pathetick Circumstances as
might engage them more effectually to the performance. It Is some comfort to
have Copartners in trouble, (I mean for a good cause) The undaunted Constancy
of one buoys up the sinking Spirit of another: And mutual Compassion does in a
manner divide any affliction, making it affect the suffering party with a far
less Powerful resentment. But certainly in such cases it is the indispensable
Duty of the whole Church, to assist them to the utmost, not only with their
Prayers but their purses.

It Is more Blessed to give than to receive, says our Savior; and surely no
instance of it can be more honorable, than that of relieving those who suffer
for Righteousness sake. This is the highest Act of Charity; the truest Test of
every Christian; wherein every one ought to vye with each other for the common
edifying of the Church. It Is the cheapest composition, and has the best of all
Funds to ensure us from the like Extremity. And I doubt not, but God in his
great Mercy will so effectually hear and accept our Prayers and Charity for the
distressed Protestants, as to shorten the time of their Persecution; and to
Crown them with Religious perseverance, to the Salvation of their own Souls,
and (may it please God) to the Conversion of their Tormentors also. 'Twere easy
to enlarge upon this subject, but the present Occasion recals me home, to those
who are our Brethren in a nearer Relation. For though we ought to retain an
Universal good will toward all Mankind, especially Christians; yet since our
Abilities cannot possibly extend to all, Love contracts the Object of our
Charity; that we should not imprudently bestow that on Strangers which more
properly belongs to our own Country. Charity and Love in this point may
lawfully begin at home. For Nature instructs us to have an inbred affection to
the Place we were Born in; the Persons we are related to, and those we are bred
up, or have Conversation, with. It Is the main design of your meeting. To
maintain Friendship and Promote Charity; and indeed the advice of my Text is an
effectual Method to both; toward the Observance and intent of which be pleased
to take notice, That our Love to the Brotherhood consists.

First, In Loving the Persons, seperately as Brethren.

Secondly, In Loving the Assembly, Collectively as a Church.

The first of these exerts it self in the mutual Amity of each other as equals.
How good and pleasant a thing it is for Brethren to dwell together in Unity!
says the Psalmist. It Is as sweet incense in the Nostrils of the Almighty;
acceptable to God, beneficial unto Men. Nothing is able (as to our humane
endeavors) to preserve Church and State so much, as mutual Brotherly Love
which is the Fruit of the Spirit; the very bond of Peace. This redoubles all
that is good, this will sweeten and mitigate all afflictions: And will render
that considerable in an entire Body, which would be almost despicable if
separated. Such Societies as these render London like Jerusalem as a City at
Unity in it self; wherein nothing is more Amiable and Lovely, than the
Harmonious concourse of Persons, thus gathered together (as it were in Tribes)
to serve God, and do good unto Men. From this source (as Springs from the
Ocean) arise many circulating Veins of treasures which flow to it again in
larger streams: And by such means you Water and refresh even the barrenest
Countries at the remotest distance; which is your greatest Glory. For as the
External ornament consists in the Pomp and appearance of the Persons: So the
Internal, which is chiefly to be regarded, is most remarkable in that Charity
which attends it; and is indeed the most Important as well as Religious intent
of your Meeting. And this leads me to speak,

Secondly, Of that Love to our Inferior Brethren, which manisests its self in
contributing to their necessities. Bare Speculative Love is not all that is
required; Outward Pomp and show, signify nothing, without actual Charity in
contributing to the relief of our Brethren; which is a duty incumbent upon us
by a double Obligation.

First, In Gratitude to Gods Bounty toward us.

Secondly, In Obedience to His express Commands.

It Is God's Providence alone which has made a distinction amongst us. There is
no difference in the Original mould, nor will there be in the dust of the
Grave. The rich and poor are equal in this, the Lord is the Maker of them both.
He could either have made the Birth abortive; or the wisest and richest Fools
and Beggars. Nay, He can in a small time reduce the most Potent Monarch from
the Throne to the Dunghill; and (as He did Nebuchadnezzar) make him dwell with
the wild Asses, and eat Grass with the Beasts of the Field; For it is by His
free Grace alone that we are what we are.

We can make Him no Retaliation for the good things He has plentifully
bestowed on us; we must therefore pay to the Creature in this sense what is due
to the Creator: And since every other Species delights in its kind, it is
Natural as well as Religious for one Man to assist and supply the necessities
of another.

Yet least this Duty, though apparently reasonable, should be neglected; and Men
endeavor ungratefully to excuse what they are unwilling to perform; we have
many plain and positive Commands in Scripture to enforce us to it, and
therefore must be Charitable.

Secondly, In Obedience to God's Commands.

There is scarce any Command in Scripture more frequently repeated, especially
in the New Testament, than to Love one another; and there can be no instance of
our Love, more useful or convincing than by our relieving the Necessitous. In
prosperity every one has Friends but in adversity few have any. For that is the
touchstone of true Friendship, and we must gratefully acknowledge the Fidelity
of those, who supply our Necessities when there is no prospect of a return. Yet
that this Virtue may not want its due Encouragement, nor the Poor Benefactors,
God himself gives this positive Command, Deuteronomy. 15. Thou shall Open thine hand
wide unto thy brother, to thy poor and to thy needy in the land; Thou shall
surely give unto him and thy heart shall not be grieved when thou give unto
him; because that for this very thing the Lord thy God shall bless thee in all
thy Works and in all that thou put thine hand unto. Here we have a positive
Command to be Charitable, and that in a large measure; we must open our hand
wide; i. e. liberally and freely Answerable to their Occasions and our
Abilities: And the reason of this Command is the more observable; being for
this very Cause God has blessed some with riches above ohers, that they might
be his Faithful Stewards and Treasurers for the Poor. Nor is it a diminution to
any ones greatness to Exercise this Virtue: Nay, it is indeed the Principal
intent of God in raising some above others. For since all Superiority is for
the public Good; the greatest Sovereigns and Princes cannot more firmly
establish themselves in their greatness; or be more Honorably employed, than
in relieving the needy and oppressed: Who are as foils to Diamonds, which though
of inferior estimation, do notwithstanding very much increase and set off the
Luster. Nothing makes them more resemble the Great God of Heaven (from whom
alone they derive their Authority) than to imitate the Divine Goodness in Works
of Universal Mercy and Compassion. So that it may be no small motive to this
Duty if I briefly inform you,

First, Of the Excellency of Charity.

Secondly, Of some Promises attending it.

As to the First, It is a Divine Virtue, not only acceptable unto God; but in a
disproportionable manner evincing us to be resemblers of him. And yet, in this
case, he is so far from being jealous of any assault upon his Honor; that
being essentially Bountiful in himself, he delights to see it shine in his
Creatures: And according to his Bounty unto any, he expects they should
contribute to the necessities of others.

This is the best Testimony of our Thankfulness unto God; Honorable in its own
Nature; and help to the Needy, Profitable to our very selves, commended by
others, and an Act which makes Gods as it were of Men, by communicating to
those who want things necessary to their Being and Well-Being. So that such
Persons are as Visible God's distributing the common necessaries of Life to the
Poor; who, next under God, seem to have an immediate dependence upon charitable
People: And whose Welfare is in a manner at their discretion, as they please to
diffuse or restrain their Bounty. And in this respect the Rich and Charitable
are as it were the perpetual Overseers of the Poor; the very Conduits of God's
Liberality. He places his Treasures in their hands, and if they prove Faithful
in Distributing as well as Receiving of his Bounty, they make themselves
Friends of, that which otherwise will prove, the Mammon of Unrighteousness.

But that no encouragement may be wanting to promote this Duty.

Secondly, God has annexed Promises, to the performance of it, suitable to our
humane conceptions; as it were on purpose to stifle all Objections which
avarice might object against it. For least any one should be restrained from
this Duty through fear of impoverishing himself; God assures us, Prove. 11. 25.
That the Liberal Soul shall be made Fat: And he that waters [others] shall be
watered also himself. And in the 28 chap. at the 27. v. He that gives unto the
Poor shall not lack. But least these should not be prevalent enough, it is
expressly said, Prove. 19. 17. He that has Pity on the Poor, Lends unto the
Lord; and that which he has given will God pay him again. Here the Lord
himself expressly becomes a surety; and it is very certain, that he, who refuses
to lend upon this security, must unavoidably displease God. For, besides the
Breach of his Commands, he tacitly indeed, but yet very plainly, confesses,
That he believes either God is unable and cannot pay, or that he is unjust and
will not pay what he Promises. Now judge whether either of these Opinions are
fit to be conceived of Him who by His Power has made the World and in Equity
preserves it.

But our Blessed Savior goes yet further and plainly assures us, That if we
give, it shall not only be repaid unto us, but with such great interest as
methinks should tempt a Miser; even with full measure, pressed down and
running-over. And thus have I briefly insisted upon some motives to this Duty
of Charity. As to the Persons most proper; or the proportion to be alloted
them, it is altogether needless for me to direct. Your former Experience will
best instruct you in these particulars, and God prosper the Methods you have
taken. May he, who alone can, Sanctify your Charity for the Uses intended; as
also those by whom, and those to whom it is to be distributed. But besides this
Love to the Persons separately as Brethren.

Secondly, We are to Love the Brotherhood collectively as a Church. And indeed
this is the Principal intent of the Apostle. This is the most endearing,
amiable instance of Brotherly affection; when with one Heart and one Mind we
Worship the Lord in the Beauty of Holiness. To obtain and continue which
Blessing (though it may not become me to suspect, that any (at least of those who
hear me) differ in Opinion of Religious purport; yet) I hope no one,
considering the unhappy Divisions amongst us, will think it improper, earnestly
to beseech God, That he who can make the People of one Mind, would vouchsafe in
Mercy to do so. That as we are Members of one County: So we should be all
Members of the same Church: And walk unto the house of God unanimously as
Brethren; not forsaking the assembling of our selves together as the manner of
some is, but exhorting, and vying with one another in Love: That by the like
proportion as the Members of a natural Body tend all to the mutual decency,
service and succor of the same; So we may Contribute all we possibly can to
the Concord and Welfare of Christ's Mystical Body his Church. Surely God is
there most peculiarly Present; he is there most Propitious. One Day spent in
Devotion There, is, as David says, better than a Thousand. Nay he tells us, He
had rather be a doorkeeper, i. e. a Lazar or Beggar, a despicable, vile Person
lying at the Threshold of the House of God, who (yet was not admitted to enter
in) than to Dwell in the Tents of Wickedness, i. e. than to enjoy all the
outward Pomp and Splendour in the World, and be debarred of the inexpressible
pleasure of Worshipping God at the Tabernacle of his Holiness. I heartily wish
all were of David's Mind, and that there were no separations from the Church;
For certainly if Christ's Coat was not to be parted, it is extremely dangerous
to rend his Body in pieces. But I will not engage my self further upon this
subject, and shall pass,

Secondly, To the other General part of my Text,

Fear God, Honor the King.

Fear, Indeed in the common Notion of the Word, denotes the greater subjection,
and Honor the greater Love: But if I should thus expound the Text, I might
seem to follow the letter; but should very much swerve from the true sense of
the Scripture. For although it be said that we must Fear God, yet it is not to
be with a servile dread or horror, (as it is said the Indians worship the Devil)
with such a Reverend, Holy and aweful Fear as may Testify the greatest Honor,
Love and Duty from an Inferior to a Superior. And whereas it is said we must
Honor the King, we are thereby bound in Duty to observe an Honorable regard
to his Authority, and to obey his Lawful Commands; but with this difference;
viz. We are to Fear and Honor the One as our Maker, the other as under him,
our Supreme Governor. We are to obey God in every thing be it what it will; we
are to obey the King only in Lawful things. We must Fear and Honor both where
it will consist with each other; but in a case where we are under a necessity
of displeasing one, the Fear of God challenges the Superiority: Though even in
that case, where we may Lawfully disobey the King; we ought to do it in such an
humble and respectful manner, as may apparently declare our Honor to his
Authority in all (...) Obligations, though in that particular we disobey.

But to speak of each apart.

We must Fear God so as to keep from offending him; as grateful Persons do
their Benefactors; or Lovers their Beloved. Not so much out of Fear of
Punishment, as out of Tenderness and Affection not to displease One we are so
Infinitely obliged unto.

First, Then we must Fear God, not only for the sake of his Goodness and
Excellency, which is great, wonderful and Holy, and consequently to be Beloved
in respect of it self: But also for his Dispensation of it to us; in giving us
all things freely to enjoy. Things comfortable as well as Necessary; sometimes
beyond our Desires, always beyond our Deserts. But (above all things conducing
to our Worldly Being) that of his Redemption of Mankind by his Dearly Beloved
Son, cannot but have a Powerful Influence, where it is Faithfully digested. For
what can so affectionately Unite us to another, as His offering his very Life,
not for his own but our Good? Yet this Christ did; who being the Son of God
disdained not to become the Son of Man; and having no Sin dyed for ours, that
we might be saved.

Secondly, We must Fear God because of his absolute Power. As he Created the
World by his Mere Word: So by his Word he can easily reduce it to that confused
Chaos from whence he Created it. He gave us that Breath which we call Life: and
when it shall please him to demand it, we shall return again to the dust. It Is
as impossible for us to refuse or outlive his Summons: As it was for us to
become Living Creatures before he gave the All-sufficient Word. Such Thoughts
as these will make us tremble, and not only serve the Lord with Fear; but even,
when (as now) He gives us Occasion of Joy, that we rejoice before him with
Reverence. Yet that which is the strongest motive to our Fear of him, after the
consideration of this Absolute Power, is

Secondly, His Impartial Justice. There is no respect of Persons with God, says
the Apostle. Not but that he admits, nay Commands, us to Honor some Persons
here on Earth before others: Only when they come before his Tribunal all are
alike, and shall be rewarded or punished, not according to their Qualities, but
Deserts. Neither can the secrecy of any Action (be it never so cunningly
managed) hinder him from the Knowledge of it, or exempt us from the Punishment.
For he is Omniscient and knows all things; He is Omnipresent and consequently
sees; He is Omnipotent and therefore able to Punish the mightiest of his
Creatures. His Knowledge informs him infallibly of all things; His Justice will
not suffer him to be partial in Judgment; and his Power enables him to execute
whatever his Justice decrees. Yet least we should any ways be discouraged by
the consideration of this Power and Justice; as also by our own readiness to
every Evil Work (whereby we may provoke Him to anger) there are two Allaies to
prevent an Holy Fear; from degenerating into an Uncomfortable Despair. For,

First, God is as Good as He is Absolute: So that we need not to dread his
Unlimited Power. He is even Goodness it self and cannot do any Tyrannous Act of
Oppression: But on the contrary takes Pleasure in the Prosperity of His
Creatures; and has Graciously promised that if we seek the Kingdom of God and
His Righteousness, all Earthly Blessings shall be added unto us: For He will
deny no good thing to them who live a Godly Life.

Secondly, He is as Merciful as he is Just. Nay if there be any Excellency (one
above another) in Infinite things, it far exceeds it: For the Psalmist tells
us, That His Mercies are above all his Works. Ps. 145. 9. These are the
Chiefest, though not all the motives for our Fear of God as it is enjoined by
the Text.

I come now to the other General Duty, viz. That of a Good subject, which is

Secondly, To Honor the King, and this consists chiefly, I. In Honoring or
Reverencing their Persons for the sake of their Authority. II. In Paying
Tribute unto them. III. In Praying for them. And IV. In Obeying their Lawful
Commands.


I. As to the Persons for the sake of their Authority. We generally find that
whenever People are once disaffected to the Persons of Men; they have little
regard to their Station, or any other Perfection they are endowed with. Now
though God does highly disapprove and condemn all reflections upon others
(especially for those Infirmities which are not in the Power of Man to prevent)
yet the Persons of Kings ought to be accounted Sacred, and more peculiarly to
be exempted from the vulgar Censures of Men. Thou shall not revile the Gods;
nor speak evil of the Ruler of thy People, says God himself, Ex. 22. 28. And
the Reason may be, not only the restraining of unjust Censures and Reports: but
the prevention of a disrepect which insensibly increases against the Dignity as
well as the Persons. Thus our Law tells us, That the Crown takes away all
defects. And even the Murmuring Israelites, when as David was once settled in
the Throne, never objected against his being the Youngest Son of Jesse, but
acknowledge Him to be worth ten Thousand of them, As being the Lord's Anointed.

But this Honoring their Persons will be of little use to the Government of a
Kingdom, unless,

II. We pay Tribute also. Since it is the Supreme care to Defend and provide
for the Public good, it is but reasonable that the Charge should be maintained
by a public Revenue; which can never be fixed and settled in any Nation, but
must increase proportionably to the different Circumstances of times: And the
strength or Power of those Enemies we have to encounter. Nor are we to delay
provisions for our safety till we are actually invaded: But must prudently
endeavor to fortify our selves against any surprise; not accounting such
preparations unnecessary Grandeur, but useful precautions for our common safety
and defense. To make which the more effectual.

III. We must Pray for Kings, according to St. Paul's exhortation; Let
supplications, Prayers, intercessions and giving of Thanks be made for all Men:
especially for Kings, and all that are in Authority under them, that we may
lead a quiet and peaceable Life in all Godliness and Honesty. 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2.
The affairs of a Kingdom are of such Moment, that Kings of of all others ought
to be most assisted: And this of Prayer is not only one of the best, but the
cheapest way of doing it. There is that promise to our Prayers, which is not to
our Treasures: And if we faithfully and devoutly pray God to direct and prosper
the Counsels of our Governors; they may, and no doubt will, render the other
much more effectual. Hezekiahs Prayer was more prevalent, than the United
strength of all Judah, against the vast Army of Sennacherib. Let not these
therefore be wanting which are of such Powerful influence, and may be performed
without any cost and with very little labor. And so I shall pass to

Fourthly, The fourth branch of our Duty to Kings, and that is Obedience to
their Lawful commands. This is fully set down by the Apostle a little before my
Text. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man for the Lords sake; whether
it be unto the King as Supreme; or unto Governors as unto those that are sent
by him for the punishment of Evildoers, and for the Praise of them that do
well: For so is the will of God, that with well doing ye may put to silence the
ignorance of foolish Men. so that when the King commands any thing (which God
or the Law of the Land do not forbid) it may be said, That his Commands are to
be observed for the Lord's sake; because God the Supreme, commands such
subjection to the King his Vicegerent in matters of Government.

And if these were Duties incumbent upon the Christians in those days, when
Tyranny, Persecution and Arbitrary Power were the avowed practices of those in
Authority; who broke through all Laws to attain their ungovernable Wills: and
in particular levelled their Malice against the Church of God with an entire
resolution to ruin and destroy it: Certainly our present circumstances do much
rather enforce the Obligation to this Duty; having One now sitting on the
Throne who makes it his whole Delight to defend and protect us: Insomuch as
never any King did more to deserve that Authority which Providence has thought
fit to confer upon him. For to Enumerate some few of his many Glorious Actions,
(since the straitness of time will not allow me to mention more) How seasonably
did he come to our relief when our Religion and Liberty were even Marked out
for Destruction! How continually has God Blessed his Endeavors with such
success, as apparently testify his Divine Approbation! How unaccountably did
God by him put an hook in the Nostrils of the great Leviathan; and force him to
surrender by a Peace what could not be got in War! With what industrious
Fatigue, and singular Prudence, has he continued his Transmarine Voyages (not
giving himself up to Luxury and Excess as the reward of his Labors, but) by
his Presence abroad improving the Confederacy in Peace as well as War: and
animating them by his immediate Counsel and Conduct to Frustrate the great
designs of that Mighty King who is still Watchful and ready when, where, and
whom he may devour. By which means he has preserved us from dangers, beyond
our reach to foresee, and obtained Benefits we are not aware of. But I need not
enlarge to you upon this Topic. Your Loyalty has been in this Age
sufficiently remarkable. You were the only Persons who stood up in Defense of
our Laws and Religion against Anarchy and Confusion, when as the rest of the
Nation seemed to be in a deep Lethargy. Nor did that Public Spirit of our
Ancient Gentry, under the Conduct of the Honorable Father, expire with the
Fatal issue of that glorious Design: But exerted it self as Need required, with
equal Vigor, by assisting the no less Right Honorable Son; who did so
zealously and successfully revive the Courage of our Countrymen, as very much
Facilitated the late Happy Revolution, and will Chronicle our Natives with
Honor to all Posterity.

Neither are we only Eminent for Loyalty, but can assert a Title as good as any
to the other three Duties of the Text. For as no County can produce more
Ancient Families than Ours: So none are more respected and Honored in it;
which is but the due acknowledgment of their Exemplary Hospitality.

The intermixed Matches of Families (which formerly were seldom out of the
County) has so generally Allianc'd one to another as the whole is a kind of
Literal Brotherhood. And Lastly, That Motto we bear of Antiqui colant Antiquum
Dierum engages Us, in imitation of our Ancestors, to worship the God of our
Fathers; So that the whole Text is as it were a Character of your Conversations.

What then remains, but that we earnestly beseech God that we may persevere in
Well-doing. That those who have enjoyed, and those who now are to reap the
benefit of this Honorable Society, may with Thankful Hearts pray for, and
Honor their Benefactors; and make a right use of that Charity bestowed on
them. Let us also Pray that God would continue this generous and Religious
Spirit upon our Countrymen to succeeding Generations; And assist us by his
Grace so truly to Fear God and Honor the King, that we may daily grow in
Favor with both.

FINIS.

