THE CHURCH MEMBERSHIP OF CHILDREN, AND THEIR RIGHT TO BAPTISM, According to
that holy and everlasting COVENANT of GOD, established between Himself, and the
Faithful and their Seed after them, in their Generations: Cleared up in a
Letter, sent unto a worthy Friend of the AVTHOR, and many Years ago written
touching that subject; By THOMAS SHEPARD, sometimes Pastor of the Church of
Christ at Cambridg in New England. Published (...) the earnest request of many:
for the Consolation and Encouragement, both of Parents and Children in the Lord.

Genesis 17.7. And I will establish my Covenant between Me and the^ and thy
(...) Generations, for an Everlasting ^^venant, to be a GOD unto thee, and to
thy seed after thee.

Mark. 16.16. He that Believes, and is Baptized, shall be saved.

Acts. 2.39. For the Promise is unto you, and to your Children, and to all that
are a^^r^ off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call.

1 Cor. 7.14. Else were your Children unclean, but now are they Holy.

CAMBRIDG Printed by Samuel Green. 1663.

CHEMNITIVS, that eminent light in the Church of God in those elaborate works
of his against the Papists (Exam: part 2. can: 14. de Baptismo) has this
memorable saying, viz.

IT is not to be left free, to the choice of those who have been Baptized in
Infancy, when they come to be Adult, whether or no they will have that
confirmed, which was done in their Baptism; as though the Covenant of grace,
and Testament of peace, which is offered and sealed up to little Children in
Baptism, should then first begin to be established, when the consent of their
will, when Adult, is added thereunto: for from this wicked foundation, the
Anabaptists simply have taken away, and Condemned Paedobaptisme; but such
Baptized little ones are to be admonished, as they grow up, what a Covenant of
Grace, and Testament of peace it is, which God has entered into with them in
Baptism: and by what promise of gratitude they have likewise obliged themselve
(...) Obedience to God, with the renouncing of the Devil; and they are (...) to
be exhorted, that they render thanks to God for that wonderful great Benefit,
that they abide in that Covenant of peace, and endeavor to fulfill that
obligation, by mortifying sin, and setting upon newness of life, and that they
do this freely, and sincerely: or if they shall, through unthankfullness,
depart from that* Covenant, and engagement, that then they repent, and return
to the Covenant, and subject themselves again to that stipulated Obedience. But
us for them that shall do otherwise, the most severe comminations of the wrath
and Indignation of God are to be heap't up, and set before them; unto which
[saith he] excommunication is to be added, for these are the weapons of our
warfare. 2. Cor. 10.

A PREFACE TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
Might I have had mine own choice, and desires granted, some other should have
performed the task of a Preface to the following Treatise of my precious and
much Honored Father; but being put upon it, by diverse worthy friends, whom I
knew not how to deny, I shall therefore humbly premise a word or two, in
tenderness to the Truth, and out of unfeigned love to those especially of
Christ's poor sheep (how ever feeble, or diseased) that either have been, or
may be in danger of going astray from so great a Truth, as is the subject of
the ensuing discourse: being sincerely desirous, that they may be restored, and
from thence returned unto the Shepherd, and Bishop of our Souls, and may in
nothing be made a prey to him, who is our great adversary, the Devil, who
walks about, seeking whom he may devour. For we should not be ignorant of his
devices.

The enmity put by the Lord between the seed of the Woman and the seed of the
Serpent, Genesis 3.15. soon began to work, even in the infancy of the Church, in
the family of our first Parents, as we see Genesis 4.8. by the Martyrdom of
righteous Abel. No small portion of that fixed hatred, and hostility of the old
Serpent, has ever since been discovered against the young ones of Christ's
little flock. The multiplication of the Children of Israel, is the occasion why
Pharaoh deals so wisely as we read; endeavoring first by the Midwives,
secretly to destroy the male Children: and after that, more openly by an Edict,
to drown them in his Egyptian waters; for which what ever his pretense might
be, alleged Exodus 1.10. yet no doubt (as Calvin on the place somewhat that
way hint's) Satan had a design therein, to cut of the name and posteri^y of
Abraham (who is the Father of all them that believe, even of US all: the Father
of many nation, Romans 4.11, 16, 17.) and so to evacuate, and annihilate the
promise of God, even that great promise of his everlasting Covenant, to be a
God to him, and to his seed for ever, in their Generations. Hence also
afterward we find this spite of the great accuser of the brethren, vented
against these poor little ones, in the forbidding them Communion with the
Church of God in that Worship which God had instituted, and which he had
Commanded his People by the hand of Moses and Aaron, to observe, Exodus 10.3.
let my People go, that they may serve me, says the Lord* but hardhearted
Pharaoh seems to scruple whether the young Children are a part of the Lord
People, as appears by his question verse 8. [But who are they that shall go^?]
Moses pleads for the young, as well as the old; for the Sons, and the
Daughters, verse 9. but Pharaoh is of another apprehension, and resolution,
verse 10, 11. he will let the men go and serve the Lord, but not the little
ones. Again Haman the Agagite we find is not satisfied with the destruction of
the old Generation of the Jews, but the little Children of the Church also are
expressly mentioned, and designed to the same condemnation, and Massacre with
their Fathers Est^. 3.13.

And much more of the like nature might be alleged out of many records both
ecclesiastical, and other, were it needful: the satanicall delusions of those
heretical Cataphrygians, and Pep^z^ans of o^d, who were wont to mingle the
Eucharist with the blood of an Infant of a year old (of whom Austin speaks,
Tom. 6. do haeresibus ad Quodvultde^m) are not unknown. Not here to insist on
that Instance of Herod's Infanticide, Mat. 2.16, 17. We need not so much wonder
at Hazaels cruelty against the Children of Israel in sl^ying their young men
with the sword, and dashing their Children, and r^pping up their Women with
Child, 2 King. 8.12. seeing Satan has many times prevailed with those who were
Church Members, and of long standing in the house of God even the pare^^
themselves, to murder and sacrifice their Infants and little ones, which were
the Lords Children, and born unto the Lord, Ezekiel. 16, 20, 21. etc. Such an evil
eye does that great adversary of our comfort, and Salvation (seeing himself
shut out of the Kingdom of Heaven) bear against these little ones, whom Christ
has taken in to himself, and concerning whom our Savior professes, that of
such is the Kingdom of God, Luke 18.16. So does he envy to see them in the
arms of Christ and blessed by him, and to have any room in his house, or so
much as an external visible interest in the Covenant, with the initiatory seal
and livery thereof. Baptism being the seal to all Christianity, it is Sathan's
policy therefore to strike at that, that in cashiering it, he may have at All;
Hereunto tend's his dealing with witches many times, (of which diverse have
spoken) in cau^ing them when they become first his Prosely^es, solemnly to
renounce the Trinity (into the name of which they have been Baptized)
especially their salvation by Christ, and says Cooper, in his book entitled,
the mysterie^ of witchcraft discovered. Cap. 6. sec. 1. page 91. in token
thereof to disclaim their Baptism.

An ill office and work then surely are they employed in, whose way and
endeavors, shall center in the accomplishing of that which Satan has been so
busily, and with such malignity, for so many ages undertaking, and no great
thanks will such receive for that labor from the Lord Jesus another day. If
Christ was so much displeased, that his disciples rebuked those, who brought
their children to him, Mark 10.14: And if the Apostle Peter received so severe
a check as we read Mat. 16.22, 23. for speaking that, which had a tendency to
take the Lord Jesus off from ^aying down the price of R^^emption: how much more
then will he be now displeased if (after such rebuke and warning given) any
shall attempt to keep from him, and deprive him of, his Redeemed, whom he has
purchased by so dear a price? so many, I mean, of his purchased ones, as the
number of the infants and children of Believers (de^d, and alive, and to be
born,) amount's unto? why may we not believe, that an exceeding great multitude
of the Sheep that shall be seen standing at the right hand of Jesus Christ in
the day of Judgment, shall be a company of these Lambs? As to withhold from
Christ so great a part of his purchase (the labor of the Anabapt^st) must
needs be no other then highly Antichristian; so to make good, and recover the
interest of Christ in such, and the Glory which he obtaines by them, according
to the enlarged grant of the charter of h^s New Testament; the scope, and work
of these few sheets) is a service pleasing unto Christ, who out of the mouths
of these ba^^s, and suck^^ngs even (...), Mat. 21.15, 16. and so I trust will
be acceptable to his People, who when as they must go down to the d^st and
cannot keep alive their own Souls, yet may be hold their seed succeeding them
in the service and worship of God, being ^ccounted to the Lord (...)
^^generation, Psalm. 22.28, 29, 30, 31. ( (...) R^vet in locum) Schismatically
to refuse to hold Ecclesiastical Communion with so great a part of the Church
of Christ, as the children of believers are, (in many places, the major part
thereof) is a rigid and sinful Separation, and gratifying the design of the
Papists (the greatest Separatists in the world) as by and by may be further
seen.

And indeed the Lord ( avenging the quarrel of his Covenant, wherein he has
always been exceeding jealous) has manifested not a little of his anger, and
displeasure against those who have troubled these Baptismal waters of the
Sanctuary; The awful and tremendous passages of Providence recorded in several
histories, concerning the original and progress of Anabaptisme: and relating to
God's strange, judicial hand against so many of them that have been
through-paced therein, in delivering them up to spiritual judgments, to believe
lies; and to fall, step by step, into almost all sorts of heresies, and to the
commission of the most abhorred impieties, and loathsome wickednesses, and
outrages, against the Commands both of the first and second Table, (as Luther,
Bullinger, Calvi^^ Beza, and others generally and abundantly testify) they are
very observable, and not to be passed over slightly; and may make every honest
and serious heart to tremble when ever he finds himself inclining to that
path: to this purpose, and concerning Anabaptism in this our age (beside many
o^ther Authors I might cite) read only Baxter's Plain Scripture proof of
Infants Church Membership, Page 138, 139, 140 -- 152. And as in the dawning of
the reformation, begun by those Worthies of Christ in the last Centurie,
Anabaptisme seems to be the Tr^j in h^rse whereby so great confusion did
befall that Israel, and was such a Remora to that Glorio^s work then begun in
Germany, and other Neighboring Countries; so now in the further progress of
that reformation here in this our Israel* should Anabaptisme likewise
(especially accompanied with Dona^isme it is wo^ded concubine) brood and become
the instrument or medium of our miseries and confusions, possibly then
experience (a flow, but many times a sure and severe instructor) may help some
at length to see farther into the mystery of this iniquity, then now they do.
For in truth it is not improbable, that the Man of sin seeing he could not
openly and at once ruin the Reformed Churches in the days of those famous
servants of Christ before expressed, did attempt secretly, and gradually to do is
this way; viz. by first sending forth his Emissaries among the Churches, who
might fill them with the Smoke of Anabaptisme, that so he might the more
securely pass to and fro, being undiscerned in such a fog: whence what mischief
was wrought, and what an hindrance those turbulent Anabaptists were to the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ in that age (for that was the first time of their
swarming, as the most Judicious have observed) by vilifying, reproaching, and
decrying the Ministry; crying up themselves as the most Godly, spiritual, and
perfect; Judging the Old Testament to be but as an Almanac out of date;
denying Scripture-Consequences giving false interpretations of Scripture,
especially by Allegories wresting the same to their own destruction; making
and fomenting schisms and factions in the Churches; denying the Magistrates
coercive power in matters of Religion; making their own fanatic spirit the
supreme judge unto all kind of disorder, etc. the writings of the Godly Learned
in those times do abundantly even to amazement inform us. And indeed the great
consent and harmony between the main tenets of the Anabaptists, and Papists in
this point, gives not a a little ground for holy jealousy too sadly to suspect
at what backdoor it was that the Anabaptist first crept forth. And hence it is
that in the controversies between the Protestants and the Papists, we shall
generally, and abundantly find, the Papists denying the Ho^^ness of the Infants
of Beleivers before Baptism; and how near of kin this is to Anabaptisme the
reader may easily guess: and in like manner denying that great truth (as is
afterward showed in this Treatise) viz. That the Covenant of God with Abraham
under the Old Testament, was the same for substance with what is now confirmed
with us under the New Testament, etc. which (it is known) the Anabaptists also
generally assert: Let me therefore propound a few instances this way, whereby we
may see what Patrons of Anabaptisme the Papists are, in regard of those
Principles (I mean) and radical errors wherein the Papists and An^baptists
(although by diverse of them, upon the account of a diverse interest) Symbolize
and unite against the Orthodox, and speak herein, in a manner, the same thing
(distinguishing always between the Opinion, and the person; and between some
that are deceived, in other points Orthodox and precious Christians; and others
that are Deceivers.) The main pillars of Anabaptisme being no better then some
of the Old rotten sl^^ds and principles of Popery, fetched at first from thence
in all likelihood, and so inclining thitherward again. The D^^lect of the
Anabaptist is generally (and too much by some) understood, and therefore I
forbear quotations out of their own writings; possibly some may not have so
much taken notice of the l^k^ from the Papist, and therefore I shall briefly
manifest the ^a^e, by showing where we shall find some of the chief of those
Worthies that fought the Lords Battles against Antichrist, opposing, and
confuting them both, therein: I will cite a few Particulars this way among many
the like which might be produced from several other eminent Author^, Holy,
burning, and shining lights in the churches of Christ, who have been the Lords
Witnesses against the darkness of that Spiritual Egypt; and whose Testimony
in this matter concludes as strongly against the Anabaptists, having espoused
those Antichristian notions so nearly to themselves.

1. In those words of the Covenant ( I will be a God to thee and thy seed after
thee) neither life eternal is promised nor remission of sins, but only a
certain peculiar temporal protection: says B^ll^rmine (agreeing therein with
the Ana^aptist) against whom herein we find ^bam^er pleading for us, Panstrat.
tom. 4. Li^. 3 Cap. 3. Parag. 9, 10. etc. and ^ive. on Genesis 17.11. Again, we
read (says Bellarmine, the great G^^ah of the Papists) that God promised unto
Abraham when he enjoined him circumcision, earthly matters only, according to
the letter: that is, the propagation of a posterity, and the Land of Palestine.
read Ames opposing him; Bellarm. (...). Tom. 3. Lib. 1 Chap. 4. These. 9.

2. Touching the perverse and Ca^abaptistic^ll intent and meaning of that
expression of the Papists, viz. That Spiritual promises d^scend to us not by
carnal generation ( as they call it: the very Phrase of many Anabaptists, used
in a way of de^ision of the Grace of God) but by Spiritual R^generation etc.
(they are the w^rds of Bellarmine and other P^pists, c^ted and confuted by Am^s
and others) read Ames his Answer thereto, B^^ Ener. ^om. 3. Lib. 2. cap. 1.
These. 5. (consonant to the Judgment of the O^thoac^) viz. we acknowledge indeed
Spiritual regeneration to be necessary to the solid participation of the
promises; but that that Regeneration is part of the Promises, and belongs in a
singular manner to the Children of Believers, the very form of the Covenant
manifestly declares. See likewise Chamier largely replying for us against
Bellarmine, Stapleton, and others of the Papists. Pa^stra^. tom. 4 lib. 5. cap.
10. parag. 24, 25, 26, 27, etc:

3. The Sacraments of the old Law ( or Testament says Bellarmine^ had no
absolute promise of Grace annexed, and the promises annexed to thos^ old
Sacraments were fulfilled, although men did not believe. Read Ames against him.
ibid. l. 1. cap. 4. the. 5, 7. Again, the Papists [saith Chemnit. hold; that
God, by the Sacraments of the old Testament, which had eve^ the word of promise
annexed, did exhibit and conferr no grace to Believers which [saith he] is
maifestly false; Circumcision alone [which, as he shows from Scripture, is
called the S^al of the righteousness of Faith demonstrateth as much. And
thereupon he shows the reason why the Papists so much urge that difference
between the Sacraments of the old and new Testament, viz. because they
endeavor by any manner of means to defend and stablish the opinion they have
of their opus operatum. Chemnitij Exam. par. 2. de Sacram. sub canon. 2. What a
forcible engine of the man of sin this is, and of what vast concernment as to
his interest, I need not here express, and what arrows of Anabaptisme, drawn
out of this very quiver, have been shot against the Orthodox in this point, is
known unto not a few.

Moreover, as to the comparison in Scripture made between the Sacraments of the
old and new Testament, that in 1 Cor. 10.1 -- 4. (among several other
Scriptures) is cited by Ames against Bellarmine where the Apostle speake's of
our Fathers being Baptized in the Sea etc: thereby intimating our Sacraments to
be the same for substance with theirs: or Sacramental signs and seals of one
and the same sqiritual grace, so that the Covenant-mercies, or promises of
spiritual good are the same to us as to them: Bellarmine opposes this [as does
the Anabaptist] The Fathers [saith he] are said to eat the same meat not
because ours and theirs was the same, but because they themselves, all of them
did eat the same: but that meat and drink were not sacraments; they had no
promise anexed etc: Bell^ enerv. tom. 3. l. 1. c. 4. th. 10. and Cham.
panstrat. tom. 4. l. 3. c. 2.

4. The scripture no where call's Circumcision a seal [saith Bellarmine to Romans
4.] unless it be in this place, where Abraham is spoken of, which is a manifest
argument that Circumcision was a seal unto Abraham alone Ames. ibid. c. 1. th.
12. By this weapon also fetched out of the armory of Antichrist, has the
Anabaptist not a little gratifyed the common adversary.

5. The Papists generally assert, That the Baptism of John was not the same
for substance with the Baptism of Christ, nor had the same efficacy, as the
Baptism of Christ has. Which tenet see confuted by Cartwright on the new
Testament, Mat. 3.11. and by Ames Beller. (...). t. 3. l. 2. c. 5. th. 1, 2.
etc: and Rivet Cathol. orthod. tractat* 3. qu. a. and Chemnir. exam. part 2. de
baptismo sub canon. 1. and Chamier panstrat. t. 4. l. 5. c. 12. still we see
the harmony between the Papist and the Anabaptist. And hence we find likewise
the Papist pleading for the rebaptizing of those who had received the Baptism
of John. Chamier ibid. cap. 13. paragr. 35. etc:

6. The Papists assert, that Laics [ as they call them, i. e. those that are
not in Office in the Church] may in case administer Baptism: yea that not
only men but women may do it. Read Ames his confutation thereof, Bell. enerv.
tom. 3. l. 2. cap. 2. and Rivet against Baily the Jesuit, Cathol. orthod.
tractat. 3. qu. 7. add thereto Chamiers Panstr. tom. 4. l. 5. cap. 14. de
legitimo Baptismi ministro. where, among other Passages, citing the thesis of
Suarez the Jesuit, viz: that any body whosoever, that (...) speak, and wash,
may be a sufficient Minister of Baptism; whether he be man or woman; believer
or unbeliever; baptized or not baptized, if so be he know how to wash, and
utter the Words with a due mention, haec assertio (says the Jesuit) est omnino
certa, But says Chamier in the name of the Orthodox, we teach the contrary,
viz. that the right of conferring Baptism belongs to those only who are
public Officers in the Church etc. which accordingly he there makes good
against the Papists.

7 Baily the Jesuit (whom Rivet encountereth) to the Question between the
Orthodox and the Papist; viz. Whether the Infants of believers are holy before
Baptism? he answers roundly for them; NO. Rivet. Cath. Orthod. Tract. 3. q 3.

And touching that famous place controverted between our selves and the
Anabap^^sts, in regard of their wresting, and perverting the sense of that
Scripture, 1 Cor. 7.14. [ ^ls^ w^r^ your Children unclean, but now they are
Holy] we may observe how they tread in ehe steps of the Papists that have gone
before them therein, (as they likewiso do in that noted Scripture Col 2.11, 12.
not allowing Baptism to answer Circumcision according to the mind and meaning
of the Holy Ghost: wherein see Ames against them, Bell. Enerv. Tom. 3. l 1. Ca^.
4. These. 13. and Rivet in Genesis 17 Exercit: 88. Page 340. etc. Take a taste of
that 1 Cor. 7. as follows; Baily (the Jesuit) before Cited, ibid: quest. 3.
labors thus to avoid the dint of that text, The Apostle (says he) either
speaks of a civil Sanctification before men, that the Infants should not be
ILLEGITAMATE or BASTARDS: or else of an Instrumental Sanctification, because
that one shall procure the Salvation of the other, etc. the like we find of
Bellarmine's apprehention and Judgment of the sense of that Scripture; Such
Children (says he) are said to be not (unclean) that is, Infamous and
BASTARDS: but (holy) that is, LEGITIMATE, and free from civil ignominy: Ames.
Ibid. Lib. 2. C. 1. These. 6. The Rhemists also very perniciously abuse this
Scripture (and are not therein, without their Antipaedobaptisticall followers)
Blessed Cartwright excellently upon the place in his confutation of their
annotations on the New Testament, defend's this cause of Christ against their
Popish glosses: It is (says he) one thing (oftentimes in the Scripture) to be
Sanctified, and another to be holy: as for you, you err in both: for when it is
said, the unbelieving party is Sanctified by the believing, it is not only
meant, as you say, that the Marriage is an occasion of the Sanctification to
the infidel party, but that the use of the infidel party, in Marriage company,
is Sanctified, or made holy and lawful unto the believing party; as meat and
drink is said to be Sanctified unto us by the word and Prayer, 1 Timothy 4.5. and
as your Interpretation here is short, so in the exposition of the Holiness of
the Children, which are begotten in this Matrimony, it is utterly false: and
first it is to be observed, that the Apostle speaking of the Children, does not
(as you do) apply one word of them to both, saying that they are Sanctified,
but says that they are holy; which is more then he had spoken before of the
infidel party: for although our meat, and drink be Sanctified unto us, and that
the use of them is holy to those which are holy, yet the meats, and drinks
themselves are not holy: if therefore you were short in the interpretation of
Sanctified, you fail much more, in giving the same exposition unto the holiness
of the children; for if the holiness here spoken of, be not in the children
when they are begotten, and born of the Parents, but come unto them afterward
by Baptism and Faith; there grows no sufficient comfort unto the faithful
party to continue in marriage with the Infidel, consid^ring that occasion of
holiness might come otherw^se then by marriage: For that which is able to
uphold the faithful in comfort, and strength to abide in marriage with the
infidel, is the knowledge that the Children begotten in that Marriage are in
Covenant, and are Children of Gods favor, and grace, washed in Christ's Blood,
and Sanctified by his Spirit: and if you will know what this Holiness of
Children newborn is; the Apostle tells you, Gal. 2.15. That it is [through
the Covenant] to be a Jew by nature, or birth, and if you will yet further
understand what the Holiness of Children is, the Apostle, in the same place,
tells you; that it is, not to be Sinners by Nature as those which are born of
the Heathen, for as much as their sins who are in Covenant, are by Christ not
reckoned unto them. And this Doctrine of the Holiness of the Children which are
born of the Faithful, if you could not attain unto, it is so sensibly s^t
forth unto you, that unless together with the knowledge of the Truth, you are
also bereaved of your common sense, you cannot be ignorant of it: for how can
you but understand, that if the root be holy, the branch is holy, Romans 11.16.
and if the first fruits be holy, the whole crop is holy All which privilidges
of Children newborn, sometime being proper to the Jews, are now our
privileges, as well as theirs; sithence we are grown into one body with them,
Ephesians. 2.15. and ( being Burgesse^ of the same Heavenly City that they are]
must needs have the same infranchisement, and Prerogatives, t^^t they have: not
that every one which is ^orn under the Covenant is holy, but t^^t they are so
to be taken of the Church, until the contrary do manifestly appear, etc.

By the premises we may see therefore whence [even from that MOTHER of harlots]
probably this Illegitimate birth, this antichrist an fl^ud of Anab^^t^^me has
issued forth; yea and I also fear is l^ke to be ^^sed, and maintained ^n it is
course, unt^l God has dried up those breast, and rive^s of spiritual Babylon,
in the mean while, Calvin's admonition touching Anabapt^sme, may not be
unseasonable, meri o debet nobis esse suspectum, quicquid a tali officina
proa^erit. Opuscu^: ^n Psychopannychia. Page 411. S. M.

There are some who though they grant the Baptism of some Children, yet
utterly deny the continuance of that Covenant-mercy of God to their succeeding
Generations, though the Church-society whereof they were Members be not
dissolved, nor the surviveing posterity so much as deserve to be, by the
Discipline of Christ in his Church excommunicated; This seems in truth to arise
from their not acknowledging sufficiently, or not abiding by the true genuine
grounds of the Baptism of those whose right to Baptism is acknowledged by
them.

For the information (therefore) of the minds of the weak and stablishing their
hearts in this Truth of God, according to the Scriptures, even in the Doctrine
of P^^dobaptisme (a Doctrine of so great concernment, and of so much comfort
and encouragement, both to believing parents and their children not in life
only but in death; whence it is that they only can be preserved against
sorrowing when they fall asleep, as others do, which have no hope) This ensuing
Treatise is at the earnest request of many worthy friends to the Author of it
(of blessed memory) now published, wherein we may see both; 1. The Membership
of the Children of Church Members proved to be of Divine institution, and
likewise 2. (among other things] The continuance of the Membership of those
Children, in particular Churches, when they are grown up, even until they are
excommunicated, unless there be a dissolution of the person by death, Instances
hereof see in the p^eface to ^^e act of the Synod held a^ Boston. 16^2 Touching
B^ptism and Consociation of Churches.
or of the Church-society: So that this latter is not a principle of
Innovation, and Apostasy; but as it was the Judgment of the Author of this
following Letter (as is therein to be seen and to manifest which was one
special end of the Printing thereof) so was it the light which others have
held forth, who in their time were Stars not of the smallest magnitude, whom we
have here seen sometimes shining with him in Christ's right hand, but are now
set, and shining with that Sun of righteousness in another World.

That there is no cessation of the membership of a person in this or that
particular Church (the Church whereof he i^ a m^mber continuing in b^ing,
together with the person himself) unles it be by means of a Church-act
intervening, is a truth of no small importance; And therefore as for that
notion which does obtain with some; That in particular Churches of Christ,
walking in the order of the Gospel, there are such as become Ecclesiastically
Felones de se, that is such Church Members who by their scandalous sin, do
become their own executioners Ecclesiastically, cutting themselves off from the
Church, so as that they thereby become actually non-members, and that the
Church has no more power over them, either Ecclesiasticallly to admonish them,
or Excommunicate them; this seems unto me to be but an humane invention, and
not of Divine institution, yea in truth destructive to the Order of the Gospel.
And therefore to apply it, (as to members in full communion, so) to these
Children of the Church whom we now speak of, is not of God; as may appear by
these reasons following.

1. Because it is unscriptural. In matters of Gods worship, a negative argument
is conclvsive; if that which is asserted; be not contained in the Scripture,
expressly, or (...) the consequence therefrom, it is to be rejected. To the Law
and by the Testimony.

The Scriptures alleged by some ^^d thought to favor this notion of Felones
de se, are only such as do but lay down before us the sins of some
Church Members, and do not speak of the (...), ( punishment or censure) as it is
called, 2 Cor. 2.6. which in such cases is to be inflicted, and therefore are
not ad rem: only that which seems to have most weight in it, and to which
therefore I shall briefly reply, is that in Acts 8.21. Thou have neither part
nor lot in this matter: Answer. I would not say that this text, propounded with
reference the children of the Church that are not in full communion, is not
apposite, because the text speak's of a member in full communion: though to say
so much is accounted by some a sufficient answer to such Scripture arguments,
as conclude against felones de se, from Church Members that are in full
Communion ( quatenus Church Members) to such Church members as are not in full
communion: But yet having gained this fort; that what is in Scripture spoken of
a member in full communion, is applicable (as far as mere membership reachet^)
to a member that is not in full communion, we may now the more easily proceed
in the after discourse. To this Scripture (then) ^lledged for children of the
Church not in full communion; by their sin, when adult, to become felones de se
as above said, I answer:

1. That the objection from hence tend's as much to frustrate the Church act,
or censure of excommunication upon members infull communion: and makes that
ordinance of Christ vain, and needless to the parents in full communion, as to
these children. 2. These words of the Apostle Peter, were indeed a dreadful
admonition, and the Apostle being a Church Officer, did judge this sinner to
deserve it for his simonie; so that he was not (granting the cessation of his
membership) felo de se. 3. By [this matter] spoken of in the text, seems most
properly to be meant (not Church Membership, but) the power of giving the holy
Ghost spoken of in the context, which power Simon Magus would have bought with
money, and for which the Apostle rebukes him: and therefore his not having part
or lot in that matter, is to be understood directly with relation to that
Extraordinary power; the Apostle would have him k^ow, that he should not share
in such a power or privilege as that was: 4. I would ask whether, if a Member
of a church be discovered not to have his heart right in the sight of God, but
to be in the Gall of bitterness and bond of Iniquity, stand conv^ct of Simonie,
and the wickedness be so grossly aggravated as this Scandal of Simon Magus was;
I say whether the Church is not bound to bear witness against such an offender
by inflicting some Church-Censure (properly so taken) upon him? if it be said
^oe; then may it not be questioned, whether such a Church would not as well
tolerate any other pollutions and defilements in it whatsoever? The woeful
fruit whereof who is there that does not easily perceive: On the other side if
it be said yea, that the Church is to Censure and Authoritatively to put away
from among themselves such a wicked person by excommunication, I then demand
(if this notion of felo de se be right and sound) how they can excommunicate
one, who is a non-Member before the Church can pass the sentence of
excommunication against him? whether does this Scripture Act. 8.21. give the
Church power over him by it is Discipline to censure him, who already (as the
objection speak's) has cut himself off from being a Churchmember? or whether
the Church has any part in him who has no part or lot in them, or in these
matters?

2. Scripture Example lead's us, to what is contrary to this Felon^^ spoken of:
witness, under the Old Testament, Ishmael's being cast out, by Abraham who was
the chief Officer in that family Church* So the incestuous person under the
New Testament is not felo de s^ though guilty of such a sin as was not so much
as named among the Ge^^iles, 1 Cor. 5.1. but there is a Church act intervening
his sin and the cessation of his Memberly-Communion with that Church, viz a
delivering him [(...) such a one] unto Satan. Hence as the Church of Ephesus is
commended for not bearing with them which are evil, Rev. 2.2. so the Church of
Th^a^ira is rebuked for suffering that woman Iezebel, verse. 20.

3. Because this notion of Felo de se takes away the use of a Ministerial Judge
in the Church, in case of the offenses, and Scandals of this or that particular
Member of the Church, to determine of the same. Supposing a person could
ecclesiastically cut himself off from the Church by his very act of sin, there
would then he no room left for a competent Judge to enquire into the crime
whereof he is accused, and to make particular application of the Rule to the
case of the s^nning brother, and pass sentence according to the true desert,
and nature of the offense. That God has ordained a ministerial judge is plain,
M^tth. 18.17. [if he neglect to hear the Church] the Church is to be heard; the
phrase of our Savior Christ implies judicial superiority on the Churches part,
and the inferiority and subjection of a part or member to that whole, etc. but
now this Felony denies this order which Christ has established. Though a
person deserve excommunication perhaps, yet it must appear that he do deserve
it* neither does his wickedness for which he deserves excommunication, render
him a non-Member till he be excommunicated; and hence in this case is very
considerable what is asserted by that deservedly famous divine, Mr. Cotton, in
his book entitled [the keys of the kingdom of heaven] viz. Though the Jury
have given up their judgment, Cap. 4. Page 14.
and verdict, yet the Malefactor is not thereupon legally condemned, much less
executed, but upon the sentence of the judge in l^ke sort here [saith he]
though the Brethren of the Church do with one accord give up their vote and
judgment for the censure of an offender, yet he is not thereby censured, till
upon the Sentence of the Presbytery.

4. Because the binding and loosing, mentioned, Mat. 16.19. the opening and
shutting of the doors of the Church by the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven,
belong to the same power or subject: hence therefore as none may intrude
himself, or can regularly be admitted or let into this or that particular
Church without a Church-act intervening, so none can be shut out, and deprived
of that Membership therein (as abovesaid,) without an act of the same power
intervening. Ejusdem potestatis est ligare, and solvere; claudere and aperire.
Mr. Cottons keys cap. 7. page 45.

5. Taken from Mat. 18.15, 16, 17, 18. Which command and institution, leaves
Churches under a solemn obligation of duty, that when this offending Brother or
Churchmember deserves excommunication that censure be duly inflicted on him;
so as that thereby ( viz. the sentence or censure past against him, in case he
will not hear the Church) he must be to the Church as an He* then Man, and a
Publican. so that it is not a matter of ind^fferency, [to be observed or not to
be observed] but after the steps taken [mentioned in verses 15, 16.] and the
brother remain obstinate, it is Christ's Charge that then that public process
[verse 17.] be attended, whereby the offender become's ecclesiastically bound
according to verse 18. Christ therefore requires a Church-act to intervene, as
abovesaid, and so the offender is not felo de se.

6. Because a scandalous Member of a Church, by virtue of Christ's Institution,
Mat. 18.17. is to be accounted not as an Heathen and Publican, but still a
Church-Brother if he will hear the Church, this is clearly intimated in those
words If he neglect to hear the Church) running conditionally, which suppose,
that if he will hear, he is not to be as an Heathen i. e. his Membership shall
not cease notwithstanding the Scandalous sin Committed. Therefore by his
wickedness and offense he is not felo de se.

7. Because this felony objected tend's to render that Ordinance of
Church-Censure and Adm^nition laid down Mat. 18.15. etc. vain and useless, for
the felo de s^, by his sin becomeing a non-Member and so no Church-Brother,
hence let a private Member of the Church go to tell him his fault, in the sense
of the text, which is in order to more solemn Church-proceeding and Judicature,
in case he will not hear; or let the Church require him in the name of Christ
to hear, in such a Church Way as is there spoken of; he may tell them that he
is no Brother of the Church, for he has by his offense cut off himself, and
therefore they have nothing to do with him: that that rule of Christ concerns
only the Brother or the Churchmember, not one that is out of the Church, as he
is, being felo de se, and therefore may say (according to 1 Cor. 5.12.) what
have you to do to Judge me that am without? If his sin be not yet great enough
to render him felo de se, and he suspect that therefore the Church may have
power over him and is going about to bind him on earth, so that (being
thereupon also bound in heaven) he shall become bound from an orderly entrance
in at the doors of other Sister-Churches, without Repentance first held forth
to the acceptance of the Church which he offended; it is then but to commit
another fault whereby he may be sure he shall be felo de se, and so he is
beyond the Churches reach, and this frustrates Church Discipline, and renders
vain that ordinance of Christ above mentioned.

8. To deny the intervening of this Church-act of Excommunication is to deny
unto, and withold from a person deserving to be cast out of the Church, an
ordinance, and means which may be for the saving of his soul, 1 Cor: 5.4, 5.
It is not enough to say that the felo de se makes himself no member; and so the
Church is freed from his communion which would pollute it, as fully as if he
were excommunicated; for God's means are not empty or vain means, and to
think to reach the full end, but not in Gods way, and by observing his means
ordained, is neither Christian wisdom, nor Gospel policy; yea to deny the
application of this ordinance of excommunication to the offending Brother is to
deny a means for the Salvation of his Soul, and to deny a remedy for his
Repentance, and the healing, and gaining of our Brother again.

9. Because the Holy Ghost command's the Church to Judge them that are within,
1 Cor. 5.12* Do you not judge them that are within? All that are within, are
subject to Ecclesiastical judicature, and therefore cannot by
Scripture-Warrant be felones de se.

10. Because this notion of felones de se evacuate's that power given of
Rebukeing before all, 1 Timothy 5.20. which is to be done without partiality*
(whether they be young, or old, rich or poor etc.) ver. 21 and so likewise
takes away that Authority given of reproving with all long-suffering, 2 Timothy
4.2. leaves no room for obedience to that command (2 These. 3.15.) of
Admonishing the offender as a Brother etc. add thereto that this notion of the
felo de se supposes some disobedience in a Churchmember of an open scandalous
nature against which God has not provided the remedy of spiritual revenge in
an ecclesiastical way, contrary to that 2 Cor. 10.6, where the Apostle says,
we have in readiness to revenge all disobedience etc. that this is spoken of
Church discipli^e is well cleared by that expression of worthy Mr. Cotton. viz.
the Apostles revenge of D^sobedience by way of reproof in preaching does not
follow the Peoples Obedience, Keys Cha. 4 Page 15.
but proceeds whether the people obey it or no; it was therefore their
revenge of disobedience by way of Censure in discipline etc.

11. The Notion of felo de se asserts the lawfulness of exclusion or sh^t^ing a
Churchmember out of the kingdom of Heaven by none of the keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven, viz. by the sin of this felon, or gives the managing of
these keys, in a case which concerns the whole to act in (for such is the
non-Communion of a Member with the Church^ into the hands solely of a private
person: both which right reason does plainly condemn.

12. Because were the sin of a Churchmember of as h^gh and heinous a nature as
H^resie, nay (which is more) though the Brother of a Church should turn
Heretic yet he is not immediately thereby a non-Member, or felo de se: he is
not presently to be rejected: but a first and second Admonition must be
applied, and in case of incorrigibleness then follows the Ecclesiastical
rejection spoken of, Tit. 3.10. he must be rejected, but according to Gods
Order, even the order of the Gospel: for all things are to be done in order, 1
Cor. 14.40. so when the Apostle required the Corinthians to put away from among
themselves that wicked person, it is to be understood of putting such away, and
avoiding such, and withdrawing themselves from such, and having no company
with such etc. All in due season, and all according to the order of Christ,
even according to that rule of delivering such an one unto Satan as is
expressed, 1 Cor. 5 and suiting with that other command of Christ, Mat. 18.
according as the nature of the offense is more or less heinous, proportionably
is the admonition to be applied, either in case the offense be at first
private, but grows public and notorious by the impenitency and obstinacy of
the offender; or in case the offense be at first rise of it public and
notorious, still we have no allowance from Scripture to entertain or admit of
the Opinion of this Ecclesiastical felony.

Having thus finished this Discourse I shall now very briefly acquaint the
Reader, in a word or two further, touching the following treatise, viz. that it
was written by the Authors own hand: and not three months before the time of
his Dissolution, and sent to one who, before the receipt thereof, was not so
clear in the point of Infant Baptism but was hereby recovered, and stablished
in the truth, and dyed in the same Faith as the letter did persuade him, ( to
use Mr. Fox his Phrase, in h^s Book of Martyrs, touching that excellent letter
which Philpot, that Glorious Martyr, a little before his death also, wrote to a
friend of h^s, that was then a Prisoner, upon this very subject of
Infant Baptism* who was thereby converted from the error of his way, as is
there to be seen. A le^ter exceeding well worth the reading and serious perusal
by any, Act. mon. vol 3. Page 606 -- 610. s. m.
such especially as hesitate in this matter.) The Reader may please further to
mind, that ^his was not intended by the Reverend Author for the publ^ck view;
but was only a private Answer sent to a special friend, for his particular
satisfaction, relating to some doubts mentioned in a letter of his to my Father
concerning this subject: Had he purposed to have Written, and Printed off his
thoughts to the World touching this article of Baptism I question not but he
would have been more polite and curious; and the expectations of those who knew
him thoroughly satisfied therein.

I would not detain the Reader by any further Preface of mine: and therefore to
conclude; May this from one who is now in Heaven, unto such as may have too
far engaged against God's Covenant-meries toward his, and our poor Children,
sent indeed in a special manner unto such; have a rich and effectual blessing
from the Fat^er of lights ^^ mercies; a better effect upon their hearts, then
that famous Letter had of Elijah the Prophet, upon Jehoram to whom it was sent,
2 Chronicles. 21.12. (written, it is thought by diverse, before his Translation to
Heaven, but concealed until there was so fit a season for the presenting of
it) May this Writing (I say) and in such a season also, have a better effect
and fruit; even to bring them from the error of their way, into the paths of
Truth and peace, and settle them, and others, more and more therein; That is
the sincere desire of the publisher thereof, who is

thin^ to serve thee in our Lord Jesus. Thomas Shepard.

I. THOMAS SHEPARDIVS Anagr: Paradisus hostem?
HE^! Paradisus alit Sanctis infantibus hostem?
Q^os Baptizar^ praecip^^ ipse Deus?
Q^os Deus ambabus, clemens, amplectitur ulnis,
Non sinet in gremio Tingur Ille suo?
Annon pro Sanctis Ecclesia (matter) habebit,
Quos sancti Sanctos vox ait esse Dei?
Hoc Deus av^^ia^. Non sic Shepardius olim,
Non sic, quae moriens Scripta re^iquit, aiunt.
Non sic Doctores celebrat quos sanclior atas,
Anglia quos celebrat Prisca, simulque nova.
His u^^nam Sanctis Deus ipse laboribus abnam
E superis, clemens, suppeditaret opem!
Qua sine, Doctores non ulli, scripta nec ulla,
Errores possunt carnificare malos.
Ius confirmabas puerorum, Christ, tuorum
A gremio vellent cum revocare t^o;
S^rgito, Lactentesque tuos defendito ab host
Q^i vellet lundes ( -- cunque) perire tuas.
Amen
Johannes Wilsonus senior.

II. THOMAS SHEPARD. Anagr: o a map's thresh'd.
Lo here is a map, where we may see
Well thresh'd an heap of corn to be
By Thomas Shepard's happy hand
Which from the chafe pure wheat has fan'd:
The wheat is the Church Members right
(Both great and little ones) to wit
Unto the seal of Baptism, all
That are within the Gospel call;
I mean Believers and their seed;
To whom the Lord has Promised,
To be their God; and does reveal
Their right to's Covenant and the seal:
On whom through Grace the Blessing came
Of his dear servant Abraham.
Be they or Jews or Gentiles, now
No difference the Lord does know.
The promise is to us and ours.
As large, or larger: and God pour's
His Spirit now as much, or more
Then e're he did on them before.
And if that they were Circumcised.
Then we are now to be Baptized:
Our Babes must now no less then theirs
Be sealed (as of his Kingdom heirs)
Christ calls them his little ones,
And as his darlings He them owne's*
Denouncing against them a woe,
That are despisers of them, who*
Offend the least of them, and such
As do their interest in him grutch.
Crispus, with Gaius, Stephanas,
With others, were not all through Grace
Baptized that of their Household were?
And Children who will doubt were there?
Then let us not to them deny,
Nor seem as if we did envy
The privilege which God from heaven
Has through his grace and favor given.
Nor let us limit his good Spirit
In applycation of Christ's merit:
Whose blood was shed for them, as well
As those who them in age excel:
If such be taught of God, who dare
Deny, they his Disciples are?
III. THOMAS SHEPARD Anagr: More has po^s'd.
MOre from this holy pen does ^ast'd
The Baptism to defend
(...) Infants (...) at Church members are
(If well you do attend)
Then any Anti-baptists can
with solidness confute.
I wish with all my heart that God
will grant these labors fruit,
As good or better then the pains
by other Godly taken.
That thereby all his precious Saints
be would please to awaken.
That none may any more oppose,
with Zeal preposterous,
The Truth which Gods most holy word
commends unto us;
That who were less convinced by
this holy Shepards voice,
Yet in his Letter left behind
they may ^^e more rejoice.
He was a shining Light indeed,
few other such are left,
The Lord vouchsafe we be not by
our Sins of them bereft.
And pour down of his Spirit more
upon his Sons surviving;
That will be more and more unto
Truth's lovers a reviving.
IIII. THOMAS SHEPARD Anagr: Armed as the Shop.
Armed ( at the shop of God's good word
^oth weapons unto him afford)
^^^^nd's the right of little ones,
Whom God in the Church Covenant ownes
The Child^e^ of ^is Church among,
To whom (...) Kingdom does belong,
And there withal the Seal thereof,
Through his free Mercy, Grace, and Love.
Yet are there some which them forbid
(As once his weak Disciples did)
To come to Christ, and ^cruple make,
Whether thereof they should partake?
But Christ was very angry for it,
As for such Zeal he did abhor it;
Oh come, said he, and welcomed such,
With tokens of affection much:
As if that they and scarcely ^hy
But such as they might challenge any
Or part, or portion in his grace,
(So did his favor them embrace)
His Babes, his Lambs, his little creatures
He call's them. As for such d^features,
Christ they defeat as well as them
Whom they presume so to contemn.
This holy Shepard is like David,
From Ly^^s mouth, and Beare's who saved
That Little Kid; whom God did crown
With great and singular renown:
And so this Shepard has (no doubt)
A glorious crown his head about.
For all his lab^urs, (and for this;)
In high and everlasting bli^s.
And as the Lord does honor him
(For Christ his sake) so his esteem
Both is, and ought to be most rare,
Amongst them who Christ hi^ followers are*
And oh how should we bless his Name
That o^ ^is Son he pour's the same
Good Spirit that was in the Father
Or doubles it upon him rather:
LORD* these Epistles do thou bless!
And as thy Truth they do confess
So make them precious in the eyes
Of all that do thy Gospel prize.
Amen
JOHN WILSON Senior

THE CHURCH MEMBERSHIP OF CHILDREN CLEARED UP IN A LETTER IN ANSWER To the
Doubts of a Friend.
WHen we say, That Children are Members by their Parents Covenant, I would
premise three things for Explication.

1. That Children of Godly Parents come to the fruition of their Membership by
their Parents Covenant, but that which give's them their right, and interest in
this Membership is Gods Covenant, whereby he engages himself equally to be a
God to them, and to their Seed. This I suppose is clear.

2. That according to the double Seed, viz. 1. Elect Seed. 2. Church-Seed; So
there is a double Covenant, 1. Exernal and outward: 2. Internal and inward.
And because the Covenant makes the Church, hence there is an inward, and
outward Membership, and Church estate: there is an outward Jew, and an inward
Jew, Romans 2.28, 29. All are not Israel ( i. e. the elect Seed) that are of
Israel ( i. e. the Church-Seed of in outward Covenant) to whom the Apostle
says belong's the Adoption, the Covenants, and the promises, that is, the
external Adoption whereby God account's them his Children, or the Children of
his house, and family, the Children of the Church; and accordingly have the
promises belonging to them in respect of outward dispensation, although they be
not Children by internal Adoption, to whom belongs the promises by effectual
and special communication of saving Grace: It is clearer then the day, that
many who are inwardly, or in respect of inward Covenant, the Children of the
Devil, are outwardly, or in respect of outward Covenant, the Children of God,
Isay. 1.2. I have brought up Children, and yet Rebellions; and in the next
verse they are called [ my People] ( i. e. by outward Covenant) and yet worse
then the Ox, or Ass: Deuteronomy. 32.19, 20. they are called Sons, and yet provokeing
God to revengefull Wrath; and Children* and yet without Faith. And look, as
some may be externally Dogs, and yet internally Believers: (as the woman of
Canaan, whom, in respect of outward Covenant, Christ calls a Dog: and the
Jews, who yet rejected him, Children Mat. 15.26) so many may be externally
Children, in respect of external Covenant, and yet internally Dogs, and evil
men, and we see that the purest Churches of Christ are called Saints, and
faithful, and Children of God and yet many among them Hypocrites, and
unbelievers; because they that in respect of Church estate, and outward
Covenant, and profession, are outwardly, or federally Saints; are many times
inwardly, and really unsound: Hence therefore it is, that when we say, that
Children are in Covenant, and so Church Members, the meaning is, not that they
are always in inward Covenant, and inward Church Members, who enjoy the
inward, and saveing benefits of the Covenant, but that they are in external,
and outward Covenant, and therefore outwardly Church Members, to whom belongs
some outward privileges of the Covenant for their inward and eternal good.

These things being clear, I the rather make mention of them, to undermine
diverse usual objections againts the Membership, and Covenant Interest of
Children; as, that they have no saving Grace many times; and that they make no
actual profession of any grace; and that many of them degenerate, and prove
corrupt, and wicked etc. for suppose all these, yet God may take them into
outward Covenant (which is sufficient to make them the Church-Seed, or Members
of the Church) although he does not receive them into inward Covenant, in
bestowing upon them saving Grace, or Power to profess it, nay though they
degenerate, and grow very corrupt afterward.

3. Because you may question what this outward Covenant is, to which the seals
are annexed; and under which we shall prove, Children are comprehended; and
because the Knowledge of it is exceeding useful and very pleasant, I shall
therefore give a short taste of it, as a light to our after-discourse,
especially as it is considered in the largest extent of it. This outward
covenant therefore consists chiefly of these three branches, or special
promises:

1. The Lord engages himself to them, that they shall be called by his Name,
or is Name shall be called upon them, as it is Isay. 63.19. They shall be called
the Sons of God, Hos. 1.10. and the People of God, Deuteronomy. 29.12.13. Thou
becamest mi^e, Ezekiel. 16.8. They may not be his Sons, and People really, and
savingly, but God will Honor them outwardly (at least) with this name, and
privilege: they shall bear his name, to be called so, and consequently to be
accounted so by others, and to be reckoned as of the number of his visible
Church, and People; just as one that Adopts a young Son, he tel's the Father if
he carry it well toward him when he is grown up to years, he shall possess the
inheritance it self, but yet in the mean while be shall have this favor to be
called his son, and be of his family, and household, and so be reckoned among
the number of his Sons: (...) R^m. 9 4.

2. The Lord promises that they shall, above all others in the World, have the
means of doing them Good, and of conveying of the special Benefits of the
Covenant; Nay they shall be set apart above all People in the World, to enjoy
these special benefits of Remission of Sins, power against sin, eternal life,
etc. ^nd^^ all certainly have these, by these mean, unless they refuse them:
this is evident from these, and such like Scriptures and examples; (...)
privilege has the Jew says the Apostle R^m. 3.1. and what advantage by
Circumcision, if by nature under wrath, and sin for upon that ground the
Apostle make's the question he Answers it is much every way but co^sly because
t^ them were commi^ted the Oracle of God: 1.^. the Word, promises, Covenant
which are the ordinary means of saving grace and eternal good: others hear
the word but these in outward Covenant enjoy ^^ ^^ Covenant, and promise; and
hence these in the first place, and principally are sought after by these
means; and therefore Christ forbids his D^sciples at first to go preach in the
way of the G^n^ile^ (persons out of Covenant) but to the l^s^ sheep of ^h^
h^use of Israel, Mat. 10.6. and himself tells the Woman of Canaan, that he
came not but to the last sheep of the house of Israel, Mat. 15.24. And although
he bid's his disciples go preach to all nation, yet Acts 3.26. it is said unto
you First has he sent Christ, because you are children of the promise and
Covenant, verse 25: Repent therefore, and be converted, verse 19. Do not
resist, or refuse Christ, for he has First sent Christ to you to bless you,
and turn you from your iniquities; and the promise is full and fair, Romans
11.23. If they abide not in unbelief, ( i. e. in refusing grace, and Christ
when offered) they shall be graffed in, for God is able to do it, and will do
it: and the reason why the Lord gave his people up to their own counsels; it
was, because My people would no^e of me, after all the means God used for
their good, Psalm. 81.11, 12, 13. And Deuteronomy. 7.6. The Lord has chosen you, above
all people on the earth, to be a special people to himself, and thou art an
holy people unto the Lord: How a holy people? by inward holiness? no verily,
for many of them were inwardly unholy, both Parents and children, but thou art
holy, i. e. thou art externally sanctified, and set apart by special means of
holiness, to be a special people unto God. And therefore Isay 5.7. the men of
Judah are called Gods pleasant plant: i. e. planted into the root and fatness
of the Church, and therefore had all means used for their further special
good, verse 4. What could be done to my vineyard, that has not been done? And
hence it is, that though the word may come to heathens as well as
Church Members, yet it comes not to them by way of Covenant, as it does to
Church Members; nor have they any promise of mercy aforehand, as Church Members
have; nor is it chiefly belonging to such, but unto the children of the
Covenant and the promise, as has be said. And hence also it fallows that God
never cutt's off the seed of his Servants from the special benefits of the
Covenant until they have had the means thereunto, and they have positively
rejected those means: and hence the Jews (who are made the Pattern of what
God will do toward all Gentile-churches, Romans 11.) were never cast off till by
positive unbelief they provoked the Lord to break them off, by rejecting and
refusing the means of their eternal peace

3. The Lord promises, that the seed of his people (indefinitely considered)
shall have this heart (viz: which would refuse special grace, and mercy) taken
away, as well as means used for that end: this is evident from Deuteronomy. 30.6. The
Lord thy God will Circumcise thy heart and the heart of thy seed, to love the
Lord: he will cut off the uncircumcision, and sin, and resistance of the heart
against God; he will take away the stony heart: not indeed from all, in outward
Covenant particularly; but from these indefinitely; so that there is no promise
to do this for any out of the visible Church, (though God of his Sovereignty,
and free mercy sometimes does so) but the promise of this belongs indefinitely
to those of his Church, among whom usually, and ordinarily he worke's this
great work, leaving him to his own freeness of secret mercy, to work thus on
whom he will, and when he will: in the mean while no man can exclude himself,
or any others within this Covenant from hope of this mercy, and grace, but may
with comfort look and pray for it; for this is Gods Covenant that the Redeemer
shall come out of Sion, and turn away ungodlyness from Jacob, Romans 11.26, 27.
for the Covenant of God does not only run thus; If thou believe and receive
grace thou shall have it; but thus also, I will Circumcise your heart, I will
take away the stony heart, I will turn away ungodliness form you, I will enable
to believe: And hence these three things follow from these things thus opened.

1. That as the Covenant run's not only thus, viz. If thou believe thou shall
be saved, but also I will enable to believe; So a man's entrance into Covenant
is not only by actual and personal profession of Faith [as some say] because
God's Covenant run's a peg higher, viz: to make and enable some to believe, and
so to make that profession.

2. That the very outward Covenant is not merely conditional, but there is
something absolute in it: and hence it fallows, that it is a great mistake of
some who think that Circumcision, and Baptism, seal only conditionally [the
outward Covenant being ^say they] merely conditionall] for those three things
mentioned in the outward Covenant you see are in some respect absolute, and if
the Covenant was only conditional, then the Lord was no more in Covenant with
Church Members, than with pagans, and infidels, for it may be propounded
conditionally to all such, that if they believe, they shall be saved, but
assuredly God's grace is a little more extensive to the one, then to the other.

3 Hence you may see what Circumcision once did, and Baptism^ now seal's unto,
even to Infants the seal is to confirm the Covenant: the Covenant is, that God
(outwardly at least) owne's them, and reckon's them among his people, and
Children, within his visible Church and Kingdom, and that here upon he will
prune, and cut, and dress, and water them, and improve the means of their
eternal good upon them, which good they shall have, unless they refuse in
resisting the means; nay that he will take away this refuseing heart from among
them indefinitely, so that though every one cannot assure himself, that he will
do it particularly for this or that person, yet every one, through this
promise, may hope, and pray for the communication of this grace, and so feel it
in time.

These things thus premised, to clear up the ensuing discourse, I shall now do
two things. 1. Leave a few grounds and reasons to prove, that Children are in
Church Covenant, and so enjoy Church Membership by their parents. 2. I shall
then Answer your scruples.

To the first; The truth of it is manifest, by clearing up this proposition;
viz: Argum: 1.
That one and the same Covenant which was made to Abraham in the old Testament,
is for substance the same with that in the New; and this under the
New Testament, the very same with that of Abraham's under the old.

I say for Substance the same, for it is acknowledged that there was something
proper and personal in Abraham's Covenant, as to be a Father of many Nations,
but this was not of the Substance of the Covenant, which belong's to all the
Covenanters, and unto which the Seal of Circumcision was set: for all Abraham's
seed, neither in those, nor these days, are the fathers of many nations, nor
did Circumcision seal it.

Again it is confessed, that the external administrations of this one and the
same covenant, are diverse; but still the Covenant for substance is the same:
For that old covenant was dispensed with other external signs, sacrifices,
types, prophesies, then this under the new. There was something Typical in
Abraham's covenant concerning Canaan, a type of heaven, but yet the same
Covenant remaine's now with a more naked manner of dispensation, or promise of
heaven. And hence it fallows, that if it may appear, that the Covenant it self
is one and the same, now, as then; then, as now; then it will undeniably
follow, that if the New Covenant under the Gospel be not a carnal Covenant, no
more was that: if the New Covenant be not proper to Abraham's natural seed, no
more was that which was made with Abraham: if the substance of that Covenant
was, I will be a God to thee and thy seed, then this very Covenant remaine's
still under the Gospel, it being one and the same with that; if by virtue of
that Covenant, the Children were made Members of the Church; and hence had a
Church privilege, and seal administered; then the same Covenant remaining the
same, and in the same force, and benefit, our Children also are taken into the
like Membership. It remaine's therefore to prove that which all our Divines have
long since made good against the Papists, that the Covenant then, and now, is
for substance one and the same; or that the Covenant made with Abraham was a
Gospel Covenant, and this Gospel Covenant the same that was made with Abraham.

1. The Covenant made with Abraham is renewed in the Gospel, as to the main
thing in it, viz: I will be their God, and they shall be my people, Heb. 8.10.
Ier. 31.33. and though the seed be not expressed, yet its understood, as it is
Genesis 17.8. and if need be shall be proved hereafter.

2. Because Abraham's Covenant is of Gospel and eternal privileges. Not proper
therefore to him, and his fleshly posterity. For righteousness by Faith was
sealed up by Circumcision Romans 4.11. which is a Gospel privilege, and is the
ground of all other privileges, and yet in Genesis 17.7. there is no expression
of this righteousness by Faith, but it is understood therefore in this, I will
be their God: So the promise of eternal life, and resurrection thereunto is
wrapped up in this, I am the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.

3. Because there was never any Covenant, but it was either of Grace; or
works: that of works on mount Sinai, that of Grace which was made with
Abraham: and hence Gal. 3.17. The Covenant which was confirmed before by Christ,
the Law 430 years after cannot disanull: and what was that Covenant before?
surely it was the Covenant of Grace, because it was confirmed by Christ: and
what was this Covenant confirmed by Christ, but the Covenant made with Abraham?
for of this the Apostle speaks, verses 14, 16. And he cal's it expressly by
the Name of Gospel, or the Gospel Covenant, verse 8, 9.

4. Because when God renews his promise and Covenant made with Abraham, with
his people at the plains of Moab, Deuteronomy. 30.6. it run's in these words, viz: I
will Circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy seed, now this is a Gospel
privilege, and a Gospel Covenant: as appears by comparing this text with Romans
10.8. wherein the righteousness of faith, or the Gospel, is brought in speaking
the words of this Covenant, saying the word is nigh thee, in thy heart and
mouth, Deuteronomy. 30.11, 12, 13, 14. Now if that place, Genesis 17.7. should be said to
be obscure concerning the promise [I will be a God to thy seed] yet here in
this place God speak's plainly, which by comparing the scriptures is a Gospel
promise, and of a Gospel privilege and therefore to be preached by Ministers
of the Gospel, and to be believed by the professors of it.

5. Because this promise [I will be a God to thee and thy seed] does not belong
to Abraham and his seed as after the flesh, or as lineally descended of
Abraham: but as believers, and this is most evident Romans 11. wherein it is said
of the Jews, 1. That they were broken off, (made no people, no Church) by
unbelief, verse 20. 2. That by Faith they shall be graffed in again, verse 23.
If therefore they were broken off the Church by unbelief, then they stood as
members of the Church by Faith: and if by faith they should be graffed in, then
they stood by faith at first: Again it is said in this Rom 11.28. that they are
loved for the Fathers sakes, surely not as natural fathers, but as spiritual by
faith: and hence Nehem. 9.8. it is expressly said, that God found Abraham
faithful before him, and made a Covenant with him.

Again if the posterity of Abraham were Members upon this ground only or
chiefly, viz. because they were lineally descended of Abraham, then Esau,
Ishmael, the Jews Romans 11.20. could never have been cast off from being
Members of the Church, because they were always the natural offspring and
posterity of Abraham. Hence therefore it fallows that if they were ingraffed in
the Church as Believers (the Fathers as actually believing the Children as set
apart by promise of God to be made to believe and in their Parents Faith
accounted believers) then all believers at this day have the same privilege,
and the Covenant then being made only in respect of Faith, must needs be Gospel
Covenant, the same with God's Covenant at this day. And hence also it fallows
that if they were Members as Believers, then not as Members of that nation.
They were not therefore members of the Church, because they were descended of
Abraham, and were in a national Church, and were by generation Jews.
Circumcision was a Seal of Righteousness by Faith, Romans 4. 11. therefore they
were sealed as believers.

Thus much for the first argument, wherein I have been the larger, because much
light is let in by it, to answer diverse mistakes I shall name the rest with
morerbrevity.

Argum: 2. If it was the curse of Gentiles, to be strangers to the Covenants of
promise (made with the Jews) before they became the Churches of God; then by
being Churches, this Curse is removed; and hence Ephe. 2.12, 13. The Apostle
says they were strangers to the Covenant, and Commonwealth of Israel, but are
not so now. If you lay that the Ephesians were in Covenant, but not their seed,
and so they were not strangers? I Answer that the Apostle does not set out
their cursed estate merely because they were without any Covenant, but because
they were strangers to that Covenant of promise which the Israelites had; for
if their children had it not, they were then as without Covenant, so without
God, and without hope, as Pagans are, which is notoriously cross to the current
of all Scripture, as may afterward appear.

Argum: 3. The Apostle expressly says [ Your children are holy] 1 Cor. 7.14.
and if federally holy, then of the Church, [for real holiness cannot be here
meant] and in the Covenant of it: even as it is said Deuteronomy. 7.6. thou art an Holy
people unto the Lord thy God: few of which number were really and savingly
holy, but they were all so fed^rally, or by Covenant, and so became Gods
special Church or people.

If you say, That this holiness is meant of matrimonial holiness, viz. that
your children are not bastards, but legitimate: The answer is easy; for upon
this interpretation the Apostle's Answer should be false; for then if one of
the parents had not been a Believer, and so by his Believing Sanctified his
unbelieving Wife, their Children must have been Bastards, whereas you know that
their Children had not been in that sense unclean or illegitimate, although
neither of them were Believers: for the Apostle's dispute is plain, viz. that
if the Believing Husband did not Sanctify his unbelieving Wife, then were your
Children unclean, ^^e say you Bastards, but it is evident that Children may be,
in this sense, clean, and yet no Faith in either Parent to Sanctify one another
to their particular use: unless you will say, that all Children of heathens are
Bastards, because neither of the parents Believe.

Argum. 4. Romans 11.17. The Jews are cut off from the fatness of the Olive tree,
and the Gentiles put in, or ingraffed in their room: Now this Ingraffing is not
into Christ by saving faith, for it is impossible that such should ever be
broken off, who are once in; it must therefore he meant of their ingraffing
into the external state of the visible Church, and the fatness and privileges
thereof; of which Church Christ is the external and political head, into whom
(in this respect) they are ingraffed by external visible Fa^^h (...) Covenant.
Hence thus I reason; That if the Jews and their (...) were ingraffed members of
the Church, then the Gentile (...) into the same state, and coming in their
(...) with their Children, members of the Church: when the Jews hereafter shall
be (...), they shall be ingraff^d in as they were before; them and their (...)
verse 23. In (...) mean while, the Apostle put's no difference between the
present ingraffing of the Gentiles now, and of t^e^s past, or to come, and
therefore they, and their seed are ingraffed Members now.

Argum. 5. Because there is ^he same inward cause, moving God to take in the
Children (...) believing Church Members into the Church, and Covenant now, to
be of the number of his people, as there was for ^aking the Jews and their
children: for the only cause why the Lord took in the Jews and their Children
thus, was (...) Love, and f^^e grace, and mercy De^. 4.37. because (...) L^ved
thy fathers, t^erfore ^^ crose t^^ir seed, which choosing is not by eternal
Election or choosing to gl^^y, for many of their ^^ed never came to Glory; but
unto this privilege to be his people above all others, in outward Covenant with
him; which is exceeding great Love, if you Remember what has been said of the
b^anches of this outward Covenant, and visible Church estate. And hence ^eu.
10.15. ^e u^ the Lord had ^^^light in thy fathers, hence he chose their seed
above all people, as at that day, viz. to be his people ^^ so that I do from
hence fully believe, that either God's love is in these days of his Gospel
less unto his people; and servants, then in the days of the old Testament, or
if it be as great, that then the same Love respects the seed of his people now
as then it did. And therefore, if then, because he loved them, he chose their
seed, to be of his Church; so in these days, because he loves us, he chooses
our seed, to be of his Church also.

Argum: 6. Because our Savior speak's plainly of all Children who are brought
to him, that of such is the Kingdom of heaven: and none are ordinarily heirs
of the Kingdom of Glory, but such as are of God's visible Church and Kingdom
here. The objections against this place, I think not worth confuting, because I
hope enough is said to clear up this first particular, to prove the children of
confederate believers to be in Covenant, and Church Members.

I now proceed to the second thing, viz: to answer your objectio^s

Object: 1. If Children (say you) be members as it was in Abraham's Covenant,
then wives and servants, and all the household are to be taken in; for so it
was, Genesis 17. and Genesis 3^.2.3. and then what Churches shall we have? but such
as you fear, God will be weary of and angry wa^.

Answ. Churches at first (by your own confession) were in families, where
therfo^e God's grace did the more abound, by how much the less it did abound
abroad^ And hence Abraham's family and household was a Church of God; but yet
consider withal that all were not of this Family church, merely because they
were of the family of household, but because they were Godly, or the children of
such as were godly in the family; for Abraham's servants and household, were
such as he could and did Command to keep the way of the Lord, and so were
obedient to God in him, Genesis 18.19. and we see they did obey, and did receive
that new strange, and painful sign of Circumcision: about the nature and use
of which, no doubt he first instructed them, and in the place you mention, Genesis
35.4. they gave to Jacob all men strange gods, and eat^^ings to worship God
more purely And it is evident, Exodus 12.45 that every one in the family, had not
to do with the seals of the Church, and therefore now not of the Church though
of the family: for a foreigner, or hired servant was not to eat of the
passover nor was every one who was bought with money to eat often until they
were Circumcised, ver. 44. nor were (...) such to be circumcised, until they
were willing and desireous to eat the Passover, and that unto the Lord; then
indeed they, and theirs were first to be Circumcised, ver. 4^. and although
this be not expressly set down, Genesis 17. in Abraham's family* yet I doubt not,
but that, as one Scripture gives light unto another, so, this Scripture in Exo.
shows the mind of God in the first beginning of the Church, as well as in these
times: if therefore the servants who were godly in the family, were only to be
circumcised, and their children born in the house with them, then this example
is no way leading to corrupt Churches, as you fear it will; but rather the
contrary, that if Prose^^te servants then, were received into the Church
together with their seed, much more are they received now: And if they did not
defile the church then, neither should we think that they will do so now. And I
beseech you consider of it, that God was then as careful of keeping his Church
holy as in these days, especially in the first constitution of it, as in this
of Abraham's Genesis 17. And hence God was as much provoked by their unholiness
then, as by any unholiness now, 1 Pet. 1 16. Suppose therefore (as you imagine)
that all the household, whether profane or holy, were to be received into the
Covenant, and so to the seal of it, do you think that this course of admitting
all profane persons then, would not make the Lord soon weary of, and angry
with those family-churches, as well as of national, or congregational now, upon
the like supposition? if therefore any servants born in the house, or hired,
were admitted, surely they were not such unholy ones, whom the Lord could not
but be as much angry with, then as now; but they were godly and holy at least
in outward profession, upon which ground the Lord commanded them to be
Circumcised.

I know there are some, and very holy and learned also, who think that if any
godly man undertakes to be a^ a father to an adopted Pagan or Indian, that such
an one, not grown up to years, is from the example in Genesis 17. to be received
into the Covenant of the Church, and the ^eale of it* and I confess, I yet see
no convicting argument against it, if it could be proved that some servants
bought with Abraham's money were such, and were under years, but I see as yet
no convicting argument for this assertion from this example; and therefore I
stick to the former answer, and see no reason, from any rule of charity, but to
believe that all those in Abraham's family, were either visibly godly, or the
children of such; to whom Circumcision belong's: and consequently might as well
partake of Church Membership, as Abraham himself; which sort of servants in
these days may as well be admitted to Church Membership, without fear of
defiling the Church, as their masters themselves.

Object: 2. If Children (say you) be members, then all Children, good and bad,
must be received, as Jacob and Esa^ etc:

Answ. Why not? for if there be any strength in this Argument, it holds as
strongly against the admission of professing visible believers: where, though
all are externally, and federally holy, yet some, yea many, yea the greatest
part of such may be inwardly ^ad, and as profane in their hearts, as Esau: and
must we therefore refuse them to be Church Members because many of them may be
inwardly bad? verily there must then never be Churches of God in this world. So
it is among children, they are all outwardly holy, yet many of them may be
inwardly unholy, like Esau, must we not therefore accept them to Membership? It
is a miserable mistake to think that inward real holiness is the only ground
of admission into Church Membership, as some Anabaptists dispute, but it is
federal holiness, whether externally professed as in grown persons, or
graciously promised unto their seed.

Reply 1. But you here Reply, If so, then they are of the Church when they are
grown up, and profane, until they are cast out: and to take in profane, is
sinful, Ezekiel. 44.

Answ. It is very true; For it is herein just as it is in admitting professing
believers, they may prove profane, and continue so in Church Membership,
until they are cast out; but is this therefore any ground to keep out those
who are personally holy by their own profession? no verily, why then should
such as are parentally, and federally holy be kept out from Church Membership
because they may prove profane, and being profane must remain Church Members
till they be cast out.

Reply 2 But then (you say) they must be Church Members though their Parents
themselves, and the whole Church be unwilling thereunto, even as (say you) a
man that marries a woman, her children must be his, and he be a Father to
them, though he and she, and they should say ^e shall not be a father in law to
them.

Answ. This similitude of marriage does neither prove, nor illustrate the
thing; For the relation between father and such children is absolute and
natural, and hence continues though they say he shall not be their father, and
though he profess he will not; but the relation founded upon Church Covenant,
between member and member, is not natural, not only, and allway absolute; but
also conditional, which condition not being ^ept* the relation may be, and is
usually broken; for look as the Jews were not so absolutely God's people, but
if they did in time reject the Gospel, they were to be cast off, and indeed are
so at this day, Romans 2.25. Hosea 2.2. Acts 13.46, ^1. So it is with all Gentile
Churches, and the members thereof: and as for that which you last say, That
they may refuse their Parents Covenant at age, as well as own i^, and so may
members go out at pleasure, which is disorder. I answer, That the like may be
said of such members as come in by personal profession, for they may renounce
their own Covenant with God and the Church, one may do so, and so may twenty,
yet though this be wickedness and disorder, yet the Church may proceed against
them, and so it may against their Children, who are bound to own the Covenant
made with God, and of God with them in their Parents, as well as any
Church Members are to own their own Covenant by their own personal profession.
What disorder therefore will come in as you conceive this way will come in by
your own way, and what course you should take to heal the one, by the same you
may heal the other.

Object. 3. If Children (say you) be members; then their seed successively,
until they be either dissolved, or excommunicated; and if so, then what
Churches shall we have?

Answ. 1. What Churches shall we have? Truly not allway Churches of Angels and
faints, but mixed with many chaffy hypocrites and often times profane persons.
But still I say this objection holds as firm against gathering Churches of
visible professing believers; For God knowe's what Churches we may have of
them, even heaps of hypocrites, and profane persons, for I know not what can
give us hope of their not apostatizing, but only Gods promise to be a God to
them, and to preserve them; and truly the same promise, being made to their
seed, gives me as much ground of faith to hope well of Churches r^sing out of
the seed of the godly, as of the professing, Parents themselves. I know one may
have more experimental charity concerning some few professing the fear of God,
but my Church-charity is equal about them, especially considering, that those
whom God receiv's into Church Covenant, he does not only take them to be a
people to him, but to ^stablish them to be such, viz: for time to come. And
hence God is said, to establish his Covenant with Isaac, not Ishmael who was to
be rejected, Genesis 17.19* and God is said, to gather them into Covenant to
establish them to be a people, both young and old, present posterity, and that
which was to come, Deuteronomy. 29.11, -- 15.

2. God was as Holy, and as exactly requiring holiness from the Jewish Church,
as well as from Christian Churches; now do you think that the Covenant which
then wrapped up the Jews children into Church Membership, was an highway of
profaneness, and unholyness in the members thereof, and of defiling and
polluting Gods Church? or was it a way and means of holiness, and to keep them
from being profane? to affirm the first is something Blaphemous, and very
false, for it is expressly said Ier. 13.11. that as the girdle cleaves to the
loins of a man, so he caused the whole house of Israel (not grown men only) to
cleave to him, that they might be to him a people (which was by Covenant) and
for a name, for a praise, and for a glory; Gods name, Glory, praise was the
end; and the Covenant was the means hereunto; and therefore it was no way or
means of unholyness in that Church: but if you say, it was a means of
holiness; why then should we fear the polluting of Churches by the same
Covenant, which we have proved, wraps in our seed also? indeed they did prove
universally profane in the Jewish Church; so they may in ours, but shall man's
wickedness in abuseing God's grace, and forsaking h^s Covenant tie the hands,
or heart of God's free grace from taking such into Covenant; what ^^o^gh some
did not Believe? says the Apostle, Romans 3.3, 4. ^^all their unbelief make the
Faith of God without effect? God forbid.

3. Suppose they do prove profane, and corrupt Churches; yet even then, when
they are corrupt, they are such Churches, where ordinarily God gathers out his
Elect, and out of which (till purer are gathered, or these wholly rejected)
there cannot be expected ordinarily any salvation: for so says our Savior,
salva^ion is of the Jews, John 4.22. even in that very corrupt, and worst
estate of the Church that ever it was in.

Object. 4. If children be members, then they must come to the Lords Supper,
for you know no difference between member and member, in point of privilege,
unless they be under some sin.

Answ. 1. Yes verily, there is a plain difference between member and member
(though professing believers) in point of privilege, though they lie under no
sin: for, a man may speak and prophesy in the Church, not Women. A company of
Men may make a Church, and so receive in, and cast out of the Church, but not
Women though professing Saints.

2. All grown men are not to be admitted (though professing Believers) to the
Lords Supper; my reason is; A man may Believe in Christ, and yet be very
ignorant of the nature, use, and ends of the Lords Supper, now such may be
Baptized as soon as ever faith appears, Mark 16.16. but they may not be
admitted to the Lords Supper, because they will be guilty of the body and blood
of the Lord, if they through their ignorance, cannot discern the Lord body. I
know no reason but ignorant persons may be as well suspended from the use of
this privilege, though they be true believers (for faith may consist with much
ignorance) as well as distracted persons, who notwithstanding may be believers
also.

3. If therefore children be able to examine themselves and discern the Lords
body, they may then eat; and herein there is no difference in this privilege
between member and member.

4. Children not being usually able to examine themselves, nor discern the
Lords body, hence they are not to be admitted to the use of ^^is privilege:
and yet they may be such members as may enjoy the benefit of other privileges
even that of Baptism* for baptism seals up our first entrance into the
Covenant. This first entrance is not allway by pe^sonal profession of Faith,
but by Gods promise of working, or of vouchsafeing the means of working of it,
now Children (as is proved) being under this Covenant (as we see all the
posterity also of Abraham was) hence though children cannot profess faith, nor
actually examine themselves, yet they may receive, and must receive baptism,
being already under God^ Covenant; but because the Lords Supper does not seal
up this first entrance, and first right to the Covenant, but our growth and
fruition of the Covenant; hence this act on our part is required to participate
in this, which the Apostle calls self-examination, and the act of taking, and
eating Christ, and of discerning the Lords body, and of doing this in
remembrance of Christ: which every baptized person, and Churchmember is not
allway able to do. A child may receive a promise aforehand of a rich estate
given him, and this promise sealed up to him, his father receiving it for him,
but it is not fit that he should be put to the actual improvement, and fruition
of that estate, until he is grown up, understands himself, and knows how to
do it: so it is here, the Sacrament of the Lords Supper requires ability, 1. To
take Christ as our own. 2. To eat Christ, that is, to take fruition of him: the
which acts of says, God does not require of all those immediately, who are
wrapped up in Covenant with him.

Object. 1. But here you say, that that examination 1 Cor 1^ is required of all
that be members, and that at all times, as well as their first coming to the
Lords Supper.

Answ. This examination is indeed required of all those members who should
partake of the Lords Supper, but it is not required (as you seem to say) of
every one to make him a member, so that none can be a member, but him that is
able to examine himself; for Gods Covenant to work faith, and to give power to
examine one's self afterward, may make some as truly members as those who are
able to act and express their faith. Now I have proved that Gods Covenant is a
forehand given to children: and to give them the seal of their first entrance
into it many years after, is as vile a thing, as for them that are able, and
fit to examine themselves, to have this Sacrament of the Lords Supper denied,
or delaied till many years after.

Object. 2. But you say, It Is left to every ones conscience to examine himself,
not that others should examine them, and consequently if children be members,
thou it must be left upon their conscience.

Answ. We know in our own consciences that Children usually cannot examine
themselves, now if the Elders and the Church are bound to see Christ's rules
observed by others, and if this examination be the rule that all must walk by
who participate here, then they must not suffer such young ones, no nor persons
grown up, and entered in by personal profession, to receive this seal, as they
know are unable thus to do: I think if Churches should degenerate in these
days, this course of Discipline should be attended (especially by the Elders)
toward any of their members, which way soever they have entered, whether by
their own, or by their parents covenant: And I have often feared that there is
some need already of it, even toward some who enter by their own covenant, and
may have faith, but are miserably to seek in the nature, use, and ends of the
Lords Supper, and consequently unfit to d^scern of Christ's body, and so to
come to that Sacrament.

Object. 5. If Children may be members, and yet not come to the Lords Supper:
then it may come to pass that a whole Church may be a Church, and yet not have
the Lords Supper, or ought not to have it.

Answ. 1. So there may, for a Church may be a true Church, and yet want the
benefit of some one or more of Gods Ordinances, sometime Pastors, sometime
Elders, sometime Seals.

2. A Church of professing Believers may degenerate, and turn profane, and
sottish, and so have no just right to the Seals; and their Officers may leave
them, and so have no use of the Seals: yet I suppose it is a Church of Christ
still though degenerate, though unfit to enjoy Seals; will you therefore think
the way of their Membership unlawful, viz. by professing their Faith? Because
such a rare thing as this may happen? why then should you think the way of
Childrens Membership unlawful because of the like rarity in such a dark and
gloomy state of them as you mention?

Object. 6. If Children be Members, then there will be many in the Church, who
are not Saints by calling, nor faithful in Christ Jesus, which ought not to be
if the Church could see ^t, but these may be too plainly seen.

Answ. 1. I do think it is true, that poor Children may be* and are looked upon
with too too many dejected thoughts of unbelief, ^espising of them as Children
of wrath by nature, and not with such high thoughts of Faith, as Children, and
Sons of God by promise, as I have shown. And I think herein is our great sin,
as it was in Christ's own disciples, who were the first, that we read of, that
would not have little Children brought unto him, for which he rebuked them,
showing their privilege; and for want of which faith in Gods promise about our
children, certainly God smites, and forsakes many of our children.

2. If therefore you think that Church Members must consist only of saints by
calling; so that your meaning is, such saints as are so by outward and personal
profession, from the call of the Gospel, are only to be Church Members; this is
an error: For, 1. You know that they who define a Church to be a number of
visible saints, they usually put this phrase in, [ and their s^ed] who may not
profess faith perhaps as their Fathers do: and you shall find that the Israel
of God under the old Testament, are all of them said to be adopted, Romans 9.4.
chosen and called, Isay 41.8, 9. and faithful, Isai. 1.21. and yet we know
they were not all so by personal profession, but in respect of their joint
federation, and the outward Covenant of God with them. 2. The outward Covenant
is not all way first entered into by personal profession of faith, but by Gods
Covenant of promise to work, or to use the means to work faith: Hence it
undeniably follows; that as many may be in Church Covenant before they profess
faith personally, so many may be members of the Church without this profession
of faith; for this Covenant of working faith (as has been formerly explained)
does not only belong to the Jews, but to Gentile Churches also, and Believers;
as has been proved, and might further be confirmed.

Object: But say you, If we saw hypocrites, we were to cast them out as well as
profane persons: and we see no grace in many children, and therefore they must
not be received in.

Answ. 1. If you see children, of whom you cannot say that they are faithful
personally, yet they may be faithful federally (as has been showed) for they
may lie under Gods Covenant of begetting faith, by some means in them; and
then you are not to cast them out, but accept them, as God does.

2. The children of godly parents though they do not manifest faith in the
Gospel, yet they are to be accounted of Gods Church, until they positively
reject the Gospel, either in themselves, or in their Parents; and therefore God
did never go about to cast off ^he Jews, and their seed, until they put forth
positive unbelief; the Lord promised to give them the means of Faith, and did
so: and when Christ was come, and the Gospel sent first unto them for their
good, the Lord herein fullfill'd his Covenant-Mercy, as toward his Beloved
people; but when they rejected these means, and cast off Christ, and his
Gospel, then Romans 11. they were broken off, and not before. Now hypocrites are
such as profess Christ in words, and yet deny Christ in deed, Titus 1.16. 2 Timothy 3.5. Hence they are such, as positively refuse Christ: hence the case of
children in whom no positive unbelief appears, is not the same with this of
hypocrites, or profane persons; and when young Ch^ldren shall grow positively
such, I know not but they may be dealt with as any other Members, for any such
like offense.

Thus you see an answer to your Six Objections. In the end of your paper there
are TWO QVESTIONS, which I suppose may not a little trouble against their
Baptism and membership. To these briefly.

Quest. 1. What good (say you) is it, either for a wicked, or an elect Child,
till he be converted, to be in the Church? or what good may any have by being
in the Church, till they can profit by what they enjoy?

Answ. 1 The Apostle put's the like case, and gives you an Answer Romans 3.1, 2.
what advantage has the Jew, and what profit is there of Circumcision? what use
or profit could the Infants then make of their Church Covenant, Membership, or
Seal, who understood none of these things? do you think the Lord exposed his
holy ordinances then unto contempt? and is more careful that they may be
profitably used now? was there no good by Circumcision? yea says the Apostle,
much every way.

2. What profit is it to persons grown up to years, and yet secretly
hypocrites, who enter into the Church by profession of the faith? you will say
there is good and profit in respect of the privileges themselves, but they
abusing them they had, in this respect, better have been without them, because
they bring hereby upon themselves greater condemnation. The same say I of
children, whom God receives into his Church, by promise, and Covenant of doing
them good, although at present they may not be so sensible of this good.

3. To speak plainly, the good they get by being thus enriched is wonderful:
and here there is more need of a Treatis^ then of a L^tter, to clear up the
benefits from all Scruples, arising by being in outward Covenant, in Church
fellowship, even unto Infants: I confess I find little said by Writers upon
this Subject, and I believe the doubts against childrens Baptism, as they
arise by blindness in this particular; so I think that God suffers that opinion
to take place, that by such darkness he may bring out light in this particular.
I will only hint unto you some few of my many thoughts, which have long
exercised me for many years in this thing. The good by childrens membership,
especially when Sealed, is in four things.

1. In respect of God. God shows hereby the riches of his grace toward them, in
taking them to be his people: In Adopting them to be his children: In
preventing them with many special promises aforehand of doing them good, by all
which, the Lord does as it were prevent Satan, in wooing their hearts as it
were, so soon to draw them to him before he can actually stir to draw their
souls from him. So that I beseech you consider, suppose they cannot as yet
understand, and so make profit by all this, yet is it not good for them, or for
any of us to partake of Gods grace, before we know how to make use of it? is it
not good for God to be good to them that are evil? is it not good for God to
glorify and make manifest his grace to man, though man knows not how to make
use of his grace? was it not rich grace for Christ to wash Peter's feet, and yet
he not know at present what it meant, only (says Christ) thou shall know it
afterward? is it not good for God to give life to us, and to let us be born in
such and such a place of the Gospel where it is preached, and to lay in mercy
aforehand for us, before we know how to be thankful, or know how to use any of
these outward mercies? and is it no mercy or favor to have so much spiritual
mercy bestowed on children aforehand, before they can be thankful, or make use
thereof? Deuteronomy. 7.6, 7. The choosing of them to be his people, above all other
people (which you know was from the womb) it is called Gods setting his Love
upon them, and the reason of this Love, verse 8. is said to be, because God
loved them, this love was not Electing, and peculiar love, (for thousands of
these perished and went to hell) but it was his external adopting love to
choose them to be his people, and to improve all means for their good, and to
give them the good of all those means unless they refuse: and to give
indefinitely among them, and particularly to many of them, such hearts as that
they shall not be able to refuse the good of those means (as has been showed
formerly) this is love, great love and mercy; not shown or promised to any who
are not of the visible Church throughout the whole world. By which God is
glorified, and let him be so, though we cannot see how to profit by it, when it
first break's out; Have not you profited much by considering Gods preventing
grace, long before you understood how to make use of it? has not God received
much glory from you for it? has this grace then think you, been unprofitably
spent on Gods part? No verily: The case is the same here, David blesses God,
for being his God from his Mothers belly, and from the womb, Psalm. 22.9, 10.
and Gods grace is shown through this expression, Isai. 46.3.

2. There is much good hereby in respect of the Parents; for, suppose the
children cannot profit by it, yet Parents may, and it is in respect of them very
much that God looks upon their children, thus to receive them into Covenant,
Deuteronomy. 4.37. For, 1. Parents may hereby see, and wonder at the riches of Gods
grace, to become a God not only to themselves, but to take in their seed also,
whose good they prize as their own, and as if done to themselves: hence Abraham
fell down upon his face, adoring God, when he heard of this Covenant, Genesis 17.
See also how Moses aggravates this love, in the eyes of all that had eyes to
see, Deuteronomy. 10.14, 15. 2. Hereby God gives Parents some comfortable hope of
their childrens salvation; because they be within the pale of the visible
Church; for as out of the visible Church (where the ordinary means of
salvation be) there is ordinarily no salvation, Acts 2.47. So if children were
not of Christ's visible Church and Kingdom, we could not hope for their
salvation, no more then of Pagans, or Turks; for if they be without God, they
are without hope, Ephesians. 2.12. and to be without hope of such, to whom God has
made such promises of salvation, not given to Pagans, nor proper to Abraham, is
very hard, and horrid to imagine; for the promise run's universally, that the
Seed of the upright (whether Jews, or Gentiles) shall be Blessed. Psalm. 112.1,
2. Prove. 20.7. 3. Hereby Parents are stirred up the more earnestly to Pray for
them, because God's Covenant and promise is so large toward them, at which
Prayer look's, and by which it wrestle's with God, and hence, we find that
Moses, and others, they use this argument in their Prayers; oh God of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob: etc: 4. Hereby they may not only hope, and Pray, but are
encouraged to Believe, concerning their Children and the rest of those who are
in Covenant among them, that God will do them good, as they conclude mercy to
the remnant, forgiveness of their sins, with faith, upon this ground, thou will
remember the Truth to Jacob, and thy Mercy to Abraham, sworn unto our Fathers
in days of old, Micah 7.18, 20. This indeed is the childrens faith for
themselves, and their children: but so it may be a ground of Parents faith: And
if we pray for our children, why should we doubt (leaving only secrets to God)
if we see them die before they reject the Gospel positively; I see no reason for
any man to doubt of the salvation of his child if he dies, or that God will not
do good to his child in time if he lives. 5. This stirrs up their hearts to be
the more sincerely holy, and keep in with God, because of their children: and
to educate them with more care, and watchfullness, because they are the Lord's
Children as well as theirs; they are not common, but holy vessels, and therefore
let them see that they be not defiled; and hence we find, that when God
exhort's to any duty of holiness in Scripture, he often makes this the ground of
it [ I am your God] and hence God aggravates their sin in offering their
children to Molech, Ezekiel. 16. because they were his children, that should have
been better used.

3. In respect of themselves, the good is very great. 1. It is a special means
to prevent sin, Deuteronomy. 29. I make this Covenant, not only with him that is
present, but with your seed also, who are not here, verse 15* Lest there should
be among you man, or woman, family, or tribe, whose heart turns away from God,
and lest there should be a root of gall and wormwood: and indeed it mightily
works on the heart to think; shall I whom God has chosen to be his, be my
own; or be the Devils, or be my lusts etc? 2. It Is a strong motive and
engagement upon them to forsake sin, even the uncircumcision and sin of their
hearts, as is evident, Deuteronomy. 10.15, 16. The Lord had a delight to choose the
seed of your fathers, even you to be his people, as it is this day: what
fallows? Therefore Circumcise the foreskin of your hearts, and be no more
stiff-necked: 3. It Is a special help, as to avert their hearts from sin, so to
convert and turn them to God, and to make them look toward God, that he would
turn them, when perhaps they are without any hope (in other respects) of mercy,
or of being able by any means they can use to turn themselves; this is
evident, Acts 3.19. with verse 25. Repent and be converted, for you are the
children of the Covenant, which God made with our fathers; this draws their
hearts, when they see, how God call's them to return, Ier. 3.22. Come unto me
ye back sliding children etc: we come unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God.
When backsliding Ephraim could not convert himself, he cries unto God, oh turn
me* and I shall be turned, for thou art the Lord my God, Ier. 31.18. which
places cannot be meant of being their God only by internal Covenant, in giving
to them the special benefits of the Covenant, for then they should be in
Covenant with God and have remission of all their sins, etc: before they were
turned, or before faith? and therefore it is meant of being a God in outward,
and external Church Covenant, which is no small motive, and loadst one to
Believe. And although many do not believe, and will not be turned, yet this
Covenant is an high privilege, and great favor, fit in it self, to draw to
God, though many believe not: and hence the Apostle says, that the privilege
of the Jew is great, in having God's Oracles (which contain God's Covenant)
committed to them, though some believe no^, which unbelief make's not (he
says) the faith of God, i. e. God's promise or Covenant of none effect, or an
uneffectual, and fruitless Covenant: for this word of God's Covenant shall take
some effect among some such as are in it; which therefore is a privilege,
though many perish, as is evident, Romans 9.4, 6. 4. It Is a special means of
binding them fast to God, when they are turned: Ier. 13.11. as the girdle
cleaves unto a man, so have I caused the whole house of Israel, to cleave unto
me, that they may be for a name, and glory. Deuteronomy. 30.20. thou shall cleave unto
him, because he is thy life, and the length of thy days: he was not their life
spiritually, and savingly, (for many thus exhorted, were dead, and in their
sins) but federally, or in outward Covenant. 5. If they shall forsake, and
break loose from God, and from the bond of his Covenant, and have (as much as
in them lies) cast themselves out of Covenant, by their own perfidiousness, and
breach of Covenant, that one would think now there is no more hope; yet it is a
special means, to encourage their hearts to return again: even when they seem
to be utterly cast off, and therefore it is said Ier. 3 1. though thou have
committed whoredom with many lovers (whereby the covenant was broken) yet
return unto me: so Deuteronomy. 4. If when you are scattered among the nations, and
shall serve wood and stone, and be in great tribulation, if from thence thou
seek the Lord thy God, thou shall find him, he will not forsake thee; and what
is the reason of it? viz. his remembrance of the Covenant with their fathers,
for so it is Deuteronomy. 4.27, 28, 29, 30 31. But I forbear to name more such things
as these which come by outward Covenant to Inchurched Members.

4. In respect of others their good is very great; for, 1. now they may enjoy
the special watch and care of the whole Church, which otherwise they must want.
2. They hereby have the more fervent Prayers of others for their good: and
hence Romans 9.1, 2, 3. we see how Paul upon this ground had great zeal in his
prayers for the Jews, not only because his countrymen, but especially because
to them did belong the Adoption, and Covenants, and they had gracious Fathers
etc. so Psalm* 89.49. Lord remember thy former loving kindnesses, which are
sworn to David in truth. And hence we see Moses often pleads and prevails with
God in prayer, for the sinning Israelites, viz. oh Remember Abraham, Isaac, and
Iaco^*

Now I pray you, lay all these things together, and then see whether you have
any cause to say; What profit is there by Covenant and Church Membership of
persons not yet able to profess the faith of Jesus Christ?

Quest. 2. You say, when families were Churches, all of the family were of the
Church, and when a Nation was a Church, all that were of that nation were of
that Church; But now Believers being matter of the Church, what if none were
admitted, till they can hold forth visible faith, would not many of these
things be more clear?

Answ. In these words there is a threefold mistake.

1. That all of the family and nation in former times were of the Church: this
(...) for God never took ^^y to be his Church, but (...) they were Believers,
at (...) e^ternally, In that Nation; I say Believers: which either are
professed believers: or promised believers, such as by outward Covenant shall
have the means to be made believers in y^ Nation; and hence you have heard,
that the Nation of the Jews stood by Faith, and were broken of by unbelief,
and if any rejected the Covenant: as Ishmael, and Esau, they were not of that
Church, though they did, and might dwell in yt nation, as doubtless thousands
did.

2. You think that Visible p^^sonal Faith only, makes the Church, and members
of it; which ^s an error, as may appear from many things already said: for
Children may be in Gods account professors of y^ Faith parentally, as well as
personally; i. e. in the profession of their parents, as well as in their own;
And hence you shall find, that the Covenant God entered into with the Parents
of Church Members personally, the Children are said, to have that Covenant made
with them many hundred years (...) See for this purpose* among hundreds, these
few Scriptures, Hagga^ 2.5. In Haggal's time God is said to make a Covenant
with them then when they came out of Egypt (which was not personally, but
parentally) so Hosea 12.4, 5. when God entered into Covenant with Jacob at
Bethel; God is said to speak with US, who lived many years after; and hence
the Children many years after, challenge Gods Covenant with them, which was
made with their Fathers for them, Micah 7.19, 20. Hence also those Children are
said to Come to Christ (who were not able to come themselves) but only were
brought in the arms of others to Christ. It Is a known thing among men, that a
Father may receive a gi^^, or Legacy given to him, and his heirs, and he, and
his heirs are bound to perform the condition of the Covenant, and promise by
which it is conveyed, and that the Child does this in his Father.

3. You think that if men only, grown up, and able to profess Faith, should be
of the Church, then all things would be more clear abo^^ Children: Truly I
believe the quite contrary, upon y^ grounds before laid dow^; For, 1. Hereby
pollution of Church shall not be avoided, but rather introduced, to exclu^^
Children from an holy-making Covenant, as we have proved. 2. Hereby that good
and benefit of their Covenant, should be lost, (not gained) by excluding them
out of Covenant, until they can personally profess, and make use of the
Covenant: The wisdom of man* furthers not the Righteousness of God. And here
let me conclude with the naked profession o^ my Faith to you in this point,
which is ^ Bulwark of defense against all that is said by Anabaptists against
baptising of Infants.

1. That the Children of professing Believers are in the same Covenant God made
with Abraham; Abraham was a Father of many nations, and not of one nation only,
and hence the same Covenant made with him, and the believing Israel in that
nation, the sa^^ Covenant is made with all his believing seed in all other
nations. 2. That Baptism is a seal of our first entrance, and admission into
Covenant; and therefore is to be immediately applied to children of believeing
parent, as soon as ev^^ ^hi^ be in Covenant, and that is as soon as they become
the visible seed (...) faithful, for so the Covenant to Abraham run's (I will
be thy God, and the God of thy seed) not only his electseed, but Church-seed,
(as has been showed) not only of his seed in that one nation, but in all
Nations.

These two things I cann^^ ^ell how to avoid the light of, they are so clear*
and the ignorance of these makes so many Anabaptists (as they are called) and I
never, yet met with any thi^^ written by them (and much I have read) that was
of any considerable weight to overthrow these. But I forget my self, and
trouble you: My prayer is and shall be, That the Lord would g^ve you
understanding in all these things.

FINIS.
Errata Preface, Page 4. Lin^ 20. read wonted. p. 6. l. 7. r. yt have fought.
p. 7. l. 28. r. spirit^^^ page 18. li^^ 29. for (...) r. an^. In ye Book page
11. line 34. for now r. were.


