MISCELLANEOUS ESSAYS: BY Monsieur St. EUREMONT. Translated out of French. WITH
A CHARACTER, BY A Person of Honor here in England.

CONTINUED By Mr. DRYDEN.

LONDON, Printed for John Everingham, at the Star in Ludgate Street, near the
West End of St. Paul's Churchyard, 1692.

LICENSED.

Feb. 17. 1691/2. Rob. Midgley.

THE CHARACTER.
THE Discourses which compose this Book, being printed already, in another
Language, there may be several amongst us, who have only heard in general of
Monsieur St. Euremont, and the Reputation he has with the Men of Sense, and
therefore may be well enough pleased to know what it is, wherein he Excels, and
which distinguishes him from other Writers. For it is not with the Wits of our
Times, how Eminent so ever, as with those who lived under Augustus when the
Empire and Language were in some Sense Universal. They properly wrote to the
World: the Moderns, even the French Authors themselves, write at most but to a
Province of the Roman Empire; and if they are known beyond their own Country,
and become a Common Bene^it to Mankind, it is, in a great measure, owing to
their Translators. Monsieur St. Euremont has established his Fame wherever
the French Language is understood, and yet surely he cannot be displeased with
an attempt to carry it farther, by making him speak that of a Country, where he
has resided so many Years.

Whoever reads these Essays will acknowledge, that he finds there a Fineness of
Expression, and a Delicateness of Thought, the Easiness of a Gentleman, the
Exactness of a Scholar, and the Good Sense of a Man of Business: That the
Author is thoroughly acquainted with the World, and has conversed with the best
sort of Men to be found in it. His Subjects are often Great and Noble, and then
he never fails to write up to them; when he speaks of the Ancient Romans, you
would believe you were reading one of the same Age and Nation: the same Spirit,
the same Noble Freedom, the same unaffected Greatness appear in both; if the
Subject he chooses be of a lower Nature, he is sure to write that which is not
common upon it: there is still somewhat New and Agreeable, and beyond what you
could expect. However you were affected when you began to read him, he gains
upon you insen^ibly, and before you have done, you take a pleasure to be of the
same Opinion with him.

The Variety and Choice of his Subjects pleases you no less, than what he
writes upon them: He perpetually entertains you with new Objects, and dwells
not too long upon any of them. As for Method, it is Inconsistent with his
Design, neither pretends he to write all that can be said: He sets not up for a
Teacher, but he Instructs you unawares, and without pretending to it: Every
thing appears so Natural, that the Art is hidden, and yet the Observer finds
all the strokes of a Master's Hand: He knows exactly when to give over: All is
so well, you will wish he had said more; and yet when he concludes, you believe
he could not have ended better. He has truly studied Nature in that point, that
it is with the Mind, as with the Body, they are to be treated alike: the
desires of both should be satisfied, yet so that you are to rise with an
Appetite.

I know, how Nice an Undertaking it is to write of a Living Author: Yet the
Example of Father Bouhours, has somewhat encouraged me in this Attempt. Had not
Monsieur St. Euremont been very considerable in his own Country, that Famous
Jesuit would not have ventured to praise a Person in Disgrace with the
Government of France, and living here in Banishment. Yet in his Pensees
Ingenieuses, he has often cited our Author's Thoughts and his Expressions, as
the Standard of Judicious Thinking, and Graceful Speaking. An undoubted sign
that his Merit was sufficiently established, when the Disfavour of the Court
could not prevail against it. There is not only a justness in his Conceptions,
which is the Foundation of good writing^ but also a Purity of Language, and a
beautiful turn of Words, so little understood by Modern Writers; and which
indeed was found at Rome, but at the latter end of the Commonwealth, and ended
with Petronius, under the Monarchy. If I durst extend my Judgment to
particulars, I would say that our Author has determined very nicely in his
Opinion of Epicurus; and that what he has said of his Morals, is according to
Nature, and Reason. It Is true, that as I am a Religious Admirer of Virgil, I
could wish that he had not discovered our Father's Nakedness. But after all, we
must confess that AEneas was none of the greatest Hero's, and that Virgil^ was
sensible of it himself. But what could he do? The Trojan on whom he was to
build the Roman Empire, had been already vanquished; he had lost his Country,
and was a Fugitive. Nay more, he had fought unsuccessfully with Diomedes, and
was only preserved from Death by his Mother Goddess, who received a Wound in
his Defense. So that Virgil bound as he was to follow the Footsteps of Homer,
who had thus described him, could reasonably have altered his Character, and
raised him in Italy to a much greater height of Prowess than he found him
formerly in Troy. Since therefore he could make no more of him in Valor, he
resolved not to give him that Virtue, as his Principal, but chose another,
which was Piety. It Is true this latter, in the Composition of a Hero, was not
altogether so shining as the former; but it entitled him more to the favor of
the Gods, and their Protection, in all his undertakings. And, which was the
Poets chiefest aim, made a nearer Resemblance betwixt AEneas and his Patron
Augustus Caesar, who, above all things, loved to be flattered for being Pious,
both to the Gods and his Relations. And that very Piety, or Gratitude, (call it
which you please,) to the Memory of his Uncle Julius, gave him the Preference
amongst the Soldiers to Mark Anthony; and consequently raised him to the
Empire. As for Personal Courage, that of Augustus was not pushing; and the
Poet, who was not ignorant of that Defect, for that reason, durst not ascribe
it, in the supreme degree, to him who was to represent his Emperor, under
another name: which was managed by him, with the most imaginable fineness: for
had Valor been set uppermost, Augustus must have yielded to Agrippa. After
all, this is rather to defend the Courtier, than the Poet; and to make his Hero
escape again, under the covert of a Cloud. Only we may add, what I think Bossu
says, That the Roman Commonwealth, being now changed into a Monarchy, Virgil
was helping to that Design; by in^inuating into the People the Piety of their
New Conqueror, to make them the better brook this Innovation; which was
brought on them by a Man, who was favored by the Gods: Yet we may observe,
that Virgil forgot not, upon occasion, to speak Honorably of AEneas, in point
of Courage, and that particularly in the Person of him by whom he was overcome.
For Diomedes compares him with Hector, and even with advantage.

Quic quid ap^d durae cessatum est moenia Trojae;
Hectoris, AEneaeque manu Victoria Grajum
Haesit, and in decumum vestigia rettulit annum:
Ambo animis, ambo insignes praestantibus armis;
Hic Pietate prior --
As for that particular Passage, cited by Monsieur St. Euremont, where Aeneas
shows the utmost fear, in the beginning of a Tempest: Extemplo AEneae solvuntur
frigore membra, etc. Why may it not be supposed, that having been long at Sea,
he might be well acquainted with the Nature of a Storm; and by the rough
beginning, foresee the increase and danger of it? At least, as a Father of his
People, his concernment might be greater for them, than for himself. And if so,
what the Poet takes from the merit of his Courage, is added to the prime virtue
of his Character, which was his Piety. Be this said, with all manner of Respect
and Deference, to the Opinion of Monsieur St. Euremont; amongst whose admirable
Talents, that of Penetration is not the least: He generally dives into the very
bottom of his Authors; searches into the inmost recesses of their Souls, and
brings up with him, those hidden Treasures which had escaped the Diligence of
others. His Examination of the Grand Alexandre, in my Opinion, is an admirable
piece of Criticism; and I doubt not, but that his Observations on the English
Theater had been as absolute in their kind, had he seen with his own Eyes, and
not with those of other Men. But conversing in a manner wholly with the Court,
which is not always the truest Judge, he has been unavoidably led into
Mistakes, and given to some of our Coursest Poets a Reputation abroad, which
they never had at home. ^ Had his Conversation in the Town been more general,
he had certainly received other Idea's on that Subject; and not transmitted
those Names into his own Country, which will be forgotten by Posterity in ours.

Thus I have contracted my Thoughts on a Large Subject: for whatever has been
said falls short of the true Character of Monsieur St. Euremont and his
Writings: and if the Translation you are about to read does not every where
come up to the Original, the Translator desires you to believe, that it is only
because that he has failed in his Undertaking.

I. Dryden.

THE TABLE.
REflections upon the diverse Genius's of the Roman People in the different
times of the Republic. Page. 1 Of the first Wars of the Romans. 14 Against the
Opinion of Livy, upon the imaginary War which he makes Alexander wage against
the Romans. 18 The Genius of the Romans at the time when Pyrrhus made War
against them. 27 Of the first Carthaginian War. 38 Of the second Punick War. 45
Upon the end of the second War of Carthage. 71 Of Augustus his Government, and
Genius. 85 Of Tiberius and his Genius. 105 Observations upon Salust and
Tacitus. 116 The Comparison of Caesar and Alexander. 128 A Discourse upon the
French Historians. 148 Reflections upon the French Translators. 174 Some
Observations upon the Taste and Judgment of the French. 188 Interest in Persons
altogether corrupted. 197 The too Rigid Virtue. 202 A Judgment upon those
Sciences which a Gentleman should apply himself to. 208 A Discourse upon the
Great Alexander. 216 A Judgment upon Seneca, Plutarch and Petronius. 133 Chap.
II. and III. 247, 250 Maxim, That one ought never to be wanting to his Friends.
258 Observations upon the Maxim, That one ought to despise Fortune, and not
care for the Court. 276 Man that is desirous of knowing all things, is ignorant
of himself. 278 Of Study and Conversation. 292 A Discourse upon the word Vast,
to the Gentlemen of the Academy. 302 St. Euremont to the Modern L^ontium. 332
Reflections upon Religion. 342 A Fragment of Friendship without Friendship. 348
The Character of a Woman that is not, and never will be found. 370
ERRATA.
PAge 16. Line 13. for Arms read Armies. Ibid. l. 15. r. Papirius Cursor without
a Comma between. Ibid. l. 22. after great leave out of. p. 21. l. 9. after
things r. were. p. 26. l. 15. before Carthaginians r. the. p. 36. l. 15. for
Reason r. Reasons. p. 39. l. 26. for Eye r. Eyes. p. 52. l. 1. after and r. 1.
p. 73. l. 6. for sussered r. suffered. p. 97. l. 6. dele and. p. 109. l. 14. r.
in spite of our will. p. 110. l. 3. for understanding r. undertaking. p. 126.
l. 6. for comes r. come. p. 138. r. Arbella with (...). p. 141. l. 24. r.
Par^thians. p. 53. l. 25. r be but once. p. 164. l. 18. for is r. in. p. 205.
l. 20. after none r. a full stop. p. 218. l. 18 r. before him, like. p. 219. l.
12. for make r. may. p. 220. l. 9. for w^ r. who. p. 223. l. 13. after him r.
go. p. 133. l. 18. for wet r. whet. p. 241. l. 5. after Gentlemanlike r. Men.
p. 320. l. 25. for uncer^^in r. uncertain.

REFLECTIONS Upon the Diverse GENIUS'S Of the Roman People, In the different
times of the REPUBLIC.
CHAP. I.
IT is with the Original of People, as with the Genealogies of private persons,
they cannot bear with low and obscure beginnings: these are purely imaginary,
those show themselves in Fables. Men are naturally defective in many things,
and naturally vain; amongst whom the Founders of States, Legislators and
Conquerors, little satisfied with their Human condition, whose defects and
infirmities they had a sense of, have frequently enquired after the causes of
their merits elsewhere; from whence it comes to pass that the Ancients held
themselves obliged to some Deity or other, either upon the account of
descending from it, or el^e because they acknowledged a particular Care and
Protection from its Tutelary Virtue. Some persons have been under a seeming
persuasion thereof, purely for the sake of persuading others, and have made an
Ingenious Use of an Advantageous Deceit, which might afford a Veneration for
their persons, and a submission to their Authority. There have been those that
have flattered themselves with such thoughts, and seemed to be in earnest; The
Contempt they used men with, and the confident opinion of their own
extraordinary qualities, has occasioned their fantastical search after an
Original different from ours; but it has been more frequent that some Nations
to make themselves Honored, and through a Spirit of Gratitude to those that
had rendered them some very important Services, have given occasion for these
sort of Fables.

The Romans have not been exempt from this Vanity. They are not contented with
their Relation to Venus by AEneas, who led the Trojans into Italy, they have
refreshed their Alliance with the Gods by the Fabulous Nativity of Romulus,
whom they supposed to be the Son of the God Mars, and whom they Deif^ed himself
after his Death.

His Successor Numa had nothing of Divine in his Race, but the Sanctity of his
Life afforded him a particular Communication with the Goddess Egeria, which
Commerce was of no small assistance to him toward the establishment of his
Ceremonies.

In short, if you will believe them, the Destinies had no other cares upon them
than the Foundation of Rome, and so far, that Providence seemed Industrious to
adapt the various Inclinations of its Kings, to the different Necessities of
that People. I hate admirations founded upon Tales, or established through the
Error of false Judgments. There are so many realities to be admired amongst the
Romans, that to be willing to advance 'em by Fables, is to do them wrong; to be
truly serviceable to their Memory, is to rescind all vain Commendations: In
this design I am inclined to consider them by themselves, without any
subjection to such and such opinions, which are not believed, and yet are kept
up. It would be a tedious piece of business to give an exact account of every
thing, but I shall not amuse my self about the particulars of actions; I Will be
content with pursuing the Genius of some memorable times, and the different
Spirit, wherewith Rome has been observed to be variously animated.

The Kings have had so little a share in the Grandeur of the Roman People, that
they don't oblige me to very particular considerations: It Is with reason that
Historians have entitled their Reign the Infancy of Rome, for it is certain
that under them she has had but a very feeble motion. To be convinced of the
little Action they were concerned in, it suffices to know that seven Kings at
the end of Two Hundred, so many years, have not left behind them a Dominion
much larger than that of Parma or Mantua: One single Battle now a days gained
in very narrow places, would afford a greater extent of Land. As for those
various and singular Talents which are ascribed to each of them by a mysterious
Providence, there is nothing of any more consideration, than what has happened
to many Princes before; it is an extraordinary thing to find a Successor endowed
with the same Qualities of his Predecessor: The one Ambitious and Active,
thinks nothing of Value but War: Another, who naturally loves Repose, thinks
the finest Policy in the World consists in keeping himself in Peace; this makes
Justice his principal Virtue, that Prince is Zealous after nothing, but the
observance of Religion; so that each pursues his own natural Disposition, and
is delighted in the exercise of his Talent; now to make a sort of a Miracle of
so ordinary a thing, is it not very ridiculous? But further, This Difference of
Genius is so far distant from procuring any Advantage to the Roman People, that
their small increase under the Kings, in my Judgment, is to be imputed thereto;
certainly nothing can be a greater hindrance to a Progress than this difference
of Genius, for it oftentimes is the occasion of quitting the real Interest,
which is not understood, by a new Spirit, which would introduce something that
one has a better notion of, but which for the most part is inconsistent with
the forementioned advantage.

Allowing you could come at all you intended by these new Institutions, yet it
happens many times from the diversity of applications, that several things were
fortunately enough begun, without arriving to a happy accomplishment.

The disposition of affairs was all of a piece under Romulus. In Numa's Reign
nothing was performed, but the establishment of Priests, and Religious persons.
Tu^lus Hostilius found it no easy Province to Convert men from a pleasant
amusement, to the application of War; this Discipline was hardly established,
but that Ancu^ appeared with inclinations to render the City commodious, and
magni^icent.

The first Tarq^in, to give more Dignity to the Senate, and more of Majesty to
the Government, invented Ornaments, and gave marks of Distinction.

The Principal Study of Servius, was to have an exact account of the estates of
the Romans, and according to those, to divide them by Tribes, that so they
might contribute with Justice and Proportion to the Public Nece^^ities.

Tarquin the Proud, says Florus, was extremely serviceable to his Country,
when he gave occasion by his Tyranny to establish the Republic; this is the
Discourse of a Roman, who, although born in the Reign of Emperors, does not
think it ami^s to prefer Liberty to the Empire.

My Opinion is, that the Commonwealth may be justly admired, without admiring
the manner of its Constitution. But to return to these Kings, it is certain that
each had his particular Talent, but not one, a capacity large enough. Rome
should have had some of those great Monarchs, that know how to embrace all
things by the Advantage of a Universal Genius, and not to be under the
necessity of borrowing from different Princes, the diverse Institutions, which
one might easily have composed, during his particular Life.

The Reign of Tarquin is as well known to the World, as the establishment of
their Liberty. Pride, Cruelty, and Avarice, were his chiefest qualities, but he
wanted dexterity to manage his Tyranny.

He had much of Injustice and Violence in him, his Designs ill contrived, and
his measures ill taken. To define his conduct in a few words, he knew neither
how to Govern according to the Laws, nor Reign against them: In a State so
violent for the People, and dangerous for the Prince, there was nothing
expected, but an opportunity for Liberty, when the death of the miserable
Lucretia, presented one to their view.

This Virtuous Lady, so cruel to her self, could not Pardon her self for the
Crime of another, she Stabbed her self with her own proper hands, after she had
been ravish^d by Sextus, and commended the Revenge of her Honor to Brutus and
Collatinus. 'Twas then that this constraint of Humors, so long since penned up,
made the first Rupture.

It is incredible how all people agreed to revenge the death of Lucretia; the
People, to whom the slightest matter relating thereunto served for a specious
reason, were more incensed against Sextus for the Violence Lucretia offered her
self, than if he had really himself been the Author of it; and as it generally
happens in Tragical events, by the mixture of Pity and Indignation, every one
augmented the Horror of the Crime, by a Compassion for this Celebrated, but
Unfortunate Virtue.

You may observe in Livy, the very least particulars of the concern and conduct
of the Romans, an odd mixture of Fury and Wisdom, very ordinary in great
Revolutions, where Violence produces the same effect^, that Heroic Virtue
does when accompanied with Discipline; It Is certain that Brutus made an
admirable use of the Dispositions of the People; but to describe him well, is a
Task of no mean difficulty. The Grandeur of a Republic admired by the whole
World, occasions an admiration of the Founder thereof without an examination of
his Actions.

Every thing that appears Extraordinary, appears Great if it be Successful; as
every thing which is Great, appears Foolish, when there is a contrary Event. It
were necessary to have lived in his time, and to have had some experience of
his person, to be perfectly satisfied whether he Killed his Sons by a motion of
Heroic Virtue, or the hardness of a Cruel and Unnatural Humor.

As for me, I Am of Opinion that there is much of his Conduct owing to Design:
His profound Dissimulation under the Reign of Tarquin, as well as his industry
to chase Collatinus from the Consulship, is to me matter of a convincing
nature. It might very well be, that the Sentiments of Liberty made him forget
those of Nature: It might also be that his own proper Security prevailed with
him above all things, that in this hard and melancholy choice of undoing
himself, or undoing his Children, so urgent an Interest overcame in him the
safety of his Family. Who knows if Ambition had not a share in this action?
Collatin ruined himself through a a natural affection for his Nephews; Brutus
rendered himself Master of the Public by the Rigorous Punishment of his own
Sons. That which may with assurance be affirmed is this, that there was
something of Cruelty in his Nature, that was the Genius of the time; a
disposition as Savage as it is free, did then, and has very long since produced
Virtues, that are not rightly apprehended.

CHAP. II.
IN the first times of the Republic, people were strangely furious for Liberty
and the Public Good; the affection they bore to their Country, leaving no
Obligation to the motion of Nature; the Zeal of the Citizen robbed the Man of
himself. Sometimes through a Savage Justice, the Father caused his Son to Die
for the performance of some extraordinary exploit contrary to his Commands;
sometimes he made himself a Victim, through a Superstition as Cruel as it was
Ridiculous; as if the intention of Society were to oblige us to Dye, when it
was instituted to encourage us to live with less Danger, and with greater
Freedom. Valor had I know not what of Cruelty in it, and an Obstinacy of
Fighting, supplied the place of Discipline in War. In Conquests was as yet
observed nothing of Generosity, it was not an aspiring Spirit which sought
after an Ambitious Superiority over others: To speak with something of
Propriety, the Romans were Violent Neighbors, who were disposed to exclude
from their Possessions the Legitimate Owners, and to Manure the Lands of other
People by Force; oftentimes the Victorious Consul was in no better a Condition
than the Conquered People; the refusing the Spoil has cost him his Life, the
division of it has caused his Banishment; they have refused to go to War under
the Conduct of some particular Generals, and denied to Conquer under others.
Sedition was easily taken for the effect of Liberty, which was supposed to be
prejudiced by the least mark of Observance, even to those Magistrates that they
themselves had made, and those Captains whom they had Chosen.

The Genius of this People was as Rustical as it was Wild; Dictators were
sometimes taken from the Plough, which they took to again after the end of
their Expedition, not so much by a preference of an innocent and undisturbed
Condition, as for having been accustomed to a sort of life so unpolite and
unsociable. As for that Frugality which is so extremely boasted of, it was not
a retrenchment of superfluities, or a voluntary abstinence from things
agreeable, but a gross usage of what they presently enjoyed. '^is true they
were not Ambitious after more Riches, because they did not understand them,
they were content with a little, because they conceived no more, those
Pleasures too they omitted, of which they had no Idea. Notwithstanding for want
of a due reflection, these old Romans were taken for the most considerable
persons of the World; for their Posterity has Consecrated the very least
particulars of their Actions, whether it is, that people naturally respect
beginners of Great Actions, or that their Posterity, glorious throughout, were
desirous that their Ancestors should be Masters of Virtues, when they were not
of Greatness. I know very well that one might allege some particular Actions
of an extreme Virtue, which will serve for Patterns to all Ages; but these
Actions were done by certain persons, which did in no measure resemble the
Genius of the time, or else they were Actions of so singular a nature, which
proceeding from Men by Accident, had in them nothing common with the ordinary
course of their lives.

It is to be acknowledged nevertheless, that manners so Unpolished and Rustical
were agreeable enough to a Rising Commonwealth. This roughness of Humor,
which never yielded to Difficulties, established Rome on a stronger Foundation,
than one more tractable, more enlightened, and rational, could have done.

This Quality considered in it self, to speak apprehensively, was very Savage,
which deserves no respect but by the recommendation of Antiquity, and because
it has afforded a Beginning to the greatest Power upon Earth.

CHAP. III.
Of the First Wars of the Romans.
THE First Wars of the Romans were of very great Importance in their respect,
but little remarkable, if you except the extraordinary actions of some
particulars. It is certain that the Interest of the Commonwealth could not
possibly be greater, since there was some likelihood of their returning under
the Subjection of the Tarquins; since Rome could not preserve it self from the
resentments of Coriolanus, but by the Tears of his Mother; and that the defense
of the Capitol was the ultimate refuge of the Romans, seeing that after the
defeat of their Forces, their very City was taken and Sacked by the Gauls. But
considering these Expeditions in themselves, one shall find that they were
rather Tumults, than real Wars; and to speak the Truth, if so be the
Lacedaemonians had seen the kind of Warlike Discipline which the Romans
practiced in those times, I question not, but they would have taken for
Barbarians, a Nation, that took off the Reins of their Horses, to make their
Cavalry the more impetuous, a Nation, who depended on Geese and Dogs for their
Guard, as a Security sufficient, whose negligence they punished, and
recompensed their Watchfulness. This gross Custom of wageing War, was of no
small continuance, the Romans have purchased many considerable Conquests with
an indifferent Capacity: they were a people of bravery enough, and but little
understood, who were concerned with Adversaries less Courageous and more
ignorant, but because the Captains were nominated Consuls and Dictators, their
Troops called Legions, and their Soldiers Romans, there has been more ascribed
to the Vanity of these Names, than the Truth of things; and without examining
the distinction of Times and Persons, people would imagine, that they were the
same Arms under the Commands of Camillus, Manlius, Cincinnatus, Papirius,
Cursor, and Curious Dentatus, as under Scipio, Marius, Sylla, Pompey and Caesar.

That which may be affirmed to have been in the Primitive times of the Romans,
is an extraordinary Courage^ a great Austerity of Life, a great Affection for
their Country, and an equal Valor; in the latter times, a great of Discipline
in War, and every thing else, but withal abundance of Corruption.

From thence it is come to pass, that persons of the highest Rank, to whom Vice
and Luxury were become odious, have not been satisfied to admire the Probity of
their Ancestors, if they did not extend their admiration to the utmost degree,
without distinguishing wherein their deserts consisted, and where not. Those
that have found some occasion to complain of the Age they lived in, have
afforded a Thousand Encomiums to Antiquity, which never exacted from them the
least sufferance; and those who are so Morose as to censure and blame every
thing that is in view, by the strength of their Imagination make that estimable
which is no more. The most reputable persons have not been destitute of
Judgment, and knowing that all Ages have their Imperfection and Virtues, they
made a prudent Scrutiny into the Time of their Ancestors and their own; but
they were obliged to admire with the People, and to exclaim sometimes suitably
enough, sometimes without reason: majores nostri, majores nostri, when they
observed others to cry out in so general an admiration. The Historians have not
been wanting in the same respect to the Ancients, and making a Hero of every
Consul, they have supposed every one, that has been very serviceable to the
Republic, to be of a Consummated Virtue.

I acknowledge that it was very deserving to serve it, but that is a different
case from what we are upon; and it may truly be said, that the excellent
Citizens lived amongst the ancient Romans, and the most accomplished Generals
amongst the latter.

CHAP. IV.
Against the Opinion of Livy, upon the Imaginary War which he makes Alexander
wage against the Romans.
I Admire to what degree might extend the Opinion, that Livy entertained of
those ancient Romans, nor can I comprehend, how a person of such excellent
sense, could search out an Idea off from his Subject to reason so falsely, upon
the imaginary War, wherein he engages Alexander: He makes this Conqueror
descend into Italy, with a small number of Forces he then had, when he was no
more than a little King of Macedon. He ought to have recollected, that a simple
General of the Carthaginians has passed the Alps with an Army of 80000 men.

And this does not suffice, he affords as much capacity in War to Papirius
Cursor, and to all the Consuls of that time, as to Alexander himself* when to
speak the Truth, they had but a very imperfect knowledge thereof: For the
Romans at that time made no great Advantage of their Cavalry, their Horses were
so little assistant to them, that they used to dismount in the very heat of the
Engagement, and mount again to pursue their Foes, when defeated: It Is certain
that the Romans made their Strength to consist in their Infantry, accounting
the benefit, which might be received from the Horse, of little importance. The
Legions particularly had in great misprision the Adversaries Horse, till the
War of Pyrrhus, where the Thessalians gave 'em sufficient cause to change their
Opinions: But the Cavalry of Hannibal occasioned to them since, great Terror,
and those Invincible Legions were for some time so horribly frighted, that they
durst not appear upon the least Plain.

To return to the time of Papirius, one was hardly acquainted with the notion
of Cavalry, there was no skill either in Posting or Encamping in any Order; for
they themselves acknowledge, that they learned to form their Camp by the
disposition of that of Pyrrhus, and before were used to Encamp always in
Confusion: They were no less ignorant of Engines, and other works, necessary to
form a considerable Siege; which proceeded either from the slackness of
Invention of a People, not at all Industrious, or else because their Armies
were never of a long continuance, whereby there was no opportunity afforded
Men, to bring things to Perfection. Rarely was one and the same Army observed
to pass from the Conduct of one Consul, to that of another; and yet more rarely
was the Captain of the Legions continued in his Command, after the expiration
of his Term; which management was admirable, for the preservation of the
Republic, but very much repugnant to the establishment of a good Army. To let
you see that the cause of this, was the Jealousy of Liberty; you may observe,
that after the defeat of Thrasimene, at what time they were obliged to create a
Dictator, Fabius had scarce stopped the Torrent of Hannibal by the Wisdom of his
Conduct, but they put Consuls in his place: All things to be dreaded from the
Fury of Hannibal, nothing to be feared from the moderation of Fabius; and yet
the apprehension of a remote Evil, carried them beyond the pre^sent Necessity.

It is most certain, that the two Consuls managed themselves with Prudence in
this War, and ruined Hannibal insensibly, as they established the
Commonwealth, when by the same reason Terentius Varro supplied their room,
Presumptuous and Ignorant, who gave Battle at Cannae, and lost it, and reduced
the Romans to that extremity, that their Virtue, as extraordinary as it was,
was not so much instrumental in their preservation, as the carelessness of
Hannibal. There was another Inconvenience, which hindered the Conduct of the
Armies from being always given to the most Experienced and Capable. The Two
Consuls could not be Patricians, and the Patricians would not agree, that both
should be of the Plebeian Order. For the Generality it happened, that the first
which was nominated, was a person agreeable to the People, who owed his
Preferment to Favor; the other, whom they had a mind to choose for his Merit,
was oftentimes excluded, either through the opposition of the People, if he was
a Patrician, or by the Intreagues of the Senators, when he was not of their
Rank. Amongst the Macedonians the contrary was observed, where the Captains and
Soldiers stood together from their first establishment: They were like the
Veterans of Philip, that I may so speak, renewed from time to time, and
augmented by Alexander, as his occasions required. Here the Courage of the
Cavalry equaled the resolution of the Phalanx, which indeed might be preferred
to the Legion, inasmuch as the Legions, in the War of Pyrrhus, were afraid to
oppose some miserable Phalanxes of the Macedonians got together. Here they were
equally expert in the War, relating to a Siege, or the Field. Never was Army
concerned against so many Adversaries, or had seen so many different Climates.
If so be the diversity of Countries, wherein War is exercised, and the variety
of Nations, which are brought under submission, can form our experience, how
should the Romans enter in comparison with the Macedonians, a people that never
went out of Italy, nor beheld other Foes than a few inconsiderable Neighbors
of their Republic? The Discipline was in reality great amongst them, but the
Capacity of an indifferent nature. Even since the Commonwealth was become more
puissant, they have suffered the disgrace of being defeated, as often as they
made War against experienced Captains; Pyrrhus overcame them by the advantage
of Conduct, which made Fabricius declare, that the Epirotes did not conquer the
Romans, but that the Consul had been Vanquished by the King of the Epirotes.

In the first Carthaginian War, Regulus defeated the people of Carthage in
Africa in so many Engagements, that they were already looked upon as Tributaries
to Rome. They were upon Conditions, which seemed insupportable, when Xantippus
a Lacedaemonian, arrived with a Body of Auxiliaries. The Grecian a Man of
Valor and Experience, informed himself of the Order and Discipline of the
Carthaginians, together with the conduct of the Romans. Having fully instructed
himself, he found both one and the other very ignorant in War, and by his
frequent discourse thereof amongst the Soldiers, the noise came to the very
Senate of Carthage, in what little esteem this Lacedaemonian held their Foes.
The Magistrates at length had the curiosity to give attention to him, where
Xantippus, after he had given them a sense of their past omissions, encouraged
them to put him at the head of their Troops, through a promise of Victory.

In a miserable State where all things are despaired of, a Man is more easily
persuaded rather to confide in another, than himself; so those Suspicions fatal
to the merit of Strangers, came to yield to the present Necessity, and the most
powerful, urged with an apprehension of their ruin, abandoned themselves to
the Conduct of Xantippus without Envy. I should make a History instead of
alleging an Example, to extend my self any further; it suffices to say, That
Xantippus becoming the manager of affairs, altered extremely the Carthaginian
Army, and knew so well how to prevail over the Ignorance of the Romans, that he
obtained one of the most entire Victories over them, that ever was won. The
Carthaginians out of Danger, began to be ashamed of owing their Preservation to
a Stranger, and returning to the perfidiousness of their Nature, they thought
to extinguish their disgrace, by ridding themselves of him, who had rid them of
the Romans: It is not well known, whether they put him to Death, or that he was
so Fortunate as to escape; but this is most assured, that through the absence
of this person, the Romans most easily regained the Superiority they had over
them before.

If you would repair to the second Punick War, you will observe, that the vast
advantages, which Hannibal received from the Romans, proceeded from the
capacity of the one, and the small ability of the other; and in effect, when he
would put a confidence in his Soldiers, he never said that his Enemies wanted
Courage or Resolution, for they experienced the contrary often enough, but he
assured them, that they were concerned with a people little dexterous in War.

It is with this Science, as with Arts and Politeness, it passes from one
Nation to another, and Reigns at diverse times, and in different places. Every
one knows, that the Graecians enjoyed it to a high degree, Philip gained it
from them, and all things arrived to their perfection under Alexander, when
Alexander alone corrupted himself: It continued still with his Successors:
Hannibal^ brought it amongst the Carthaginians; and for all the Vanity of the
Romans, they have received it from him by the experience of their Defeats,
their reflections upon their mistakes, and the observance of the Conduct of
their Foes. You will be easily convinced of this, if you consider, that the
Romans did not begin to make resistance against Hannibal in their utmost
Bravery; for the most Valiant Persons were lost in Battle. Then there was
Arming of Slaves, and Armies composed of unexperienced Soldiers. The truth is
this, that they were prejudicial to him only, when the Consuls became more
expert, and that the Romans in general knew better how to make War.

CHAP. V.
The Genius of the Romans at the time when Pyrrhus waged War against them.
IT is not my intention to enlarge my self here, upon the Wars of the Romans, I
should then ramble from the Subject I have proposed to my self: but it seems to
me, that to apprehend the Ge / nius of the times, one must consider in a people
the different affairs, which they have been concerned in, and as those of War
are without doubt the most remarkable, so it is there Men ought to be
particularly observant, seeing that the disposition of Tempers, and the good as
well as the ill Qualities, appeared with the greatest Figures. At the beginning
of the Commonwealth, the Roman people, as I have elsewhere said, had something
of wildness in them; afterward this Humor turned into Austerity, and became a
rigid Virtue, far remote from politeness or agreeableness, and repugnant to the
very least appearance of Corruption. These were the manners of the Romans, when
Pyrr^us pas^ed into Italy to relieve the Tarentines. The Science of War was but
indifferent amongst them, that of other things was unknown. As for Arts, either
they had none at all, or they were very gross; there was a want of Invention,
and they knew not wh^t belonged to Industry: but there was a good Order, and a
Discipline exactly observed, an admirable greatness of Courage, and more
Integrity used with the Enemy, than commonly with the Citizen. Justice,
Sincerity, and Innocence, were common Virtues; Riches were already understo^d,
and the use thereof amongst particulars prohibi^ed. The being Impartial went
ev^n to Excess, every one making it a Duty to neglect their own affairs for the
Service of the Public, the Zeal of which did then supply the room of all other
things.

After having spoken of these Virtues, its necessary to come to the Actions,
which have made them known. A Prince is well esteemed of, who by opposing Force
to Force, employs nothing but open and lawful means to rid himself of a
Formidable Enemy. But as if we were obliged to preserve those that are disposed
to ruin us, to secure them from the Snares that are laid for them by others;
and to save them from a Domestic Treason, is the effect of an unparalleled
Generosity.

Behold one instance hereof in the time I am speaking of; The Romans being
defeated by Pyrrhus, and in a doubtful State, whether they should re-establish
their affairs, or be constrained to yield, had in their power the loss of this
Prince, and made the following use thereof.

A Physician, in whom Pyrrhus reposed a confidence, offered his Service to
Fabricius, to Poison his Master, provided he might have a reward proportionable
to the importance of the action. Fabricius scared at the Horror of the Crime,
forthwith with gives notice of it to the Senate, who detesting with the Consul,
so unworthy an Action, sent to advise Pyrrhus to take care of his person,
adding, that the Roman Peoples temper was, to overcome him by their proper
Arms, and not to free themselves of an Enemy by the Treason of his own People.

Py^rhus, either sensible of the Obligation, or astonished at this greatness of
Courage, was more desirous than ever to make a Peace; and to dispose the Romans
thereto with the greater easiness, he remitted 200 Prisoners without Ransom; he
sent Presents to the most considerable persons, to the Ladies also, and
neglected nothing under a pretense of Gratitude, to bring Corruption amongst
them. The Romans, who had not preserved Pyrrhus but by a persuasion of Virtue,
would receive nothing that had the least Air of Acknowledgment. They sent to
him an equal number of Prisoners, the Presents were refused by both Sexes, and
all the Answer that he had, was, That they would never hearken to a Peace, till
he was removed out of Italy.

Amongst an Infinite number of Virtuous things, that were practiced at this
time, the great and impartial Natures of Fabricius and Curious, who went to a
voluntary Poverty, were admired amongst the rest. 'Twould be a piece of
Injustice not to allow them a great approbation; notwithstanding it is to be
considered that it was more the general Quality of this time, than a Virtue
peculiar to these two Men. And in effect since Riches were punished with
Disgrace, and Poverty rewarded with Honor, it appears to me, that there was
need of some Dexterity, to know well how to be Poor. By this means they raised
themselves to the chiefest Employments of the Republic, where by the exercise
of a great Power, they stood in greater want of Moderation than Patience. I
cannot blame a Poverty that was Honored through the World, it never wants any
thing, but what our Interest, or Pleasure is concerned in. To profess the
Truth, these sorts of Privations are of a delicious Nature, it is affording the
Mind an exquisite Relish of what the sense is Robbed of.

But who knows if Fabricius did not follow his humor, there are some persons
that are disordered upon a multitude and variety of Superfluities, who in
repose would taste things Commodious and even Necessaries with Delight. In the
mean time, those that have but a false knowledge of things, admire the
appearance of moderation, when the exactness of Judgment would show the small
extent of a confined Spirit, or the little action of some negligent Soul. With
those persons, to be content with little, is to rescind less of Pleasure than
of Pain. Further, when it is not despicable to be Poor, we are in want of fewer
necessaries to live in Poverty with Satisfaction, than to live magnificently
with Riches. Can you imagine the Condition of a Religious person to be unhappy,
when he is considered in his Order, and is of some repute in the World? He
makes a Vow of Poverty, which frees him from a Thousand Cares, and leaves him
the desire of nothing that is agreeable to his Profession and his Life. Those
who live magnificently, for the most part are the real Poor, they contend for
Money on all sides with Inquietude and Disorder, to maintain the Pleasures of
others; and whilst they expose their abundance, which strangers have more
advantage of than they, in private consider their Necessity, with their Wives
and Children, through the importunity of Tyrannizing Creditors, and the
miserable State of their affairs, which they behold in a tendency to Ruin.

Let us return to our Romans, from whom we are insensibly stepped aside. Admire
who will, the Poverty of Fabricius, I commend his Prudence, and find him very
much advised, to have had but one Salt-seller of Silver, to afford him the
credit of chasing from the Senate, a man that had been twice Consul, a
Triumpher, and Dictator, because in his person they observed something more,
besides that it was the humor of the time, the real Interest was, to have no
other than that of the Republic.

Men have established Society by a motion of particular Interest, imagining to
live more pleasant and secure in Company, than they did in frights, when in
solitudes; seeing they find therein, not only an Advantage, but Glory and
Authority, Can they better do, than devote themselves wholly to the Public,
from whence they attract considerably more?

The Decij, who Sacrificed themselves for the good of a Society, whom they went
to forsake, seem to me truly Enthusiastic; but these people here, appear very
rational in the Passion they had for a grateful Republic, which was at least
as careful in their respect, as they could be in hers.

I represent Rome in this time as a true Community, where every one lets alone
his Private good, to f^nd a better in that of the Body he belongs to; this
Temper subsists no where but in small Republics: In great ones, all appearance
of Poverty is contemned; and ^tis much, when the extraordinary use of Riches is
not there approved of. Had Fabricius lived in the Grandeur of the Republic,
either he must have changed his Manners, or he had not been useful to his
Country; and if so be, the reputable Men of the latter time, had existed in
that of Fabricius, either they had made their Integrity more rigid, or they
would have been chased from the Senate as, corrupted Citizens.

After having spoken of the Romans, it is reasonable to touch a little of
Pyrrhus, who comes in here naturally amongst such variety of things.

He was the most Expert Captain of his time, even in the opinion of Hannibal,
who placed him immediately after Alexander, and before himself, as it seems to
me, through modesty. He joined the curiousness of Negotiations, to the Science
of War; but withal, could never make a solid establishment for himself; If he
knew how to gain Battles, he failed in the issue of War; if he drew people to
his Alliance, he knew not how to maintain them there; these two Noble Talents
unseasonably employed, ruined the Work-manship of both.

When he had succeeded to his Wish in Fighting, his Thoughts were immediately
bent to Treat; and as if he had kept Intel^igence with his Enemies, he
obstructed his own Progress. Had he known how to win the affections of a
People, his first Thoughts would have been to have made them subject: From
hence it came, that he lost his Friends without gaining his Enemies; for the
Conquered took the Spirit of the Victors, and refused the Peace that was
offered them, and they not only withdrew their assistance, but considered how
to get rid of an Allie, who showed the temper of a real Master.

A Procedure so extraordinary, ought in part to be ascribed to the nature of
Pyrrhus, partly to the different Interests of his Ministers. There was amongst
the rest, two Men near his Person, whose advice he generally followed, Cineas
and Milon. Cineas being Eloquent, Ingenious, fit for and skilled in
Negotiations, insinuated the Thoughts of Peace, every time he Debated upon War;
and when the Ambitious Humor of Pyrrhus had transported him beyond his Reason;
he patiently expected Difficulties, when managing the first distasts of his
Master, he presently turned his Inclinations to Peace, to the end of re entering
upon his Talent, and putting the affairs in his own dispo^al.

Milon was a Man experienced in War, who brought back every thing to force, he
forgot nothing to hinder Treaties; or else to break them off, advised to
overcome Impediments; and if so be, there was no subduing Adversary Nations, by
all means to reduce the Allies to Subjection. As far as one may guess, behold
the Rules by which Pyrrhus governed, as well by others as himself: It may be
said in his Favor, that he was concerned with Powerful Nations, that could
better shift than he; and again, that he won Battles by his Valor, that such a
small and weak State as his, would not afford him the means to bring a long War
to a Conclusion. In short, to look upon him through the qualities of his
Person, and his Actions, he was an admirable Prince, who yields in no respect
to any of the Ancients. To consider in general, the Success of his Designs, and
the end of affairs, he will often appear to have been out of the way, and lose
much of his reputation. To conclude, he possessed himself of Macedon, and was
thence expelled; his beginnings in Italy were fortunate, from whence he was
forced to retire; he saw himself Master of Sicily, where he was not permitted
to reside.

CHAP. VI.
Of the First Carthaginian War.
THE War of Pyrrhus enlivened the Romans, and Inspired them with Thoughts,
which they had not yet entertain'^; to speak the Truth, they entered upon it
very Rude and Presumptuous, with much Temerity and Ignorance; but they had a
great Courage to sustain it; And as they found every thing new with so
experienced an Enemy, they became without doubt, more industrious, ^and more
enlightened than they were before They found ou^ a way to secure themselves from
the Elephants, which had put the Legions in disorder at the first Engagement;
they learned to avoid the Plains, and searched advantageous places against a
Cavalry^ which they had despised without Cause. They were at length instructed
to form their Camp by that of Pyrrhus, after having admired the Order and
Distinction of Troops, which encamped with them in Confusion. As for the things
which relate purely to the Mind, although the Harangue of old Appi^^ drove
Cineas from Rome, yet the Eloquence of Cineas did not cease to please, and his
dexterity was very agreeable.

The Presents that were offered, notwithstanding the Refusal, gave a Veneration
for those that could make them; and Curious, so much honored for his Impartial
Virtue, was still the more, when he showed them in his Triumph, Gold, Silver,
Pictures, and Statues. 'Twas then understood, that there were in other places
things more excellent than in Italy.

Thus new Ideas, that I may so speak, made new Inolinations; and the Roman
people, taken with an unknown Magnificence, lost those old Opinions, where the
habit of Poverty was no less concerned than Virtue.

Curiosity was excited in the Citizens, even their hearts began to feel with
emotion, what the Eye had begun to see with pleasure; and when their
understandings were cleared, there appeared real desires for things abroad.
Some particular persons did yet preserve the ancient continence, as it has
happened since, and in the most corrupted time of the Republic; but at length,
there was a general desire of passing the Seas, to establish themselves in
places where Pyrrhus knew how to find so much Wealth. Behold properly, from
whence proceeds the first Carthaginian War; the Succor given to the Tarentines
was the pretext thereof, the Conquest of Sicily the true Occasion.

After having said by what motives the Romans disposed themselves to this War,
it is necessary, in few words, to show what their Genius was at that time.
Their principal Qualities in my Judgment, were Courage and Resolution.

To undertake things of the greatest difficulty, not to be frighted with any
danger, not to be discouraged with any loss. In all the rest the Carthaginians
had over them a very great Superiority, whether through Industry or Experience
at Sea, or else their Wealth, which afforded 'em the Traffic of the whole
World, when the Romans, naturally poor enough, went to exhaust themselves in
the War of Pyrrhus.

To speak the Truth, their Valor was instead of all things, a good Success
encouraged them to the pursuit of a greater, and a contrary event did nothing
but exasperate them the more. It happened directly otherwise in the
Carthaginian affairs, who became careless in good Fortune, and easily dejected
in Adversity. Besides the different nature of these two Nations, the different
constitution of the Republics contributed much thereto. Carthage was
established upon Commerce, and Rome founded upon Armies. The first employed
Strangers in their Wars, and Citizens in their Traffic: The other made
themselves Citizens of the whole World, and of Citizens Soldiers: The Romans
breathed after nothing but War, even those that went not there, for having been
formerly concerned, or else through the necessity of going one day.

At Carthage they always demanded Peace upon the first Inconvenience that was
Threatened, as well to get rid of the Strangers, as to return to Trade. One may
yet add this difference, That the Carthaginians have done nothing that is great,
but by the Valor of particular Persons; where the Roman People has often
re^established by their Constancy, what the Imprudence or Cowardice of their
Generals had lost.

All these things considered, we need not be astonished at the Romans remaining
Victorious, for they had the principal qualities, which render one People
Master of another. As the Idea of Riches made the Romans desirous of subduing
Sicily, so the Conquest of Sicily, made them desire to enjoy those Riches which
they had got.

The Peace with the Carthaginians, after so rude a War, inspired a Spirit of
Repose, and that Repose produced the Ta^t of Plea^ures: It was then the Romans
introduced the first pieces of the Theater, and made a discovery of their first
Magnificence. They began to have a curiosity for Shows, and an affection for
Pleasures.

The Proceedings at Law, although Enemies to Joy, did not cease to increase,
every one having recourse to the Public Justice, according as that of
Particular persons corrupted.

Intemperance occasioned new Distempers, and Physicians were established to
cure the Maladys, from which Continence had formerly secured the Romans.

A^varic^ caused some little Wars, weakness made great ones apprehended. If so
be necessity obliged the undertaking of on^, it was begun with displeasure, and
they were glad when it was ended.

They demanded Money from the Carth^gin^a^^, which they did not owe, when they
were employed in the reduction of their Rebels; and they used all the cautions
in the World, not to break with them, when affairs were a little accommodated.

So that it was sometimes Injuries, sometimes Considerations, always Averseness
or Fear; and certainly one may say, that the Romans knew how to live neither as
Friends nor Enemies: for they offended the Carthaginians, and suffered them to
re-establish themselves, giving cause enough for a new War, where they
apprehended above all things Ill Success.

A Conduct so uncertain, changed into a true Carelessness, and they let the
Saguntines be destroyed with so much disgrace, that their Ambassadors were
shamefully treated for it by the Spaniards and Gaul^s, after the ruin of this
miserable People.

The contempt of Nations, wherewith they were Stung, drew them from this
drowsiness, and the descent of Hannibal into Italy revived their ancient
Vigor. They made War sometime with much Incapacity and a great Courage;
sometime with more Sufficiency, and less Resolution.

In fine, the lost Battle of Can, made them find again their Virtue, and
excited, to speak better, a new one, which extolled 'em yet above themselves.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Second Punick War.
To see the Republic in all the extent of her Virtue, its necessary to
consider her in the second War of Carthage. She has had before more of
Austerity; she has been found since with more of Grandeur; never so true a
desert: In other extremities wherein she has been engaged, her Security was
owing to the Boldness, Valor, or Capacity of some particular Citizen. Perhaps
without Brutus, there would have been no Commonwealth. If Manlius had not
defended the Capitol, if Camillus had not come to rescue it, the Romans hardly
free, would have fallen under the Bondage of the Gauls.

But here the Roman People has sustained the Roman People, here the Universal
Genius of the Nation has preserved the Nation, here good Order, Resolution, a
general Conspiring for the Public Good, have saved Rome when she was going to
fall, by the Faults and Imprudences of her Generals.

After the Battle of Cannae, where any other State had yielded to her Ill
Fortune, there was not a motion of weakness amongst the people, not a thought
but tended to the good of the Commonwealth. All Orders, all Ranks, all
Conditions voluntarily exhausted their Abilities; the Ramans gave up with
Pleasure the most valuable things they had, and kept with regret what they were
obliged to leave themselves for their bare use. To retain the least, was a
point of Honour^ to reserve the most in their Houses, a kind of disgrace. When
they treated about creating Magistrates, the Youth for the most part Jealous of
one another, consulted freely the Wisdom of the more Ancient, to give their
Suffrages the most discreetly.

Old Soldiers coming to be wanted, Liberty was given to the Slaves to make new
ones; and these Slaves becoming Romans, were encouraged with the same Spirit of
their Master to defend the same Liberty: But behold a greatness of Courage,
which surpasses all other qualities, be they never so noble. It happens
sometimes in an eminent danger, that persons of no remarkable Prudence, are
ob^erved to take good resolutions; it happens that the most concerned,
contribute largely for the Public Good, when by another Interest, they are
afraid to ruin themselves with the Public.

It may be, it never happened in the World, that people took an equal care both
abroad and at home in such pres^ing extremities; and I find nothing so
admirable in the Romans, as to see them send their Troops into Sicily and
Spain, with the same Care, as they did against Hannibal.

Overwhelmed with so many Losses, exhausted of Men and Money, they divided
their last Supplies between the defense of Rome, and the preserving of their
Conquests.

A People so Magnanimous, chose rather to Perish than Fail, and to be no more,
was held as an indifferent thing, when there was no being Masters of others.
Admitting Self-Preservation to be always advantageous, yet I reckon amongst the
chief advantages of the Romans, the owing their Safety to their Constancy, and
the greatness of their Courage.

This was yet a Felicity to them, to have changed their Genius since the War of
Pyrrhus, to have quitted that extraordinary Impartiality, and that Ambitious
Poverty which I have spoken of: otherwise there had not been found in Rome
means to sustain it.

It was necessary that the Citizens had Ability, as well as Zeal, to assist the
Commonwealth. If so be she had not relieved her Allies, she would have been
abandoned by them. The Discourse of a Consul who thought to give Compassion to
the Deputies of Capua, did but excite their Infidelity: The Senate much more
Wise, took a quite different Conduct, sent Men and Provisions to the Allies,
which stood in want thereof; and of all the Succors which they of Naples came
to offer, they accepted of nothing but Corn in Exchange for Silver.

But notwithstanding so much Resolution and true sense of things, there had
been no more Republic of Rome, if so be Carthage had acted the least of those
things to destroy it, which Rome did for her security.

Whilst Thanks were rendered to a Consul that had fled, for not having despaired
of the Commonwealth, Victorious Hannibal was accused at Carthage. Hanno could
not pardon him the Advantages of a War, which he had dissuaded; and more
Jealous of the Honor of his Opinions, than the good of the State, more an
Enemy to the Carthaginian General, than the Romans, he forgot nothing that
might obstruct the Successes that might be gained, or destroy those already
obtained. Hanno had been taken for an Ally of the Roman people, who regarded
Hannibal as the common Enemy. When the last sent to demand Men and Money to
maintain the Army, What would he demand said Hanno, if he had lost the Battle?
No, no, My Lords, either it is an Impostor, that amuses us by false News, or a
Public Thief, that appropriates to himself the Spoils of the Romans, and the
advantages of the War. These Oppositions troubled at least the Succors, when
they could not hinder their resolution. They executed slowly what had been
resolved with pain. The Recruits at length prepared, remained a long time
before their departure; if he were upon a March, Orders were sent to make him
halt in Spain, instead of encouraging him to pass into Italy. They arrived then
very late, and when they came to join Hannibal, which was miraculous, Hannibal
received them infirm, ruined, and out of season.

This General was almost continually destitute of Money and Provisions, red^ced
to the Necessity of being Eternally Successful in War; no Recruit at the first
Ill Fortune, and much Confusion in good ones, where he ^ound not wherewith to
entertain different Nations^ who rather followed his Person, than depended on
the Commonwealth.

To keep so many different people in order, he added to his natural Severity an
Artificial Cruelty; which made him formidable to some, whilst his Virtue gave
him Veneration from others. To acknowl^dge the Truth, he used no great Violence
in it to his Temper, but being naturally a little Cruel, he found himself in
such a Condition, that was necessary for him to be so; Yet his Interests
sometimes diverted his Cruelty, and afforded him the use of Mercy; for he knew
how to be pleasant and tractable for the benefit of his Affairs, and Design
always in him got the better of his Temper.

He made War upon the Roman^s with all ^orts of Severity, and treated their
Con^ederates with much Civility, and Sweetness, contriving to destroy the first
absolutely, and to d^s^engage the others from their A^^iance: A Procedure
extremely different from that of Pyrrhus, who kept all his Courtesies for the
Romans, and his ill Entertainments for their Allies.

When I consider that Hannibal departed from Spain, where he had left nothing
behind him well secured, that he cross^d the Country of the Ga^ls, whom they
ought to have accounted Enemies, that he passed the Alps to make War against
the Romans, who came to drive the Carthaginians from Sicily.

When I consider, that he posses^ed in Italy, neither Places, Magazines, nor
any certain Assistance, or hopes of Retreat, I am astonished at the boldness of
his Design. But when I consider his Valor, and his Conduct, I admire none but
Hannibal, and esteem him yet beyond the undertaking.

The French particularly admire the War of the Gauls, both for the reputation
of Caesar, and because, it being done in their Country, it affects them with a
more lively Idea, than other people. Notwithstanding, to judge thereof with
exactness, it does not approach to Hannibal's Actions in Italy. Had Caesar
found amongst the Gauls, the Union and Bravery, which the other did amongst the
Romans, he had obtained over them but small Conquests; for it is to be
acknowledged, that Hannibal met with very strange difficulties, without
reckoning those he carried with him. The only advantage on which he could
reasonably depend, was the goodness of his Troops, and his own Personal Courage.

It is certain, that the Romans had a great Superiority over the Carthaginians
in the Sicilian War; but the Peace having made them disband their Army, they
insensibly lost their Vigor, whilst their Adversaries, employed in Spain and
Afric, made a practice of their Valor, and acquired Experience.

It was then with an old Body, that Hannibal came to attack Italy; and with an
old Reputation, more than old Troops, the Romans found themselves obliged to
defend it.

As for the Roman Generals, they were persons of a great Courage, who thought
to have injured the Glory of their Commonwealth, if they had not given Battle
upon the first offer of the Enemy.

Hannibal made it his particular Study to know their Genius's, and observed
nothing so much, as the humor and conduct of each Consul, that opposed him. It
was by provoking the Fiery Temper of Sempronius, that he knew how to draw him
to Fight, and gain the Battle of Trebia: The Defeat of Thrasimene is owing to a
like Stratagem.

Knowing the haughty Spirit of Flaminius, be burned before his Eyes, the
Villages of his Allies, and incited so opportunely, his natural Temerity, that
the Consul not only took a resolution to Fight, at an unseasonable time, but he
ungaged him in certain Straits, where he unhappily lost his Army, together with
his Life. As Fabius had a contrary method of acting, so the conduct of Hannibal
was different.

After the Fight of Thrasi^e^^, the Roman People created a Dictator, and a
General of Horse. The Dictator was Quintus Fabius, a Man wise and slow, who
placed the only hope of Safety in Cautions, from whence might proceed Security.
In the posture things were in, he thought there was no difference between
Fighting, and losing the Battle; insomuch that he aimed at nothing, but to
secure the Army, and omitting the hope of Conquest, he thought to act Prudently
enough by preventing his being overcome.

Mar^us Minutius was the General of Hor^e, Violent, Ra^h, Vain in Discourse,
equally Daring, through Ignorance, and through Courage: This person placed the
Interest of the State in the reputation of Affairs, and imagined that the
Republic could not sub^i^t, if so be she did not efface the discredit of
pa^sed Defeats, by some Glorious Action: He was for Grandeur, when there was a
necessity for Prudence; for Glory, when Safety was questionable.

Hannibal foon apprehended these different humors, by the report that was made
him, and his own Observations; for he offered Battle to Fabius, many days
successively, who was so far from accepting of it, that he would not permit a
single man to stir out of his Camp.

Minutius on the contrary, took the Artificial Bravado's of the Enemy, for so
many Affronts, and made the Dictator pass for a weak Man, or at least
insensible of the disgrace of the Romans.

Hannibal advertised of this Discourse, endeavored to augment the opinion of
Fear and Weakness, which was attributed to Fabius. He burnt in his view, the
most delightful Country of Italy, to draw him to the Fight, which he could not
do; or at least to disparage him, in which he did not want for Success. He made
it even suspected, that there was Intelligence between them, preserving his
Lands with great Care, in the general Desolation of the Country.

This is but one part of his Contrivances, Whilst he labored to ruin the
Reputation of Fabius, which gave him some disquiet, he forgot nothing, to
increase that of Minutius, in whom he wished the Command, or at least, a great
power in the Army; sometimes he made a seeming to observe him, when he showed
all manner of Contempt for the other: Some time after, being engaged in a small
Skirmish with him, he retired first, and let him take a small Advantage, which
increased his Credit with the Romans; and he prepared him to fall by an
inconsiderate Considence: At length he knew how to employ so much Artifice, as
to cry ^ down the Dictator, and to make the General of the Horse esteemed;
insomuch that the Command was divided, and the Troops shared, which was never
done before. You would say, that Rome acted by the Spirit of her Enemy; for in
Truth so extraordinary a Decree, was the pure effect of his Contrivance and
Design.

Then was the Vanity of Minutius without bounds, he contemned with an equal
Imprudence, Fabius and Hannibal, declaring nothing less, Than that he alone,
would expel all Foreigners from Italy.

He would have a separate Camp, of which Hannibal was no sooner sensible, but
he approached with his; and without amusing my self, by describing the
particulars of all actions, Minutius engaged in a Fight, where he was defeated.

This was the behavior of Hannibal, during the Dictatorship of Fabius, and his
Conduct was much after the same manner, toward the Consuls that gave the
Battle of Cannae; it is true, that there was no need of so delicate a Conduct.
The Wisdom of Paulus, was less injurious to him than that of Fabius; and the
Presumptuous Ignorance of Terentius, hurled him headlong to his own ruin.

One will admire perhaps, that I extend my self so far upon an affair, which
ends at the simple defeat of Minutius, and that I do but just mention that
great and famous Battle of Cannae: But I rather aim at making known the
Genius's, than to describe the Battles. And as Ingenious Men, are better
pleased by considering Caesar in the War of Petreius and Afranius, than in
Actions of his, which make the greatest show: I have imagined, that one ought
to consider Hannibal more curiously, in an affair of entire Conduct, than that
great and fortunate Success, which the imprudence of Terentius gave him without
much difficulty.

It is to be confessed notwithstanding, that never was Battle so entirely won^
and that very day, that I may so speak, had been the Romans last, if Hannibal
had not chose rather to enjoy the Pleasures of the Victory, than to pursue the
Advantages thereof.

He that made others guilty of so many mistakes, is here sensible of the
weakness of Human Nature, and cannot hinder himself from failing: He showed
himself Invincible in the greatest Difficulties, but could not resist the
sweetness of his good Fortune, and let himself yield to ea^se, when a little
Action, would fix him in a state of Repose all his life.

If you enquire the reason of it; it is that every thing has Bounds in Man,
Patience, Courage, Resolution is worn out in us.

Hannibal could endure no more, because he had endured too much, and his
consummated Virtue finds it sel^ without assistance in the midst of Victory.

The remembrance of past difficulties, gave him a prospect of new ones; his
Spirit, which ought to have been full of Confidence, and almost Assurance,
turns it self to a fear of the Future: He considers, when he should be bold; he
Consults, when he should be Active; he gives reasons for the Romans, when he
ought to have put his own in Execution.

As the Faults of great Men have always apparent Subjects, so Hannibal did not
cease to represent to himself very specious Reasons.

That his Army, Invincible in the Field, was by no means fit for Sieges; his
Infantry not good, no Engines, no Money, no certain Subsistence: That by the
same defect he had Attacked Spolete to no purpose, after the success of
Trasimene, as Victorious as he was; that a little before the Battle of Cannae,
he had been constrained to raise the Siege of a Town, without Name or Forces;
that to Besiege Rome, furnished with all things, was to loose the Reputation he
went to gain, and to destroy an Army, which alone made him to be considered;
that he ought to let the Romans, shut up within their Walls, fall insensibly of
themselves; and in the mean time to go and establish himself near the Sea,
where he might receive Recruits from Carthage with convenience, and where it
would be easy to settle the most considerable power of Italy. Behold the
Reasons, which Hannibal accommodated to the disposition he found himself in,
and which he had not tasted in his first heats.

In vain did Maharbal promise him to Sup in the Capitol, his Reflections, which
had nothing but the Air of Wisdom, and a false Reason, made him reject, as
unadvised, a confidence so well established. He had pursued Violent Counsels,
to begin a War with the Romans, and he is kept back by a false Circumspection,
when he finds a time to make an end of all.

It is certain, that Spirits too delicate, such as Hannibals was, make
difficulties in Undertakings, and stop themselves by the Obstacles, which
proceed more from Imagination, than the thing it self.

There is one point in the declining of States, where their ruin would be
unavoidable, if so be one knew the easiness of d^stroying them; but for want of
a Sight pure enough, or a sufficient Courage, we are content with a little,
when we might do more, making either the meanness of Spirit, or the want of
Greatness in the Soul, pass for Prudence. In these conjunctures, a Man is not
the Instrument of his own Security, an old reputation maintains you in the
imagination of your Enemies, when the real Forces abandon you.

Thus Hannibal puts in his view, a power which is no more: He entertains an
Idea of dead Soldiers, and dissipated Legions, as if he were to Fight and
Defeat, what he has already defeated.

And certainly the Confusion had not been less at Rome after the Battle of
Cannae, than it was heretofore after that of Allia; but instead of approaching
a City where he had carried a Consternation, he removed at a distance from it,
as if he had a mind to hearten it, and give the Magistrates leisure to provide
for all things at their ease: He took their part who advised to attack the
Allies, who would have fallen with Rome, and sustained themselves by her with
more easiness, than she sustained her self.

Behold the first and great omission of Hannibal, which was also the first
refuge of the Romans: The Amazement passed, their Courage increased, as their
Forces grew less; and the Carthaginians lost their Vigor, as their power
increased.

If so be one would enquire the caus^ of all their misfortunes, there may be
found two Essential ones; The Carelessness of Carthage, which let good
Successes fall to nothing, for want of Relief, whilst Rome made use of all
things to repair the bad; and Hannibals inconsiderate desire, to put an end to
his Labors, before he had ended the War.

After having tasted Repose, he was not long before he was inclined to taste
delights, and he was the more easily charmed therewith, inasmuch as they were
always unknown to him.

A Man that knows how to mingle Pleasures with Business, is never possessed of
them; he quits them, and re takes them at his Pleasure; and in the habit, which
he has made of them, he rather finds a weariness of Spirit, than a dangerous
Charm that might corrupt him.

It is not so with these Austere persons, who by an Alteration of Temper come
to taste of Voluptuousness, they are immediately enchanted with its sweetness,
and have nothing but an aversion for the Austerity of their past life, Nature
being in them wearied with Inconveniences and Pains, abandons it self to the
first delights it meets with: Then what had appeared Virtuous, presents it self
with a rude and difficult Air; and the Soul, which imagines it self to be
undeceived of an old Error, pleases it self with its new affection for things
agreeable.

It Is this that properly arrived to Hannibal and his Army, which did not cease
to imitate him in Remissness, when it had done it so well in Fatigues.

There was nothing then but Baths, Festivals, Inclinations and Passions; there
was no more Discipline, neither by him that ought to have given Orders, nor in
those that should have put them in Execution. When he was to go into the Field,
Glory and Interest excited Hannibal, who took again his former Vigou^, and
found himself, but he found no more the same Army; there was nothing else but
softness and carelessness; if they were to endure the least necessity, they
bewailed the abundance of Capua.

They thought upon Mistresses, when they were to meet the Enemy; they
languished with the tenderness of Love, when there was need of action and
fierceness for Battle.

Hannibal forgot nothing that might excite their Courage, sometimes by the
remembrance of a Valor which they had lost, sometimes by the shame of
Reproaches, which they were insensible of.

In the mean while the Roman Generals became every day more expert. The Legions
had an advantage over corrupted Troops; and there arrived from Carthage, no
assistance which might encourage so languishing an Army. But the more
resolution Hannibal found amongst the Enemies, the less Service he received
from his own, and the more he took upon himself. It is not credible with what
Valor he maintained himself in Italy, from whence the Romans did not make him
depart, but by obliging the Carthaginians to recall him: These being defeated
and chased from Spain, beaten and undone in Afric, had recourse to their
Hannibal for their last refuge. He obeyed the Orders of his Country with the
same submission, that the least Citizen could have done: And he was no sooner
Arrived, but he found affairs in a desperate posture.

Scipio, who had seen the Calamities of his Republic under unfortunate
Generals, commanded then the Army, in the Prosperity which he had brought.

As for Hannibal, he had nothing but the memory of his good Fortune, which he
had ill used; but he was not in the least wanting to support the bad. The first
naturally assured, and by the present happiness of his affairs, was at the head
of an Army, which doubted not of Victory; the second increased his natural
distrust by the miserable condition ^e saw his Country in, and by the ill
opinion he conceived of his Soldiers.

These different scituations of Spirit, made Peace to be offered, and rejected;
after which, every ones Thoughts were upon Battle.

The day that it was given, Hannibal surpassed himself, whether by taking his
Advantages, disposing his Army, or giving Orders in the Fight; but at length
the Genius of Rome carried it from that of Carthage, and the defeat of the
Carthagi^ian^ yielded the Empire for ever to the Romans.

As for the General, he was admired by Scipio, who in the midst of his Glory,
seemed to envy the Capacity of the Conquered; and the Conquered, whose humor
was remote enough from vain Oftentations, thought always to have some
Superiority in the Science of War: For discoursing one day with Scipio of the
Great Captains, he put Alexander first, Pyrrhus second, and himself the third;
to which Scipio coldly answered, if you had Conquered me, said he, in what rank
would you have placed your self? The first of all, replied Hannibal. It Is
certain, that he had an admirable Capacity in War, and those Illustrious
Conquerors, who have left so great a Name to Posterity, came not near his
Industry, both in bringing together, and maintaining Armies.

Alexander passed into Asia with Macedonians that would obey their King; if he
had but little Money and Provisions, the Battles which he obtained, put him in
the abundance of all things: A City taken or surrendered, afforded him the
Treasures of Darius, who became necessitous in his own Country, as Alexander
possessed the Riches thereof.

Scipio, whom I was speaking of, made War in Spain and Afric, with Legions
which the Republic had levi^d and maintained.

Caesar had the same Conveniences for the Conquest of the Gauls, and made use
of the Forces and Money of the Commonwealth, even to bring them in Subjection.

As for our Hannibal, he joined to a little body of Carthaginians, several
Nations, which he knew how to link together by himself; and by whom he could
make himself be obeyed in a continual neces^ity of Provisions and Money. That
which is yet more extraordinary, Victories made him not the easier, he was
almost as much straightened after the gaining of them, as before.

But if he had Talents which the others had not, so was he guilty of a fault,
which in probability they would not have committed.

Alexander was so far from leaving things imperfect, that he always went
beyond, when they were completed.

He was not satisfied with subduing the great Empire of Darius, even to the
least Province; his Ambition carried him to the Indies, when he might have
united his Glory and Repose, (which is extraordinary) and have had a peaceable
enjoyment of his Conquests.

Scipio did not think of ease before he had reduced Carthage, and established
in Afric the affairs of the Romans.

And one of the great Commendations which is given to Caesar, is, That he
thought nothing was done, while there remained any thing to do.

Lucan. Nil actum reputans, si quid superesset agendum. When I think upon the
fault of Hannibal, it comes presently into my mind, that the importance of a
good resolution in great affairs is not enough considered.

To go to Rome after the Battle of Cannae, makes the destruction of this City,
and the grandeur of Carthage; not to go, produces with time the ruin of the
Carthaginians, and the Empire of the Romans.

I have seen a resolution taken which would have occasioned the loss of a great
State, if so be it had been pursued. I have seen a contrary taken the same day,
by a happy Change, which was its security: but it gave less reputation to the
Author of so good advice, than the defeat of Five Hundred Horse, or the taking
an inconsiderable City would have done.

These last events strike the eyes or imagination of all the World: Judgment is
hardly admired by any, because it is known but by the reflections which few
people know how to make. Let us return to our Hannibal.

If the Trade of War, for all the show it makes, merited only Consideration, I
don't see one amongst the Ancients, which might reasonably be preferred before
him: but he that knows it best, is not necessarily the greatest Man.

The Beauty of Genius, Greatness of Soul, Magnanimity, the being disinteressed,
Justice, a Capacity universally extensive, make the better part of the Merit of
these Great Men.

To know simply how to Slaughter Men, to be more understood than others in
rooting out Society, and destroying Nature, is to excel in a very fatal
Science.

The application of this Science ought to be Just, or at least Honorable; it
should turn to the good of those whom it has subdued, if possible; always to
the Interest of ones Country, or the necessity of a private advantage. When it
becomes the employment of Fancy, it serves for Irregularity and Fury; when its
end is to prejudice all the World, then that Glory which is ascribed to it,
ought to be taken away, and it rendered as Shameful, as it is Unjust.

But it is certain, That Hannibal had but few Virtues, and many Vices;
Infidelity, Covetousness, a Cruelty oftentimes necessary, always natural.
However, people judge for the most part by the Success, whatsoever is the
opinion of the wiser sort; allowing we had all the good Conduct that is
possible, if so be the event is not successful, ill Fortune is instead of a
Fault, and is justified but with a very few persons.

So that Hannibal has made War better than the Romans; that these are become
Victorious by the good Order of the Republic, and that he was undone by the
ill Government of his own; this is the consideration of a few persons.

That he was defeated by Scipio, and that the ruin of Carthage was the
consequence of his defeat, is a thing fully known, from whence is framed the
universal Opinion of all Men.

CHAP. VIII.
Upon the end of the Second War of Carthage.
UPON the end of so great and so long a War, there was formed a certain
particular Spirit unknown till then in the Commonwealth.

Not but that there was often Seditions, The Senate was more than once inclined
to the Oppression of the People, and the People was inclined to much Violence
against the Senate. But men had acted in these Occasions by a public
Sentiment, regarding the power of one as a Tyranny which ruined Freedom, and
the Liberty of the other as an irregularity which confounded all things. Here men
begin to respect themselves less in Public than in particular; the Bonds of
Society, which had been found so agreeable, seemed then to be troublesome
Chains, and every one out of conceit with the Laws, had a mind to re-enter into
the first right of disposing himself, to go to his own choice, and to follow in
this choice by the Light of his own Spirit, the motions of his Will.

As the disgust of Subjection had been the occasion of casting out the Kings,
and dispose the People to the establishment of Liberty, so the disgust of this
same Liberty which had been found troublesome to sustain, disposed the Spirits
to particular Passions.

The Love of the Country, the Zeal of the Public good were exhausted in the
midst of the War against Hannibal, where the affection and virtue of the
Citizens had been beyond the expectation of the Republic. Men had given their
Estates and Blood for the Public, which was not yet in a State to give any
Comfort to Private men.

The hardness even of the Senate had increased that of the Laws in some
occasions, and the rigor which had been used to the Prisoners of the Battle of
Cannae, had touched the whole World: but people had sussered patiently, at a
time when they thought to have endured all things by a common Interest. So soon
as they had less to Fear, they thought the necessity of Suffering was at an
end, and every one having lost their being tractable and patient, before the
conclusion of their misfortunes, they supported with Pain, what they imagined
to endure without necessity, by the sole pleasure of the Magistrates.

'Twas thus properly that the first disgusts were framed, from whence it came
to pass, that Men returned from the Republic to themselves, sought new
engagements in Society, and preferred amongst themselves the choice of
Subjects, which deserved their affections.

In this Disposition of Minds, Scipio presented himself to the Romans, with all
the Qualities that might acquire the Esteem and Favor of Men.

He was of a Great Birth, and in him was equally discerned Goodness, and the
Beauty of an excellent Nature. He had an admirable greatness of Courage; a
humor sweet and bountiful; a Spirit earnest in Public to inspire his
Resolution and Confidence, polite and agreeable in particular conversations,
for the Pleasure of Friendship most refined; a lofty Soul but regulated, more
sensible of Glory than Ambitious of Power, seeking less to distinguish himself
by Authority, or the splendour of Fortune, than by the difficulties of his
Undertakings, and the merit of his Actions.

Add to so many things, that Happy Successes always answered to high designs;
and to leave nothing that is desirable, he persuaded the People, That he
enterprised nothing without Advice, and never acted without the Assistance of
the Gods.

It is not strange, that such a Man as I describe, should draw to him
inclinations which they had a mind to give, and disengage Spirits from a
Republic, which they had already some disgust for: So that the Will of a
Person so Virtuous, was preferred before Laws, which perhaps were not so
equitable.

As for Scipio, he used all sorts of Humanity and Courtesy; and quitting the
ancient Severity of Discipline, he commanded Troops with Sweetness, that obeyed
with Affection.

Besides, never had a Roman General so much Capacity, nor so well managed;
never were Legions so desirous to do well; never was Commonwealth so well
served, but by a different Spirit from that of the Commonwealth.

^abius and Cato were sensible of this evil, and forgot nothing that might
administer a Remedy. In truth, they mixed therewith the sowrness of their
Passions; and the envy they bore to this Great Man, had as great a share in
their oppositions, as the Jealousy of Liberty. That which is extraordinary, is,
that the Corruptor remained a person of Credit amongst those whom he Corrupted,
and acted more nobly than those who opposed the Corruption.

Indeed he made all things subservient to the Commonwealth, from which he took
others off, and had no Crime but serving it with the same qualities, wherewith
he might have ruined it.

I acknowledge, That in the Maxims of so Jealous a Government, some Alarm
might be reasonably taken.

A Soul so elevated, is thought incapable of Moderation; a desire of Glory so
passionate, hardly distinguishes it self from Ambition, which aspires to
Power. A confidence so uncommon, is not remote from undertakings so
extraordinary. In a word, the Virtues of Heroes are suspected in Citizens; I
dare even affirm, that this Opinion of Commerce with the Gods, so advantageous
to Legislators for the foundation of States, seemed of a perilous consequence
in a private person for an established Commonwealth.

Scipio then was unfortunate, in giving appearances contrary to his intentions:
which served as a pretense for the malice of his Rivals, as a ground for the
caution of alarmed persons.

Behold immediately a Man of Reputation suspected, and a little after an
Innocent accused: He could answer and justify himself; but there is an Heroic
Innocence as well as a Courage, if one may be allowed to say so: he neglected
those forms, where the ordinary Innocents are subjected, instead of answering
his Accusers; and he rendered the Gods Thanks for his Victories, when they
demanded of him an Account of his Actions. All the People followed him to the
Capitol, to the shame of those that prosecuted him. And to justify better the
sincerity of his Designs, and the pureness of his Virtue, he gave up his
resentments to the Public, choosing rather to live at a distance from Rome,
through the ingratitude of some Citizens, than to render himself the Master of
it through the injustice of an Usurpation. So many Noble Qualities have obliged
Livy to make his Hero of so great a Man, and to give him a curious preference
over the rest of the Romans.

If there have been those that have obtained more Battles, and taken a greater
number of Cities, they have not defeated Hannibal, nor reduced Carthage: if
they have known how to command others as well as he, they have not known how to
Command themselves, and to enjoy themselves equally in the hurry of Business,
and the Repose of a Private Life.

I will not dispute whether he was the Greatest, but if I dare affirm what Livy
has but insinuated, to take him all together, he was the most deserving
Person. He had the Virtue of the Ancient Romans, but cultivated and polished;
he had the knowledge and capacity of the last, without any mixture of
Corruption. It is to be acknowledged notwithstanding, that his Actions were
more advantageous to the Commonwealth, than his Virtues. The Roman People had
too deep a taste of his Virtues, and disengaged themselves from the Obligations
of their Duty, to follow the engagements of their Will.

The Humanity of Scipio, did not cease to produce unhappy effects with time. It
taught the Generals how to make themselves beloved, and as things always
degenerate, an agreeable command was followed by an unworthy complaisance; and
when Virtues wanted to gain esteem and friendship, they employed all the means
that might corrupt. See the miserable effects of this particular Spirit, Noble
and Glorious in its beginning, but which since produced the Ambitious and the
Covetous, the Corrupters and the Corrupted.

This first disrelishing of the Republic, had notwithstanding so much of
Honesty, that people disengaged themselves from the Love of the Laws, on
purpose to settle their affections on Virtuous persons.

The Romans came to consider their Laws, as the sentiments of the old
Legislators, who ought not to Rule their Age; and those of Scipio were looked
upon as living and animated Laws.

As for Scipio, he turned to the Service of the Public, all that consideration
which they had for his Person; but desiring to sweeten the austerity of Duty by
the Charm of Glory, he was perhaps a little more sensible therein than he
ought, and at Rome particularly, where all the Citizens appeared Criminals,
when they attracted too favorable an esteem.

This new Genius which succeeded to the Public Good, encouraged the Romans
long enough to great things, and the Spirits disposed themselves thereto with
something of Life and Industry, which they had not before: for the Love of our
Country makes us abandon our Fortune, and even our Lives for its Security; but
the ambition and desire of Glory much more excite our Industry, than this first
Passion always delicate and noble, but rarely cunning and ingenious.

It Is to this Genius that is owing the defeat of Hannibal, and the ruin of
Carthage, the fall of Antiochus, and the Conquest or subjection of all the
Greeks: from whence one may say with reason, that it was advantagio^s to the
Commonwealth for its Grandeur, but prejudicial for its Liberty.

At length they were as much out of humor with that, as they were with the
love of the Republic; that esteem, that inclination so Noble for Men of
Virtue, seemed ridiculous to those that would consider nothing but themselves.
Honor began to pass for a Chimera, Glory for a mere Vanity, and every one
rendered himself basely Interessed, imagining to become judiciously solid.

But the Genius of Interest, which took place to that of Honor, acted
differently amongst the Romans, according to the diversity of Tempers.

Those that possessed any thing of Greatness, would acquire Power; Inferior
Souls contented themselves by heaping up Riches all manner of ways.

As they did not fall quite of a sudden to an entire corruption, so there was a
passage from Honor to Interest, where both one and the other subsisted in the
Republic, but with different respects. There was something of Honesty in some
particular things, and Infamy in others.

The Tempers were corrupted in Rome, in affairs that related to the Citizens.
Integrity became every day more rare; Justice was hardly known any more, the
desire of becoming Rich the predominant Passion, and the considerable persons
applied their Industry in appropriating to themselves what did not belong to
them.

But still there was a Dignity in what related to Strangers; and the most
depraved within showed themselves Jealous of the Glory of the Roman Name abroad.

Nothing was more unjust than the Judgments of the Senators, nothing so filthy
as their Avarice; in the mean time the Senate applied themselves with niceness
to the preservation of their Dignity, and never were they more careful of
hindering the Majesty of the Roman People from being violated.

This Senate, in other things so much given to Interest, and so corrupted with
their Citizens, had as elevated Thoughts, as Scipio could have, when they were
concerned with Enemies. In the time of a great corruption, they could not
dispense with the shameful Treaty of Mancinus with the Numantines; and this
miserable Consul was obliged to go and deliver up himself into their hands,
with all manner of Disgrace.

Gracchus, who had some share in the Peace, being Quaestour in the Army of
Mancinus, made a useless endeavor to sustain it; his Credit was of no Service,
and his Eloquence was vainly employed. As there has happened through Gracchus,
one of the most important affairs of the Commonwealth, and perhaps the rise of
all those that have since disturbed it, it will not be amiss to describe him to
you.

He was a person very considerable by his Authority, by the Advantages of his
Body, and the Qualities of his Mind; of a Genius opposite to that of the Great
Scipio, from whom his Mother Cornelia came; more Ambitious of Power, than
Animated through a desire of Glory, unless it were that of Eloquence, necessary
at Rome to get a Reputation. He had a great and lofty Soul; more fit
notwithstanding to embrace Novelties, and to recall past affairs, than solidly
to pursue those established. His Integrity could not suffer any Interest of
Money for himself: it is true that he did not procure that of others, without
mingling therein the consideration of some design; yet the Love of good things
was natural enough to him, the hatred of bad ones yet more. He had a Compassion
for the Oppressed, more Animosity against the Oppressors: insomuch that his
Passion prevailing over his Virtue, he insensibly abhorred the Persons, more
than the Crimes.

Several great Qualities made him admired amongst the Romans: he had not one in
that exactness where it ought to have been. His Engagements carried him farther
than he thought, his Firmness turned into something of obstinate; and those
Virtues which might have been useful to the Republic, became so many
advantageous Talents for Factions.

I see neither curiousness nor moderation in the Judgments, that have been left
of him.

Those that have held the Party of the Senate, have made him pass for a Furious
person; the Partisans of the People, for a true Protector of Liberty. It seems
to me that he aimed at goodness, and that he naturally hated all manner of
Injustice; but opposition put these good motions in disorder: A thing
contested, incensing him against those that made resistance, made him pursue by
his Spirit of Faction, what he had begun by a Sentiment of Virtue.

Behold, in my Opinion, what was the Genius of Gracchus, who stirred up the
People against the Senate. Its necessary to see what disposition the People was
in.

After having rendered great Services to the State, the People found themselves
exposed to the Oppression of the Rich, and particularly to that of the
Senators, who by Authority, or other wicked methods, robbed the Commons of
their small Possessions. Continual Injuries then had alienated the Spirits of
the Multitude, but without conceiving, as yet, any Ill intentions; they
suffered with Grief a Tyranny, and more Miserable, than Seditious, they
expected, more than they sought after, a Deliverance from an unfortunate
Condition.

I thought it necessary, to describe the Senate, Gracchus, and the People,
before I entered into that violent agitation, which the Commonwealth was
sensible of.

One will conceive then the Senate unjust, corrupted, but concealing the
Infamys within, by some Dignity to the affairs abroad: One will have the Idea
of Gracchus, as a person that had great Talents, but fitter to ruin altogether
a corrupted Commonwealth, than to re-establish it in its purity by a wise
Reformation. As for the People, they were not disaffected, but they could not
tell how to live in their Misery, nor how to employ themselves after the loss
of their Possessions.

CHAP. IX.
Of Augustus, his Government, and his Genius.
I Will not treat of the Beginnings of the Life of Augustus, they were too
Tragical: I pretend to consider him since his Arrival to the Empire. And in my
Opinion, never did Government deserve more particular observations, than his.

After the Tyranny of the Triumvirate, and the Desolation that the Civil War
occasioned, he had a mind at length to Govern by Reason, a People subjected by
Force, and disgusted by a Violence, which perhaps the Necessity of things had
obliged him to: He knew how to establish a happy subjection, farther distant
from Slavery, than the ancient Liberty.

Augustus was not one of those, who fixed the Beauty of Command, in the Rigor
of Obedience; who reap no Pleasure from the Service which is done them, but by
the Necessity which they impose for it.

This fineness of Government has been a point of Nicety under some of the
Emperors, that Subjects were not permitted to seem willing to bear that, which
they were willing to impose on them. A Disgrace that was received without Pain,
a Banishment whereto one agreed with facility, a Submission easy in every
thing, caused the disgust of the Prince; to Obey at his Pleasure, it was
necessary to Obey in spite of himself; but it was also requisite to be very
exact, when they seemed dissatisfied; for he that did so, and made a show of
it, excited Malice and Anger, so that the poor Romans knew not where to find a
Medium too nice, between two dangerous things.

Augustus had a contrary Judgment; he supposed that to dispose Men with ease,
it was proper to gain their Minds, before he exacted Duties; and he was so
successful in persuading them of the usefulness of his Orders, that they
thought less upon the Obligation they were under to follow them, than upon the
advantage, that they found therein. One of the greatest Cares that he ever had,
was to make the Romans taste the Happiness of Government, and to make the
Power, as far as he could, insensible to them. He rejected the very Names that
he thought might be displeasing, and above all things the quality of Dictator,
detested in Scylla, and even odious in Caesar.

The most part of those that raise themselves up, take new Titles to Authorize
a new Power; he was for hiding a new Power under usual Names, and ordinary
Dignities.

He made himself called Emperor, from time to time, to preserve his Authority
over the Legions; he made himself to be created Tribune, to manage the People;
Prince of the Senate, to govern them; but when he reunited in his person, so
many different Powers, he also charged himself with diverse Cares; and he really
became the Servant of the Armies, People, and Senate, when he rendered himself
Master thereof: yet he made use of his Power, only to take away the Confusion,
that was slipped into all things. He reunited the People in their Rights, and
retrenched nothing but Factions at the Election of Magistrates: He restored to
the Senate their Ancient Splendor, after having banished Corruption; for he
contented himself with a moderate Power, which did not afford him the Liberty
of doing ill; but would have it absolute, when he treated of imposing upon
others the necessity of doing well.

So that the People were not less free, but to be less Seditious; the Senate
was not less powerful, but upon the account of being less unjust: Liberty lost
nothing but the misfortunes which it might occasion, nothing of the Happiness
it might produce.

After having established so good an Order, he found himself agitated by
different Thoughts, and considered a long time with himself, whether he ought
to keep the Empire, or restore the People to their first Liberty. The examples
of Scylla and Caesar, notwithstanding their difference, made an equal
impression in favor of the last Opinion. He considered that Scylla, who had
voluntarily quitted the Dictatorship, dyed peaceably in the midst of his
Enemies: and that Caesar, for having kept it, was Assassinated by his most
intimate Friends, who made an Ostentation of it.

Struggling with so troublesome an uncertainty, he discovered the disorder of
his Soul to his two principal Friends, Agrippa and Mecenas. Agrippa, who gained
him the Empire by his Valor, advised him by moderation to lay it down; unless
it were perhaps, that he had more concealed ends: And to show himself a greater
Warrior, than Augustus was, he expected the chief Employments of the
Commonwealth, when it should be re-established. As for Mecenas who had no
share in the Victories, he Counseled him to retain what they had given him.

It was not without making enter into his Reasons, the consideration of the
Public, which could not be sustained, said he, without Augustus: But allowing
it might be so in some measure, he followed in effect his inclination for the
Person of the Prince, and his own proper Interest.

Mecenas was a person of Esteem, of those notwithstanding that are complaisant,
tender, more sensible of the agreements of Life, than of those solid Virtues,
which were esteemed in the Commonwealth. He was Ingenious, but given to his
Pleasures, apprehending all things with much clearness, and judging thereof
with solidity; but more capable of advising, than acting: So that finding
himself weak, unactive, and purely for the Cabinet, he hoped from his nicety
with a Nice Emperor, what he could not expect from the Roman People; where he
must have raised himself by his own proper means, and acted briskly by himself.

To return from the persons to the thing, the Empire was retained by his
Advice, and the resolution of keeping it being taken, Augustus did not cease to
offer to lay it down to the Senate.

Some were affected therewith as a great moderation, many acknowledged the
simple Honesty of the Offer: But all truly agreed in this point, to refuse the
ancient Liberty.

You would have said, that there was a contest of Civilities, which concluded
in a common Satisfaction: For Augustus governed the Empire by the Senate, and
the Senate did not govern it self, but by Augustus.

A Government so ordered was pleasing to all the World, and the Prince followed
no less his Interest therein, than his moderate Temper; for at length one
passes with much ado from Liberty to Subjection, and he might esteem himself
happy to command, insome fashion, a Free People.

Moreover, the fatal example of Caesar, had perhaps obliged him to take
different ways, to avoid the same end.

The Great Julius Born, that I may so speak, in a Faction opposed to the
Senate, had always a secret desire of oppressing the same; and having found it
contrary to his Designs in the Civil War, he took a new aversion for the Body,
although he had much Sweetness and Clemency for the Senators in particular.
After his return to Rome, as he saw himself assured of the People and the
Legions, he made but a small reckoning of the Senate, and even treated it
insolently upon some occasions; so difficult is it in the most reserved, not to
forget themselves in a great Fortune.

But it is certain that this proud Contempt, incensed a great many persons, and
produced, or at least advanced, the Conspiracy that ruined him.

Augustus, one of the wariest Princes of the World, did not omit the benefit of
an observation so necessary, and scarce was he Possessed of the Empire by the
Legions, but he thought to govern it by the Senate.

He knew the Violence of the Soldiers, and the Tumultuousness of the People,
both one and the other appearing to him, more fit to be employed in a present
occasion, than easy to be managed, when it is over.

He had a mind then to found the Government upon the Senate, as upon the Body
the best ordered, and most capable of Wisdom and Justice; but at the same time
he assured himself of the Legions and the People, by Donatives and Acts of
Grace. So the whole World was contented, as I have said, and Augustus found in
his moderation, the safety of his Person, and his Power. In which, certainly he
had an extraordinary Happiness, imagining nothing so desirable in Life, as to
be able honestly to pursue his Inclination and his Interest.

I will not excuse his Beginnings, but I make no question, but that in the
violence of the Triumvirate, he did much Violence to himself.

It Is certain, that he naturally hated the cruel humor of Marius, Sylla, and
such as were like them; he hated those fierce Souls who have but an imperfect
Pleasure in being Masters, if they don't make their Power felt by others; who
place Greatness in Force, and the happiness of their Condition, in making
persons miserable at their Pleasure.

He had experienced that an Honest Man makes himself first unhappy, when he
makes others so; and he was never so well satisfied, as when he saw himself in
a capacity of doing well, according to his inclination, after having done ill
against his Mind.

He always aimed at the good of affairs, but he desired that affairs should go
to the advantage of Men, and con^idered less in his undertakings the Glory,
than the Benefit. During his Government, no War was neglected that might be
useful; and left those for Heroes, that are purely Glorious.

This made him come to an Accommodation with the Parthians, and renounce the
Project which Caesar made, when he was killed; this made him reject the
Proposal of a certain War in Germany, where he discerned no real Interest; this
made him set Limits to the Empire, whatsoever Interpretation Tacitus has given
of so prudent a Design. In a word, he was little attentive to Opinion, Noise,
and Vanity. He esteemed a solid Reputation, which renders the Life of Men more
pleasant and secure.

It Is very true, that Augustus had but an indifferent Talent for War; and to
commend his Wisdom and his Capacity, one must not commend his Valor in all
things. Hirtius and Pansa carried on the first War against Anthony, whereof
Augustus alone reaped the Advantage. He gained but little glory in that of
Brutus, which was managed and concluded by Anthony. The loss of Anthony was the
effect of his Passion for Cleopatra, and the Valor of Agrippa. Augustus had
but little share in Battles, and obtained the Empire. Not but that he was in
several, and even wounded in some: but with more Success for his affairs, than
Glory for his person. So the Tenth Legion somewhat insolent through the high
esteem that the Great Caesar had for them, could not bear with the Nephew,
every time they remembered the Uncle; from whence it came to pass that it was
Disbanded, notwithstanding all its Merit, for showing a want of Respect to him
once in his Presence. That does not hinder him from making an admirable use of
War for his own Interest, and that of the Empire. Never did Prince know how to
give a better Order, nor Transport himself more willingly, wherever his affairs
called him, to Egypt, to Spain, amongst the Gauls, Germany, and the East.

But at length it was discerned, that War was not agreeable to his true Genius,
and although he triumphed with the applause of all the World, it was well known
that his Lieutenants had Conquered.

He would have passed for a great Captain in the time of those Emperors, who
by their little Valor, or a false Greatness, durst not take, or else thought
below them the Conduct of Armies. Being come in an Age, wherein he could not
recommend himself but by his own Exploits, and particularly succeeding to
Caesar, who owed all to himself, it was a disadvantage to him to owe more to
another, than himself.

It was not so in the Government, where the Senate did nothing that was Wise
and Good, but what Augustus had Inspired into them: The Good of the State was
his first Thought, and he did not apprehend by the good of the State, a vain
and fantastical Name, but the real benefit of those that composed it. His own
first; for it is not just to quit the Pleasures of a Private Life, to abandon
himself to the cares of the Public, if so be he did not find his advantages
therein: And that of others, which he imagined could not be absolutely separate
from his own.

Persons of the greatest Service had his first consideration, and Merit
advanced under him those, which it had ruined under his Successors, where the
Crimes were less dangerous than the Virtues. Agrippa had not so great a share
in his Confidence, as Mec^nas; but his great qualities rendered him much more
considerable; and and it being come to that point in Rome, that Augustus found
himself obliged to be rid of him, or gain him entirely, he rather chose to give
him his Daughter, for all the meanness of his Birth, than hearken to what
Jealousy might Inspire him with. As for Mecenas, as he was more agreeable, and
more versed in the Closet, so had he the preference in his Pleasures, and in
his Secrets.

He was obliging to his Courtiers, and was not displeased, that these Romans
heretofore so fierce and free, would take the advantage of his Favors. So that
they studied to please Augustus, and the application of the Court became a true
Interest: Yet it was not the most considerable. The Merit which related to the
State, was preferred before that which was acquired by an inclination for his
person: Which he established himself by his Discourses, never speaking of what
was due to him* but always what he owed himself to the Republic.

In the mean time, there is no life so regular, where particular Actions don't
sometimes exceed the general habit and conduct: He defended one day a Friend of
his, that was accused of a horrible Roguery, and in all appearance preserved
him by his consideration alone. It was not without offending all persons of
repute, but yet he had so much moderation in keeping the forms, and in
suffering the liberty of those, who answered him something smartly, that he
regained their minds; and even those that were scandalized, returning from
their Indignation, excused the Injustice of Protecting a wicked Man, by the
Honesty that appeared in not deserting a Friend.

The Men of Learning had a share in his familiarity, amongst the rest Livy,
Virgil, Horace; whereby one may see the goodness of his Judgment, as well for
Works of Learning, as in Business. He loved the exquisite taste of his Age, the
delicacy of which has been but little common in all the rest. But he feared the
singularities which came from a false Spirit, and whereof the Wicked persons
that are knowing therein, make an extraordinary merit. As he lived amongst
curious persons, so he took delight in seeing his Laws approved, and his
Opinion was, that it is much better to fall naturally into the good sense of
others by his Reason, than to make his Humors received by Force. I imagined
formerly, that the most delicate Spirits of the Romans, had been in the Reign
of Augustus, but since my Writing this small Treatise of Augustus's Government,
I have altered my Opinion.

Besides the Honor of his Judgment, which he was Jealous of, he still thought
that a Gift disapproved of, was a Favor but to one, and a prejudice to a great
many. That the disgrace of an honest man on the other side was resented by all
honest men, by the compassion it gives to some, and the allarm that it gives to
others.

He had an admirable Faculty in discerning the humor and ambition of the most
elevated persons, yet without conceiving Suspicions fatal to their Virtue.

The Liberty of Opinions was not displeasing to him upon general affairs,
esteeming that Men have their Privileges therein; that it is a crime to search
curiously into the Secrets of the Prince, and a piece of Infidelity not to make
a good use of his Confidence: But that business which was become public,
belonged in spite of all to the Judgment of the Public; that he ought to
represent it to himself before he was concerned, and not to pretend to obstruct
it, when it was done.

It was perhaps upon the knowledge of his humor, that Livy durst write so
boldly the War of Caesar and Pompey, without being e're the less in his Favor.
Cremutius Cordus recited his History to him, and he did not think himself
scandalized to see therein Brutus and Cassius called the last of the Romans: An
Encomium fatal to Cremutius under Tiberius, in that he was accused of a Crime
says Tacitus, till then unheard of, and which cost him his Life. M^cenas had
given him an advice yet more particular, but of a more difficult use; it was,
never to be concerned at what was spoken against him.

If so be what is alleged of us be true, added Mecenas, it is our business
rather to correct our selves, than for others to contain themselves. If so be
what is said of us be false, so soon as we show a concern at it, we make it
suspected for Truth. The contempt of such Discourses discredits them, and takes
away the pleasure from those that make them. If you are more sensible of them
than you ought to be, it is in the power of the most miserable Enemy, the most
pitiful envious person, to disturb the repose of your life, and all your power
cannot defend you from your own Vexation.

Augustus went further in certain matters, and not so far by abundance in
others. I see Injuries forgotten, I see him so bold in his Clemency, that he
durst Pardon a Conspiracy not only true, but even ready for Execution.

In the mean time for all the Virtues of Men, they never give so much to their
Virtue, but they leave to their humor. It is not credible how nice he was, in
relation to his Family, nothing was so dangerous as to talk of the Amors of
Iulia, if he would not be thought to have some Interest with her: Ovid was
Banished for it, and was never recalled; and that which appears to me
extraordinary, the Husband himself resented this unlucky humor. That the
Conduct of Iulia should displease Augustus, was a natural thing, but that the
poor Agrippa should suffer the Anger of his Father in Law, and the Debaucheries
of his Wife at the same time, is an odd business, and the last misfortune of a
Husbands state.

It is to be confessed that the Family of the Emperor, gave him too much
disturbance in the general applause of the whole Empire. He could not resist
the little Troubles which his Family afforded him, and he behaved himself
therein more like a Private person than a Great man, for he knew neither how to
end a misfortune by a good Order, which is really no easy thing, nor yet to
pacify himself.

After having been too much afflicted on one side, he let himself go too
carelessly to the sweetness he found on the other; and if so be Iulia tormented
him as long as she lived, Livia knew how to possess him so well in the
declining of his Age, that the adoption of Tiberius was rather the effect of
her Conduct, than the real choice of the Emperor.

Augustus discerned Vices better than any one; the Vices of Tiberius, and the
designs of Livia: but he had not the force to act according to the Judgment he
made thereof.

Whilst he saw every thing with a sound prospect, which moved him to nothing,
his Wife left his Understanding there with an unprofitable Knowledge, and made
her self Mistress of his Will.

It Is this which has deceived Tacitus, in my Judgment, in that malicious
curiosity, which he gives Augustus. He knew that the nature of Tiberius was not
unknown to him; and to believe that a Great Emperor could not be persuaded to
so important a business against his own proper Sentiment, he has made a Design
and a Mystery, where there was nothing, if I am not deceived, but facility.

After these particulars of his Family, let us return to generals: He made the
World happy, and was happy in the World: He had nothing to desire of the
Public, nor the Public of him: And considering the Evils which he occasioned
to come to the Empire, and the good he has done since he was Emperor, I find
that it has been said with reason, that he should never have been Born, or
never have Died.

He died at length regretted of all men, less great without comparison than
Caesar, but of a more regular Spirit; which makes me believe, that it had been
more glorious to have been in the Army of Caesar, but more pleasant to have
lived under the Command of Augustus.

As for the Romans, they had nothing so elevated, as in the time of the
Republic, neither for the greatness of Genius, nor the force of the Soul; but
something more sociable: After all the misfortunes they had suffered, they were
glad to find some refreshment, no matter how.

There was no more a sufficient Virtue to sustain Liberty; they would have been
ashamed of an entire subjection; and with an exception of some fierce Spirits,
which nothing could content, every one took a Pride in the appearance of a
Republic, and was not displeased with the effect of a pleasant and agreeable
Government.

CHAP. X.
Of Tiberius, and his Genius.
AS there are but few Revolutions, where one stops at terms that are moderate,
a happy and an honest State is frequently changed into a miserable and unworthy
condition. The Roman Valor was softened after the death of Brutus and Cassius,
who sustained the fierceness thereof.

After the loss of Anthony, there was, as it were, a general agreement for the
conduct of Augustus, and an equal complaisance for his person.

When Tiberius came to the Government, this complaisance turned into baseness
and flattery.

One might have said, that this Prince, being naturally irresolute, would have
taken but a moderate power; but the Romans more disposed to serve, than
Tiberius to command, gave him themselves their Slavery, when he hardly durst
hope for their Subjection. See what was the Genius of the Roman People at that
time.

Its necessary now to speak of that Tiberius, and to show the temper he brought
with him to the Government of the Empire.

His design most concealed, but best followed, was to change all the maxims of
Augustus. This, when he came to be Emperor, gave all his Thoughts of so just
and so prudent a conduct, to the general Good: Tiberius made a Science of the
Closet, wherein was shut up a false and mysterious Interest of the Prince,
separate from the Interest of the State, and almost always opposed to the
Public Good.

Judgment, Capacity, and the Secret, were changed into Slyness, Artifice, and
Dissimulation. There was no more knowing of Good and Evil actions by
themselves; every thing was taken according to the nice intention of the
Emperor, or was judged by the curiousness of some malicious Speculation.

The Credit which Germanicus had to appease the Legions, was a Service very
advantageous, and a little while agreeable: When the danger was over, it was
reflected that he could draw the Troops from their Obedience, since he knew how
to bring them there. In vain was he faithful to Tiberius, his moderation in
refulsing the Empire, made him not to be thought Innocent; he was judged
capable of what had been offered to him; and so many tricks were employed for
his loss, that they at length got rid of a Man that would have Obeyed well, but
deserved to Command.

He perished, this Germanicus so dear to the Romans, in an Army, where he had
less reason to fear the Enemies of the Empire, than an Emperor whom he had so
well served.

He was not the only person that had a sense of this fatal Policy, the same
Spirit reigned generally in all thins. The distant employments were mysterious
exiles, the Charges, the Governments were given to persons that ought to have
been ruined, or else to those that should ruin others. In a word, the benefit
of good service entered no more in any consideration; for in truth the Armies had
rather Outlaws than Generals; and the Provinces, Banished Men, than
Governors. At Rome, where the Laws had been always so religiously observed,
and with so much formality, every thing was then managed by the jealousy of
his Mysterious Cabinet.

When a person of considerable Merit testified, some Passion for the Glory of
the Empire, Tiberius suspected immediately, that it was with a design to obtain
it.

If any other had an innocent remembrance of Liberty, he passed for a dangerous
Man that had a mind to Re-establish the Re-publick. To praise Brutus and
Cassius, was a morrtal Crime; to bewail Augustus, a secret Offense, which was
so much the less pardoned, as they durst not complain; for Tiberius always
commended him in Public, and made Divine Honors be decreed to him, which he
first of all performed to him: but Humane Motions were not permitted, and a
Passion testified for the Memory of this Emperor, was taken for an Accusation
to disturb the Government, or for a disaffection for the Person of the Prince.

Hitherto you have had Crimes inspired by the jealousy of a false Policy, now
it is an open Cruelty, and a declared Tyranny.

One is not contented to forsake good Maxims, one abolished the best Laws, and
made an infinite number of new ones, which respected in an appearance the
safety of the Emperor, but in truth the loss of the Men of Credit that
remained at Rome.

Every thing was made Treason; formerly a true Conspiracy was punished, here an
innocent word maliciously explained.

The Complaints, which have been left to the Unfortunate for the support of
their Miseries, the Tears, those natural Expressions of our Grief, the Sighs
which slip from us in spite our Will, the simple Regards at length became
fatal. The simplicity of Discourse expressed evil Designs, the discretion of
Silence concealed mischievous Intentions: Joy was observed as a Hope,
conceiving the Death of the Prince. Melancholy was remarked as a Trouble for
his Prosperity, or an Envy of his Life: In the midst of Dangers, if that of
Oppression gave you any motion of Fear, your Apprehension was taken for the
Testimony of a frighted Conscience, which, betraying it self, discovered what
you was going to do, or what you had done. If you were in the Reputation of
having Courage and Resolution, they feared you as a bold Man, capable of
understanding all things* To Speak, to be Silent, to Rejoice, to be Afflicted,
to be Fearful or Assured, all was Criminal, and very often incurred the utmost
Punishments.

Thus the Suspicions of others rendered you culpable; it was not enough to wipe
off the Corruption of your Accusers, the false Reports of Spies, the
Suppositions of some Infamous Informer, you were also to fear the Imagination
of the Emperor; and when you thought to be secure by the Innocence not only of
your Actions, but of your Thoughts, you would be ruined by the Malice of his
Conjectures.

To push the matter no further, there was need of much Desert to be a person of
Credit; for by that there were many misfortunes to be endured. That Virtue,
which durst appear, was infallibly lost, and that which was but guessed at, was
never assured.

As one is not exempt from Perplexity in the Evil which one makes others
endure. Tiberius was not always at Peace in the Exercise of his Cruelties.
Sejanus who insinuated into his Favors, by ways as unjust as his own; this
great Favorite surfeited with Honors and Riches, which left him always in a
Dependence, had a desire to free himself from all Subjection, and forgot
nothing to put himself insensibly in the place of his Master.

Being instructed in the Maxims of the Emperor, and knowing in his Art, he
took off his Children by Poison, and was upon the point of dispatching him,
when this Prince returning from his Blindness, as by a Miracle, preserved his
unhappy days, and destroyed this great Confident that would have ruined him.

His condition was not more happy than before; he lived odious to all the
World, and troublesome to himself, an Enemy to the Lives of others, as well as
to his own: at length he died, to the great Joy of the Romans, not being able
to escape the impatience of a Successor, who caused him to be stifled in a
Sickness he was going to be cured of.

I once made a Reflection upon the Difference there was between the Republic
and the Empire, and it appears to me, that it had not been less pleasant to
live under Emperors, than under Consuls, if so be the Maxims of Augustus had
been pursued.

Rome was not so happy. The Politics of Tiberius were embraced by the greatest
part of his Successors, who placed the Honor of their Reign, not in governing
the Empire best, but in enslaving it the most.

In this opinion Augustus was les esteemed, for having known how to make the
Romans happy, than Tiberius for having made them miserable without help. It
appeared to these Emperors, that it was a mark of Insufficiency or Weakness to
keep the Laws; and sometimes the art of deluding them, made the Secret of their
Policy, sometimes the violence of breaking through them, appeared a true
Greatness, and a worthy Authority.

The Forces of the Empire no more regarded Strangers, the Power of the Emperor
was felt by the Natives and oppressed Romans held the place of the subdued
Nations.

At length the Caligula's, the Nero's, and the Domitian's pushed the Dominion
beyond all Bounds; and although the Prerogatives of Emperors were infinitely
below those of the Kings, they disposed themselves to Violences, which Tarquin
himself would not have done.

The Romans of their side became equally fatal to the Emperors, for passing
from Slavery to Fury, they Massacred some of them, and attributed to themselves
an unjust and violent Power to depose and set them up at their Fancy.

Thus the Bonds of Government were broken, and the Duties of Society coming to
fail, they had no other aim but to ruin those that obeyed, or to destroy those
that should have commanded others.

So strange a confusion ought chiefly to be imputed to the ill nature of these
Emperors, and to the brutish Violence of the Soldiers; but if you would ascend to
the first Cause, you will find that this ill nature was authorized by the
Example of Tiberius, and the Government established upon the Maxims, which he
has left.

As those, who concert things the best, don't always stick to the justice of
Rules, the most Irregular don't eternally follow the disorders of their
Inclinations, and their Humors.

They add at least a Policy to their Temper. Even those who do all things
without Deliberation, return there by Reflection, when they are done, and apply
a Conduct of Interest to the pure Motions of Nature.

But let the Emperors have acted by Nature, by Policy, or both together, I
maintain, that Tiberius has corrupted every thing that was good, and has
introduced every thing that was bad in the Empire.

Augustus, who had a pure and delicate ^ight into things, knew admirably well
the Genius of his time, and had no trouble in changing a Subjection, voluntary
in the Captains of Parties, into a true one.

Tiberius full of Frauds and Subtilty, but a false Judgment, scorned to search
into the disposition of Spirits. He thought he had to do with those old Romans
amorous of Liberty, and incapable of any Subjection: in the mean time the
general inclination was to serve, and the least enslaved were disposed to
Obedience.

This false account of things made him take cruel Cautions against persons, he
feared without Cause; for it is to be observed, That a Prince so suspicious had
never occasion to fear any one, but Sejanus, who made him distrust all others.

With his false measures Cruelty increased every day, and as he that offends,
is the first in hating, the Romans became odious to him, by the injury which he
did to them. At length he acted openly, and treated them as his Enemies,
because he had afforded them an occasion to be so.

The humors of Yiedling, which reigned then, made his Tyranny endured without
Complaints. They suffered the brutality of Caligula with the like Submission,
for his Death is a particular Fact, wherein neither the Senate, People, nor
Legions were concerned. They suffered the dangerous Stupidity of Claudius, and
the insolence of Messalina. They suffered the Fury of Nero, till their Patience
being exhausted, there was a Revolution in Men's Minds.

Immediately there was a Conspiracy against his Person, from particular
Combinations, they came to the revolt of the Legions, from the revolt of the
Legions to the Declaration of the Senate. It may be the Senate could have
Re-established Liberty, but being already accustomed to Emperors, they were
contented to dispose of the Empire, the Praetorian Cohorts would dispose
thereof themselves, and the Legions of the Provinces could not yield them that
advantage. A Division intruded amongst these, some nominating one Emperor,
some another. There was nothing but Massacres, and Civil Wars, and never were
Peoples Minds in their true Situation; if you except the Reign of some
Princes, who knew how to reunite the Interests, which the false Conduct of
Tiberius had divided for the common Misfortune of the Emperors, and Empire.

OBSERVATIONS UPON SALUST and TACITUS.
I Once intended to have made an exact Judgment of Salust and Tacitus, but
understanding since, that others had already done it, that I might neither
wholly follow, or lose my Design, I have reduced my Thoughts to one single
Observation, which I send you.

In my Opinion, the last turns every thing into Policy, with him Nature and
Fortune have very little to do in the management of Affairs, and I am deceived,
or he oftentimes gives too far fetched Causes of some Actions, which are
altogether Simple, Ordinary, and Natural.

When Augustus would set Bounds to the Empire, it is in his Conceit out of a
jealous Apprehension, least some other should have the Glory of extending it.
The same Emperor, if you believe him, took measures to assure himself, that
the People of Rome should have a Concern for him, Artificially managing the
Advantages of his Memory, by the choice of his Successor.

The dangerous temper of Tiberius, his Dissimulations are known to all the
World; but it is not enough to know the Nature of the Man, without giving this
Prince a Craftiness in every thing: Nature is not yet so much reduced, but that
she keeps as much Right over our Actions, as we can take over her Motions.
Something of ones Temper always enters into the best formed Designs: And it is
not credible, that Tiberius, who was so many years subject to the Will of
Sejanus, or his own Infamous Pleasures, could have, in that Weakness, and
abandoning up of himself, so far fetched an Act, and so studied Politics.

The Poisoning of Britannicus causes not so much Horror, as it should, by
Tacitus his putting us upon the observing the Behavior of the Spectators: So
long as the Reader is taken up in considering the diverse Motions they are in,
the one's being frighted out of Imprudence, others deeply reflecting on it,
Nero's dissembled Coldness, the secret Fears of Agrippina, their Spirits turned
off from the blackness of the Action, and from the sad Image of this Death,
lets the Parricide escape their hatred, and leaves the unhappy dying Person to
their Pity.

The Cruelty of the same Nero in his Mother's Death, has too delicate a
Conduct, when Agrippina had certainly perished by a small Intriegue of Court so
well managed, he ought at least to have suppressed half the Art, for the Crime
finds less aversion in our Spirits, and if I may say so, he reconciles the
Judgments of the Readers to it, when he puts so much Address and Dexterity in
the Conduct.

Almost in all things Tacitus leaves us pieces too finished, where he leaves us
nothing to be desired of Art, but where he gives us too little of the Natural.
Nothing is finer than what he represents; oftentimes it is not the thing which
ought to be represented; sometimes he passes beyond things by too great a Depth
and Penetration* Sometimes Speculations too fine rob us of the true Objects, to
place in their stead ^ine Ideas. What one may say in his Favor is, that he
obliges us more than he had done, in giving us things grossly, the truth of
which had been of no importance.

Salust, of a Spirit opposite enough, gives as much to Nature, as the other to
Policy. The greatest care of the former is to make known the Genius of Men,
Affairs come afterward naturally, by the Actions not far fetched of those
Persons, whom he has described.

If you consider with Attention, the Character of Catiline, you will not be
astonished at that horrible design to oppress the Senate, nor at that vast
project, to render himself Master of the Re-publick, without the assistance of
the Legions. When you shall reflect on his Pliantness, his Insinuations, his
Faculty of inspiring his Motions, and uniting the Factious Persons to himself;
when you shall consider that so much Dissiulation was sustained by so much
fierceness, when there was a necessity for Action, you will not be surprised,
that at the head of all the Ambitious, and Corrupted Men, he was so near over^
whelming Rome, and ruining his Country. But Salust does not content himself
with describing the men to us in Characters, he makes them describe themselves
in Speeches, where you always see an expression of their Nature. The Oration of
Caesar made it plain enough to us, that a Conspiracy did not displease him.
Under the Zeal which he testifies for the preservation of the Laws, and the
Dignity of the Senate, he leaves to be discerned a delicate inclination for the
Conspirators; he is not so careful to hide his Opinion of Hell; the Gods are
less considerable to him than the Consuls, and in his Conceit Death is nothing
else but the end of our Torments, and the repose of the Miserable. Cato makes
his own Picture, after Caesar had given us his. He goes directly to that which
is good, but with a rough Air: the Austerity of his Manners is inseparable from
the integrity of his Life; he mixes the sowerness of his mind, and the hardness
of his manners, with the usefulness of his Counsels.

This single expression of (Optimo Consuli) which vexed Cicero so much, for not
giving to his merit extent enough, makes me fully comprehend both the good
intentions, and the vain humor of this Consul. To conclude, by the various
descriptions of different Actors, I not only represent to my self the persons,
but I seem to behold every thing that passed in the Conspiracy of Cataline.

You may observe the same thing in the History of Iugurtha. The description of
his qualities and his humor, prepares you to see the Invasion of a Kingdom,
and three lines show his whole method of making War. You see in the Character
of Metellus, with the re-establishment of Discipline, a happy alteration of the
Roman affairs.

Marius managed the Army in Africa with the same Spirit, wherewith he spoke at
Rome.

Sylla talks to Boccus, with the same Genius that appeared in his Character,
little tied to Duty and Regularity, giving all things up to the passion of
making Friends to himself. Dein parents abunde habemus, amicorum unquam neque
nobis, neque cuiquam omnium satis fuit. Thus Salust makes Men Act by their
temper, and thinks to oblige his Reader enough, by describing them well. Every
extraordinary person that is represented, is exactly drawn, even when he has no
considerable part in his Subject. Such is the Character of Sempronia, in my
Judgment, inimitable; he goes even to search remote considerations, to give us
the Pictures of Cato and Caesar, so fine in truth, that I should prefer them
before entire Histories.

To conclude my observation upon these two Authors, Ambition, Avarice, Luxury,
Corruption, all the general causes of the Disorders of the Republic, are very
often alleged by Salust. I know not whether he descends enough to particular
Interests and Considerations. You will say, that subtle and refined Counsels
seemed to him unworthy of the grandeur of the Republic; and that is perhaps
the reason, that he goes to seek as it were all things in Speculation, few
things in the Passions and Genius of Men.

One sees in the History of Tacitus yet more Vices, more Wickedness, and more
Crimes; but Ingenuity conducts them, and Dexterity manages them: one speaks
there always with design, there is no acting without measure, the Cruelty is
prudent, and the Violence advised. In a word, the crime there is too delicate;
from whence it comes to pass, that men of the most credit taste the Art of
mischief, which does not let it self be known enough, and that they learn to
become Criminal before they are aware, imagining only to become expert. But
leaving here Salust and Tacitus, in their different Characters, I will affirm,
that one meets but seldom together, a curious description of Men, and a
profound intelligence of things.

Those that are brought up in Societies, that speak in Assemblies, learn the
order, the forms, and all the matters that are treated of there. Passing from
thence through Embassys, they instruct themselves in Foreign affairs, and there
are but a few things, of what nature soever they be, but they become capable
of, through application and experience. But when they come to settle at Court,
they are looked upon as awkard in their choie of persons, without any taste of
Merit, ridiculous in their Expenses, and in their Pleasures.

Our Ministers in France are altogether free from these defects, I may affirm
it of them all without Flattery, and enlarge my self a little upon Monsieur de
Lionne, whom I am better acquainted with.

It Is in him properly, that separated Talents are collected; it is in him that
meet a curious knowledge of the merits of Men, and a profound Intelligence of
things.

To speak the Truth, I have a Thousand times admired, how a Minister, who has
confounded all the Politics of the Italians, who has disordered the settled
Prudence of the Spaniards, who has turned to our Interests so many Princes of
Germany, and has made them act as we would have them, who were brought with
much difficulty to act for themselves: I have admired, I say, how a Man so
complete in Negotiating, so well versed in affairs, can have all the
delicateness of the most polite Courtiers for Conversation, and Pleasures. One
may say of him, what Salust affirmed of a Great person of Antiquity, that his
lisure is Voluptuous: but that by a just dispensation of his time with the
facility of labor, which he has made himself Master of, never was any affair
retarded by his diversions.

Amongst the divertisements of his leisure, amongst his most important
employments, he does not cease to dedicate some Hours to Learning, whereby
Atticus, that honest Man among the Ancients, did not acquire a more curious
knowledge in the sweetness of his Repose, and the tranquillity of his Study. He
is infinitely skilled in all things, and Learning, which very often spoils the
Nature, does but embellish his; it quits what it has of obscure, difficult,
rude, and brings him entirely all its advantages, without disturbing the
neatness and politeness of his Spirit. No body is better acquainted with fine
works, than He; no body composes them better; he knows equally how to judge and
to produce, and I am a little at a stand, whether one ought to esteem more in
him the fineness of his Judgment, or the beauty of his Genius. It is time to
leave his, and come to that of the Courtiers.

As they are educated near Kings, and make their ordinary residence near
Princes, they make it their particular Study to know them well: There is not an
inclination that is concealed from them, no aversion unknown, no weakness which
is not discovered to them. From thence comes insinuations, complaisance, and
all those curious measures which compose the Art of winning hearts, or at least
to reconcile their Wills; but whether it be for want of application, or else
thinking those employments below them, where one's instructed in affairs, they
are equally ignorant of them all, and their agreements coming to fail with
their Age, nothing affords them consideration and Credit. They grow old then in
the Closets, exposed to the Raillery of the Young men, who cannot suffer their
Censure, with this difference, that these for the most part do things that
agree to their humor, and that the others cannot abstain from those that are
unbecoming them; and certainly the most honest man, of whom no body has need,
finds it troublesome to exempt himself from being ridiculous in growing old.
But it is with them as with those gallant Women, who are still pleased with the
World, when that is displeased with them. If we were wise, our disgust would
answer to that which is had for us; for in the disadvantage of States, where
one does not sustain himself but by the merit of pleasing, when he ceases to be
agreeable, he ought to think of retiring. Lawyers, on the other side, appear
less Genteel when they are young, by a false Air of the Court, which makes them
succeed in the City, and renders them ridiculous to Courtiers: but at length
the knowledge of their Interest brings them to their Profession, and becoming
expert with Time, they find themselves in considerable Stations, where all the
World generally stands in want of their assistance. It is very true, that those
Courtiers that arise to Honors by great employments, leave nothing to be
desired in their sufficiency, and their merit is fully perfected, when they
join to the nicety of the Court, the knowledge of affairs, and the experience
of War.

THE COMPARISON OF Caesar and Alexander.
IT IS almost universally agreed, that Alexander and Caesar have been the
greatest Men in the World: And all those that have undertaken to Judge, have
thought to oblige the Heroes that came after 'em, by finding some resemblance
between their Reputation and their Glory. Plutarch, after having examined their
Natures, their Actions, and their Fortunes, leaves us the liberty to decide,
that he had not assurance enough to undertake it. Montagne, more confident,
declares himself for the former, and since the Versions of Vaugelas and
Ablancour, have made these Heroes the Subject of all our Conversations, every
one has embraced the part of one or the other, according to his own particular
Inclination or Fancy. As for me, who perhaps have examined their Lives with as
much curiosity as any person, notwithstanding I will not allow my self the
Authority of an absolute decision. But because you are unwilling to dispense
with me from discovering my Thoughts, you shall have some observations of the
relation and difference I find between 'em. Both have had the Advantage of
Illustrious Births. Alexander Son of a considerable King; Caesar descends from
one of the most Noble Families of that Republic, whose very Citizens esteem
themselves more than Kings. It seems that the Gods had a mind to let us know
the future grandeur of Alexander, by Olympias's Dream, and by some other
Presages. His inclinations sublime from his Infancy, his Tears which showed him
jealous for the Glory of his Father, the Judgment of King Philip, who believed
him worthy of a greater Kingdom than his own, are sufficient supports for the
declaration of the Gods. Many things of this Nature have been no less
remarkable in relation to Caesar. Sylla apprehended in him, though he was very
young, many Marius's. He dreamed that he had lain with his Mother, and the
Soothsayers interpreted, that the Earth the common Mother of mankind, should
be subjected to his Power. He was observed to weep, when he looked upon the
Statue of Alexander, for having performed nothing considerable, at an Age when
this Conqueror had made himself Master of the World. They were both Passionate
Lovers of Learning; but Alexander in every thing Ambitious, was Jealous of any
Superiority in his Studies, and his chief Prospect in Sciences, was to exceed
all others. So we may see that he complained of Aristotle, for publishing some
mysterious matters, which ought to have been reserved for him alone, and he
declares, that he a^pires no less to raise himself above Men by his Learning
than his Arms. As he had a most curious Genius, and whose Passions were easily
raised, so he was addicted to the searching after the most hidden Mysteries,
and had a particular Fancy for Poetry.

There Is no man can be ignorant of the great affection he bore to Homer, and
that in favor of Pindar, the Houses of his Posterity were conserved in the
general ruin and desolation of Thebes.

The Genius of Caesar, not altogether so vast, reduced the Sciences to his own
use, and he seems to have admired Learning, for no other purpose in the World,
than for his own advantage. In the Philosophy of Epicurus, which he held
preferable to all others, he made his chief application to that part which
relates to Man. But it appears that Eloquence was his principal aim, through a
persuasion of mind, that it is most necessary in a Republic, to arrive at the
highest employments. He made a Funeral Oration in Public at the death of his
Aunt Iulia, which succeeded with great Applause. He accused Dolabella, and
afterward made that Speech that was so exact and so fine, for the saving the
Lives of those that were Imprisoned for Catiline's Conspiracy.

We have nothing that we have any assurance to be Alexanders, except some smart
sayings of an admirable Turn, which leaves us an equal impression of the
greatness, of his Soul, and the vivacity of his Genius.

But the greatest distinction that I can apprehend in their Sentiments, is upon
the Subject of Religion; for Alexander was devout even to Superstition, giving
an entire credit to Divinations and Oracles; which might be attributed, besides
his inclination, to his usual reading of Poets, who imprint in men a Fear and
Reverence of the Gods, and made up all the Divinity of those times.

As for Caesar, whether it were out of a pure natural temper, or else giving
way to the opinions of Epicurus, it is beyond dispute that he passed into the
other extreme, had no expectation from the Gods in this Life, and was very
little concerned about the Thoughts and Accidents of the other. Lucan
represents him at the Siege of Marseilles, with an Axe in his hand in a
Consecrated Wood, where giving the first strokes himself, he encourages his
Soldiers, who were seized with a secret horror of Religion, with expressions
impious enough. Salust makes him affirm, that Death is the conclusion of all
misfortunes, that after it there remains neither rememembrance nor imaginations
of Joy.

But as men, be they never so great, compared one to another, are always
infirm, defective, contrary to themselves, subject to Mistakes or Ignorance;
Caesar was concerned at a Dream, which predicted to him the Empire, and would
not give the least Credit to that of his Wife, which advertised him of his
Death. His Life was answerable to his Belief; he was in reality moderate in
indifferent Pleasures, but denied himself nothing in those that affected him.
This was the cause that Catullus writ so many Epigrams against him, and whence,
at last it became a Proverb, that Caesar was the Wife of all Husbands, and the
Husband of all Wives.

Alexander was moderate enough in this, yet he was not altogether insensible,
for Barsine and Roxana made him Captive to their Charms, and his Continence at
last could not restrain him from using Bagoas, as Darius had formerly done.

The pleasure of Banquering, which Alexander loved so much, and where sometimes
he suffered himself to be carried, even to Excess, was indifferent to Caesar;
not but that Alexander, in time of Action, was very sober, and could easily
endure a fatigue; but when Ease and Repose had succeeded the Toils of War,
Tranquillity he esteemed as insipid, and unsavory, if he did not stir it up, as
it were, by some thing extraordinary.

They were both magnificent, even to Profusion: but Caesar with more of Design
and Interest. His Gratuities to the People, his excessive Expenses in the
Edileship, his Present to Curio, were properly, rather Corruptions than true
Liberalities. Alexander's Gifts proceeded from a pure greatness of Soul. When
he passed into Asia, he distributed his Patrimony, he left himself destitute,
and had no other prospect than the hopes of Conquest, or a resolution to dye.
At a time, when he hardly wanted the assistance of a Man, he discharged the
Debts of the whole Army. Limners, Engravers, Musicians, Poets, Philosophers
(all famous in their way, but generally in want) did partake of his
Magnificence, and were sensible of his Grandeur; not but that Caesar also was
naturally disposed to be Liberal; but out of a design to raise himself, he was
obliged to gain Persons necessary for his Affairs, and he hardly saw himself
Master of the Empire, but he* was unhappily deprived of it, together with his
Life. I don't find in Caesar those Friendships that Alexander ha^ for
Hephestion, nor that Confidence that he had in Craterus. His Correspondences
were either Obligations for his own Affairs, or else a Proceeding complaisant
enough, but much less passionate in relation to his Friends. It Is true, his
Familiarity had nothing in it of Danger, and those that were his Intimates,
never apprehended his Wrath, nor his Humors. As Alexander was in extremes,
either he was the most Charming, or the most formidable Person, and there was
no security to be expected in an Intriegue wherein he himself was engaged;
notwithstanding Friendship, after Glory, was his greatest Passion, of which
there needs no other Testimony, than his own Expression, when he cried out near
the Statue of Achilles: O Achilles, how happy do I esteem thee, in that thou
had a faithful Companion during thy Life, and such a Poet as Homer after
Death!

Hitherto we have examined the Natures of th^se two great Men, it is now time to
make a Scrutiny into the Genius's of the Conquerors, and to consider 'em in the
utmost extent of Action. It Is a kind of Folly, to reason much upon things
purely Imaginary; notwithstanding in all appearance, if Alexander had been in
Caesar's place, he had made no better use of his great and admirable Qualities,
than to his own proper Destruction. One may suppose that his haughty Humor,
which scorned to take any care of preventing things, would have but ill
preserved him in the persecutions of Sylla, he would hardly have been brought
to secure himself by a voluntary Absence. As his Gifts proceeded out of a
principle of Generosity, they would undoubtedly have proved pernicious to him.
Instead of waiting for the Edileship, where his Magnificence and Profusions had
been permitted, his Largesses and Presents at an unseasonable time, would have
rendered him justly suspected to the Senate. Perhaps too, he could not have
confined himself to those Laws, they would have tormented a Soul so imperious
as his, and by undertaking something at an inconvenient time, he would have
found the Destiny of Manlius, of the Gracchi's, or that of Ca^iline. But then,
if Alexander had perished in the Republic, Caesar, whose Courage and Wariness
went ordinarily together, had never entertained in his Thoughts, the vast
design of the Conquest of Asia.

It Is to be believed of Caesar, whose Conduct was so delicate, and so secret,
that he entered into all Conspiracies, without being (except once) accused, and
never convicted: He that in the Divisions of his own making amongst the Gauls,
assisted one to oppress the other, and brought them all under at the last: It Is
to be believed, I say, that this same Caesar following his own Genius, would
have established the State, subdued his Neighbors, and set all the Republic
of Greece at difference one with another, in order to have made himself Master
of them. And certainly, to have relinquished Macedon without the least hope of
return, to have left his Neighbors disaffected; Greece in a manner subdued,
but not quite reconciled to the new method of Government, with 35000 Men, 70
Talents, and an inconsiderable quantity of Provisions; to have gone directly to
seek out a King of Persia, whom the Greeks called the Great King, and whose
simple Li^utenants upon the Frontiers, struck the whole World with Amazement:
This is beyond ones Imagination, and something more surprising, than if the
Republic of Genoa, together with those of Lucca, and Ragusa, should at this
day enterprise the Conquest of France. Had Ca^sar declared War to the Great
King, he had acted, perhap^, only upon the Frontiers, and would not have been
judged Unfortunate, if he had made the River Granicus to be the extent of his
Territories. If Ambition had caused him to have advanced further, can it
possibly be imagined, that he would have* refused the offers of Darius, he,
that always proposed an Accommodation with Pompey, and that he would not rest
satisfied with the Daughter of the King, with Five or Six Provinces, which
Alexander, perhaps, insolently enough refused? In fine, if there is any Reason
in my Conjectures, he would hardly have been so inquisitive after the King of
Persia, in the Plains, attended by a Million of Soldiers: Let us allow Caesar
to be exceeding brave: let us allow him also to be of an assured Spirit, but
when that is done, I cannot promise my self, that he would have slept so
p^ofoundly the Night preceding the Battle of Arbel^a; I rather believe he would
have been of Parmenio's Opinion, and that his Answers would have bore no
proportion to Alexander's; notwithstanding that great Battle was absolutely
necessary for the Master^ ship of Asia; otherwise Darius had protracted the War
from Province to Province all the remainder of his Life; 'twas necessary, that
he fell as he did, or that a thousand different People should observe him
vanquished with his whole Power.

It Is true, that this immoderate desire of Glory, and this excessive Ambition
which allowed him no interval of Repose, rendered him at some particular times
so insupportable to the Macedonians, that they were all ready to abandon him;
but it is there particularly, that is observed, that prodigious Courage which
nothing could abate. Go Cowards, says he, Go Ungrateful Men, and tell to your
Country, that ye have left Alexander, with his Friends, laboring for the Glory
of Greece, amongst Nations that know how to obey him, better than you.

In all the Passages of his Life, the Prince of Conde admired nothing more than
this brave fierceness to the Macedonians, and this Confidence in himself.
Alexander, says he, le^t by his own men, amongst the barbarous Nations, who
were not thoroughly subdued, was so persuaded of his own Worthiness, and
Capacity to Command, that he thought it not in the Power of men to refuse to
pay him Obeisance. To reside in Europe, or in Asia, amongst Greeks, or amongst
Persians, each was indifferent to him; he was assured to meet with Subjects
where he found Men. That which is said to the advantage of Caesar is this, that
the Macedonians were employed against a People drowned in Ease, and Cowardice,
and that the Conquest of the Gauls, who are a fierce and Military People, must
of necessity be much harder to the Romans. I will not amuse my self, by enquiring
into the Courage of one or the other, but it is certain, that Caesar never found
real, and substancial Armies amongst the Gauls. There was entire Nations, if
you reserve the Women, Children, and Old Men, who made a Tumultuary Assembly
for the defense of their Liberties: a vast number of Combatants without Order,
or Discipline; and to acknowledge the Truth, excepting two or three, Caefar
might boast, Veni, Vidi, Vici, in all his Undertakings; which makes me
thoroughly convinced, that Labienus commanding the Legions, would have had the
same good Fortune to subject our Provinces to the Republic, or by all the
appearances of things Parmenio had not given that great Battle, that afforded a
decisive Judgment concerning the affairs of Asia. You way observe also this
remarkable particular, that Parmenio wanted Alexanders assistance in the
Battle, and that Caesar had been infallibly lost without Labienus, who after
having routed all of his side, sent the Tenth Legion to disengage him. Whether
it were that he undertook more dangerous enterprises, or else by exposing
himself more than he need, or whether he was in this point the more
unfortunate, Alexander was a hundred times in manifest danger of his Life, and
very often extremely wounded. It Is certain too, that Caesar had his Hazards,
but more rarely, and I Am in suspense whether he was ever much Wounded in all
his Wars. For my part, I cannot conjecture how the People of Asia should be so
soft and pusillanimous, they, that have been always formidable to Europe. In
the greatest power of the Republic, have not the Romans been unhappy in their
Encounters with the Parthians, who possessed but one part of the Empire of
Darius? Crassus was there lost with his Legions in the time of Caesar; and a
little after, Anthony made an Expedition thither with loss and shame. As for
Conquests, we cannot justly attribute any others to Caesar than those of Gaul:
for by the advantage of a Civil War, he subjected the Commonwealth with the
better part of its own Forces* and the single Battle of Pharsalia, rendered him
absolute Master of a Hundred different people, which others had subdued before.

Vespasian cannot be said to have Conquered the Empire, when he was made
Emperor upon the Defeat of Vitellius. So Caesar has advantaged himself by the
Labors and Exploits of all the Romans: the Scipio's, Emilius, Marcellus,
Marius, Sylla, and Pompey, even his own proper Enemies have fought for him; and
all that was performed in 600 years, was the fruits of one hours Battle. That
which seems to me still more incomprehensible, as to Alexander is this, that in
twelve or thirteen years he has subdued more Countries, than the greatest
States in the whole extent of their Durations. At this time a Traveller is
celebrated, for having passed but a part of those Nations, that he subdued* and
that nothing might be deficient to render his Happiness complete, he had a most
peaceable enjoyment of his Empire, even so far as to be adored by the
Conquered. In which particular I pity the misfortune of Caesar, who had not
opportunity enough to give a form to the State conformable to his intentions,
being Assassinated by those he went to reduce to a Compliance. There remains
still one consideration upon Alexander, viz. that all the Macedonian Captains,
after his Death, were powerful Kings, who compared to him when alive, appeared
but as indifferent persons. And certainly, he is in some measure pardonable, if
in a Country where was a strong Belief that the greatest part of the Gods had
once their Habitations upon Earth, where Hercules was supposed to be the
Offspring of Jupiter, because he had the fortune to slay a Lion, and to rid the
World of a pernicious Robber: I say, sure he is pardonable in some measure, if
having a reliance on the opinion of Philip, who was under a persuasion that his
Wife had some communication with a Deity, if imposed on and flattered by the
Oracle; if upon finding himself so much above ordinary men, he has sometimes
disowned his real Birth, and given credit to the sentiments of his Divine Race.
Perhaps he only dispersed this Belief amongst the Barbarians, to attract from
'em Veneration, for at the time he put himself out to the World for a kind of a
God, his natural Slumbers, his Society with Women, the Blood which came from
his Wounded Body, made him sensible he was but a Man. After so large a
discourse of the advantages of Alexander, I Will briefly affirm, that through the
Beauty of a Universal Genius, Caesar was the greatest of the Romans in all
respects, both in matters of the State, and those of War. In reality the
enterprises of Alexander, have something in them more amazing; but the conduct
and the capacity must not stand for so great a share: The War of Spain against
Petreius and A^ranius, is a passage that men of approved experience yet admire.
The most memorable Sieges of the latter times, have been formed in imitation of
the Siege of Alexia, and to Caesar is owing our Fortifications, our Lines, our
Contravallations, and every thing that generally relates to the security of
Armies before the places Besieged. As to what regards Vigor, the Battle of
Munda was by far more contested than those of Asia; and Caesar run as great a
risque in Egypt, as Alexander did in the Town of the Mallians. They were no
less different in the proceeding than in the action. When Caesar had not the
Justice of his side, he searched for appearances, and praetexts were never
wanting to him. Alexander gave no other reasons to the World than his own Will*
he followed throughout either his Ambition or his Humor. Caesar on the other
side suffered himself to be conducted either by his Interest, or his Reason.

There never was observed in any person so much equality in Life, so much
Moderation in Fortune, and so much Clemency in apparent Injuries. Those
impetuosi^ies which cost poor Clitus his Life, those ill made out Suspicions,
which occasioned the loss of Philotas, and which to the Infamy of Alexander, at
length drew on, as a necessary misfortune, the death of Parmenio* all these
irregular motions were unknown to Caesar: he is irreproachable in that
particular, except in relation to himself, for not having been careful enough
of his own proper Security.

It must be acknowledged, that instead of being subject to the disorders of his
Passion, he was the most active Man of the World, and the least liable to
disturbance. Great things and little things, found him still easy, without
being raised by the one, or dejected by the other.

Alexander seemed to be out of his way, but when he was doing extraordinary
things. If he was to Run, it was to be with none but Kings; if he loved Hunting
it was that of Lions; he could not make a Present unworthy of himself: He was
at no time so resolute, nor in so good a humor, as at the despondency of his
Troops: never so full of hope, as in their despair. In a word, he began to
enjoy himself, when Men for the most part, either through Fear, or some other
Infirmity, are used to give themselves up to their Afflictions. But his too
elevated Soul, could not easily dispense with the common Accidents of Life; and
hardly secure of himself, it was to be f^ar'd least he should be lost either
amidst his Pleasures or his Ease.

Here I must oblige my self to make some reflections upon the Heroes, whose
Dominion has so much sweetness in it, that without trouble we submit to it.
There remains with us, none of those secret repugnances for 'em, nor those
internal notions of Liberty, which are so painful to us in a forced Obedience.
All our qualities are easy and compliant, but what proceeds from them is
sometimes insupportable. When they are our Masters by power, and so much beyond
us in regard of their desert, they think to enjoy a double Empire, which exacts
a double subjection; and very often it is a miserable condition to have our
dependence upon Men that are so great, that they may with reason despise us. In
the mean time, since they don't rule in Deserts, and that they are under a
necessity of conversing with us, methinks it should be for their Interest to
accommodate themselves to our Infirmities, and we would then justly respect 'em
as Gods, when they would be content to live as men. But let me conclude a
discourse, which begins to grow tedious to my self, and determine, that by
practicable means Caesar has executed the greatest things, and has rendered
himself the first of the Romans.

Alexander was naturally above Men* you would say that he was Born Master of the
Universe, and that in his Expeditions he rather sought to make himself taken
notice of by his People, than to encounter his Foes.

A Discourse upon THE FRENCH Historians.
IT is to be acknowledged that the greatest part of our Historians have had but
an indifferent merit, and without the natural desire of knowing what has come
to pass in their own Countries, I cannot imagine how a person, that has good
Skill in ancient Histories, could persuade himself to suffer the tediousness
which ours afford. And certainly it is strange enough, that in a Monarchy where
there has been so many memorable Wars, and so many signal alterations of
affairs; that amongst a People that have a Courage to perform great things, and
a Vanity to speak of them, there should not be one Historian, that answers
either to the Dignity of the Subject, or to our own proper inclination.

I was of opinion formerly, that one ought to attribute this defect to our
Language; but when I have since considered, that the Beauty of the French in
the Translation almost equalled that of the Greek and Latin in the Original, it
is come into my Thoughts in spite of my self, that the indifference of our
Genius is below the Majesty of History. Besides, if so be there were amongst us
some Genius's of a sufficient height, there are too many things necessary to
the composition of a fine History, to be able to meet with them in one and the
same person. One might find perhaps a style pure enough and noble enough in
some of our Authors, who by reason of their living at a distance from the Court
and Business, would handle them with general maxims and common places, which
relish more of the Policy of Antiquity, than ours. Our experienced men of
business have a great knowledge of our own Interests; but they have the
disadvantage of being used to a certain style of dispatch, as proper for
Negotiations, as it is little agreeable to the Dignity of History. It is also a
usual thing with them, to speak very ill of War; unless Fortune has laid it in
their way to be concerned therein sometimes, or they have lived in the
acquaintance and familiarity of Great Men, that have had the management
thereof: That has been a considerable defect in Grotius, who after he had
pierced into the most secret causes of the War, the nature of the Government of
the Spaniards, the disposition of the People of Flanders; who, after he had
entered into the true Genius of Nations, forms a just Character of Societies and
that of principal persons; who after he had so well explained the different
States of the Christian Religion; who after he had ascended to Originals,
unknown to Cardinal Bentivoglio and to Strada, could not maintain in men's minds
the admiration which he had caused there, so soon as he was to open the Field
of War, when he was to speak of the motion of Armies, and come to the
description of Sieges, and to the recital of Battles.

We have some Persons of Quality of an extraordinary merit, who for having
executed great employments with a good natural Judgment, and some acquired
knowledge, are equally capable of acting well and speaking well; but generally
they want a Genius, or have not the Art of Writing well: Besides that,
referring all things to their own way, and the function of their Charges, they
seek little to instruct themselves in the forms of the Government, and Orders
of the Kingdom. They would imagine to do themselves wrong, and take the Spirit
of the Lawyers against the Dignity of their Profession, if so be they should
apply themselves to the knowledge of our Principal Laws. And without those
Lights *I durst assure, that it is as it were impossible, to make a good
History filled (as it ought to be) with sound and judicious Instructions.

Bacon often complained, that Historians took pleasure in extending themselves
upon. Foreign affairs, and that they seemed to avoid as a weakness, the
discourse of Rules, which compose the public Tranquillity: That letting
themselves go, with Joy, to the recital of those Evils which War brings, they
don't treat of, but with distaste, the good Laws, which establish the happiness
of a Civil Society. His complaints appear to me so much the better founded,
inasmuch as there is not one History amongst the Romans, but where we discern
the in side of the Republic, by its Laws, as well as the outside by its
Conquests. You see in Livy, sometimes the abolishing of old Laws, and sometimes
the establishment of new ones; you see there every thing that depends on
Religion, and what relates to Ceremonies. The Conspiracy of Catiline in Salust,
is quite full of the Constitutions of the Republic; and the Speech of Caesar
so delicate, does it not all roll upon the Portian Law, upon the just
considerations their Fathers had for quitting the ancient rigor in the
punishment of Citizens, upon the dangerous consequences which would follow, if
so be so wise an Ordinance should be violated?

The same Caesar in his Commentaries, never loses an occasion to speak of the
Manners, Customs, and Religion of the Gauls.

Tacitus is perhaps but too full of Accusations, Defenses, Laws, and Judgments.

Quintus Curtius, in a History made to please more than to instruct, puts at
the mouth of Alexander the Laws of the Macedonians, to answer the reproaches of
Hermolaus, who had Conspired against his Life.

This Alexander that seems to have known no other Laws, than his own Will, in
the Conquest of the World.

This Alexander does not scorn to support himself by the Authority of the Laws,
for having ordered a young Lad to be Whipped, when he was Master of the Universe.

As there is no Nation, that is unwilling to secure it self from Foreign
Violences, when it is infirm, or to render its condition more glorious by
Conquests, when it is Powerful. As there is none, but ought to assure its
repose by the constitution of a good Government, and the Tranquillity of the
Conscience by the Sentiments of their Religion; so there is no Historian, but
ought to be instructed in all these different Interests, when he undertakes
their History; but ought to make known what renders men unhappy, to the end
that it may be avoided, or what makes their happiness, that it may be procured.
One cannot write a good History of France, for all the Wars that are to be be
described, without showing the orders of the Kingdom, the difference of
Religion, and the Liberties of the Gallican Church.

It would be ridiculous to undertake to write that of England, without knowing
the Affairs of the Parliament, and being well instructed in the different
Religions of this Kingdom.

It would not be less to attempt that of Spain, without knowing exactly the
various forms of its Counsels, and the mystery of its Inquisition, as well as
the secret of its Foreign Interests, and the motives, and successes of its Wars.

But in truth, these diversities of Laws, Religion, Politics, and War, ought
to be ingeniously mingled, and very discreetly managed: For a Man, that should
affect to speak often of the Constitution and Laws of a State, would rather
savor of the Legislatour or Lawyer, than the Historian. To treat of each point
of Religion with a meditated curiosity, would be to make Lectures of Divinity;
and one should suffer him with pain in the History of Father Paul, if one did
not pardon the tediousness of his Controversys between the Doctors, by the
necessity of his Subject.

Although the Description of Wars seem to hold the first place in History, it is
to appear a sort of a troublesome Romancer, to heap up accidents upon
accidents, without any diversity of matter, it is to find the means in true
Subjects of imitating the manner of the Old Romance-makers, in their false
Combats, and fabulous Adventures.

The Latin Historians have known how to mingle admirably the diverse pieces of
Knowledge, that I have treated of: so the History of the Romans ought to have
some resemblance with their Lives, which were divided in the different Offices
of several Professions. Indeed, there has hardly been any Great Persons at
Rome, but have passed through the Dignities of the Priesthood, have belonged to
the Senate, and taken from thence to Command Armies. Now a days every Profession
takes up a man wholly: The greatest Virtue of the Clergy, is to apply
themselves entirely to Ecclesiastical affairs; and those whose ambition has
pushed them to the management of Business, have gone through a thousand
reproaches for having corrupted the Sanctity of Life they were destined to. The
Lawyers are made ridiculous, so soon as they go out of their Profession; and a
Soldier is for the most part ashamed, to know any thing beyond his Art.

It is certain notwithstanding, that the diverse applications of the Ancients,
formed a capacity much more extensive, the same persons understanding how to
employ well the forces of the Republic, and to contain the People by the
Reverence of Religion, and by the Authority of the Laws. It was a great
advantage to the Magistrates to be Masters of the strongest impressions, which
are made upon the Spirits, and to seize on all the Sentiments, whereby they are
disposed to the being tractable, or constrained to Obedience. It was not a less
benefit to Generals to be instructed in the Secrets of their Religion, to be
able to inspire their own Notions, and to make them received with the same
respect, as if they had been truly Inspired by the Gods; to have the Art of
turning all things into Presages of good or ill Fortune, and to know seasonably
how to fill the Soldiers with Confidence or Fear. But there returned yet
another advantage to the Republic, to wit, that the Magistrates made
themselves entirely known; for it was impossible that in these different
functions, the most profound nature should equally conceal it self throughout,
and that these good or ill Qualities should not be at length discerned. One
discovered in these limited Genius's, whom Nature has restrained to certain
Talents, that a sweet and peaceable Temper, which was accommodated to the
Ministry of Religion, had not sometimes constancy enough to maintain the Laws
in Vigor.

Sometimes a Senator could not be corrupted in Trials, who had neither the
activity nor vigilance of a good Captain.

Such was a Great Warrior, as Marius, who had no ^apacity in what related to
Religion and business. To speak the Truth, there was often a general
sufficiency, and a complete Virtue throughout, which might render the Citizens
useful to the Public in all things, but oftentimes also a capacity not so
large, made Men to be employed to certain uses, for which they were but just
fit.

It Is this which has been seen in the Consulship of Cicero and Antonius, where
the first had orders to watch for the safety of the Republic according to his
Talent, the other was sent to gather Troops with Petrei^xss, to Fight with
those of Catiline.

If one makes reflection upon what I have said, one will not be surprised to
find excellent Historians amongst a People, where those that writ History were
most frequently very considerable persons, to whom was wanting neither Geni^^,
nor the Art of Writing well, and who had in an equal measure a profound
knowledge of the affairs of Religion, War, and Men. To affirm the Truth, the
Ancients had a great Advantage over us in knowing the Genius of Men by these
different proofs, where they were obliged to pass into the Administration of
the Commonwealth; but they have not been less careful in describing them well,
and whosoever will examine their Characters with a little curiosity and
intelligence, shall discover therein a particular Study, and an Art deep laid.

In effect you see them gather as it were opposite qualities, which one could
not imagine to find in one and the same person, animus audax, subdolus: You see
them find a difference in certain qualities, which appear to be absolutely the
same, and which one cannot discover without a great nicety of Judgment:
subdolus; varius; cujuslibet rei simulator, ac dissimulator. There is another
diversity in the Characters of the Ancients, more curious, and which is yet
less known to us.

There is a certain difference, wherewith each Vice, or each Virtue is marked
by the particular impression it takes in minds, where it is. For Example, the
Courage of Alcibiades has something singular in it, which distinguishes it
from that of Epaminondas, although both knew how to expose their lives equally.
The integrity of Cato is different from that of Catulus; the boldness of
Catiline is not the same, as that of Anthony; the ambition of Sylla, and that
of Caesar have not a perfect resemblance: from whence it comes that the
Ancients forming thereby the Characters of their Great Men, form, that I may so
speak, at the same time the Character of the Qualities they give them, to the
end that they might appear not only Ambitious and Daring, or Moderate and
Prudent, but that one might know more particularly what was the kind of the
Ambition and the Courage, or the Moderation and Prudence, which they had.

Salust describes Catiline to us, as a person of a Wicked Nature, and the
wickedness of this nature is immediately expressed: Sed ingenio malo pravoque.

The kind of his Ambition is distinguished by the irregularity of his manners,
and the irregularity is marked in regard of the Character of his Spirit by
imaginations too vast and too high: Vastus animus immoderata, incredibilia,
nimis alt^ semper cupiebat.

He had a temper wicked enough to enterprise all things against the Laws, and
too vast a Spirit to fix himself to designs, proportioned to the means of
making them succeed.

The bold Spirit of a Voluptuous and Unchaste Woman, such as Sempronia was,
might have made it believed that her boldness would have undertaken all things
in favor of her Amors: But as this sort of confidence is little proper for
dangers, to which one is exposed in a Conspiracy, Salust presently explains
what she is capable of doing, by what she had done before: Quae multa saepe
virilis ^udaci^^ facinora commiserat. Behold the species of her boldness
expressed.

He makes her Dance and Sing not with the Fashions, Gestures, and Motions,
which the Singing and Dancing Women at Rome used, but with more Art and
Curiosity than was decent for an honest Woman: Psallere and saltare elegantius
quam necesse sit probae. When he attributes to her a Wit which you would value,
he tells at the same time wherein it consisted. Caeterum ingenium ejus haud
absurdum versus facere, jocos movere, sermon uti vel modesto, vel molli, vel
procaci. You will know in the Character of Sylla, that his Nature agreed
happily with his Designs. The Republic at that time being divided into two
Factions, those that aspired to the power had no greater Interest than to
acquire Friends, and Sylla had no greater pleasure than to make them.

Liberality is the best means to gain Affections. Sylla knew how to give all
things. Amongst the things, which one gives, there is nothing which enslaves Men
more, and assures so much their Services, as the Money, which they receive of
us. In which the Liberality of Sylla was particularly exercised. Rerum omnium,
pecuniae maxim largitor. He was liberal of his own Nature, liberal of his
Money out of Interest.

His leisure was Voluptuous; but it had not been giving a fine Character of
this Great Man, to have described him with Sensuality or Laziness: which
obliges Salust to mark the Character of the pleasure of a Gentleman which
yielded to Glory, by whom Affairs are never retarded, for fear one should come
to suspect him of a softness, wherein for the most part languish the
Effeminate. Voluptatum cupidus, gloriae cupidior otio luxurioso esse, tamen a
negotiis nunquam voluptas remorata.

He was the happiest Man of the World before the Civil War, but this happiness
was not the pure effect of Chance; and his Fortune, as great as it was always,
never was above his Industry. Atque illi felicissi^o omnium ante civilem
victoriam, nunquam super industriam fortuna fuit.

When Tacitus leaves us the description of Petronius, he marks the qualities he
gives him, with these sorts of distinctions; he makes him consume his Wealth
not as a profuse Man in Debauchery, but as a delicate Person, in a polite and
curious Luxury.

The contempt of Death which he ascribes to him, has nothing common with that,
which the other Romans had: It is not the constant gravity of Thraseas, giving
Instructions to him that brought him the order to Die; it is not the forced
constancy of Seneca, who has occasion to encourage himself by the remembrance
of his own Precepts and Discourses; it is not that affected firmess, which
Helvidius spurs himself on with; it is not a resolution formed upon the
Opinions of Philosophers; it is a soft and careless indifference, which left in
his Soul no room for the fatal thoughts of Death; it is a continuation of the
ordinary course of his Life to the last moment. But if the Ancients had so much
curiousness in marking these distinctions, there is not less Art in the style
of their Characters to tie our judgment to the knowledge of them.

In their Narrations they engage us to follow them by the insensible bond of an
agreeable and natural recital. They attract our minds in their Orations, by the
earnestness of discourse, fearing if our Spirits were not moved out of their
place, they should examine the little Judgment there is in the amplifications
of Eloquence, and should have the opportunity of forming secret oppositions to
the being persuaded. Sometimes they bring in a Council Reasons upon Reasons to
determine Souls unresolved to the party, which they ought to take. But in
Characters where one should discern Vices and Virtues, where one should
discover the differences which meet in one Nature, where one should not only
distinguish the different qualities, but the differences whereby each quality
is marked, one ought not to make use of a style which engages us, or draws us
in, nor of Arguments one upon another, which should put ours in subjection. On
the contrary one ought to disengage us from every thing that draws us on, from
every thing that imposes on us, from every thing that enslaves our
understanding, to the end of leaving us with our selves is a full use of our
own understanding, tied notwithstanding, as much as it is possible for us, to
every term of a compendious style, and a various construction, for fear the
mind should come to disperse it self in too rambling considerations.

By that a Reader is obliged to give his utmost attention to diverse
singularities, and to examine separately each feature of the Picture.

It Is thus the Ancients formed their Characters. As for us, if so be we were to
describe a Nature, like that of Catiline, we should be troubled to conceive in
one and the same person, qualities which appear to be opposite.

So much boldness with so great Artifice, so much fierceness and so much
Policy, so much Ardour in what he desired, with so much Fraud and Dissimulation.

There are nice differences between qualities, which seem to be the same, which
we have much ado to discover.

There is sometimes a mixture of Vice and Virtue in one single quality, which
we never truly separate. It is easy for us to know Virtues, when they are
pure and entire; and for the most part we give prudence in Counsels, promptness
in Execution, and valor in Battles.

As for what regards good Manners, Piety toward God, Honesty toward Men, and
Fidelity to his Friends, and to his Master.

We make the same use both of Defects and Vices; of Incapacity in Affairs, of
Cowardice against Enemies, of Infidelity to his Friends, of Idleness, Avarice
and Ingratitude: But where Nature has not put a great purity in Virtues, where
she has left some mixture of Virtue amongst Vices, we want sometimes a
penetration to discover what lies concealed, sometimes a curiousness to
dis^entangle what is confused.

These particular distinctions, which variously mark the qualities according to
the Spirits, where they meet, are yet more obscure to us. The diversity of
Valor is unknown to us; we have but one Courage for all the Valiant Men, one
Ambition for all the Ambitious; and to speak the truth, the Character, which we
make of a Person of great Desert, might agree to every thing that has been
given to the Great Persons of our Time.

If so be we were to speak of those Dukes of Guise, whose Reputation is
Eternal, we should Entitle them, Valiant, Generous, Courteous, Liberal,
Ambitious, Zealous for the Catholic Religion, and declared Enemies of the
Protestant; but the qualities of the one too little distinguished from those of
the other, would not form the Characters as different as they should be.

Those Virtues, which Morality and general Discourses represent to us to be the
same, take a different Air by the difference of the Humor and Genius of the
Persons that have them.

We judge well that the Constable, and the Admiral have been capable of
sustaining the Burden of the most important Affairs; but the difference of
their capacity is not sufficiently marked in our Authors.

The Courage of the Marshall de Chatillon was a slow and negligent stoutness.
That of the Marshall de la Meilleraye had a Fervency very proper to press a
Siege, and a Passion, which disordered him in Field-fights.

The Valor of the Marechal de Ranzau was admirable for great Actions; it could
save a Province, it could preserve an Army: But one would have said that it
esteemed common dangers below it self, to have seen it so careless in little
and frequent occasions, where common Parts could have done the Business.

That of the Marechal de Gassion, more lively and active, might have been
useful at all moments; there was not a day, wherein it gave not to our Troops
some advantage over the Enemies. It is true that it was less free at the sight
of something that was weighty. This Marechal who had ventured so much in
falling upon Parties, so brisk in charging the Rear of an Army, feared an
entire Engagement, being Occupied with the thoughts of Events, when it was more
necessary to act than to think.

Sometimes we insist wholly upon Qualities, without having regard to what
Humor mixes therein. Sometimes we give too much to Humor, and don't consider
enough the depth of Qualities.

The Meditation of Monsieur de Turenne, his Spirit retired into himself, full
of his Projects, and his Conduct, have made him pass for timorous, irresolute
and uncertain, although he gave Battle with as much easiness, as Monsieur de
Gassion went to a Skirmish. And the Natural heat of the Prince of Conde made
him thought impetuous in Battles; He, that was Master of himself more than any
Person in the World in the heat of Action, He, that had more presence of Mind
at Lens, Fribourg, Norlingue, and Senef, than he would have had perhaps in his
Closet.

After so long a Discourse upon the knowledge of Men, I will affirm that our
Historians don't give us enough of it, for want of Application or Judgment to
know them well.

They imagined that an exact recital of Events sufficed to instruct us, without
considering that Affairs are done by Men, whom Passion oftener transports, than
Policy conducts them.

Prudence governs the Wise; but there is but a few of them, and the most Wise
are not so at all times: Passion agitates almost the whole World, and almost
always.

In States, where the Maxims of true Interest ought to be better followed, one
see^ the greatest part of things acted by a Spirit of Faction, and all Factions
are passionate; Passion is found every where, the Zeal of the best Persons is
not exempt from it.

The Animosity of Cato against Caesar, the Fury of Cicero against Anthony have
not been less serviceable to the Ruin of Liberty, than the Ambition of those,
who have Established Tyranny.

The Opposition of two Great Men, equally, but differently Zealous for the good
of Holland, have been very near destroying of it, when it had no more to fear
from the Spaniards.

Prince Maurice would have it powerful abroad; Bernaveld would have it free at
home. The first put it in a condition to support it self against a King of
Spain: The second sought to assure it against a Prince of Orange.

It cost Bernaveld his Life, and that which frequently enough happens, one saw
the Partisans of Liberty even Ruined by the People.

I pass from Observations upon History, to Reflections upon Politics: Perhaps
I may be pardoned for it; whatever happens, I shall satisfy my self.

In the beginnings of a Republic, the love of Liberty is the chief Virtue of
the Citizens, and the Jealousy which it inspires, establishes the principal
Policy of the State.

As weary as Men are of the troubles, perplexities and dangers, which they must
endure to live always Independent, they follow any Ambitious Man, that pleases
them, and fall easily from a troublesome Liberty, to an agreeable Subjection.

I remember that I have often said in Holland, and even to the Pensioner, that
Men were mistaken in the Nature of the Hollanders.

One is persuaded, that the Hollanders love Liberty, and they only hate
Oppression. There is with them more roughness in the Mind, than fierceness in
the Soul, and the fierceness of the Soul makes the true Republicans. One would
be apprehensive there of a Covetous Prince, capable of taking away their
Estates; a Violent Prince, that might be outrageous to them: But they agree to
the Quality of Prince with Pleasure.

If so be they love the Republic, it is for the Interest of their Traffic,
more than through a satisfaction, they have in being free.

The Magistrates love to be Independent, to govern those that depend on them:
The People would more easily acknowledge the Authority of the Prince, than that
of the Magistrates.

When a Prince of Orange had a design to surprise Amsterdam, all declared for
the Burgo-Masters, but that was more through a hatred of Violence, than a love
of Liberty.

When another opposed a Peace, after a long War, there was a Peace made in
spite of him: But it was done through a sense of the present misery; and the
natural consideration, which they had for him, is but suspended, not destroyed.

These extraordinary strokes being passed over, they return to the Prince of
Orange. The Republicans are displeased to see the people take up their first
Affections, and they apprehend a Dominion, without daring to appear jealous of
Liberty.

When the Prince of Orange had neither Charge, nor Government, when he had no
Credit but by his Name, the Pensioner and Monsieur de Nordhuis were the only
Persons, that durst boldly pronounce the word Republic at the Hague.

The Family of Orange had other Enemies enough; but these Enemies always spoke
of States with general Expressions, which did not explain the Constitution of
the Government.

Holland (says Grotius) is a Republic made by chance, which maintains it self
by the fear they conceive of the Spaniards, Respublica casu facta, quam metus
Hispanorum continet.

The Apprehension, which the French nowadays give them, produces the same
effect; and the necessity of a good Intelligence unites the Prince to the
States, and the States to the Prince.

But to judge of things by themselves, Holland is neither free, nor subject.
It Is a Government made up of pieces very slightly fastened, where the Power of
the Prince, and the Liberty of the Citizens have an equal necessity for
Stratagems to preserve it.

Let us come now to what regards the Courts, and make Reflection upon the
Effects that Passions occasion there.

In what Court have not the Women had Credit, and in what Intrigues are not
they concerned?

What has not the Princess of Eboly done under Philip the Second, as Prudent
and Politic as he was?

And the Countess of Carlisle, from the most inward part of Whitehall, did not
she animate all the Factions of Westminster?

It Is a Consolation for us to find our Infirmities in those, that have the
Authority to govern us; and a great delight to those, that are distinguished by
Power, to be made, like us, for Pleasures.

REFLECTIONS UPON THE FRENCH Translators.
THE Works of our Translators are generally esteemed throughout the World. It Is
not the very exact fidelity, that recommends our Ablancour: But one must admire
the agreeable force of his Expression, where there is neither harshness, nor
obscurity. You will find therein not a term to be desired for the purity of
Sense, nothing to be rejected, nothing of superfluity, nothing that is
displeasing to us. Every word is there measured for the exactness of periods,
without the stile's appearing less natural; and yet a Syllable more or less
would ruin, I know, any Harmony, which is as agreeable to the Ear, as that of
Verse. But, in my Opinion, he holds the Obligation of these advantages to the
discourse of the Ancients, which rules his own; for so soon as he returns from
their Genius to his own, as in his Prefaces and Letters, he loses the best
part of all these Beauties: And he who is an admirable Author, whilst he is
animated with the Spirit of the Greeks and Latins, becomes but a moderate
Writer, when he is not supported, but by himself. It Is that which happens with
the greatest part of our Translators; whereof they appear to me to be
convinced, to be first sensible of their own Barrenness. And indeed he that
places his Merit in improving the Thoughts of others, is not very confident of
being capable to recommend himself by his own: But the Public is infinitely
obliged to him for the labor he undergoes to bring forth Foreign Riches,
where the natural ones don't suffice: I am not of the Humor of a Person of
Quality, whom I know to be a declared Enemy to all Translations. He is a
Learned and Ingenious Spaniard, who cannot suffer that things should be rendered
apprehensive to Idle Persons, which he has learned amongst the Ancients with
pains. As for me, besides that I improve in a thousand places by the Laborious
Enquiries of Translators, I love that the knowledge of Antiquity should become
more general, and I am pleased in seeing his Authors admired by those very
Persons, that would have treated us as Pedants, if so be we had named them,
when they did not understand them. I mix then my knowledge with that of the
Public, but I don't give my esteem, and can be very liberal of my praises for
Translation, when I shall be very covetous of them for the Genius of its
Author. I can much esteem the Versions of Ablancour, Vaugelas, Durier, and many
others, without having much value for their Spirits; if they have not appeared
by those Works that proceed from themselves.

We have the Versions of two Latin Poems in French Verse, which deserve to be
as much considered for their Beauty, as for the difficulty of the Enterprise.
That of Brebaeuf has been generally esteemed, and I am not so censorious, or so
severe, as to oppose my self to so favorable an Approbation. I will observe,
notwithstanding, that he has shot forth the heat of Lucan in our Language,
further than it goes in his own; and that by the attempt which he has made, to
equal the warmth of this Poem, he has fired himself, if one may speak so, much
more. Behold, what happens to Brebaeuf often enough, but he relaxeth sometimes;
and when Lucan happily meets with the true beauty of a Thought, the Translator
remains much below him, as if he had a mind to appear easy and natural, when
he might be permitted to employ all his Force.

You will remark a hundred times the truth of my first Observation, and the
second will not appear to you less just in some places; for example, to render
Victrix causa Diis placuit, sed victa Catoni.

Brebuaef has only said, the Gods serve Caesar, and Cato follows Pompey.

It Is a low Expression, which does not answer to the Nobleness of the Latin;
besides, that it is not well using the Sense of the Author: for Lucan, who has
a Spirit full of the Virtue of Cato, would raise him above the Gods, in the
opposition of Opinions, upon the merit of the Cause; and Breb^uf turns a noble
Image of Cato raised above the Gods, into that of Cato subjected to Pompey.

As for Segrais, he remains throughout much below Virgil, which he easily
acknowledges himself; for it would be very extraordinary, to be able to render
a Translation equal to so excellent an Original: Moreover, one of the greatest
advantages of the Poet consists in the Beauty of the Expression, which it is
impossible to equal in our Language, since it could never be done in his own.

Segrais ought to be contented with having found the Genius of Virgil, better
than any of our Authors; and whatsoever Graces the Aeneids have lost in his
hands, I durst pronounce, that he, by far surpasses all those Poems, that our
Frenchmen have published with more Confidence than Success.

The great Application of Segrais, to know the Genius of the Poet, appears in
his Preface, as well as in the Translation, and it seems to me, that he has
succeeded well, as to the whole, except the Characters. In that I cannot be of
his Opinion, and he will pardon me, if, for having been displeased a thousand
times with his Hero, I do not lose the occasion of speaking here, of the
little merit of the good Aeneas.

Although Conquerors are usually more careful in making their Orders executed
upon Earth, than in observing Religiously, those of Heaven; as Italy was
promised to this Trojan by the Gods, it is with Reason, that Virgil has given
him a great Compliance to their Wills; but when he describes him to us so
devout, he ought to attribute to him a Devotion full of Confidence, which
agrees with the Constitution of Heroes, not a scrupulous Sentiment of Religion,
which never subsists with a true Valor.

A General, that has a good Faith in his Gods, ought to augment the greatness
of his Courage, by the hopes of their Assistance: His Condition were unhappy,
if he could not believe in them, but with a Superstition, which would take away
the natural use of his Understanding, and his Heart. It Is this that happened to
poor Nicias, who lost the Army of the Athenians, and himself too, by a
credulous, and superstitious Opinion of the Anger of the Gods. It is not so
with the Great Alexander, he believes himself to be the Son of Jupiter, to
undertake things very extraordinary. Scipio, who feigns, or thinks to have a
commerce with the Gods, draws an advantage from thence, to recover his
Commonwealth, and to pull down that of the Carthaginians. Ought then the Son
of Venus, assured by Jupiter, of his Prosperity, and future Glory, to have
Piety only to fear Danger, and to distrust the Success of every Undertaking?
Segrais hereupon defends a Cause, which is troublesome to him, and has so much
affection for his Hero, that he prefers rather not to express the Sense of
Virgil in all its extent, than to discover purely, the shameful Fears of poor
Aeneas.

Extemplo Aeneae solvuntur frigore membra,
Ingemit, and duplices tende^s ad syder a palmas,
Talia voce refert; o terque, quaterque beati,
Queis ante or a patrum Trojae submaenibus altis
Contigit oppetere.
I acknowledge, that these sorts of Seizures happen to us in spite of our
selves, by a defect of Constitution: but since Virgil had the liberty of
framing that of Aeneas according to his Fancy, I admire that he should give him
one susceptible of these Frights. Philosophers take a Pride in the defects of
Tempers, when they know how to correct them by Wisdom: And Socrates easily
confesses those evil Inclinations, which Philosophy had made him overcome. But
Nature ought to be all noble in Heroes; and if by a necessity of Humane
Condition, it must offend in something, their Reason is employed in moderating
Transports, not in surmounting Infirmities, even many times their impulses have
something of Divine, which is above Reason; that which is called Irregularity
in others, is in them but a full Liberty, where their Souls display themselves
in their utmost Extent; one makes of their Impetuosity, that Heroic Virtue,
which transports our Admiration, without our Judgments being concerned in it.

But mean Passions dishonor them, and if so be, Friendship exacts from them,
sometimes Fears and Afflictions, (like those of Achilles for Patroclus, and
Alexander for Hephestion,) it is not permitted them in their own Dangers, and
their particular Misfortunes, neither to show the same Fear, nor to discover
the same Complaints. But Aeneas knew how to Fear, and lament upon every thing
that concerned himself. It is true, that he does the same thing for his
Friends; but one ought to attribute it less to a noble and generous Passion,
than to an inexhaustible source of Apprehensions and Tears, which furnished him
naturally therewith, both for himself, and others.

Extemplo Aeneae solvuntur frigore membra,
Ingemit, and duplices tendens ad syder a palmas.
Seized as he is with this Coldness through all his Members, the first argument
of Life, which he gives, is to groan; then he extends his hands to Heaven, and
in all appearance would implore its Succor, if so be the State, wherein is the
good Hero, would afford him the strength to elevate his Spirit to the Gods,
and to have some attention to Prayer. His Soul, which could not apply it self
to any thing, abandons it self to Lamentations; and like to those desolate
Widows, who desire to be dead with their Husbands, say they, upon the first
trouble they meet with, The poor Aeneas bewails, in that he did not perish
before Troy, with Hector, and esteems them very happy, who left their Bones in
the Bosom of so sweet, and so dear a Country. Another will believe, that it is
to envy their Happiness; I am persuaded, that it is for fear of the Danger that
threatens him.

You will observe still, that all these Lamentations begin almost as soon as
the Tempest.

The Winds blow impetuously, the Air is darkened, it Thunders, it Lightens, the
Waves grow larger and more furious; behold what happens in all Tempests. Yet
there is neither Mast broken, nor Sails torn to pieces, no Oars dashed in two,
nor Rudder lost, no Leak made, whereby the Water might enter into the Ship;
this is the time when one ought to be Afflicted: For there are a thousand young
Lads in England, and as many Women in Holland, who would hardly be amazed,
where the Hero shows his Despair.

I find one thing remarkable in the Aeneids, it is, That the Gods abandon
wholly to Aeneas, all the subject Matters of Lamentation. Let him speak of the
Destruction of Troy as pi^^fully as he will, they will not interfere to moderate
his Tears: but as soon as there is a great Resolution to take, or an Execution
difficult to perform, they don't trust to his Capacity, nor to his Courage, and
they do even at all times what otherwise great Men have been used to undertake,
and execute themselves.

I know how much the intervention of the Gods is necessary to an Epick Poem:
but that does not hinder, that one ought to leave more things to the Valor of
the Hero; for if the Hero is too confident, who in contempt of the Gods, will
found all upon himself; the God is too favorable, who, to perform all, quite
takes off from the Merit of the Hero.

No body better understood this delicate management of the Assistance of
Heaven* and the Courage of great Men, than Longinus. Ajax, says he, finding
himself in a Battle, in a horrible dark Night, does not ask Jupiter to save him
from the danger he was in; that had been unworthy of him. He does not ask of
him a supernatural Strength to overcome with Security, then he should have too
little a share in the Victory. He only begs for Light, that he might be able to
discern his Enemies, and to exercise against them his own proper Valor, Da
lucem ut videam.

The greatest fault of the Pharsalia is, That it is properly but a History in
Verse, where illustrious Men perform almost all things by Methods purely
Humane. Petronius blames him for it with Reason, and remarks judiciously, That
per ambages Deorumque ministerium, and fabulosum sententiarum tormentum
praecipitandus est liber spiritus, ut potius furentis animi vaticinatio,
appareat, quam religiosa orationis sub testibus fides.

But the Aeneids is an Eternal Fable, where the Gods are introduced to manage,
and execute all things. As for the good Aeneas, he hardly concerns himself in
important, and glorious Designs. It suffices him not to be wanting in the
Offices of a pious, tender, and compassionate Soul. He carries his Father on
his Shoulders, he conjugally laments his dear Creusa; he causes his Nurse to be
Enterred, and makes a Funeral Pile for his Pilot, in shedding a thousand Tears.

This was a poor Hero in Paganism, that might be a great Saint amongst the
Christians, very proper to afford us Miracles, and a more worthy Founder of an
Order, than a State.

To consider him through the Sentiments of Religion, I can reverence his
Sanctity. If so be I would judge of him by those of Glory, I should not suffer
a Conqueror, that furnishes himself with nothing but Tears in Misfortunes,
and Fears at all Dangers that happen. I cannot suffer that he should be rendered
Master of so delicious a Country, as Italy, with Qualities that agreed better
to lose his own, than to subdue that of another.

Virgil, in my Opinion, was undoubtedly very pitiful. He does not make the
desolate Trojans complain of so many misfortunes, but by a secret Inclination
he found in himself to be compassionate. If he had not been of that
constitution, he would not have given to the good Aeneas so great an Affection
for his dear Country; for Heroes easily part with the remembrance of their
Country in Nat^ons, where they ought to perform great matters. Their Souls
quite turned to Glory, preserve no Sentiment for those trifling Delights.

The Trojans then should have been less afflicted for their Misery: Warlike Men
that would excite our pity for their Misfortunes, inspire nothing but contempt
for their weakness. But Aeneas particularly ought to have been taken up with
his great design, and to have turned his Thoughts from what he had su^fered,
upon the Establishment he was going to make: He, that went to found the
greatness and virtue of the Romans, ought to have an Elevation, and a
Magnanimity worthy of them.

In other things, Segrais could not give too many commendations of the Aeneids,
and perhaps I am pleased with the fourth and sixth Books, more than he is
himself with the Characters. I acknowledge that they don't affect me, and I
find those of Homer as enlivening, as those of Virgil are flat and insipid.

Indeed, there is no Soul, which is not elevated by the impression, that the
Character of Achilles makes upon it.

There is none, to whom the impetuous Courage of Ajax does not give some motion
of impatience. There is none but is animated, and excited by the Valor of
Diomedes.

There is no person, in whom the Rank and gravity of Agamemnon does not imprint
some respect; who has not a veneration for the long Experience and Wisdom of
Nestor; in whom the advised industry of the Sub^le and Ingenious Ulysses does
not raise the Imagination. The Unfortunate Valor of Hector makes him lamented
by the whole World; the miserable condition of old King Priam touches the most
obdurate Soul; and although Beauty has as it were a secret privilege of
reconciling the Affections to it, that of Paris and Helena attracts nothing but
indignation, when one considers the Blood she caused to be spilt, and the fatal
Misfortunes she was the occasion of.

Of whatsoever manner it is, all Animates in Homer, all is Affecting; but in
Virgil, who is not tired with the good Aeneas, and his dear Achates? If you
except Nisus, and Euryalus, who, indeed, in^eress you in all their Adventures,
you will of necessity languish with all the rest; with an Ilioneus, a Sergestes
Mnestheus, Cloantes, Gias, and the rest of those ordinary Men, that accompany
an indifferent Leader* Judge by that, how much we ought to admire the Poetry of
Virgil, since in spite of the Courage of the Heroes of Homer, and the little
merit of his own, he is, it may be preferable to him, or assuredly, is not his
Inferior.

Some Observations UPON THE Taste and Judgment of the French.
ALthough the ordinary Genius of the French appears indifferent enough, it is
certain, that those, who distinguish themselves amongst us, are capable of
producing the finest things: But when they know how to compo^e them, we are at
a loss how to esteem them; and if so be, we have rendered Justice to some
excellent Work, our Distaste, or our Levity, does not suffer it long to enjoy
the Reputation, we have given it.

I don't much wonder, that a good Sense of things is not found in places where
Barbarity Reigns, and that there is no Judgment, where Letters, Arts, and
Disciplines are lost; it would be ridiculous too, to search for so exquisite a
Light in certain times of Weakness and Ignorance: but that which is surprising,
is, to see in a most Polite Court, a good and evil Sense, a true and false
Genius succeed turn by turn A^la-mode, like Habits.

I have seen considerable Men sometimes pass for the Ornaments of the Court,
and immediately held ridiculous; to be liked again, then fall into Contempt,
without any alteration, either in their Persons, or their Conduct.

A Man retires with the Applause of the whole World, who, the next day finds
himself the Subject of Raillery, without knowing what might become of the
Opinion which was had of his Merit. The reason of it is, That one rarely Judges
of Men by solid Advantages, which is an Argument of good Sense; but by
Measures, whose Applause finisheth, as soon as the Fancy, which produced them.
The works of Authors are subject to the same inequality of our Judgment. When I
was young, Theophile was admired, in spite of his Irregularities, and
Negligence, which escaped through the little Curiosity of the Courtiers of that
time. I have seen him since Cried down by all the Versifiers, without any
respect to his fine Imagination, and the happy Graces of his Genius.

I have seen the Poetry of Malherbe thought admirable in the Turn, Exactness,
and Expression. Malherbe a little after was neglected, as the last of Poets,
Fancy having turned the French to Riddles, Burlesque, and unfinished Verses.

I have seen all the World exclaim against the Pucelle of Chapellain.

I have seen our Judgments returned from an Error of Surprise, to fail.

I have seen then a Conspiracy, which was made to render it ridiculous, without
distinguishing what it might have of Good, from what it had of Bad.

I have seen Corneille lose his Reputation, if it were possible for him to lose
it, at the representation of one his best pieces.

I have seen the two best Comedians of the World exposed to all our Railleries;
and the influence of this false Spirit being passed, they made themselves
admired, as before, through a happy return of our good Sense.

The Airs of Boisset, which heretofore so justly charmed all the Court, were
soon left for little Songs; and Luigi, the first Man of the Universe in his
Art, must come from Italy to admire them, to make us repent of this abandoning,
and to give up to them again the Reputation, which a mere Fancy had taken from
them.

If so be you ask the Reason of it, I will tell you, that Industry in France
holds the place of the greatest Merit, and that the Art of making himself
esteemed, oftener, gives a Rep^tation, than the thing it self.

As good Judges are as rare as good Authors; as it is as difficult to find the
Judgment in one, as the Genius in the the other; every one aiming to give a
Reputation to that which pleases him, it happens, that the Multitude values
that which is agreeable to their ill Judgment, or at most, to their moderate
Understanding.

Add, That the novelty thereof is a temptation to us, from which our Minds
cannot easily defend themselves. The Merit which we are accustomed to, forms
with time an envious Habi^, and the defects are capable of surprising us
agreeably, in what we never saw.

The most valuable things, which have long appeared amongst us, make no more
Impres^ions, as good; they bring a distaste, as old. Those on the other side,
which deserve no Esteem, are less rejected as despicable, than sought after, as
New.

Not, but that there are in France very found Minds, which never dislike any
thing that ought to please, and are never pleased with what is distastful: but
the Multitude either ignorant, or prepossessed, stifles the small number of
those that are knowing.

Besides, Persons of the greatest Figure make every thing valued according to
their Fancy, and when a person is Alamode, he may equally esteem those things
he knows, and those he does not.

There is no Country, where Reason is more rare, than it is in France; when it
is found there, there is not a purer in the World.

For the most part all is Fancy, but a Fancy so fine, and a Capricio so noble,
in what regards the outside, that Strangers ashamed of their Judgment, as of a
gross Quality, seek to make themselves esteemed amongst them* by the imitation
of our Modes, and renounce Essential Qualities, to affect an Air, and Ways,
which i^s hardly possible for them to invent. Thus that continual alteration in
our Habits, which they reproach us with, and is always followed, becomes
insensibly a very great piece of Wisdom; for, besides, infinit^ sums of Money
which we draw from thence, it is an Interest more solid than is imagined, to
have French Men dispersed throughout, who form the outside of all People by our
own; who begin by enslaving the Eyes, when the Heart is still opposed to our
Laws; who gain the Senses in favor of our Government, when the Opinions hold
still for Liberty.

Happy then is that Fancy, Noble, and Genteel, which makes it self accepted by
our greatest Enemies; but we ought to lay aside our claim to that, which would
rule in Arts, and which imperiously decides the Prod^ctions of the Spirit,
without consul^ing either good Taste, or Reason.

When we are arrived to the perfection of any thing, we ought to fix our
Curiosity in the knowledge of it, and the Justice we owe thereto, in our
Eternal Esteem of it; without that we may be reproached upon good Grounds, that
Strangers more justly value the merit of our Works, than our selves.

We shall see the good things, which proceed from us, preserve their Reputation
elsewhere, when they have lost it in France: We shall see our Fopperies
elsewhere rejected by good Sense, when we extol them up to Heaven out of a
ridiculous Conceit.

There is a Vice opposed to that, which is no more supportable, that is our
passionate* Affection, for what is done in any other time but our own, and our
dislike for every thing that is done in that we live.

Horace thereupon made the Character of old Age, and an old Man is, indeed,
admirably described.

Difficilis, querulus, Laudator temporis acti.
In this sad and unhappy Age we impute to Objects, the defects which proceed
purely from our Moroseness; and when a pleasant Remembrance turns our Thoughts
from what we are, to what we have been, we attribute Agreements to many things*
which had none, because they recall in our Minds the Idea of our Youth, when
every thing pleased us by the disposition of our Sentiments.

But we ought not to impute this Humor to old Age alone, there are some
persons, who imagine, that Merit consists in despising every thing that is New,
and Solidity, in valuing all the old Works.

There are those, who, of their own Nature, are discontented with what they
see, and amorous of what they have seen.

They will tell you wonders of an old Court, where there was nothing but
indifference, in contempt of the Grandeur, and Magnificence, which they have
before their Eyes.

They will give a thousand Praises to deceased Persons of but a common Virtue*
and will hardly dispense with the Glory of the greatest Hero, if alive.

The first Obstacle to their Esteem, is to Live, the most favorable
Recommendation, is to have been. They will praise after the Death of a Man,
what they blamed in him, whilst alive; and their Spirit, disengaged from the
moroseness of their Humor, will justly render to his Memory, what it unjustly
robbed his Person of.

I was always of Opinion, That to make a sound Judgment of Men, and of their
Works, it is necessary to consider them by themselves, to have a Contempt, or a
Respect for things past according to their little Worth, or their Desert.
Iimagined that one ought not to oppose Novelties through a Spirit of Aversion,
nor to enquire after them through a love of Novelty; but to reject, or receive
them according to the true Opinion, one ought to conceive of them, we ought to
part with our Capricio's, and all the fantasticalness of our Humor, which yet
is but a hindrance to know things well.

The most essential point is to acquire a true Judgment, and to get a pure
Understanding.

Nature prepares us to it, Experience and Conversation with delicate Persons,
compleats us therein.

INTEREST In Persons altogether Corrupted. The Corrupted Speaks.
I Have passed, Gentlemen, through all conditions, and after an exact
Reflection upon Life, I find but two things that can solidly employ a Wise Man,
the care of getting, and that of hoarding.

Honor is but a conceit of Young Men; it is by that one begins his Reputation,
when he is a Fool, and he concludes it by that which is called Corruption, so
soon as he is Wise.

As for me, I never had a Spirit stained with this Chimera. Duty, Friendship,
Gratitude, and the rest of those Errors, which make the Bonds of Sot^s and
Fools, have not caused me a moments trouble in all my Life.

Nature brought me forth with the true Genius of Interest, which I have
improved by Study, and fortified by Experience.

Greediness, which causes the same effect for Wealth, as Ambition does for
power, has raised me to great advantages, without making me fall into the
carelessness of small Gains.

One gets in a hundred different methods, which are as so many different
products of our Industry.

It would be a difficult thing to give the particulars thereof; but one shall
never be deceived, if so be he holds for a principal Maxim, to prefer the
profitable before the honest: To apply himself to the profitable, is to follow
the Intention of Nature, which by a secret Instinct carries us to what is
agreeable to us, and obliges us to refer all things to our Selves.

Honor is an Imaginary Duty, which for the consideration of another, makes us
abstain from those good things, that we might enjoy, or part with those which
we should retain.

As for what relates to hoarding, is it not just to manage with care, what we
have procured with difficulty? As long as we have Money in our ^offers, we
shall have Friends, and humble Servants: If so be we exhaust it by a vain
liberality, we shall but give Men the liberty to be ungrateful, losing that
which certainly draws them to us, to ^ye them again to themselves.

There are but a few acknowledging Persons, and when we can meet with any, it
is certain that the price of Gratitude very rarely comes near that of Benefit.

There is one thing of great use, which I have happily practiced; it is,
Gentlemen, to promise eternally, and very rarely to give. One reaps more
Services by Promises, than by Presents. For Men put themselves in a state of
deserving, what they hope from us: And they are but just barely contented with
what they receive, who make it pass for a recompense of their pains, or for an
effect of their Industry. However amongst the ungrateful, these appear to me
less dangerous, because they undeceive us immediately, and cannot put us to the
expense of above one Gift.

You will find those, that are much more to be feared, who preach to us the
good which is done them, so far as to importune the whole World. They have
always the Name of their Benefactor in their Mouths, and his Picture in their
Chambers; but what proceeds from this vain appearance of acknowledgment?

They frame to themselves a Title for a new pretension, and whilst you think
they are employed about returning the favor, which they have received, they
think they have rendered themselves worthy of another, which they are not
wanting to request.

Fine subtilty of our days, to have turned Gratitude from the future side,
that, which had not been hitherto but the Sense of a passed Obligation.

As you are to live with Persons, that make designs upon you; it is your
business to take cautions against them; and instead of discovering the good and
evil Intentions by the curiousness of Judgment, I find it necessary to secure
your Self by a general de^iance of all Men.

In the mean time, not to let a universal discontent be established, which
would make you be abandoned of all the World, it will be proper to appear
disinteressed sometimes through a secret design of Advantage; it will be good
to give to the Public certain Actions of a seeming freedom, but indeed
contrived, and to force your Nature to do a favor as Nobly, as i^ it came from
a true Inclination.

By this you will make the past displeasures forgotten, and leave nothing in
view, but what is agreeable for the future.

But in these rare occasions the secret is, to choose a Merit well known, or one
of those pleasing subjects, which affect the Inclinations of Men: By this
universal Esteem, or Friendship, every one foolishly thinks him obliged for a
favor, which is received but by one single person.

After the noise of so fine an Action, let the World rest in the Opinion of
your Generosity, and take pleasure some time in laughing at the Courting of
Parasites, and the approbation of Ill Judges.

As you have excited thereby desires, and permitted hopes to be conceived, all
those that think themselves deserving, will endeavor to show themselves in
your presence.

Your Enemies will search secret ways to reconcile themselves, that they may
^not be excluded from your favors. Your Friends, encouraged by a new Zeal,
will do their utmost to deserve them; and those persons, that are particularly
intimate with you, will redouble their cares and their diligence in the
performance of their Charges.

Then seeing the whole World well reunited upon your commendations, you will
insensibly take again your usual methods.

Your Acquaintance will become more difficult, to have a sight of you will be
no small favor, to converse with you will be a greater, your frowns will
repulse the troublesome, and your smiles will satisfy the Ignorant; your
familiarity, as severe as it is, shall be managed as a precious favor; and to
conclude this discourse in a few words, you shall practice all the vain things
to others, and wisely take all the solid ones to your self.

THE Too Rigid Virtue. The Virtuous Person speaks.
I Have passed, as well as you, through all conditions, and after an exact
Reflection upon Life, I find but two things that may render it happy: The
moderation of a Man's Desires, and the good use of his Fortune.

They, to whom Reason affords repose, which takes away our fancy, live free
from many Misfortunes, and are in a condition of tasting the most real good.

A Man, raised to Grandeurs, that makes others find their Fortune in his, joins
a great Merit to a great Happiness, he is not the more happy by the Wealth,
which he enjoys, than by that which he knows how to give: But he that, like
you, seeks his Interest with all the World, and cannot suffer the company of
any one, makes himself unworthy of common Society, and deserves to be excluded
from the conversation of all Men.

Nevertheless, for all the ill opinion I conceive of you, it seems to me that
there is a vanity in the confession of your Vices.

Nature has not left in your power the being as wicked, as you would appear to
be.

One is not absolutely ungrateful with impunity; one does not betray without
remorse; one is not so greedy after the Wealth of another, and so covetous of
his own without some shame. And when you shall be composed within your self,
free from internal Combats and secret Agitations, you are still to account with
the World, whose importunate reproaches and troublesome Accusations you must be
forced to endure.

As for that Genius of Interest, which you spoke to us of, it is that which
renders you contemptible: For there are Illustrious Debauchees, but there never
was an Illustrious Miser.

The Grandeur of the Soul cannot consist with the filthiness of Avarice.
Besides, what is more unjust, than to procure all that makes up the Commerce
and Advantage of Mankind, to make no use thereof?

It Is justifying the Crime, and robbing the public by a continual Theft, of
what was once taken from private Persons.

Those, that take away with violence, to disperse with profusion, are much more
excusable.

Their expense is, as it were, a sort of restitution, and the losers seem to re
enter into some part of their possessions, when Magnificence exposes to their
Eyes, what Force had taken out of their Hands.

If so be an ill Reputation is indifferent to you, if Injustice has no
influence upon you, have at least some consideration for your own repose.

Since Money is become the Master of your desires, whether it be in your own
custody, or elsewhere, it equally afflicts you; that which you fail to obtain,
disorders you; that which you enjoy, puts you in pain; what you have lost,
torments you; and as there is nothing so agreeable as to have Riches, and to
make use of them, so there is nothing so uneasy, as to be greedy, and too
covetous together. I confess, that your discourse upon ungrateful Persons, is
not less ingenious, than it is true; but one may say, that this nicety proceeds
more from your observations, than your experience. Your great cautions against
Ingratitude, mark less of hatred for that, than aversion for Generosity; and
really you don't less a void the thank^ul, than the ungrateful.

Both receive favors, and your intention is to make none Capable of pardoning
the injuries, which are offered to you, you are irreconcilable when you have
done a kindness, if so be it does not gain you another of a greater
consideration.

Since I am infensibly engaged in this matter of favors, I will push it on a
little further. There are some Men of the Humor of Cardinal Ximenes, who never
agree to what is requested of them, because they would not be prevented, say
they, in their de^igns, and troubled in the order of the good, they would do.

There are some Men, jealous of the Honor of their motions, who refuse all
things at the Inspirations of others. That may proceed sometimes from a good
Principle, and be met with in very lofty Souls; but for the most part they are
dishonest jealousies, and false niceties of Honor, which produce a true
repugnance to the doing of favors.

Let us suffer the miserable to explain themselves to us in their necessiti^s,
since we do not so much as think of them in our abundance.

Let us not be ashamed of owing the Thoughts of a good Action to another, and
let us leave all the Avenues free to those, that advise us to do well.

In the mean time we should think our selves governed if we did not show our
selves difficult at the persuasion of what is good, whilst we think our selves
Masters in the greatest credulity, which one can have for what is ill.

Every one fears the ascendant of his Friends, if they will render a good turn
near his person; every one takes for a freeness of Heart, and a Testimony of
Friendship, the secret of an Imposture, and the Artifice of those ill
Impressions, which they give him.

It Is there notwithstanding that the caution is honest; '^is there one may be
upon his guard with Jealousy; '^is there one ought to defend himself from nice
Insinuations, which insensibly lead us to do ill.

But to lay aside discourses that are too general; what do you gain by
husbanding so cunningly the Liberty of seeing you, and conversing with you?

What signifies that great Art, which rules all the features of your Face?
Which governs your smiles, and your frowns; To give Seasonably, and to refuse
with Reason, would be more beneficial for others, and more commodious for your
self. It Is a small merit to play the Poli^icks with those, that are in your
dependence.

You think to show the subtilty of your Spirit, and you do but make known the
malice of your Nature.

That Industry, which you employ to find vain things for others, is vain of it
self for you.

Every day brings you Rich^s, and every day retrenches the (...) thereof; your
Wealth increases, and your Senses, which should enjoy it, decay.

You engage Foreign things, and you lose your Self.

What then becomes of this happy Nativity? What advantage come^ of this fine
Genius of Interest?

You pas^ your Life amongst superfluou^ Treasures, of which Covetousness does
not leave you the Disposal, and of which Nature deprives you of the Enjoyment.
Unhappy Fortune, which respects nei^h^^ you, nor others, but through the
perplexity of your Cares, and the morosenes^ of their Envy.

A IVDGMENT Upon those Sciences, which a Gentleman should apply himself to.
YOU ask me my Opinion of those Sciences, to which a Gentleman may apply
himself: I will give it you very honestly, without pretending to subject any
Bodies judgment thereto. I never had great Inclinations to Reading; if so be I
employ some hours therein, they are the most useless; without design; without
order, when I cannot enjoy the Conversation of Men of Parts, and find my self
remote from the commerce of Pleasures. Don't you imagine then that I speak to
you profoundly of things, that I have but cursorily studied, and upon which I
have made but slight Reflections.

Divinity seems to me very considerable, as a Science which regards Salvation:
But in my judgment, it is become too common; and it is ridiculous that even
Women dare dispute on questions, which should be handled with a great deal of
Mystery and Secrecy. It would be enough for us to be tractable and submissive.
Let us leave this Doctrine entire to our Superiors, and follow with respect
those, that have the care of guiding us. Not but that our Doctors are the first
to ruin this deference, and contribute to give Curiosities, which insensibly
lead to Errors: There is nothing so well established in Nations, but they
subject to the extravagance of reasoning. They Burn a Man unhappy enough for
not believing in God, and at the same ^ime ^tis a question in the Schools,
whether there is one, or no. By that you confound weak Spirits, you cause a
suspicion in the distrustful; by that you arm the furious, and permit them to
search pernicious Reasons, whereby they oppose their own proper Sentiments, and
the true impressions of Nature.

Hobbs, the greatest Genius of England, since Bacon, could not suffer that
Aristotle should have so much Credit in Theology, and makes his subtilties the
occasion of the Division of the Church.

It is perhaps by these sorts of Reasonings, that the Divines are not sometimes
the most tractable; from whence comes the Proverb, That the Physician, and
Divine Rarely trust to Remedies, and Religion. I Will sa^ no more, but only wish,
that our Directors would treat of matters of Religion with more moderation, and
that those, who ought to be subject thereto, would have less Curiosity.

As Philosophy gives more liberty to the Mind, I have improved that a little
more. In this time, where the Understanding gives way to Knowledge, I had a
curious ^esire ^o comprehend the Nature of things, and Presumption presently
persuaded me, that I was acquainted therewith: the least Proof seemed to me a
Certainty, and a Probability was to me a Truth; and I cannot express to you
with what Contempt I looked upon those, that I imagined Ignorant in what I
thought my self instructed. At length, when Age and Experience, which unhappily
come together, had caused me to make serious Reflections, I began to lay aside
a Science always Contested, and upon which the greatest Men have had different
Sentiments. I knew by the Universal consent of Nations, that Plato, Aristotle,
Zeno, and Epicurus, had been the most conspicuous of their Age; yet there was
nothing so contrary as their Opinions. Three Thousand Years after, I found them
equally disputed, Partisans of all sides, nothing of Certainty and Assurance.
In the midst of these Meditations, which insensibly disabused me, I had the
curiosity to see Gassendus, the most enlightened of Philosophers, and the least
presumptuous. After some long Entertainments, where he made me see all that
Reason could inspite, he complained, that Nature had given so much Extent to
Curiosity, and such narrow bounds to our Knowledge; that he did not say it to
mor^ifie the Presumption of others, or by a false Humility of him, which
savours altogether of Hypocrisy; that perhaps he was not ignorant of what
might be thought upon many things; but to know well, the most Inconsiderable,
he durst not assure to himself. Then a Science, which was already suspected to
me, appeared too vain to enslave my self to it any longer; I broke all Commerce
with it, and began to admire how it was possible for a wise Man to pass his
Life in unprofitable Enquiries.

The Mathematics have, indeed, much more of Certainty; but when I consider the
profound Meditations they require, as they draw you from Action and Pleasures,
to employ you entirely, its Demonstrations seem to me very dear, and one must
be very amorous of a Truth, to search after it at that Price. You will tell me,
that we have but few Conveniences in Life, few Ornaments, but we are obliged
to them for: I will ingeniously acknowledge it; there are no Commendations
which I will not afford the great Mathematicians, provided that I am not one of
them. I admire their Inventions, and the Works which they produce: but I am of
Opinion, that i^ suff^ce^h Men of good Sense, to know how to apply them well;
for to speak wisely, we have more Interest to enjoy the World, than to know it.

I find no Sciences that particularly belong to Gentlemen, but Morality,
Politics, and the knowledge of good Literature.

The first regards Reason, the second Society, the third Conversation.

The one teaches us to rule our Passions, by the other you are instructed in
Affairs of State, and how to direct your self in the Fortune of your Life. The
last polisheth the Mind, inspires Delicacy, and Agreement. The Persons of
Quality amongst the Ancients, had a particular Care to instruct themselves in
all things; every one knows that Greece has given to the World, the greatest
Philosophers, and the greatest Legislators: And one cannot deny, but that other
Nations have taken from thence all the Politeness they have had.

The beginnings of Rome were Ignorant and Savage, and that wild Virtue which
did not pardon their own Children, was advantageous to the Commonwealth; as
they began to be more reasonable, they found a way for the Motions of Nature to
consist with the Love of their Country; at length they joined Graces and
Ornaments to Justice and Reason. It has been seen then in the latter times,
that there was no body of any Consideration, but what was tied to some Sect of
Philosophy, not with a design to comprehend the Principles and Nature of
things, but to fortify their Minds by the study of Wisdom.

As for Politics, it is incredible how the Romans instructed themselves early
in all the Interests of their State; how they applied themselves in the
Knowledge of their Policy, and Laws, as far as to render themselve* capable of
the Affairs of Peace and War, even without Experience. The least Curious know
after what manner they were affe^ted with Learning, and it is certain, that one
saw but few great Men at Rome, who did not entertain some ingenious Greeks, to
talk of things that were agreeable.

Amongst a hundred Examples, that I could allege, I will content my self with
that of Caesar, and it will suffice for my own Opinion to rely upon his
Authority.

Of all the Sects that were then in Repute, he chose that of Epicurus, as the
most pleasant, and most conformable to his Nature, and his Pleasures; for there
were two sorts of Epicureans, the one teaching Philosophy in Retirements,
according to Precept; the other, who could not approve of the Austerity of too
rigid Philosophers, gave way only to more natural Opinions. Of these last have
been the greatest part of the ingenious Men of that time, who knew how to
distinguish the person from the Magistrate, and apply their Cares to the
Republic, in such a manner, that there was left enough, both for their
Friends, and for themselves. It would be unprofitable to explain to you the
Knowledge that Caesar had of the Affairs of State, as well as the politeness
and beauty of his Genius: I will only say, that he could dispute for the
Mastery of Eloquence with Cicero; and if he did not affect the Reputation of
it, no person can deny that he both writ, and spoke much better, as a person of
Quality, than Cicero.

A DISCOURSE UPON THE Great ALEXANDER.
SInce I have read the Great Alexander, the old Age of Corneille much less
alarms me, and I don't so much apprehend to see the writing of Tragedies end
with him. But I wish, that, before his Death, he would adopt the Author of this
Piece, to form with the tenderness of a Father his ^rue Successor. I wish, that
he would afford him the good taste of Antiquity, which he enjoys so much to his
Advantage; that he would make him enter into the Genius of those dead Nations,
and know judiciously, the Character of Heroes, which are no more. It is, in my
Opinion, the only thing which is wanting to so fine a Wit. He has Thoughts
strong, and bold; Expressions, which equal the force of his Thoughts: But then
you will permit me to tell you, That he was not acquainted with Alexander, or
Porus. It appears, that he had a mind to give a greater Idea of Porus, than of
Alexander, wherein it was not possible for him to succeed; for the History of
Alexander, as true as it is, has much of the Air of a Romance; and to make a
greater Hero, is to make him pass for Fabulous, to take from his Work, not
only the credit of Truth, but the agreeableness of Probability. Let us not
imagine any thing greater than this Master of the World, when our Imaginations
shall be too vast, and elevated: If we would give other Heroes an advantage
over him, let us take from them the Vices which he had, and give them the
Virtues which he had not: don't let us make Scipio greater, although there
never was amongst the Romans a Soul so aspiring as his; he should be made more
Just, more disposed to do Good, more Moderate, more Temperate, and more
Virtuous.

Let the greatest Admirers of Caesar against Alexander, allege in his Favor,
neither the Passion of Glory, the Grandeur of the Soul, nor the Firmness of
Courage. These Qualities are so complete in the Grecian, that to have been
more, would have have been too much; but let them make the Roman more wise in
his Enterprises, more dexterous in his Affairs, to have understood his
Interests better, and more Master of himself in his Passions.

One who was a very curious Judge of the desert of Men, is contented to liken
to Alexander, him, to whom he would give the highest Character: He durst not
attribute to him greater Qualities, but took away from him the Bad. Magno illi
Alexandro par, sed sobrio nec iracundo.

Perhaps our Author is entered into these Considerations in some measure;
perhaps, to make Porus the greater, without Romancing, he took the party to
lessen his Alexander. If that was his design, he could not succeed better
therein, for he has made of him so moderate a Prince, that a hundred others
might be preferred before, like him, ^^^us. Not but that Hephestion affords a
fine representation of him; that Taxila, and Porus himself speak advantagiously
of his Greatness: but when he appears himself, he has not the force to sustain
it, unless through Modesty he had a mind to appear an ordinary Man amongst the
Indians, in a just Repentance, for having been desirous to pass for a God
amongst the Persians. To speak seriously, I can discern here nothing of
Alexander, but the single Name; his Genius, his Humor, his Qualities appear to
me no where. I seek in an impe^uous Hero such extraordinary Motions, as should
excite my Passion; and I find a Prince of so little Spirit, that he leaves my
Blood entirely cold.

I imagined to my self in Porus, a greatness of Soul, which was more strange to
us; the Hero of the Indies should have a different Character from ours.
Another Heaven, that I make so speak, another Sun, another Land produce therein
other Animals, and other Fruits: The Men appear there quite otherwise, by the
difference of their Faces, and still more, If I durst say so, by a distinction
of Reason: Morals, Wisdom, singular to Religion, seem there to guide other
Minds in another World. Porus notwithstanding, whom Quintus Cu^tius describes
an utter Stranger to the Greeks and Persians, is here purely French; instead of
transporting us to the Indies, he is brought into France, where he is so well
accustomed to our Humor, that he seems to be born amongst us, or at least, to
have dwelt here all his Life.

They that undertake to represent some Hero of ancient times, should examine
the Genius of the Nation he was of, the ^ime wherein he lived, and particularly
his own. One ought to describe a King of Asi^ otherwise than a Roman Consul;
the one should speak as an absolute Monarch, who disposes of his Subjects as
his Slaves; the other, as a Magistrate, woe only puts Life into the Laws, and
makes their Authority respected by a free People. One ought to describe an old
Roman furious for the public good, and moved by a wild Liberty, differently
from a flatterer of Tiberius's time, who knew nothing but Interest, and
abandoned himself to their Slavery. One should not make the same description of
persons of the same Condition, and of the same time, when History affords us
different Characters of them. It would be ridiculous to make the same
description of C^to and Caesar, Catiline and Cicero, Brutus and Mark-Anthony,
under pre^ence, that they lived at the same time in the same Republic. The
Spectator, that sees these Ancients* represented upon our Theaters, follows the
same Rules to judge of them well, as the Poet does to describe them well; and
to succeed therein the better, he removes his mind from all that he sees in
use, endeavors to get ridd of the humor of his own time, renounces the
inclination of his own Nature, if it is opposite to that of the persons
represented; for the Dead cannot enter into what we are, but Reason, which is
of all times, may make us imagine what they have been.

One of the greatest Faults of our Nation, is the appropriating all to it self,
so as to make Strangers to be as of their Country, where they have nothing,
neither its Air, nor Manners. From hence it comes, that we are justly
reproached, for not knowing how to esteem things, but by the report they have
amongst us, of which Corneille has made an unjust and melancholy Exp^rience in
his Sophonisba. Mair^t, who discribed his, unfaithful to old Syphax, in love
with the young and Victorious Massiniss^, pleased, as it were generally, the
whole World, for having light upon the Inclination of the Ladies, and the true
Humor of the Courtiers. But Corneille, who make^ the Greeks speak better than
Greeks, the Romans than the Romans, the Carthaginians, than the Ci^izens of
Carthage speak themselves: Corneille, who alone almost has a true Taste of
Antiquity, has had the misfortune not to please our Age, for having entered into
the Genius of these Nations, and preserved the true Character of Asdrubal's
Daughter. Thus to the disgrace of our Judgments, he that has surpassed all our
Authors, and has here, perhaps, even surpassed himself, in rendering to these
great Names all that was their due, could not oblige us to afford him all that
we are indebted to him; being enslaved by Custom, to those things we see in
use, and little disposed, by reason, to esteem those Qualities, and Sentiments,
which are not agreeable ^o our own.

Let us conclude after a consideration of Extent enough, that Alexander and
Porus ought to preserve their Characters entire; that it was our business to
view them upon the Banks of Hydaspes, such as they were: not theirs, to come
upon the shore of the Seine, to study our Nature, and speak our Thoughts. The
discourse of Porus should have something more unusual, and extraordinary. If so
be Quintus Curtius has made himself admired in the Oration of the Scy^hians* by
Thoughts and Expressions natural to their Nation, the Author might have rendered
himself as admirable in letting us see, that I may so speak, the rarity of a
^enius of another World.

The different Conditions of these two Kings, where each fills up so well what
he should in his own, their Valor differently exercised in the Variety of
their Fortune, draws the consideration of Historians, and obliges them to give
us an account of them. The Poet, who might add to the Truth of things, or at
least, set them off with all the Ornaments of Poetry, instead of using Colors,
and Figures to embellish them, has taken away much of their Beauty; and
whether the scruple of Exceeding does not let him far enough, or else, through
dryness, or barrenness, he remains much beneath the Truth. He might have entered
into the inward part, and have drawn from the foundation of those great S^uls,
as Corneille has done, their most secret Motions; but he scarce regards the
simple outside, little curious of remarking well what appears, and little
profound in searching what lies concealed.

I could have wished, that the strength of this piece had consisted in the
representation of those great Men, and that in a Scene worthy of the
Magnificence of the Subject, he would have made the greatness of their Souls
advance, as far as it was possible.

If the Conversation of Sertorius and Pompey has had such influence upon our
Minds, what should not one expect from that of Porus, and Alexander upon a
Subject so uncommon? I could have wished yet, that he had given us a greater
prospect of this War. Indeed, that passage of the Hyd^spes so strange, that it
is hardly to b^ conceived; a prodigious Army on the other side with terrible
Chariots, and Elephant^ at that time formidable; Ligh^ning, Thunder, and
Tempests, which made a general Confusion, above all, when he was obliged to
pass so large a River upon simple Skins; a hundred dreadful things, which
astonished the Macedonians, and which made Alexander say, That at last he had
found a Danger worthy of himself; all this, I say, should have extremely raised
the Imagination of the Poet, both in the description of the preparations of the
Fight, and the r^cital of it.

In the mean time, he hardly mentions the Camps of the two Kings, from whom he
takes away their proper Genius's, to enslave them to Princesses, tha^ are
purely Im^ginary. All that Interest has of Great and Pre^ious amongst Men, the
Defense of a Country, the preservation of a Kingdom don't excite Porus to the
Battle; he is encouraged thereto by the Beautiful eyes of Axiana alone, and the
single design of his Valor is to make himself recommendable to her. They
describe Knights Errants after this manner, when they undertake an adventure,
and the finest Genius, in my opinion, of all Spain, never makes Don Quixot
enter the Combat, before he recommends himself to Dul^ine^. A maker of Romances
may frame his Heroes according to his Fancy; it is of little importance also to
give a true Character of an obscure Prince, whose reputation is not arrived to
us: But these great Persons of Antiquity, so famous in their Age, and more
known amongst us, than the Living; the Alexander's, the Scipio's, the Caesar's,
ought never to lose their Character in our hands. For the least curious
Spectator perceives, that he is injured, when they give to them Faults, which
they had not, or when they take from them Virtues, which had made upon his mind
an agreeable impression. Virtues once established amongst us, interess our
proper love, as our true Master, and one cannot bring the least alteration,
without making us discern this change with Violence. Upon the whole, one ought
not to disfigure them in War, to render them more illustrious in their Amors;
we may give them Mistresses of our own Invention, we may mix Passion with their
Glory; but let us take care of making an Anthony of an Alexander, and not ruin
Heroes confirmed by so many Ages, in favor of a Lover, whom we form to our
single Fancy.

To reject the love of our Tragedies as unworthy of Heroes, is to take away
that which makes us hold to them by a secret relation, and I know not what
cohaerence, which still remains between their Souls and others: But to bring
them to us by this common Sentiment, don't let us make them descend beneath
themselves, nor destroy what they possess above Men. With this moderation, I
will affirm that there are no Subjects, where a general Passion, which Nature
has dispersed throughout, cannot enter without trouble and violence. Moreover,
as Women are as necessary for the representation, as Men, it is convenient to
make them speak, as much as one can, of that which is most agreeable to their
nature, and of which they speak much better than of other things. If you take
away from some the expression of Amorous Thoughts, and from others a converse
in Secret, into which, a confidence which they have of each other, makes them
enter, you reduce them for the most part to very tedious Conversations. As if
all their motions, as their Discourses, ought to be the effects of their
Passion; their Joy, their Sorrow, their Fears, their Desires, ought to relish
of a little love, to be taking.

If you introduce a Mother who rejoiceth for the Happiness of her Beloved Son,
or afflicts her self for the misfortune of her poor Daughter, her Satisfaction
or her Loss will make but little impression upon the Souls of the Spectators.
To be affected with the Tears and Complaints of this Sex, let us see a Mistress
that bewails the Death of a Lover, and not a Wife, that laments for the loss of
a Husband.

The Grief of Mistresses, which is tender, has much more influence upon us,
than the affliction of an invegling, self-interessed Widow, and as sincere as
she happens to be sometimes, always affords us a Melancholy Idea of Funerals,
and their dismal Ceremonies. Of all the Widows, that ever appeared upon the
Theater, I love to see none but Cornelia, because instead of making me think of
Children without a Father, and a Wife without a Spouse, her Affections all over
Roman, recall into my mind the Idea of ancient Rome, and the Great Pompey.

Behold all that may reasonably be allowed to Love upon our Theaters, but let
them be contented with this, and so far even their Rules will allow of it, and
let not its greatest favorers believe that the chief design of Tragedy, is to
excite a sort of tenderness in our hearts. In subjects truly Heroic, the
Greatness of the Soul ought to be kept up before all things. That which would
be pleasing and tender in the Mistress of an ordinary Man, is often weak and
disgraceful in the Mistress of a Hero. She may entertain her self, when alone,
with the inward Combats, which she is sensible of in her self, she may Sigh in
Secret for her misery, trust to a beloved and severe Confident, her Fears and
her Griefs: But sustained by her Glory, and fortified by her reason, she ought
always to remain Mistress of her Passions, and animate her Lover to great
things by her Resolution, instead of disheartening him by her weakness.

Indeed, it is an unworthy Spectacle to see the Courage of a Hero softened by
Tears and Sighs; and if so be he fiercely contemns the Griefs of a Beautiful
person that loves him, he discovers the firmness of his heart, less than the
hardness of his Soul.

To avoid this inconvenience, Corneille has no less regard to the Character of
Illustrious Women, than to that of his Heroes. Aemilia encourages Cinna to the
execution of their design, and meditates how to ruin all the motions, that
oppose the death of Augustus.

Cleopatra has a Passion for Caesar, and leaves nothing undone to preserve
Pompey: she would be unworthy of Caesar, if she did not oppose the baseness of
her Brother, and Caesar undeserving of her, if he was capable of approving that
Infamy. Dirce in Oedipus, disputes greatness of Courage with Theseus, turning
upon her self the fatal explication of the Oracle, which he would apply to
himself for the love of her.

But one should consider Sophonisba, whose Character might be envied by the
Romans themselves. One should see her Sacrifice the young Massinissa to Old
Syphax for the good of her Country; one should see her hearken as little to
the Scruples of Duty in quitting Siphax, as she had done the Sentiments of her
love, in losing Massinissa: One should see her, who subjects all sorts of
Obligations, what binds us, what unites us, the strongest Chains, the most
tender Passions, to her Love for Carthage, and her Hatred for Rome. In a word,
one should see her, when* she is utterly abandoned, not wanting to her self, and
when those hearts, which she had gained to save her Country signified nothing,
to owe to her self the last support to pr^serve her Glory and her Liberty.

Corneille makes his Heroes speak with so much decency, that he had never given
us the Conversation of Caesar with Cleopatra, if so be Caesar could have been
believed to have had the Business, which he had at Alexandria, as Beautiful as
she was, as far as to have rendered the Converse of a Lover to indifferent
Persons, that should hear it. He had certainly let that alone, but that the
Battle of Pharsalia was fully won, Pompey dead, and all that took part with him
in flight. As Caesar then believed himself to be the Master of all, they might
offer him an acquired Glory, and a power in all appearance assured: But when he
discovered the Conspiracy of Ptolomy, when he beholds his affairs in an ill
Condition, and his own Life in Danger, it is no more a Lover, that entertains
his Mistress with his Passion, but the Roman General, that speaks to the Queen
of the Danger which relates to them, and leaves her with have to provide for
their common Security.

It is ridiculous then to take Porus up with his single Love upon the point of
a great Battle, which was to make a decision of all things for him; it is no
less to make Alexander depart, when the Enemies began to rally. One might have
made him enter with impatience to seek Porus, not to draw him from thence with
precipitation to go and revisit Cleophile, he, that never had those Amorous
Impatiences, and who never thought a Victory to be complete, till he had either
destroyed, or pardoned. That which I find more miserable on his account, is
that he is made to lose much of one side, without gaining any thing on the other.
He is as little a Hero of Love, as of War, and the History is disfigured,
without any Ornament to the Romance: A Warrior, whose Glory cannot inflame us:
A Lover, whose Passion cannot affect us.

Behold what I had to say of Alexander and Porus. If so be I am not regularly
tied to an exact Critic, it is because I had less mind to examine the piece in
particular, than to enlarge my self upon the decorum one ought to observe in
the Discourses of Heroes, upon the Judgment one should have in the difference
of their Characters, upon the good and ill usage of the tenderness of Love in
Tragedies, rejected too severely by those, that give up all things to the
motions of Pity and Fear, and searched with too much nicety by those, that have
no Inclinations, but for these sorts of Sentiments.

A IVDGMENT UPON Seneca, Plutarch and Petronius.
I Will begin with Seneca, and will tell you with the utmost impudence that I
esteem much more his Person, than his Works. I esteem the Tutor of Nero, the
Gallant of Agrippina, an Ambitious Man that pretended to the Empire: Of the
Philosopher, and Writer, I make but little account, and am affected neither
with his Style, nor his Thoughts. His Latin has nothing of resemblance to that
of Augustus's time, nothing of easy, nothing of natural; all made up of
points, all fanciful; more of the heat of Afric, or Spain in them, than the
Light of Greece, or Italy. You see there abrupt things, that have the Air and
Shape of Sentences; but which have neither their Solidity, nor their good
Sense: Which wet and spur on the Spirit, without winning the Judgment.

His forced Discourse communicates to me a sort of constraint; and the Soul,
instead of finding there its Satisfaction and Repose, meets with Trouble and
Affliction.

Nero, although one of the most wicked Princes of the World, was
notwithstanding very Ingenious, and had near him a sort of under Masters
extremely Curious, who used Seneca as a Pedant, and turned him into ridicule. I
am not of the Opinion of Berville, who imagined that the false Eumolpus of
Petronius was the true Seneca. If so be Petronius would have given him an
injurious Character, it had been under the Person of a Pedantick Philosopher,
rather than an impertinent Poet. Besides, it is as it were impossible to find
any agreement therein. Seneca was the Richest Man of the Empire, and always
commended Poverty. Eumolpus, a Poet very low in the World, and in the despair
of his Fortune, he complained of the Ingratitude of the Age, and found no other
comfort than that bonae mentis soror est paupertas. If Seneca had Vices, he
concealed them with care under the appearance of Wisdom: Eumolpus made a Vanity
of his, and used his pleasures with much Liberty.

I don't app^ehend then upon what Berville could ground his Conjecture. But I
am deceived if all that Petronius says of the Style of his time, of the
Corruption of Eloquence and Poetry, if the controversiae sententiis vibrantibus
pictae, which offended him so much, if the vanus sententiarum strepitus,
wherewith he was astonished, does not belong to Seneca, if the perambages and
Deorum Ministeria, etc. did not relate to the Pharsalia of Lucan: if the
Encomiums, which he gives to Cicero, Virgil and Horace, were not designed in
contempt of the Uncle, and Nephew. Be it as it will, to return to what appers
to me concerning this Philosopher, I never read his Writings, without removing
my self from the Sentiments which he would inspire his Readers with. If he
attempts to persuade Poverty, I long for his Riches; his Virtue frightens me,
and the lest despos'd to Vice would abandon himself to pleasures by the
description, which he gives of them. In a word, he speaks so much of Death, and
leaves me such Melancholy Ideas, that I do my utmost endeavors not to improve
by his Lecture. The finest things that I find in his Works, are the Examples
and Citations he mingles therein. As he lived in a curious Court, and knew a
thousand fine things of all Times, he alleges some that are very agreeable,
sometimes of the Greeks, sometimes of Caesar, Augustus and Mecaenas, for after
all his Parts, and Knowledge were infinite: But his Style has nothing that
affects me, his Opinions are too severe, and it is ridiculous that one who lived
in abundance, and was so careful of himself, should encourage nothing but
Poverty and Death.

UPON PLUTARCH.
MOntagne has found much resemblance between Plutarch and Sen^ca, both great
Philosophers, great Encouragers of Wisdom and Virtue, both Tutors of Roman
Emperors: The one more Rich and Elevated; the other more Happy in the Education
of his Pupil. The Opinions of Plutarch (as the same Montagne affirms) are more
sweet and more agreeable to Society: He thinks those of Seneca more solid, but
I, more rough, more severe. Plutarch sweetly insinuates Wisdom, and would
render Virtue familiar even in Pleasures. Seneca brings back all Pleasures to
Wisdom, and esteems the Philosopher only Happy. Plutarch, natural, and first
persuaded, easily persuades others: The Spirit of Seneca opposes it self, and
encourages it self to Virtue, and as if it were to him a strange thing, he
takes pains to exceed himself. As for the Style of Plutarch, having no
Experience in Greek, I cannot make a certain Judgment: But I will acknowledge
to you, that amongst the Treatises of his Morals, there is a great deal which I
cannot comprehend, whether it be through the great difference of things and
manners of his time, from those of ours, or that they are really above my
little understanding. The familiar Spirit of Socrates, the Creation of the
Soul, the Circle of the Moon, may be admirable to those that understand them. I
will confess to you Ingeniously, that I don't apprehend the Beauty of them; and
if they are wonderful, it is a wonder that is beyond my Capacity. One may judge
by the good Words of the Ancients, which he has left us, by his Sayings which
he has Collected with so much Care, by his long Table Discourses, how much he
was taken with Converse. In the mean time, whether it were that there was but
little of delicacy at those Times, or else that his Palate was not very
exquisite: He supports grave and serious things with a great deal of good Sense
and Reason; in things that depend purely upon Wit, he has nothing of ingenious,
or delicate.

To speak the truth, the Lives of Illustrious Men is the Masterpiece of
Plutarch, and in my Opinion one of the Noblest Works in the World. You see
there those great Men set in public view, and in their retirements at home,
you see them in the purity of their Nature, and in the whole extent of action.
One sees therein the Resolution of Brutus, and that fierce answer to the evil
Genius that spoke to him: One sees that there remained with him in spite of
himself some Impression of this Ghost, which the reasoning of Cassius had much
ado to efface. A few days after, one sees him put his Troops in order, and give
Battle so successfully on his side, and so fatally by the Error of Cassius. One
^ees him try his Fortune again, lose the Battle, reproach Virtue; and find more
relief in despair, than with an ungrateful Mistress whom he had so well served.

There is a natural force in the Discourse of Plutarch, which equals the
greatest actions; and it is of him that one may properly say, facta dictis
exaequata sunt: But he forgets neither the moderate, nor the common ones, and
examines with Care the ordinary course of Life. As for his Comparisons, which
Montagne has found so admirable, they appear to me indeed very fine: But I Am of
Opinion that he might hay gone further, and pierced more into the bottom of
their Tempers.

There are folds and turnings in our Souls, which he has avoided. He has judged
of Man too much in general, and has not thought him so diff^rent as he is to
himself; wicked, virtuous, equitable, unjust, merciful, cruel: When a Man seems
to be oppo^ite to himself, he attributes to strange Causes. In a word, if he
had defined Catiline, he would have made him Covetous, or Prodigal: That alieni
appetens, sui profusus, was beyond his apprehension; and he would never have
discovered those contrarieties, which Salust has so well separated, and which
Montagne himself has much better understood.

A JUDGMENT UPON PETRONIUS.
TO judge of the Merit of Petronius, I will only see what Tacitus says of him;
and, without Flattery, he must have been one of the most Gentleman-like of the
World, since he has obliged so severe a Historian, to renounce his own Nature,
and to enlarge himself with Pleasure upon the Commendations of a voluptuous
Person. Not but that a Luxury so exquisite tended as much to the Delicacy of
Genius, as to that of the Relish. That erudito luxu, that arbiter elegantiarum,
is the Character of an Ingenious Politeness, ^ar remote from the gross thoughts
of a Vicious Man: He was not so possessed of his Pleasures, as to become
incapable of Business; and the sweetness of his Life did not render him an
Enemy to Employment. He had the Merit of a Governor in his Government of
Bithynia, the Virtue of a Consul in his Consulship. But instead of subjecting
his Life to his Dignity, as do the greatest part of Men, and to bring there all
his Troubles and all his Joys, Petronius of a Spirit superior to his Charges,
centred them to himself; and to explain my self after the manner of Montagne,
He did not renounce the Man, for the Magistrate. As for his Death, after having
examined it well, either I am deceived, or it is the finest of Antiquity. In
that of Cato, I find Trouble and even Anger. The despair of the Affairs of the
Republic, the loss of Liberty, his Hatred to Caesar, much assisted his
Resolution, and I know not if his rough Nature did not extend to Fury, when he
tore out his own Bowels.

Socrates died truly as a wise Man, and with indifference enough: Yet he
endeavored to assure himself of his Condition in another Life, and did not: He
reasoned thereof with his Friends in the Prison without ceasing, weakly enough;
and to say all, Death was a considerable Object to him.

Petronius alone has showed softness and indifference in his. Audi^b atque
referentes nihil de immortalitate animae, and Philosophorum placitis; sed levia
carmina and faciles versus. He did not only go on in his ordinary course, in
giving Liberty to Slaves, in chastising others, he followed those things that
pleased him; and his Soul at the point of so doleful a Separation, was more
touched with the sweetness and easiness of Verse, than all the Sentiments of
Philosophers.

Petronius, at his Death, leaves us nothing but an Image of Life, no Action, no
Word, no Circumstance, Marks the perplexity of a dying Person. It Is for him
properly, that to die is to cease to live, and the vixit of the Romans justly
appertains to him.

UPON PETRONIUS.
I AM not of the Opinion of those who believe that Petronius had a Mind to
reprehend the Vices of his Time, and that he composed a Satyr with the same
Spirit, that Horace writ his. I am deceived, or good Manners have not so great
an Obligation to him; He is rather a nice Courtier that finds the Ridicule,
than a public Censurer that ties himself to blame Corruption. And to speak
truth, if so be Petronius had a mind to leave us an Ingenious Moral in the
Description of Pleasures, he had endeavored to give us some distaste thereof:
but it is there that Vice appears with all the Graces of the Author; it is there
he shows with the greatest Care the agreement and Politeness of his Wit.

Further, if he had had a design to instruct us by a way more fine and
concealed than that of Precepts, we should at least see some Example of Divine
or Humane Justice upon those Debauchees. So far is he from that, that the only
honest Man that he introduces, the Poor Licas, a Merchant of good Credit,
fearing the Gods much, miserably perishes in a Tempest in the midst of those
depraved Persons, that are preserved. Eucolpius and Giton embrace one another,
to die more closely united together; and Death durst not interrupt their
Pleasures. The Lustful Triphena saved her self in a Skiff, with all that
belonged to her. Eumolpus was so little concerned at the danger, that he had
leisure enough to make an Epigram: Licas, the Pious Licas calls to his Gods in
vain for Relief; and to the disgrace of their Providence, the only Innocent
pays here for all the Culpable. If so be one sees Eucolpius sometimes in his
Afflictions, they don't proceed from his Repentance. He killed his Host, is a
Fugitive, there is no sort of Crime, which he has not committed; thanks to the
Goodness of his Conscience, he lives without Remorse: His Tears, his
Lamentations have a very different cause; he complains of the Infidelity of
Giton that abandons him, and his Despair is to imagine himself in the Arms of
another, that derides the Solitude he is reduced to.

Iacent nunc amatores obligati noctibus totis, and forsitan mutuis libidinibus
attriti derident solitudinem meam.

All Crimes have happily succeeded to him, except one alone, which indeed
occasioned him a rigorous Punishment: but it is an offense, for which the Divine
and Humane Laws have not ordained a Chastisement. He had not answered well the
Caresses of Circe; and in truth his Impotence is the only Fault, which has
troubled him. He confesses that he has failed several times, but that he never
deserved Death, except on this Occasion. In a word, without tying my self to
the particulars of the whole Story, he falls again into the same Crime, and
receives the deserved Punishment with a perfect Resignation: then he comes to
himself, and acknowledges the anger of the Gods.

Hellespontiaci sequitur gravis ira Priapi.
He laments the pitiful Estate, wherein he finds himself. Funerata est pars
illa corporis, qua quondam Achilles eram; and to recover his Vigor, he puts
himself into the Hands of a Priestess of this God with very good Sentiments of
Religion: but indeed, the only ones he appears to have in all his adventures. I
might say too, That the good Eumolpus is followed by little Children, when he
recites his Verses: but when he corrupts his Scholar, the Mother regards him as
a Philosopher; and lying in the same Chamber, the Father awakes not: So
severely is Ridicule punished by Petronius, and Vice happily protected. Judge
by this, if Virtue has not need of another Orator, to be persuaded. I fancy he
was of the Opinion of Botru, That a Gentleman and Good Manners don't agree
together.

Si ergo Petronium adimus, adimus virum ingenio vere aulico, elegantiae
arbitrum, non sapientiae.

CHAP. II.
ONE cannot doubt, but that Petronius had a Mind to show the Debaucheries of
Nero, and that this Prince was the chief Object of his Deri^ion: but to know
whether the Persons he introduces be true, or fictitious; whether he gives us
Characters according to his fancy, of the proper Temper of certain Persons, the
thing is very difficult, and one cannot reasonably be assured of it. As for me,
I Am of Opinion, That there is no Person in Petronius, who may not in general
agree with Nero. Under Trimaltion in all probability he derides his ridiculous
Magnificence, and the extravagance of his Pleasures: Eumolpus represents to us
the foolish Passion, which he had for the Theater: Sub nominibus exoletorum,
foeminarumque, and novitate cujusque stupri, flagitia Principis praescripsit;
and by an agreeable Disposition of different Persons but imagined, he touches
several Impertinences of the Emperor, and the usual disorder of his Life.

One might say, That Petronius is very contrary to himself, to blame the
Magnificence of Banquets, and the softness of some other Pleasures; he that was
so Ingenious in the search of them: Dum nihil amoenum and molle, affluentia
putat, nisi quod ei Petronius approbasset. For, to speak the truth, although
the Prince was of his own Nature, corrupt enough, in the judgment of Plutarch,
the Complaisance of this Courtier contributed much to cast him into all sort of
Luxury and Profusion. In that, as in the most part of things in History, one
should regard the difference of times. Before Nero let himself yield to this
strange abandoning, no body was so agreeable to him, as Petronius; even so far,
as every thing passed for gross, which had not his Approbation.

This Court was, as it were, a School of meditated Pleasures, where all was
subservient to the Delicacy of so exquisite a Palate. I am even of Opinion,
That the Politeness of our Author became pernicious to the Public, and that he
was one of the chief in Ruining some considerable Persons, that made a
particular Profession of Wisdom and Virtue. He preached up nothing but
Liberality to an Emperor already Prodigal, softness to a voluptuous Man; every
thing that had the Face of Austerity, had to him a ridiculous Air. According to
my Conjectures, Thraseas had his turn, Helvidius his; and whosoever had Merit
without the Art of Pleasing, was not troublesome without Punishment. In this
manner of Life, Nero corrupted himself more and more, and as the Delicacy of
Pleasures came to yield to the disorder of the Debauch, he fell into the
extravagance of all Tastes. Then Tigellinus, one that was jealous of the
Agreements of Petronius, and the advantages which he had over him in the
Science of Pleasures, attempted to ruin him, quasi adversus aemulum, and
Scientiae volupta atum potiorem. It was no difficult thing for him to do; for
the Emperor, abandoned as he was, could no longer suffer so curious a Witness
of his Infamies: He was less troubled through the Remorse of his Crimes, than
through a secret Shame which he felt, of his gross Pleasures, when he remembered
the Delicacy of things past. Petronius on his side had no less distastes; and I
believe, that in the time of his private Discontents, he composed that
Ingenious Satyr, which we have but unhappily misrepresented.

We see in Tacitus the noise of his Disgrace, and that at length, by the
Conspiracy of Piso, the Friendship of Scevinus was the pretense of his loss.

CHAP. III.
PEtronius is admirable throughout in the purity of his Style, in the delicacy
of his Sentiments* but that which more surprises me, is that great easiness in
giving us ingeniously all sorts of Characters. Terence is perhaps the Author of
Antiquity, that enters best into the Nature of Persons. But still I find this
to say, that he has too little extent; and his whole Talent is con^ined in
making Servants and Old Men, a Covetous Father, a Debauched Son, a Slave, to
speak properly. Behold how far extends the capacity of Terence. You must expect
from him neither Gallantry, nor Passion, nor the Thoughts, nor the Discourse of
a Gentleman. Petronius, who had an Universal Wit, finds the Genius of all
Professions, and frames himself as he pleases, to a Thousand different Natures.
If so be he introduces a Declamer, he practices so well his Air and his
Style, that one would say, he had used to declaim all his Life. Nothing
expresses more naturally the disorder of a Debauched Life, than the Quarrels
of Eucolpion and Acyltos upon the Subject of Giton.

Quartilla, does not she represent admirably those prostitute Women? Quarum sic
accensa libido, ut saepius peterent viros, quam peterentux. The Marriage of
Young Giton and Innocent Panichis, does it not give us the Image of an
accomplished Wantonness?

All that can make a Sot ridiculously, magnificent in Banquets, a false
delicate, an impertinent, you have it undoubtedly at the Feast of (...).

Eumolpus shew^ us the folly which Nero had for the (...), and his vanity to
recite his own (...)* and you will observe in passing by so many Noble Verses,
which he makes an ill use of, that an excellent Poet is for the most part an
irregular Man. In the mean time as Eucolpion, to represent Eumolpus a maker of
Fantastical Verses, does not cease to find in his Physiognomy something of
greatness, he judiciously takes care not to ruin the Idea's which he gives us
of him. That infirmity, which he has in making Verses out of Season, even in
vicinia mortis, his fluentness in repeating his Compositions in all places, and
at all times, answers to his ridiculous Beginning: Et ego, inquit, Poeta sum,
and ut spero, non humillimi spiritus, si modo aliquid coronis credendum est,
q^as etiam ad imperitos gratia defer solet.

His knowledge general enough, his extraordinary Actions, his expedients in
unlucky Encounters, his Resolution to support his Companions in the Vessel of
Licas, those People he brings in at Crotona, so agreeably courting of Old Men
for their Estates after their Death, have always some agreement with what
Eucolpion had promised to himself. Senex canus exercitati vultus, and qui
videbatur magnum aliquid promittere.

There is nothing so natural as the Person of Crisis, none of our Confidents
come near her; and without mentioning her first Conversation with Polienos,
that which she tells him of her Mistress upon the affront she received, is of
an inimitable simplicity: Verum enim fatendum est, ex qua hora accepit
injuriam, apud se non est.

Whosoever has read Iuvenal is well enough acquainted with impotentia
matronarum, and the ill humor it puts them in, Si quando vir aut familiaris
infelicius cum ipsis rem habuerat. But there is no body but Petronius that
could have described Circe, so Beautiful, so Voluptuous and so Gallant.

Enothea, the Priestess of Priapus, ravishes me with the Miracles she promises,
with her Enchantments, her Sacrifices, her Lamentation upon the Death of the
Sacred Goose; and the manner of her Pacification, when Polienos makes her a
Present, wherewith she might purchase a Goose and Gods too, if she thought fit.

Philumena, that honest Lady, is not less good, who, after having spent several
Estates in the Flower of her Youth and Beauty, coming to be Old, and by
consequence unfit for all Pleasures, endeavored to continue this fine Art by
the means of her Children, whom she introduced with a Thousand Noble Discourses
to Old Men, that had it not. In a word, there is no Nature, no Profession,
which Petronius does not admirably pursue the Genius of. He is a Poet, he is an
Orator, he is a Philosopher, at his pleasure.

As for his Verses, I find in them an agreeable Force, a natural Beauty,
Naturali pulchritudine carmen exurgit.

I know not if I am deceived; but in my Opinion, Lucretius has not so
affectingly treated of the matter of Dreams, as Petronius.

Somnia, quae mentes ludunt volitantibus umbris,
Non delubra Deum nec ab aethere numina mittunt:
Sed sibi quisque facit; nam cum prostrata sopore
Vrget membra quies, and men's sine pondere ludit,
Quidquid luce fuit, tenebris agit; oppida bello
Qui quatit and flammis miserandas saevit in urbes,
Tela videt, etc.
And what can one compare to this voluptuous Night, whose Image fills the Soul
in such a manner, that one has need of a little Virtue to hold fast the simple
Impressions it makes upon the Mind?

Qualis nox fuit illa, Dii, Deaeque!
Quam mollis thorus! Haesimus calentes,
Et transfudimus hinc and hinc labellis
Errantes animas. Valete curae.
Mortalis ego sic perire coepi.
What a Night, O good Gods! What Warmth! What Kisses! What Breathing! What
mixture of Souls in those hot and amourous Respirations!

Although the Style of the Declamer seems ridiculous to Petronius, yet for all
that he shows much Eloquence in his Declamations; and to demonstrate that the
most Debauched are not incapable of Meditation, Morality has nothing more
serious, or better handled than the Reflections of Eucolpion upon the
Inconstancy of Humane Affairs, and the Uncertainty of Death.

In every Subject that is offered, one cannot think more nicely, nor speak with
more purity. Oftentimes in his Narrations he lets himself go to the Simple
Nature, and contents himself with the Graces of Plainness: sometimes his work
is a finished piece, and then there is nothing so exact. Catullus and Martial
treat of the same things in a gross manner; and if so be any one could find the
secret of covering what is obscene in a Language like his, I Will answer for the
Ladies, that they would praise him for his Discretion.

But that which Petronius has more particular, is, That excepting Horace in
some Odes, he is perhaps the only Person of Antiquity, that knew how to speak
of Gallantry. Virgil is affecting in Passions; the Amors of Dido, the Amors
of Orpheus and Euridice have Charms and Tenderness: Yet there is nothing of
Gallant, and the Poor Dido, so Compassionate was her Soul, became Amorous of
the Pious Aeneas at the recital of his Misfortunes. Ovid is ingenious and
easy: Tibullus delicate. In the mean time, their Mistresses ought to be
Learned.

As they allege Gods, Fables and Examples drawn from the most remote
Antiquity, they always promise Sacrifices; and I fancy that Monsieur... learnt
of them the Method of burning Hearts in Offerings. Lucian, as ingenious as he
is, becomes gross so soon as he speaks of Love, and his Courtezans have rather
the Language of the Stews, than the Discourse of the Bedchamber.

As for me, who am a great admirer of the Ancients, I cannot but render Justice
to our Nation, and believe for certain, that we have over them in this point a
great advantage. And, without romancing, after having examined this matter, I
do not know one of these great Genius's, that could have made Massinissa and
Sophonisba, Caesar and Cleopatra, speak so gallantly of Love, as we have heard
them in our Language. As much as others come below us therein, so much does
Petronius exceed us. We have no Romance that affords us a History so agreeable
as the Ephesian Matron. Nothing has so much of Gallantry as the Love Letters of
Circe and Polienos; and all their adventure, whether in the management, or in
the Descriptions, has a Character very much above the Politeness of our Age.
You may judge, in the mean time, whether he could nicely treat of a Noble
Passion; since here 'twas an affair of two Persons, that at their first sight
were to taste the utmost Pleasure.

MAXIM.
That one ought never to be wanting to his Friends.
THIS Maxim is generally approved of, the weakest and the firmest Friend, the
ungrateful and the acknowledging Person, observe the same Language. Yet there
are but few People, that practice what they say. Is there a dispute about the
acknowledgment of a good turn, a thousand Men re^ine upon the Discourses of
Seneca? Is there a Question about acquitting himself toward a Benefactor, no
body frankly confesses the debt, nor concludes on the value of the Service? He
that has given, magnifies Objects; he that has received, lessens them. The
World is full of Braggadocio's and Hypocrites in Friendship. Nevertheless, it
is certain that Friendship is a commerce; the traffic thereof ought to be
honest, but it is still a traffic. He that has ventured most therein, ought to
reap the most. It is not permitted to infringe it, without coming to an
account; but where are those to be found, that act sincerely, and don't put in
the Balance the slightest displeasure to counter-poise the service of the
greatest weight?

Every one brags of his own Heart, it is a vanity Al-a-mode, you hear nothing
less repeated, and that without blushing: then every one makes to himself a
Rule of Acknowledgment, always commodious for him, but inconvenient for his
Friends. Tacitus has told us the reason of it; it is that our own
acknowledgement is made use of at our own expense, and that of others to our
advantage.

He that does good, because he thinks himself obliged to do it, does it always
with an ill Grace: He looks upon his Duty as a troublesome Master: He seeks for
occasions to free himself, and to shake off a Yoke, which he bears with
discontent.

From whence it comes to pass, that the Offices of these Persons have something
of a Languor in them, which takes a way all the Blossom of the good they do us.
Should you die with shame, you must explain to them all your Necessities; and
explain them more than once, if so be you would have them understand you: you
must push them on continually by the Interest of their own glory, and make
level all their ways. Their Hearts are always in a sort of Lethargy. Stir them
up, they awake for a moment, and afford some token of Life: say no more to
them, they return to their first State.

On the other side, the Offices of true Friends have something of liveliness,
which always precedes our Wants, and even prevents our very Desires. They find
every thing easy; one is sometimes forced to retain them, and moderate that
heat, which carries them to goodness; it is of them one may truly affirm, That
they think to have lost the day, wherein they have done no service for those
they love.

But Honor, which disguiseth it self under the name of Friendship, is nothing
but a Self-love, that serves it self in the Person, it makes an appearance of
serving. The Friend, who acts but by this motive, advances to do good in
Proportion only to the increase of his Reputation. He stops short, when his
Witnesses are gone; it is a false brave that turns his Eyes to see if he is
regarded; it is a Hypocrite, that gives Alms with an unwilling Mind, and pays
this Tribute to God, only to impose upon Men.

There are yet other Friends, whose only Prospect is their own Satisfaction;
this I^ternal Law, which they lay upon themselves, makes them faithful and
generous: but there is in all their Actions a stiff regularity, that puzzles
those whom they oblige. They do all things by weight and measure. It Is a
Misfortune to him that has need of their Service, when they think to have
accomplished their Duties.

Provided they have nothing to reproach themselves with, the Misfortune of
another does not affect them, on the other side they would be concerned, that
it was ended so soon. They continue it sometimes for the continuance of their
own Glory. They r^joice, they triumph in secret for a disgrace, which gives
them an occasion of showing themselves: instead of searching the most ready
means to assist you, they search the most signal ones to make themselves
honored: they always make a Figure, as they go; and, in a word, they look upon
their Friends, as Victims devoted to their Reputation. To speak the Truth,
these Persons love nothing but themselves; and if they think not to deserve
reproach, one may also be of Opinion, that they deserve no acknowledgment.

You see others pass their lives in Formalities, and Complaisance; they will not
so much as pardon you a Ceremony. These are the First Men of the World, to
comfort one upon the Death of a Father, or to make offers of Service, after the
Sword is drawn: Is the danger passed, they put themselves in Garrison with you,
and are as constant in their attendance, as your Shadow. They are always Slaves
to Circumspection, great admirers of their own Virtue, very importunate with
those that are indebted to them.

One must acknowledge that these constraints are extremely troublesome to a
Free Soul. There is no good turn that is not purchased too dear at this Price:
There is no Misfortune worse, than that of being served after this manner; To
love because one's obliged to it, is not to love.

In the mean time, if those Friendships that are urged only by Honor or Duty,
have something of Languor or Troublesomeness in them, those that are made by
the resemblance of Humors, and Communication of Pleasures, are very subject to
Alteration.

Since a Man is sometimes disgusted with himself, it is yet more easy to be
disgusted with others. The end of Friendship depends less upon our will, than
the beginning. There is no Sympathy so perfect, that is* not mixed with some
contrariety; no agreement, that holds an eternal Familiarity. The noblest
Passions become ridiculous in growing old. The strongest Friendships decay with
the time; every day makes a breach therein. One is for going immediately so
fast, that he is out of breath; in the midst of his Journey. He wearies himself,
and wearies others.

After all, says a Fickle Friend, it is a very tiresome business to be always
hinting to the same Person, I love you. Nothing comes near the Vexation, that a
too steadfast Passion occasions. It is fine indeed to endeavor to hide his
distaste, and labor to entertain Correspondence; Letters become insipid,
Conversations languish, the Lover tells, the Lady counts every hour, each at
length see himself reduced to talk of the Foul or the Serene Weather. There is
not that fine Genius in Love, that is not exhausted: there is not that Solid
Heart in Friendship, that is not repulsed. The taste of the best things change,
before they are changed themselves.

When the sole Interest of our Diversions forms the Knot of Friendship,
Absence, Employments, Disorders of Life, may easily break it, or at least untie
the same. The new Delights which are enjoyed with new Friends, efface the
remembrance of past Contentments. The first Pleasures of each Engagement, have
something of sharpness, that excites the desire to engage it self more. As soon
as they become more solid, they are satiated.

Wherefore there is no reason to reproach Inconstancy, as a very great evil; it
is no move in the power of certain Persons to love or not to love, than to be
in health, or out of order. All that one can reasonably demand from Fickle
Persons, is ingenuously to acknowledge their Levity, and not to add Treason to
Inconstancy.

For it happens but too often, that the best established Friendships, the most
strict Confidences, insensibly slacken. We are to blame to exclaim against
Ingratitude, and to decry those that desert us; we are sometimes glad, that
they give us an Example of change. We seek a Quarrel, we seem to be angry, to
the end of finding some pretense to set our selves at liberty: But supposing it
were a real Anger, perhaps it is not their fault, it may be it is our own: which
of us has a right to judge of it? That which we call a Crime of the Soul, is
very often a defect of Nature. God was not pleased to make us Perfect enough to
be always amiable: why should we desire then to be always loved?

Without doubt we took more care at the beginning to conceal our Imperfections:
our Complacency held the place of the greatest merit: we enjoyed the Graces of
Novelty; these Graces resemble a certain Flower, which the Dew disperses upon
Fruits; there are but few Hands dextrous enough to gather them, without
spoiling the same.

One must acknowledge, then, that even the best Men find in the strongest
Unions, Intervals of heaviness and weakness, whereof they know not always the
cause: This weakness, when it is not supported, passes at length to the Death
of Friendship, if so be Honor comes not to its Rescue.

It Is Honor, that labors sometimes to hide the defects of the Heart, that
plays the Person of Tenderness, that saves appearances for some time, till the
Inclination is awaked, and retakes its former vigor. I don't mean that Formal
and Ceremonious Honor, that consists in nothing but Rules and ridiculous
Looks, that takes away all from the unfortunate, as far as an opportunity to
complain, and whose Tyranny becomes sometimes more insupportable, than
Infidelity it self.

I speak of a true reason, that agrees with the Imperfections of our Nature,
that helps them the best it can, that is an Enemy to Affectation, that aims at
good, for the sake of good alone, and far remote from all the Evasions of
Self-love; that is always ready to perform a Kindness, and thinks never to have
done enough; that does not applaud it self, nor seeks for the Applause of the
World.

It is certain then, that these two Qualities stand in need of one another, and
that if Honor without Friendship is disagreeable, Friendship, that is not
supported by Honor, is never well assured.

OBSERVATIONS UPON THE MAXIM; Which says, One ought to despise Fortune, and not
care for the Court.
IT is more difficult to persuade this Maxim, than the rest. They that receive
Favors, even they that have but simple Pretentions, laugh at a Notion so
contrary to theirs.

I confess, that it is not easy to believe, that Reasonable Men would make
this Opinion Universal: I fancy they had no other design than to speak to the
Unfortunate, and to cure sick Minds of an unprofitable Disquiet.

In this case I cannot condemn them; if it is permitted to call a Mistress
Ungrateful and Cruel, when a Man has served her without any effect; it is sure
most reasonable for those that think to have received Outrages from Fortune, to
have the Privilege of forsaking her, and to seek, far from the Court, a Repose
which makes some amends to them for the advantages which she has denied them:
what injury is done her to return Contempt for Contempt?

I don't find it strange then in this case, for a Gentleman to despise the
Court: but I think it ridiculous for him to despise it, in hopes of making
himself honored. It is fine to act the Philosopher, but this Philosophy is to
me suspected of Vanity. I am not the Cully of those Hypocrites at Court, that
preach to others upon retreat, and cannot persuade themselves that it is a
happiness. The more they labor to make a suitable appearance in their
Solitude, the more earnest is their desire of altering their State.

They don't so much as attend the call of Fortune: the least hope makes them
forget all their Oaths; they cast themselves at the Feet of that Mistress, whom
they had exclaimed against; they become the Slaves of those Favorites, whom
they had braved; and their false Constancy has been of no other use, than to
render their change the more contemptible.

They return to the Court, like Persons of another World; their Habits, their
Air, their Language, are no more Al-a-mode; they pass for Strangers in their
own Country, and for ridiculous Persons amongst the young Courtiers. There is
no Patience which they don't put to the extremity, with their Tales of Ancient
Times, and their Stories of the Old War. They give Lessons to all Comers, both
of Military Discipline, and fine Gallantry. They put forth upon all occasions
cold Ralleries against Flaxen Perriwigs and wide Pantaloons. Too happy,
provided you hearken to them, and make an appearance of giving Credit to them:
but the thanks which you receive, are not worth the tiresomeness they give you.

There are others, that are not less displeasing to me; they are those, who
cannot leave the Court, and yet are vexed at every thing which passes there; who
interess themselves in the disgrace of the most indifferent Persons, and who
find fault with the Preferment of their own Friends.

They look upon, as an injustice, all the Good and Bad that is done to others;
it does not suffice to merit the being Happy to avoid their Envy: but to be
Unhappy, just suffices to attract their Pity.

In the mean time, if you hearken to these Persons, they will talk to you of
nothing but Constancy, Generosity, and Honor: and in every thing they say,
there is always a melancholy Air that makes you sad, instead of affording you
some Comfort. They meet with a certain Pleasure in Complaints, which makes you
not to be obliged to them for their Pity. They never find the State well
Governed, they favor no living Person, they give Quarter only to the Dead.
Their Choler blemishes the best Things; if through respect it spares the
Prince, it diffuseth it self bitterly amongst his Favorites. In a word, they
are ill Courtiers, ill Philosophers, and very unprofitable Friends.

They are incapable of the Cares of a Tumultuous Life, they cannot taste the
Repose of a Retired one, their Disquiet tosses them up and down, and raises
them to nothing: Like those that travel in a Dream, the error of their
Imagination torments them more, than the truth it self would do; and just as if
they had dreamt all their Life, they find themselves as little advanced the
last Day, as they were the first.

We are not in a time to storm against the Government. He that Rules is no less
above Censorious Persons, by the Wisdom of his Conduct, than by the Majesty of
his Rank. In truth, it is a Misfortune for the Peevish Courtiers, to have no
Minister in their Prospect, that might serve as a pretense for their Cabals.
But at last, Intrigue is no more in fashion, the Court laughs at those that
discommend it, one gains nothing there by acting the discontented, she is
repulsed by the importunity of those, who cannot be satisfied; she is deaf to
their Complaints, because one's aweary of pitying those, who complain eternally.

In whatsoever place you go, you ought to depend upon finding the World
composed of two sort of Persons, the one mind their Employments, the other
consult their Pleasures.

The first fly from the access of the miserable, and are afraid of becoming so
by Contagion. To enter into their Commerce, one must hide his Infirmity, and be
serviceable to them in some things: Interest alone is an infallible bait to
procure their Confidence, Compassion is of no use therein, they are hardened by
a long experience against the Miseries of others, and have preserved nothing of
Tenderness, but for themselves.

Those that give themselves up entirely to their Diversions, have something
more of Humanity, and are more familiar. Their Mistresses, their Confidents
advantage themselves by the follies which employ them. Their Souls are more
open, but their Conduct more uncertain: Passion always carries them beyond
Friendship, they look upon the Duties of Life, as an insupportable burden. To
live long with them, you must follow the course of their Pleasure, confide but
little in them, and know their Minds as much as you can.

The greatest Art consists in knowing well these two sorts of Persons. As long
as you are engaged in the World, you must comply with its Maxims, because there
is no fancy more unprofitable, than the Wisdom of these, who turn to Reformers
of the Age.

It Is a Person that one cannot long represent without offending his Friends,
and rendering himself ridiculous: there is no Life chaste enough to afford this
privilege, when Employments do not allow it.

In the mean time, the most part of these Reformers have their Prospects, their
Interests, their Cabals: one may well exclaim against them, all that is
asserted of them at Court and upon the Stage, does not move them; if they find
one Passage stopped, they re-enter at another. Proteus had less variety of
shapes, than these Persons have of Air and Language. Hearken to their
Remonstrances, you shall have them immediately for Masters; Give no attention
to them, they become your Enemies. The most secure way then, is to avoid their
Conversation, to have always before our Eyes, that these Reformers have been
Men like us, and are still, for all the Figure they make, and perhaps more than
we. As long as Fortune smiled upon them, they have enjoyed her Favors: are
they fallen into any Disgrace, they seek to raise themselves, and put
themselves forward by a Reputation of Integrity. They become Persons of
Quality, just as Wanton Girls become Wise. Old Age too hastily advanced, brings
Remorse with Wrinkles; Frauds and Knavery are of no more use, Cullies are
undeceived, Disgrace approaches, one is at a loss how to behave himself. The
World is a Comedy, every Comedian plays his part therein: but there is nothing
so unbecoming as to show himself when it is ended, and to come and censure
those, that remain upon the Stage.

To what purpose is it, to hate in another, the Fortune they seem to neglect
for themselves? if they would have it believed, that they have quitted it, why
do they pretend to find fault with others for pursuing the same?

Their Aversion is tied to those, that stand for Favors, their envy to those
that obtain them, and their Animosity to the Persons that distribute them: And
to have their esteem, or their friendship, one must be dead, or at least very
miserable.

I know that a Gentleman is always to be pitied in Adversity, and that a Fop is
always to be despised, whatsoever Condition he is in. But to hate Favorites
through the sole hatred of Favor; to love the miserable through the sole
Consideration of their Disgrace, is a very odd sort of Conduct, incommodious to
himself, insupportable to others, and always prejudicial.

Notwithstanding, the diversity of minds shows all these different effects in
the Life of Courtiers.

We have said, there are Persons enough at Court, that break with their Friends
at the very moment, when some disorder happens to them; who have neither
Friendship, nor Aversion, but what is measured by Interest. Whosoever is not
useful to them, never wants Defects; and he that is in a State of serving them,
is endowed with all Perfections.

There are others, who don't content themselves with deserting the unfortunate,
they insult over them even in the misfortune: the more humility they show in
flattering Favorites, the more fierce they are in affronting those, that are
fallen into some Disgrace.

To speak the truth, if the moroseness of those, who storm against Fortune
continually, is extravagant, the Prostitution of those who Sacrifice to her
even as far as their Friends, is infamous.

There is an exact Situation between Baseness, and False Generosity; there is a
true Honor that Rules the Conduct of Reasonable Persons. It is not
disallowable for an honest Man to have his Ambition and his Interest; but he
must follow them by lawful means. He may have Art without Subtilty, Dexterity
without Deceit, and Complaisance without Flattery. When he is a Friend of the
Favorites, he enters agreeably into their Pleasures, and faithfully into their
Secrets: if they happen to fail, he partakes of their Misfortunes, as well as
he did of their Favors.

The same Spirit that knew how to please them, can give them comfort; He makes
their Miseries less troublesome, as he rendered their Pleasures more agreeable;
he manages his Service ingeniously without staining his Fidelity, or injuring
his Fortune; he serves more conveniently for himself, and more to the advantage
of his Friends.

Oftentimes he is less discouraged, than those who seek their own glory in
assisting others, who aim at nothing but to recommend themselves by Marks of
Constancy, and who prefer the noise of a good Action before the good of those
whom they oblige.

Of these two sorts of Persons, the one make an appearance of being at a
distance from the unfortunate to the end of serving them the better, the others
run after them to be their Conduct. Whilst the first conceal themselves, and
only think how to relieve the afflicted, the others love nothing so much as to
exercise a cruel and imperious Generosity, and to insult over those, that stand
in need of their Credit.

I have gone too far in this Discourse. I go to conclude by the Opinion one
should have of Favorites.

Methinks their greatness ought not to dazzle our Eyes; in our Souls we may
judge of them, as the rest of Men; to esteem them, or undervalue them according
to their merit, to respect them or despise them according to the good or ill
they do to us: never to be wanting in the acknowledgement that is due to them,
to conceal carefully the displeasures they give us: and when Honor or Interest
would carry us to Revenge, to respect the Inclination of the Master in the
Person of the Enemy. Not to confound the public good with our own, and never
to make a Civil War of a particular Quarrel.

To despise them, to hate them, these are free Motions so long as they are kept
secret: as these Motions are in us, they depend upon us alone; but when they
carry us to things wherein the State is involved, we owe to that an account of
our Actions, and the Justice of the State has its Rights upon such Criminal
Undertakings.

Man, that is desirous of knowing all things, is ignorant of himself.
YOU are become more unsociable than you were, your Meditations have taken away
your Pleasant Humor; Study has something of dullness in it, which spoils the
good Grace, which one should have in Conversation. You say that those
Agreements, which proceed from the easiness of the Genius, scarce affect you
any more; but withal, take care that you lose not with your Friends, what you
think to gain with your self.

I know very well that your Employment is serious and important; you desire to
be satisfied from whence you come, what you are, and what you shall be
elsewhere, when you exist no more here. It Is a design that appears very
reasonable, it is even necessary; but you ought to apply your self to it with
more Moderation, and by a better Motive than you do. Our small Improvement
causes your Compassion, whilst you are employed in an Affair, which, according
to your sense, ought to be our continual business.

But tell me, I entreat you, can you imagine that those Philosophers, whose
Works you read with so much Application, have found what you enquire after?
They have searched it as you do, Sir, but they have searched it in vain.

Don't suppose that the Ingenuous Persons of the past Ages lived at Random;
your Curiosity has been of all Ages; the most stupid Men at this time have
enquired with the same Desire as you have; the most Passionate return sometimes
to these Thoughts, the Libertines themselves cannot be prevented from making
some Reflections therein; no Man is insensible of an Interest so general, and
of so much Consequence; every one meditates thereon, but with little advantage:
Insomuch that after having dreamt to no purpose, one finds that it is Wisdom to
dream no longer, and to submit to the Orders of Providence.

The Author of Nature was not pleased to let us be perfectly acquainted with
our selves; and amongst desires too curious of knowing all, he has reduced us
to the necessity of knowing scarce any thing, and of being ignorant of our
selves.

He gives Life to the Springs of our Soul, but he conceals from us the
admirable Secret that makes them move; and this Knowing Maker reserves to
himself the sole intelligence of his Work.

He has placed us in the midst of an Infinity of Objects, with Senses capable
of being affected therewith: He has given us Spirits that make continual
Efforts to be acquainted with them. Our Curiosity is raised to the very
Heavens; we observe the Course of the Stars almost with as much exactness, as
the Motions of a Clock. Astronomers have certain Rules to foretell Eclipses Two
Thousand Years before they happen; and by the means of great Perspectives,
which Invention becomes more perfect every Day, they discover new Planets, and
determine the different Motions thereof. In a word, they remark Spots in the
Sun, and Irregularities in what God has made most Regular in the World.

Although these things are much beyond us, they are not beyond our Spirit; but
our Spirit is above it self, and after it has comprehended the whole Universe,
it cannot comprehend it self, but in adoring him that has made it; and as soon
as it Would know it self, it intrenches upon the Rights of its Creator.

I have an Opinion, that you will not approve of. I believe it notwithstanding
to be true enough: It is, That no Person has ever well apprehended, by the sole
Lights of Humane Reason, whether the Soul be Immortal, or subject to Corruption.

It is our Interest to believe its Immortality, but it is not easy to conceive
it: my Intention is not to go far into a regular Dispute; it were necessary to
be of another Humor than I am, and to be better prepared. Let us leave M...
and M... to make whole Volumes by their Frivolous Reasonings upon the
Immortality of the Soul. The Examples of those, whose precepts you study, are
to me instead of Proofs, and persuade me more than all the Arguments of our
Doctors.

It Is not to be disputed, but that Socrates believed the Soul Immortal; we see
it in what remains of the History of his Life; and even the Thoughts which
Plato attributes to him, seem to confirm it. If so be you are curious,
notwithstanding you will see that Socrates is a Jesting Person that diverts
himself with all things, and makes use of reasoning to show that one cannot
even know, what Reason is. He takes every Party you will have him, whether it be
to defend or attack. With the Evasions of his Arguments, and the Sophistry of
Logic, he puts probability in the place of truth, and dazles his Auditors in
such a manner, by the various colors he gives to things, that he reduces them
to the being no longer able to distinguish the Shadow from the Body: but in
spite of his nice Ralleries, and all his Subterfuges, he perplexes himself very
often in the Conclusions he infers, and is so much dissatisfied with himself,
that he tears off his very Hair and Eyelids for Vexation, because he could not
find what he sought after. If you urge him to speak sincerely, he will tell
you, That the God, who has named him the Wisest of Men, gives him an Encomium
that does not belong to him, unless he deserves the name of the Wisest, that
confesses he knows nothing; and that it is impossible to know any thing.

He will tell you, That the Demon, who inspires him, is not enough informed of
the news of the other World, to decide the Question of the Immortality of the
Soul. He disputes of it before his Judges, like a Person that desires it, and
handles Annihilation as a Philosopher that fears it not.

After having endeavored to persuade his Friends in the Prison, it is plainly
seen that he could not assure himself thereof. He ends his Discourse with
Doubts, and all his Arguments tend to avert from his Mind the Image of Death.

From whence, do you think, proceed the Contradictions which appear upon that
Subject, in the Writings of Aristotle and Seneca?

As for Aristotle, I have no design to cry down his Doctrine, and to use him as
a Poisoner. I believe, as well as you, that it is a Calumny, and that the Roman
Emperor, whom you speak of, was foolish enough in causing the Books of this
Philosopher to be burnt, to revenge Alexander above Three Hundred Years after
his Death. But amongst us, one is not cautious of saying that he is a
Sophister, that seldom speaks like an honest Man: He Bites and Flings; he is
Ungrateful to his Master, and Captious with his Disciples. He is a Dreamer,
that fences with his own Shadow, and makes Monsters for himself to engage with.
It may be he is accused with Reason, that when he explains his idle fancies, he
does like the Fish, that disturbs the Water for fear of being taken: he
intangles himself in Arguments, which he cannot unravel. He plays the
Mysterious to hide his Doubts. In a word, he speaks like the Oracles to puzzle
the World, and is puzzled himself with his own Arguments. I say nothing here,
but what others have said before me. How many Fortunes do you think his
Writings have run through to come to us? If you appeal to his best Friends, the
greatest part of the Works, that are attributed to him, is not his own: but
allowing all that has been said of him not to be true, you must not believe,
that at those Privileged Hours when Aristotle permitted none to come to him,
but some particular Persons, he taught the same things he delivered in public.
His Morning Thoughts did not resemble those of the Evening. So soon as the
Gates of the Lycaeum were shut, and that he thought himself at Liberty, he
spoke another Language. It Is there he acknowledged much more clearly, than he
does in his Treatise of the Soul, that nothing is more impenetrable than its
Nature, its Original, and its Duration. Thus, when Alexander was angry that he
had published some Works, that he had composed for him alone: Don't afflict
your self, answered this cunning Tutor; I have taken good order to prevent
their being comprehended; they are not made to instruct the present Age, but to
exercise Posterity.

As for what relates to Seneca, you will agree that he is a Braggadocio, that
shakes for fear at the prospect of Death; that he collects all his forces to
assure his Countenance, in the cutting of his Veins; and that he speaks as a
Man, who is not altogether persuaded of what he says.

Sometimes these Philosophers tell us wonders of the Residence of the Gods, and
the Ultimate Bliss: sometimes they know not where to harbor them, and say,
That all things annihilate in Death, as far as Death it self. Now they promise
themselves Immortality, and promise it to others. Now they turn it into
Ridicule. This is so true, that Aristotle is expelled Athens for an Atheist,
and Seneca laughs at a Divinity in the Deifying of Claudius.

From whence, do you think, proceeds this Diversity in their Opinions? It is,
that they are troubled with different Idea's of present Death, and future Life;
their Soul unc^rtain upon the knowledge of it self, establishes or overthrows
its Opinions, according as it is seduced by the different appearances of truth.
If you hearken to these Talkers, they will do their utmost to make you believe
them. Assure your self, Sir, that the most resolute amongst them are no more
than Quacks, that swallow down the Poison with a b^tter Grace than others, to
the end of selling off their Drugs with more applause.

Epicurus makes an open Profession of putting the Sovereign good in the Senses,
and teaches that all things conclude with them: notwithstanding, does he not
seem in dying to contradict the Maxims, which he made Profession of during his
Life? He makes his Will with all the Cautions of a Man, that is concerned at
what will happen after him. Posterity has an influence upon him, his Memory
becomes dear to him, he cannot wean himself from the Delights of his Garden, he
flatters himself with the Reputation of his Writings, and recommends them to
his Disciple Hermachus. His Mind, which was so far engaged in the Opinion of
Annihilation, is affected with some tenderness for himself, and lays up Honors
and Pleasures in another State, besides that he goes to leave.

Solomon, who was the greatest of all Kings, and the wisest of all Men, seems
to furnish the Impious wherewith to sustain their Errors, at a time when he
advises the good Men to remain firm in the love of truth.

When he makes the Libertines speak in Ecclesiastes, is it not plain that he
appropriates to Wisdom alone the knowledge of our selves? He forms all the
Doubts, wherein for the most part Humane Reason is perplexed; he makes a
downright Description of his Irresolution, his Desires, his Distastes, his
Knowledge, his Ignorance; and at length concludes that Eternal Wisdom alone can
disentangle this Labyrinth; that we must adore the Profundity of its Mysteries,
and that the silence of a Wise Man, is of more value than the Arguments of a
Philosopher.

If any one ought to have been exempt from Error, Doubt, Inconstancy, it was
Solomon: Notwithstanding we see in the inequality of his Conduct, that he was
weary of his Wisdom, that he was weary of his Folly, and that his Virtues and
his Vices turn by turn gave him new Disgusts. Sometimes he enjoyed his Life, as
if all things went at random; sometimes he brought back all things to
Providence, and never spoke with a firm tone, but when Eternal Wisdom made him
speak.

Let the Philosophers, let the Learned study, they will oftentimes find an
Alteration, and now and then an absolute contrariety in their Judgments. Unless
Faith subjects our Reason, we pass our Lives in Belief and Unbelief; in
endeavoring to persuade our selves, and unable to convince us: the activity of
our Spirit gives us Motion enough, but its Lights are too dim to conduct us.

The one amorous of themselves help their Imagination to flatter themselves,
they think to have found what they seek for, they triumph some time in their
Error, but are undeceived in the end.

The others are vexed at their Ignorance, every thing stops them, nothing
satisfies them; they debate upon all Questions that are put to them: more
unhappy in this than the former, in as much as they have not the Wit to deceive
themselves.

This is it, Sir, in my Judgment, wherein consists the purest Wisdom; provided
that one is always deceived, provided that one is puzzled with every thing
that is difficult, and that one thinks of the future only to reap the more
advantage of the present, provided at length that one has reduced his Reason to
dispute no more upon things that God was not pleased to submit to reasoning, is
all that one can desire.

I not only believe with Solomon, that the silence of a Wise Man, in this case,
is of more account, than the Discourse of a Philosopher, but I esteem the Faith
of a stupid Peasant, more than all the Lessons of Socrates.

I know very well, that Examples might be brought, which seem contrary to what
I say. There are Pagans persuaded of the other Opinion; and affected to their
own Sentiments. A Discourse upon the Immortality of the Soul, has pushed on
some even to brave the horrors of Death, the better to enjoy those Pleasures of
Life, which were promised to them.

But not to displease the Partisans of the Virtue of the Pagans, I believe,
with some great Saints, that Vainglory made more than half of those Heroic
Actions, which cause our Admiration. When one comes to these terms, it is no
more reason that conducts us, it is Passion that draws us along; it is no more
the Discourse that has an effect upon us, it is a desire to be better, it is a
vanity to die with courage, which we love more than Life it self; it is a
weariness of present Misfortunes, it is a hope of future Rewards, a blind Love
of Glory; in a word, a Distemper, a Fury that does violence to natural
Instinct, and transports us beyond our selves.

But a peaceable Mind, that examines in cold Blood this terrible Alteration, is
not at all disturbed by the reading of Plato, or Seneca. They may preach up,
That Death is not an evil; if Grace does not come to its relief, they don't
determine it to us. It belongs only to the Sovereign Master of Reason, to make
Martyrs, to inspire a courageous Contempt for false advantages, and to persuade
upon his word that he prepares real ones for us.

I repeat it the last time, Sir; study as much as you please to know your self,
consult all your Books, consume your finest days in reflecting upon the
Immortality of the Soul, you will find that it belongs only to Religion to
decide it. As for me, I confess to you, That without that, the thoughts of
Eternity would never take up the most useless Moments of my Life.

OF STUDY AND CONVERSATION.
COnversation is an advantage peculiar to Man, as well as Reason. It is the
Bond of Society, by it is entertained the Commerce of a Civil Life; the Minds
communicate their Thoughts, the Hearts express their Motions, and Friendships
are contracted and kept up by the same.

The Conversation of two Friends renders their Happiness and their Misfortunes
common; it augments their Pleasures, and decreases their Afflictions. Nothing
alleviates Grief so much, as the liberty of Complaining; nothing makes one more
sensible of Joy, than the Delight of expressing it. In a word, Man is so far
born to be sociable, that this Quality is no less essential to him, than Reason.

To fly from Company, is to act against the Intention of Nature; to live always
in Solitude, one must be something more than Man, or less than Brute: There is
a sort of Communication amongst them. Many Philosophers have affirmed that
Beasts have a particular Language, and several Experiments have given occasion
to believe it.

However it is very true, that there are no Beasts upon Earth so wild, as some
certain Men that make a Profession of Contempt and Aversion for all Mankind:
like that extravagant Citizen of Athens, who spoke to no one to any other
intent, than to advise him to hang himself, and took care to make his Epitaph
so, as to curse Men after his Death.

One must have a Mind blemished with Melancholy, to lead a Savage Life, and
always in obscurity. I don't pretend to blame those, whose Silence and
Retirement our Religion has Consecrated; on the contrary, I admire them. The
Principle, which has disposed them to choose a Life so repugnant to Nature,
obliges us to have them in Veneration. As there is nothing more extraordinary,
than the Virtue of a true Solitary Person, so there is nothing more inimitable,
and which better deserves our Commendations.

But it is certain, that amongst those, whom a real Vocation, or a Fancy that
one sometimes takes to it, have cast into a dislike of the World, there is
found but very few that persevere in their Condition to the end, with the same
zeal. The State of a Solitary Person, is a violent State for Man. Natural
Instinct, which makes him love Society, makes it self at length the Master, and
causes to him from time to time some concern for having for saken it. After
all, to be concealed all ones Life, is that living? What distinction is there
between Death and Retirement, between Solitude and the Grave?

To live then as Man, it is necessary to converse with Men; it is fit
Conversation should be the most agreeable Pleasure of Life; but it is also fit,
that it should be confined. One ought to enjoy it with Choice, and moderate the
use of it with Discretion. There is nothing more advantageous, and nothing more
dangerous: as a too long Retirement weakens the Mind, so too frequent Company
consumes it. It is good sometimes to recollect himself; it is even necessary to
render an exact account of his Words, of his Thoughts to himself, and of the
progress he has made in Wisdom. To reap the fruits of his reading, and the
entertainments he has had, to improve by what he has seen, he must have
Silence, Repose, and Meditation.

There must be a time for Study, and also for Affairs, that are tied to our
Profession. Conversation cannot take up our whole Life; these two other Duties
deserve to be preferred before it. Ignorance is always disgraceful to a
Gentleman; his Condition does not excuse him, and the World does not instruct
him enough. When one knows how to make an equal mixture of all these things, he
must distinguish himself extremely from those that apply themselves to but one
of them.

Study is the most solid Nourishment of the Mind; it is the Spring of its most
Noble Qualities: it is Study that augments the Faculties of Nature; but it is
Conversation that sets them on Work, and refines them. It is the great Book of
the World, that teaches the Good Use of other Books, and can make of a Learned
Man, a complete Gentleman.

In a word, Study makes a greater difference between a Scholar and an ignorant
Man, than there is between an ignorant Man and a Brute: but the Air of the
World yet makes a greater distinction between a Polite and a learned Person.
Knowledge begins the Gentleman, and the Correspondence of the World compleats
him.

It has been observed notwithstanding, That extraordinary Genius's have passed
of a sudden from the Meditation of the Closet to the most difficult Charges:
but these Men cannot be brought for Examples. When a Man, intoxicated with
reading, makes his first step in the World, it is usually a false one. If he
advises himself by his Books alone, he runs the hazard of being always but an
ungenteel Man. Immoderate Study engenders a grossness in the Mind, and injures
his Sentiments; the Conversation of our Friends must assist and refine him.

To meet with a faithful, understanding, discreet Friend, is to be happy:
faithful, to conceal nothing from us; understanding, to remark our faults; and
discreet, to reprehend us for them. But to be enabled to believe his Counsels,
is the Perfection of Happiness: it happens oftentimes, that we take a pride in
following our own Conceits; like those Travelers, that lose their way for want
of taking a Guide, or enquiring for the Road.

It is true, that a Man who is sensible of his force, and knows the advantages
of his Mind, that a Man (I say) who aspires to Glory, and will raise his
Reputation, ought to dread, as a Rock, to be suspected of being governed.

Dependence is insupportable to a Man of Courage, especially that of the Mind.
When one would exercise a sort of Tyranny upon the freest part of the Soul, it
is difficult not to revolt against Reason, through Malice against him that
argues.

There is need of as much Discretion to give advice, as Compliance to follow
it: nothing is so dreadful as a Friend, that takes the advantage of his own
Experience, that proposes all his Counsels as Laws, and with the Air of a
Master, that takes from us the Privilege of examining what he says, and would
force the Mind by Authority, rather than win it by Discourse. He never fails to
give himself for an Example. He applys to all purposes the Observations of the
old Court. He brings his own adventures for Proofs, he has seen all that he
advances, every thing that he says is extravagant, and the fear of not saying
enough to persuade, makes him always say too much to be believed.

Yet, a great weakness in receiving advice is not less blameable, than a great
roughness in giving it. It is our Interest to surmount the one, and to sweeten
the other. Sometimes we should assist the liberty of him that informs us, by
accepting his Counsels with easiness.

A good Advice loses its force in the Mouth of a Friend, that is too
Complaisant; when he expresses himself with strength, he stirs up our Hearts
the more, he incites our attention the better; wholesome Remedies seldom have
an agreeable Taste, and the best humoured Physicians are not always the most
assistant.

We ought to look upon our selves as infirm, so long as we have need of Advice.
Alas! who has no need of it? If the Advice is good, why should we reject it,
because it is not delivered with a good Grace? We ought to consider, whether it
may be of any advantage to us, before we cast it aside: it is not proper to
reject even all the evil Counsels, for fear of disheartning those, that are
capable of administering good ones to us.

At the worst, when we shall reap from them no other Fruit, than to learn how
to overcome our nicety, and to take from our selves what is displeasing to us in
another, is it not sufficent to oblige us to give ear to them, and to
acknowledge our thankfulness?

An ill Example may serve to make us avoid evil, as a good one to excite us to
that which is good: let us reap the advantage of it from whatsoever part it
comes, of whatsoever Fashion it is given to us.

It Is our business to distinguish Gold from Earth, we find it seldom pure, but
it is never the less Gold: it is the fault of the Workman, not the Metal.

One meets sometimes with Men of an exquisite Sense, that have not the gift of
explaining themselves. One ought to dispense with the defect of their
Expression, and take the benefit of their Good Sense. Others have an easiness
of Speech, and only insist upon the outside of things. Let us imitate what is
good in their Language, and pierce further into the Truth.

There are still others, that have labored all their Life to render themselves
ingenious, and could not make themselves agreeable: we esteem their knowledge,
but their way is of little account with us: we should be glad of improving our
selves by their learning, but will not endure their ill humors.

A little distaste hinders us from reaping all the advantage, that one might,
from their Conversation; we prefer the Discourse of an ignorant Flatterer
before the Conversation of a learned Man, when he is morose and severe. The
Authority, which he takes over us, is indeed troublesome; but is it not a
privilege acquired by Age? If he lets us partake of what he knows, is it too
much to acknowledge him, to have a seeming Submission to his Sentiments?

Yet I would not have this Submission blind, it is just to reserve to our
selves the liberty of reflecting upon what he says: but we must answer him with
a great deal of observance: we ought not to contradict him, but to instruct our
selves the better; one should comply with Reason, as soon as it appears, and
find it agreeable even in the Mouth of a Pedant.

Notwithstanding, we are not to receive his Doctrine, as infallible; we are not
to establish an Opinion upon that of another; for it is in the Faith alone one
ought to swear upon the words of a Master.

To know things Judiciously, we ought always to be upon our guard against the
Reputation of him that speaks them; the Air of the Face, the manner of
Speaking, the Quality, the Time, the Place, all imposes. You hear the Court
exclaim against all the words of... because he sometimes delivers those that
are good. Admiration is the Mark of a little Spirit, and the great admirers are
for the most part very silly People. They want to be informed, when it is proper
to laugh; the Pit, that has no other assistance, than that of Nature, judges
better of the Play, than those who pester the Stage.

The greatest Secret then to succeed in Conversation, is, to admire little, to
hear much, always to distrust our own Reason, and sometimes that of our
Friends; never to pretend to ingenuity, to make that of others appear as much
as one can, to hearken to what is said, and to answer to the purpose. In a
word, to practice the precept of the Excellent Horace, Vt j am nunc dicat, j am
nunc debentia dici.

A Discourse upon the Word VAST, to the Gentlemen of the Academy.
AFter having condemned my self upon the Word Vast, I was persuaded that one
ought to be contented with my Recantation: But since the Gentlemen of the
Academy have thought fit to add their Censure to mine, I declare that my
disowning was not sincere; 'twas a pure effect of Compliance, and a voluntary
Submission of my Thoughts to those of Madam Mazarin.

Now I take up my Defense against them, which I had quitted upon her account,
which every Gentleman might take a pride in having lost. One may dispute with
the Gentlemen of the Academy the privilege of regulating our Language, as they
please. It does not depend upon Authors to abolish ^old Terms because they
dislike them, and to introduce new ones according to their Fancy; all that may
be done for them, is to render them Masters of Use, when that Use is not
contrary to Judgment and Reason.

There have been Authors that have refined Languages, there have been also
those that have corrupted them, and one must have recourse to a good Sense to
decide the matter.

Never had Rome such noble Genius's, as at the latter end of the Republic: The
reason is, That there was yet liberty enough amongst the Romans to give force
to their Spirits; and Luxury enough to give them negligence and agreeableness.

At this time, when the beauty of the Language was in the highest degree; this
time, when there was at Rome such great Genius's, as Caesar, Salust, Cicero,
Hortensius, Brutus, Asinius Pollio, Curio, Catullus, Atticus, and many others,
whom 'twould be of no importance to allege; it was just to submit to their
Opinions, and to receive their Decisions with Compliance: but when the Language
came to be corrupted under the Emperors, when Lucan came to be preferred to
Virgil, and Seneca to Cicero, was any one obliged to subject the liberty of his
Judgment to the Authority of those that made the Men of Parts? And Petronius is
not he commended by all judicious Persons, for having turned into Ridicule the
Eloquence of his Time, for having known the false Judgment of his Age, and
given to Cicero, Virgil, and Horace, all the Praises that they deserved?

Tertiis, Cicero, Virgilius,
Horatii curiosa foelicitas.
Let us proceed from our Latin Authors to our French. When Nerveze made his
false Eloquence to be admired, would not the Court have been under an
Obligation to any person of good Sense, that had undeceived it? When Coiffeteau
was seen to charm all the World with his Metaphors, and that the chief sails of
his Eloquence passed for wonderful: When the Florid Language of... which had
neither force nor solidity, affected all the false Polite, and pretended
Curious: When the affectation of Balsac, that undermined the natural Beauty of
his Thoughts, passed for a Majestic, Noble Style; should not one have rendered
an important Service to the Public, by withstanding the Authority that these
Gentlemen usurped, and by preventing the ill Opinions that each of them has
differently established in his own Time?

I confess, That one has not the same privilege against the Gentlemen of the
Academy. Vaugelas, Ablancour, Patru, have put our Language in its Perfection,
and I make no Question but that our present Authors will keep it up in the same
Condition wherein they have left it. But if one day a false Idea of Politeness
should make our Discourse feeble and languishing, if by too great a love for
making Histories, and writing News, one should study for an affected easiness,
which can be nothing else but a false Nature, if so be a too great Application
to purity should at length produce something of dryness: if to pursue always
the Method of Thought, one should take from our Language the fine turn it
bears, and depriving it of all Ornament, one should make it barbarous, with an
intent to render it natural; would not it be reasonable then to oppose
Corrupters, that would subvert the good and true Style, to form one as little
proper to express strong Imaginations, as curious Thoughts?

What have I to do to recall what is past, or to foresee the future? I
acknowledge the Jurisdiction of the Academy, and would have it decide, whether
Vast be in use, or no. I will submit to their Judgment. But to know the force
and propriety of the term, to be satisfied whether it is an Imputation, or an
Honor, they will permit me to refer my self to Reason. This small Discourse
will show, if I have the Notion of it.

I maintained, That in the Mind this term Vast was taken in a good or evil
Sense, according to the things which are added to it; that a Vast Mind,
Admirable, Piercing, marked a wonderful Capacity; and that on the other side, a
Genius Vast and Immoderate, was a Genius that lost it self in rambling
Thoughts, in fine but vain Idea's, in designs too great, and little
proportioned to the means that might make us succeed.

My Opinion appears to me to be moderate enough. I am disposed to deny that
Vast can ever be a Commendation, and that nothing is capable of making this
quality true. Great is a Perfection in Minds. Vast always a Reproach. A just
and regulated extent makes the Great; an immoderate Grandeur makes the Vast.
Vastitas, an excessive greatness. The Vast and the Terrible have a great
resembla^ce.

Vast Things don't suit with those, that make upon us an agreeable Impression.
Vasta solitudo, is not one of those Solitudes, which affords a delicious
Repose, which charms the Pains of Lovers, and enchants the Misfortunes of the
Miserable; it is a barbarous Solitude, where we are astonished at being alone,
where we regret the loss of Company, where the remembrance of lost Pleasures
afflicts us, and the Sense of present Misfortunes torments us. Your Vast House
is somewhat formidable to the sight. Vast Appartments never gave any Person a
desire of continuing there: Vast Gardens cannot have that agreement which
proceeds from Art, or the Graces which Nature might afford. Vast Forests put us
in a Fright. The prospect is dispersed, and loses it self in (...) king over
Vast Plains. Rivers of a reasonable greatness make us behold agreeable Banks,
and suggest to us insensibly (...) pleasantness of their peaceable Current.
Rivers too large, Overflowings, Inundations displease us by reason of their
violent Motions, and our Eyes cannot endure their vast extent.

Savage Countries that are untilled, Countries ruinated by the Desolati^^ of
War, Lands forsaken and abandoned, have something of vastness which produces
in us as it were a secret Sentiment of Horror.

Vastus, quasi vastatus vaste.
It Is almost the same thing with spoiled, and ruined. Let us repair from
Solitudes, Forests, Plains, and Rivers, to Living Creatures and Men.

Vastae and immanes Belluae.
That which the Poets have feigned most Monstrous, the Cyclops, the Gian^s are
named vast.

-- Vastosque abrupte Cyclopos
Prospicio --
-- Vasta se mole moventem
Pastorem Poliphenum. --
Virg. Amongst Men, those that exceed our ordinary Stature, those whom bigness
or height distinguishes from others, are called by the Latins, Vasta Corporum.

Vastus has passed as far as Customs and Manners.

Cato, who had otherwise so many good Qualities, was a Person vastis moribus,
according to the Romans. He had nothing of Elegance in his Discourse, nothing
of Grace either in his Person, or his Actions: He had a rustical and harsh
Behavior in all things. The Germans, at present civilized and polished in many
places, loved heretofore that what was in use with them, should have something
of vastness. Their Habitation, their Attendance, their Equipage, their
Assemblies, their Festivals, vastum aliquid redolebant; that is to say, they
were pleased with an immoderate greatness, wherein there was neither
Politeness, nor Ornament. I have observed, That the word Vast has four or five
different Significations in Cicero, all in an evil Sense.

Vasta Solitudo, vastus and agrestis, vasta and immanis bellua, vastam and
hiantem orationem.

The most usual Signification of vastus, is, too spacious, too extensive, too
great, immoderate.

One will tell me, That vast does not signify in French, what vastus may
signify in Latin, in all the senses that are given to it. I confess it. But
why should it not keep the most natural, as well as grief, pleasure, liberty,
favor, honor, affliction, consolation, and a Thousand words of this nature
keep theirs? There is a reason for vast, that is not found in the rest; it is
that there never was a French Term that expresses really and truly, what the
vastus of the Latins can express; and we have not made it French to increase a
number of words, which signify the same thing; it is to give our Language what
it wanted, and what rendered it defective. We think with more force, than we
express our selves. There is always a part of our Thought that stays behind; we
very seldom communicate it entirely; and it is by this Spirit of Penetration,
more than by the Intelligence of words, that we enter absolutely into the
Conception of Authors. In the mean time as if we should profess to understand
well what others think, or to make our own Thoughts comprehended, we should
weaken the Terms that would have the force of expressing them. But in spite of
our selves, vast will preserve in French the true signification it has in Latin.

One says too vast, as one says too insolent, too extravagant, too covetous,
and it is the excess of a vicious Quality. One does not say vast enough, because
enough marks a Situation, a Consistence, a Measure just and reasonable; and at
the moment that a thing is vast, there is an excess, there is too much, enough
can never be agreeable with it. Let us come to examine particularly the vast
Soul, since it is the subject of the Question. That which we call the Soul, is
divided into Three Faculties, the Judgment, the Memory, and the Imagination.

A Judgment may be commended for being Solid, Profound, Curious in discerning,
just in defining; but in my Opinion, never did a Person of good sense give to
it the Quality of vast.

One says, That a Memory is happy, faithful, fit to receive and preserve
Species: but I never observed, that it has been named vast.

Vast may be applied to an Imagination, that rambles, that loses it self, that
forms to it self Visions and Chimaera's.

I am not ignorant, that some have pretended to praise Aristotle, in
attributing to him a vast Genius; they have believed, that this very Quality of
vast, was a great Commendation for Homer.

One says, That Alexander, Pyrrhus, Catiline, Caesar, Charles the Fifth, and
Cardinal Richlieu, had vast Souls; but if we take the pains to examine well all
they have done, we shall find that their fine Pieces, their brave Exploits
should be attributed to other Qualities of their Minds, and that their Errors
and Faults ought to be imputed to what they had of vast. I acknowledge it: But
it was their Vice, and a Vice that is not pardonable, but in Consideration of
their Virtues. It is the error of our Judgment to make their merit of a thing
that cannot be excused but by Indulgence. If they had not been almost always
Great, they would not have been suffered to be sometimes vast. But let us come
to the Examination of their Works and their Actions, let us give to each
Quality the Effects that really belong to it, and begin with the Works of
Aristotle. His Poetry is one of the most finished; but to what are owing so
many Judicious Precepts, and so many Observations so just, but to the purity of
his Judgment? one will not say, That it was to his vast Soul. In his Politics,
which might guide our present Legislators, he is wise, prudent and skillful in
regulating the different Constitutions of States: He was by no means vast. No
Body ever pierced so far as he into the Heart of Man, as one may see in his
Morals, and in his Speculation, in the Chapter of the Passions. But he entered
therein as a Philosopher, that knows how to make profound Reflections, that had
studied much his own Motions, and strictly observed those of others. Don't
found the Merit of Vast upon that, for it had no Share therein. Aristotle had
properly a vast Genius in Natural Philosophy, and it is from thence, that
proceed all his Errors, by that he is lost in his Principle, in his own Matter,
in the Heavens, in the Stars, and in the rest of his false Opinions.

As for Homer, he is admirable as long as he is purely Humane, just in his
Characters, Natural in Passions, wonderful in knowing and expressing well, what
depends upon our Nature.

When his vast Genius is extended upon that of the Gods, he speaks thereof so
extravagantly, that Plato excluded him from his Republic, for a Fool.

Seneca was to blame for treating Alexander as a rash Person, that owed his
Grandeur to his Fortune.

Plutarch, seems to me to be rational, when he attributes the Conquests of
Alexander to his Virtue, more than to his good Fortune.

In Effect, consider Alexander at his coming to the Crown, you will find, that
he had not less Conduct, than Courage, to establish himself in the Dominions of
his Father. The Contempt they made of the Prince's Youth, carried his Subjects
to rebel, and his Neighbors to be in Motion; he punished the Seditious, and
subjected the Restless.

All Things being pacified, he took Measures to make himself chosen General of
the Greeks against the Persians, and these Measures were so well taken, that
one could not have expected more just ones from the most consummated Policy; he
made the Lieutenants of Darius, and Darius himself, commit a Thousand Faults,
without making one. I^ the Greatness of his Courage had not made him pass for a
rash Man by the Dangers which he exposed himself to, his Conduct would have
left us the Idea of a Wise and Prudent Man.

I describe him to you, Great, and Skillful, in every noble Thing he has done.
You would have him Vast, and it is to this Vast, that is owing all that he
undertook without Effect. A Desire of Glory, that nothing could limit, caused
him to make a very extravagant War upon the Scythians. An immoderate Vanity
persuaded him that he was the Son of Jupiter. Vast extends as far as his
affliction, when it carried him to sacrifice entire Nations to the Soul of
Hephestion. After he had destroyed the Empire of Darius, and subjected Babylon,
he could even attempt the Conquest of the World we are acquainted with; but his
vast Soul framed the Design of the Conquest of another. As Vast, he undertook
his Expedition of the Indies, where the Army would abandon him, and where his
Fleet was near being lost; from whence he returned to Babylon, melancholy,
disturbed, uncertain, distrusting both Gods and Men; Fine Effects of the vast
Soul of Alexander. Few Princes have had one so vast as Pyrrhus: His
Conversation with Cineas, that Conversation that is known by all, is a
sufficient Argument of it. His Valor, his Experience in War made him win
Battles; his vast Mind that embraced all Things, did not permit him to arrive
at the end of one; there was enterprise upon enterprise; War upon War: No
Effect of it.

Conqueror in Italy, Conqueror in Sicily, in Macedon, Conqueror throughout,
no Part well established; his Fancy prevailing over his Reason by new imaginary
Designs, that hindered him from drawing any Advantage from good Successes.

Catiline is spoken of, as a detestable Person; the same thing had been said of
Caesar, if so be he had been as unfortunate in his undertaking, as Catiline was
in his. It is certain, that Catiline had as great Qualities, as any of the
Romans. Birth, good Grace, Courage, Vigor of Spirit, Strength of Body, Nobili
genere ortus, magna vi animi and corporis, etc. He was Sylla's Lieutenant, as
Pompey was; of a Family much more Illustrious, than that of the last, but of
less Authority in the Party.

After the Death of Sylla, he aspired to Employments, that the other knew how
to obtain; and if so be nothing was great for the Reputation of Pompey, nothing
was high enough for the Ambition of Catiline.

What was impossible, appeared to him but extraordinary, and the extraordinary
seemed to him common and easy, Vastus animus immoderata, incredibilia, nimis
alta cupiebat.

And by that you see the Relation there is between a vast Soul, and immoderate
things. Good Men condemn his Crime, Politicians blame his Undertaking, as
ill-contrived; for all those, that had a Mind to oppress the Commonwealth,
except him, have had for them the Favor of the People, and the Assistance of
the Legions.

Catiline had neither one, nor the other of these Supports, his Industry and his
Courage served instead of all other things in so great and so difficult an
Affair. He himself made an Army of collected Soldiers, that had hardly any
Arms, or Subsistence; and these Troops notwithstanding fought with more
Obstinacy, than ever Troops did. Each Soldier had the Fierceness of Catiline in
the Battle, Catiline the Capacity of a great Captain, and the Stoutness of the
bravest and most resolute Soldier. Never did Man die with so Noble a Fierceness.

It Is difficult even for the best Man, that shall read this Battle, to be very
much of the Republick's side against him: impossible not to forget his Crime,
to pity his Misfortune.

He might have securely gotten a great Power according to the Laws.

This ambitious Man so vast in Projects, aspired always to Power, and at length
disposed himself to that Fatal Conspiracy, which ruined him.

Who was greater, more dextrous than Caesar? What Address, what Industry did
not he use to send back an innumerable Multitude of Switzers that endeavored
to establish themselves amongst the Gauls? He had as much need of Prudence as
Valor to get rid of, and send the Germans far from him. He had an admirable
Dexterity in managing the Gauls, prevailing over their particular Jealousies to
subject them one by another. Something of Vast, that mingled in his Spirit with
his Noble Qualities, made him forsake his ordinary Measures to undertake the
Expedition of England, a fantastical Expedition, vain for his Reputation, and
altogether inconvenient for his Interests.

What Stratagems he made use of to raise the Obstacles, that opposed the Design
of his Dominion. He undermined the Credit of all the reputable Men, that could
support the Republic. He made Cicero be banished by Clodius, who came to lie
with his Wife. He gave so much distaste to Catullus and Lucullus, that they
left Business. He rendered the Integrity of Cato odious, and the Greatness of
Pompey suspected. He raised the People against those, that protected Liberty.
Behold what Caesar has done against the Defenders of the State; see what he did
to those, that assisted him to overwhelm it. His Inclination for factious
Persons discovered it self at the Conspiracy of Catiline; he was a Friend of
Catiline's, and a secret accomplice of his Crime. He sought the Friendship of
Clodius, a Man violent and rash.

He contracted one with Crassus, more a rich, than a good Citizen. He made use
of Pompey to acquire Credit. And when it was debated to give Bounds to his
Authority, and to prevent the Establishment of his Power, he forgot nothing to
ruin Pompey.

He placed Anthony in his Interests, he gained Curio and Dolabella. He fixed to
himself Hirtius, Oppius, Balbus, and all the disaffected Persons he could, all
the bold, undertaking ones, all that were capable of procuring under him the
ruin of the Commonwealth. Measures so fine, so artificial, Methods so secret
and so delicate, a condition so studied for in all things, so much
dissimulation, so many secrets, cannot be attributed to a vast Soul; his
Faults, his Misfortunes, his Ruin, and his Death can be imputed to nothing
else.

It was this Soul that hindered him from enslaving Rome as he could, or from
ruling it as he ought. It Is this, that gave him the fancy of making War against
the Parthians, when there was more necessity of assuring the Romans; in an
uncertrin State, where the Romans were neither Citizens nor Subjects, where
Caesar was neither Magistrate, nor Tyrant; where he violated all the Laws of
the Republic, and could not establish his own; being perplexed, unsettled,
dispersed into vast Idea's of his Grandeur, not knowing how to rule his
Thoughts, nor his Affairs, he offended the Senate, and trusted to the Senators;
he abandoned himself to faithless and ungrateful Men, who preferring Liberty
before all Virtues, chose rather to have a Friend and Benefactor, than to have
a Master.

Commend, Gentlemen, commend a vast Soul, it has cost Caesar both his Empire
and his Life.

Beautru, who judged well enough of the desert of Men, was accustomed to prefer
Charles the Fifth before all Persons that have existed in Europe, since the
Romans. I will not decide, but I may believe that his Soul, his Courage, his
Action, his Vigor, his Magnanimity, and his Constancy have rendered him as
considerable as any Prince of his Time.

When he took upon him the Government of his Dominions, he found Spain Revolted
against Cardinal Ximenes, who was Regent thereof. The severe Humor, and
obdurate Manners of the Cardinal were insupportable to the Spaniards. Charles
was obliged to come into Spain, and affairs passing from the hands of Ximenes
to his own, all the Grandees returned forthwith to their Duty, and all the
Cities to their Obedience. Charles the Fifth was more Politic, or more
Fortunate than Francis the First.

In their Competition for the Empire, Francis was more Rich, and more Powerful.
Charles carried it by his Fortune, or by the Superiority of his Genius. The
Victory of Pavie and the taking of Rome put into his hands a King of France,
and a Pope. A Triumph, that surpassed all those of the Romans. The great League
of Smalcades was undermined by his Conduct, and by his Valor. He changed all
the Posture of the Affairs of Germany, transferred the Electorship of Saxony
from one branch to another, and from Frederick conquered and dispossessed, to
the House of Maurice, who had followed the Victorious. Religion it self was
enslaved to Victory, and received from the Will of the Emperor the famous
Interim, which will be always talked of. But this vast Soul embraced too many
Things, to regulate any one: he did not consider that he could do more by
others, than by himself; and in the time when he thought to have subdued Rome
and the Empire, Maurice turning against him the Armies he seemed to command for
his Service, was very near surprising of him, obliged him to save himself in
his Shirt, and to retire in all diligence to Willac.

It is certain that Charles the Fifth had great Qualities, and performed very
great Things; but this vast Soul, for which he is applauded, made him commit
many Faults, and occasioned to him many Misfortunes. It Is to that are owing his
Fatal Undertakings in Africa; it is to that are owing several Designs as ill
contrived, as they were ill followed; to that are owing those Voyages from
Nations to Nations, wherein there was less of Interest, than Fancy. It Is this
vast Soul, that made him be called Knight Errant by the Spaniards, and gave an
occasion to the disaffected to esteem him a greater Travellour, than
Conqueror. Admire, Gentlemen, admire the Virtue of this vast Spirit. It turns
the Hero into a Knight Errant, and gives to Heroical Truths the Air of Fabulous
Adventures.

I could show that this Spirit was the cause of all the Disgraces of the last
Duke of Burgundy, as well as those of Charles Emanuel, Duke of Savoy. But I am
impatient to come to Cardinal Richlieu, to discover in his Person the different
effects of great and vast. One may say of Cardinal Richlieu, that he had a very
great Genius; and as Great, he brought extraordinary Advantages to our State;
but as he was sometimes Vast, he has brought us very near our Ruin. In the
Ministry he found, that France was governed by the Spirit of Rome and Madrid.
Our Ministers received all the Impressions that Cardinal Marquemont gave them.

The Pope inspired all things to this Cardinal, the Spaniards all things to the
Pope. The King jealous of the Grandeur of his State, as much as a King can be,
had an Intention to follow the Interests of it. The Stratagems of those that
governed, made him follow those of Strangers. And if so be Cardinal Richlieu
had not been Master of the Counsels, the Prince naturally Foe to Spain and
Italy, had been a good Spaniard, or good Italian, in spite of his Aversion. I
will allege a thing that is little known, but very true. Cardinal Marquemont,
writ a long Letter to Cardinal Richlieu concerning the Business of the
Valtoline; and to render himself necessary near this new Minister, he
instructed himself with Care in the curious Measures one ought to observe, when
there was any Concern with the Italians and Spaniards. For answer, Cardinal
Richelieu sent him four Lines, of which behold the Sense.

The King has changed the Council, and the Council their Maxim; there shall be
an Army sent to the Valtoline which shall make the Pope more compliant, and
give us Satisfaction of the Spaniards.

His Excellency of Marquemont was much surprised at the Dryness of the Letter,
and yet more to see the new Spirit, that was going to reign in the Ministry. As
he was an expert Man, he changed the Model of his Conduct, and begged Pardon of
the Minister, if he had been presumptuous enough to give him Instructions,
which himself ought to have received. He confessed his Error in having
believed, that the Spaniards might be reduced to a reasonable Treaty by a
single Negotiation.

Monsieur de Senectere often said, That this small Letter of Cardinal Richlieu
to Cardinal Marquemont, was the first thing, that made the Design comprehended,
of the Ministers pulling down the Power of Spain, and rendering to our Nation
the Superiority, it had lost.

But to undertake abroad, it was necessary to be assured at Home, and the
Huguenot Party was so considerable in France, that it seemed to compose another
State in the State. That did not hinder Richlieu from reducing it. As they made
War unfortunately enough in the Ministry of the Constable of Luynes, it was
convenient to make a new Model, and this Model produced Effects as happy, as
the other had Successes little favorable.

It is not questioned, but that Rochelle was the Soul of the Party; 'twas there
were Deliberations made, Designs were framed, the Interests of a Hundred and a
Hundred Cities came to unite; and 'twas from thence, that a Body composed of so
many separate Parties, received Heat and Motion, there was nothing else to be
done then, but to take Rochelle, Ro^helle falling destroyed all the rest.

But when the Strength of the Place came to be considered, when they thought on
the Multitude of Defendants, the Zeal of these People, and how much their
Soldiers were encouraged, when they considered the Easiness of relieving it;
they saw the Sea at Liberty, and thereby the Gates open to Strangers, then they
believed impregnable, that which had never been taken. There was but a Cardinal
Richlieu, that did not despair of a Possibility of taking it.

He was in Hopes, and his Hopes made him draw the Design of this great Siege.
In the Deliberation all Difficulties were raised; in the Execution all subdued.

One will eternally remember that famous Bank, that great Work of Art that did
Violence to Nature, that gave new Bounds to the Ocean. One will always remember
the Obstinacy of the besieged, and the Resolution of the Aggressors.

To what end should there be a longer Discourse, Rochelle was taken, and it was
hardly surrendered, but there was a greater Enterprise without. The Dukedom of
Mantua being come by succession to to the Duke of Nevers, France had a mind to
establish it self therein, and Spain gathered an Army to prevent it. The
Emperor under pretense of his Right, but indeed to serve Spain, transported
some Troops into Italy, and the Duke of Savoy, who was entered into the
Interests of the House of Austria, was to stop us at the Passage of the
Mountains, to give the Spaniards and Germans leisure to execute their Designs.

So many Oppositions were unfruitful, the way of... was forced, the Army of the
Emperor lost all. Spinola died with Grief for not having taken Cassal, and the
Duke of Nevers acknowledged Duke of Mantua, remained quiet possessor of his
Dominion, whilst the Emperor's Army destroyed it self in Italy. Gustavus King
of Sueden was in Germany, where he won Battles, took Cities, extended his
Conquests from the Baltic Sea to the very Rhine. He became too powerful for
us, when he was killed; and his Death left the Suedes too Feeble for our
Interests. There was the Masterpiece of the Ministry of Cardinal Richlieu. He
retained Troops that were desirous of passing into Suedeland. He fortified the
good Intentions of a Young Queen not well established, and rested so well upon
Bavaria, that the War was maintained under a new Reign with as much vigor, as
it was under that Great King.

When the Duke of Weymar, and the Marshal Horns had lost the Battle of
Norlingue, Cardinal Richlieu redoubled his Succors, dispatched great Armies
into Germany, stopped the Progress of the Imperialists, and gave the Suedes an
opportunity to re-establish their Affairs in the Empire.

Behold what Cardinal Richlieu has done, as Great, Magnanimous, Wise, and
Resolute. Let us see what he did by his vast Soul.

The Prison of the Elector of Trier gives us an occasion, or pretense to
declare War against the Spaniards; and this design was worthy of the great Soul
of Cardinal Richlieu: but that vast Spirit, which was imputed to him, was lost
in the extent of his Projects. He took such false Measures abroad, and gave
such ill Orders at home, that our Affairs in all likelihood must be ruined.

The Cardinal had in his Thoughts the most fantastical design that ever was; it
was to attack Flanders behind, and take from it all the Communication it might
have with Germany by the way of the Meuse. He imagined that he should take
Brussels, and reduce the Low Countries at the same time. For this effect, he
sent an Army of Thirty Five Thousand Men to join that of the Prince of Orange
in Brabant. But instead of enclosing Flanders between the Meuse and the Sarne,
he shut up our Army between the Forts of Flanders and the Meuse: insomuch that
there was neither Provision, nor Communication in our Camp; and without
amplifying the Matter, the Misery was so great there, that after having raised
the Siege of Lauvain defended by some Scholars only, the Officers and Soldiers
returned into France, not in a Body, like Troops, but dispersed, begging for
their Subsistence, like Pilgrims. See what the vast Spirit of the Cardinal
produced by the fantastical Project of two Armies conjoined. The second
Campaign, this same Spirit scattered into its Idea's, took yet less measures.
The Enemies forced the Count... who defended the Passage of Be^ with an
inconsiderable Body.

Having passed the Sum, they made themselves Masters of the Field, took our
Cities, which they found provided with all Things, carried Desolation as far as
Compiegne, and Terror even to Paris. A fine Commendation for Cardinal Richlieu
to have been vast in his Projects. That very Quality, which the Gentlemen of
the Academy make so highly valuable, made him commit no less Faults in the
Campaign of Air. He undertook a great Siege in Flanders at the same time that
the Count... entered into Champagne with an Army. Hardly had we taken A^re, but
the Mareshal de la Meilleray was shocked, and the City besieged by the Enemy.

If so be the Count... had not been killed after he had won the Battle of
Sedan, one might have expected the greatest disorder in the World, in the
Disposition People were in. If the Gentlemen of the Academy had known
particularly Monsieur de Turenne, they would have plainly seen that the vast
Spirit of the Cardinal had no Recommendation with him. This Great General
admired a hundred Qualities of this Great Minister, but he could not bear with
the vast, for which he is commended. 'Twas this that caused him to affirm, That
Cardinal Mazarin was Wiser than Cardinal Richlieu; that the designs of Cardinal
Mazarin were just and regular, those of Cardinal Richlieu greater and less
concerted to come from an Imagination, that had too great an extent.

See, Gentlemen, a part of the Reasons that I had to tell you against vast. If
so be I don't submit to the Judgment you have given in favor of Madam Mazarin,
it is because I have found in your Writings a Censure of vast of much greater
force, than what shall be read in this Discourse.

St. EVREMONT TO THE Modern LEONTIVM.
YOU desire to know, whether I composed that Moral of Epicurus, which is
attributed to me. I could honor my self therewith, but I don't love to give my
self a desert which I have not, and I will tell you ingeniously, That it is not
mine. I have a great disadvantage in those little Treatises, which are printed
under my Name. There are some that are well done, which I don't acknowledge,
because they don't belong to me; and amongst the Things which I have done,
there is mixed a great many Silly Things, which I don't trouble my self to
disclaim. At the Age I am of, an Hour of Life well managed is much more
considerable to me, than the Interest of a Moderate Reputation. How difficultly
do People get rid of Self-love, I leave it as an Author, and retake it as a
Philosopher, feeling a secret Pleasure in neglecting what makes the Application
of others. The word Pleasure makes me recall Epicurus, and confess that of all
the Opinions of Philosophers concerning the Sovereign Good, there is none that
appears to me so reasonable, as his. It would be to no purpose to allege here
the Reasons, that are a hundred times given by the Epicureans, that the love of
Pleasure, and the avoiding of Grief are the first and most natural Motions,
that are observed in Men: That Riches, Power, Honor, and Virtue may contribute
to our Happiness: but that the sole enjoyment of Pleasure, Voluptuousness, to
speak all, is the single end to which our Actions relate. It Is a thing clear
enough of it self, and I am fully persuaded thereof. In the mean time, I don't
well know what was the Pleasure of Epicurus; for I never saw Sentiments so
different, as those Men have entertained upon the Manners of this Philosopher.
Philosophers, and even some of his own Scholars have exclaimed against him, as
a sensual and careless Person, that never departed from his Idleness but by a
Debauch. All Sects are opposed to his. Magistrates have considered his Doctrine
as prejudicial to the Public. Cicero so just, and so wise in his Opinions,
Plutarch so much esteemed for his Judgment, have not been favorable to him.
And for what relates to Christians, the Fathers have made him pass for the
greatest and most dangerous of impious Persons. Behold his Enemies, and behold
now his Friends. Metrodorus, Hermacus, Meneceus, and many others that argued
with him, had as much Veneration, as Friendship for his Person. Diogenes
Laertius could not write his Life more advantageously for his Reputation.
Lucretius was his adorer* Seneca, as much an Enemy as he was to his Sect, has
spoken of him with Praise* If so be some Cities have an Aversion for him,
others^ have erected Statues in his Honor.

In the midst of all these Authorities opposed one to the other, what Medium is
there to decide? Shall I say that Epicurus is a Corrupter of good Manners, upon
the Credit of a jealous Philosopher, or a discontented Disciple, that shall
have let himself go to a Resentment for some Injury or other?

Besides, Epicurus desiring to ruin the Opinion, which was had of Providence,
and the Immortality of the Soul, cannot I reasonably persuade my self, that the
World rose up against a scandalous Doctrine, and that the Life of the
Philosopher was assaulted to discredit more easily his Opinions? but if I am
unwilling to believe what his Enemies and his Rivals have published of him, so
do I not easily believe, what his Partisans dare say. I don't think, that he
had a design to introduce a Pleasure more severe, than the Virtue of the
Stoics. This jealousy of austerity seems to me extravagant in a voluptuous
Philosopher, let his Pleasure be interpreted as it will. A fine secret to
declaim against a virtue, that takes away the Sense from a Wise Man, to
establish a Pleasure that affords him no Motion. The wise Man of the Stoics is
a virtuous insensible; that of the Epicureans a voluptuous Immovable. The
first is in Afflictions without Afflictions; the second tastes a Pleasure
without Pleasure. What Reason had a Philosopher, that disbelieved the
Immortality of Souls, to mortify the senses? Why put a Divorce between two
Parties composed of the same Matter, who ought to have found their Advantage in
the Concord and Union of their Parties? I pardon our religious Men the sad
Singularity of eating nothing but Herbs, in the Prospect they have of obtaining
thereby an eternal Happiness: but that a Philosopher, who knows no other good
things, than those of this World, that the Doctor of Pleasure should make a
Commons of Bread and Water to arrive at the sovereign Happiness of Life, that is
what my little Understanding will not comprehend. I admire, they don't
establish the Pleasure of such an Epicurus in Death; for to consider the Misery
of Life, his chiefest Good should have been, to put an end to it. Believe me,
if Horace and Petronius had imagined him to themselves, as he is described,
they would not have taken him for their Master in the knowledge of Pleasures.
The Piety, which is allowed him for the Gods, is no less ridiculous, than the
Mortification of his Senses; those idle Gods, those disabled Beings, from whom
he saw nothing to be hoped, or feared, did not merit the pains of his Worship;
and let not People say, That he went to the Temple, for fear of drawing the
Magistrates upon him, and scandalizing his Citizens; for he had much less
scandalized them, by not assisting at the Sacrifice, than he does offend them
by his Writings, which destroyed the Gods in the World, or at least ruined the
confidence they had in their Protection. But what is your Opinion of Epicurus,
says one to me? You believe neither his Friends, nor his Enemies, his
Adversaries, nor his Partisans. What is your Judgment of him? I Am of Opinion,
That Epicurus was a very wise Philosopher, who, according to the time and
occasions, loved Pleasure in Repose, or Pleasure in Motion; and from this
different Pleasure, is come that of the Reputation he has had. Timisecrates and
his Enemies have set upon him by sensual Pleasures: those that have defended
him, have spoken of nothing, but of a Spiritual Pleasure. When the first have
accused him of the expense he made in his Banquets, I am persuaded that the
Accusation was well grounded. When the others have made him swallow down those
little Morsels of Cheese to make better cheer than was usual, I believe they
did not want Reason. When one says that he argued with Leontium, one says true.
When one affirms that he diverted himself with her, one does not tell me, there
is a time to laugh, and a time to weep, according to Solomon; a time to be
sober, and a time to be sensual according to Epicurus. Besides a voluptuous Man
is not equally so all his Life. In Religion, the greatest Libertine is
sometimes the most Devout. In the study of wisdom, the most indulgent to
Pleasure, is sometimes the most severe. As for me, I look otherwise upon
Epicurus in Youth and Health, than in Old Age and Distempers. Insensibleness,
Tranquillity, and the Happiness of idle sick Persons could not be better
expressed, than they are in his Writings. Sensual Pleasure is not less
explained in that Formal Passage, which Cicero expressly alleges. I know, that
nothing is forgotten to destroy him, or to shift him off: but may Conjectures
be compared with the Testimony of Cicero, who knew so well the Philosophers of
Greece, and their Philosophy? It were much better to reject him upon the
Inconstancy of Humane Nature, and upon the Inequality of our Minds. Where is a
Man so uniform, as to have nothing of inequality, and contrariety in his
Actions? Solomon deserves the name of Wise, at least as much as Epicurus, and
he did equally mistake in his Opinions, and in his Conduct. Montagne, as yet
very Young, believed that his Thoughts should be eternally fixed upon Death, to
be prepared for it: when he approached Old Age, he makes, says he, a
Recantation, desiring to be sweetly conducted by Nature, that will sufficiently
learn us to die.

Mr. Bernier, a great favourer of Epicurus, does now confess, that after having
studied Philosophy Fifty Years, he doubts of things that he had believed the
most assured. All Objects have different Faces, and the Minds, which are in a
continual Motion look upon them, as they turn: insomuch that we have nothing,
that I may so speak, but new Aspects, thinking to enjoy new Discoveries.
Moreover Age brings great Alterations in our Humor, and by the Alteration of
Humor is very often framed that of Opinions. Add, that the Pleasures of the
Senses sometimes render despicable the Satisfactions of the Mind, as too dry,
and too naked; and that the nice and refined Satisfactions of the Mind, despise
in their turn the Pleasures of the Senses, as gross. So one ought not to be
surprised, that, in so great a diversity of Prospects, and Motions, Epicurus
who has writ more than any Philosopher, should say the same thing in a
different Manner, according as he might have different Thoughts and Notions of
it. What Occasion is there for those general Arguments to show that he could be
sensible of all sorts of Pleasures? If you consider him in his Familiarity with
Women, you will not believe that he spent so much time with Leontium and
Ternissa to do nothing but read Philosophy. But if he loved the Enjoyment of
them as a voluptuous Person, he managed himself as a prudent Man; and being
indulgent to the Motions of Nature, contrary to Efforts, not always reckoning
Chastity for a Virtue, always accounting Luxury a Vice, he would have Sobriety
to be a Dispensation of the Appetite, and that the Feasts which were made,
should never hurt those that were to be. Sic praesentibus voluptatibus fruaris,
ut futuris non noceas. He disengaged Pleasures from the Disorders that precede
them, and the Distaste that follows them. As he fell into Infirmities and
Pains, he fixed the chiefest Good in Insensibleness: Wisely, in my Opinion, for
the Condition he was in; for the Cessation of Pain, is the Happiness of those
that endure it. As for the Tranquillity of the Mind, which composed the other
part of his Happiness; it is nothing but an Exemption from Trouble: But he that
can have no more agreeable Motions, is happy in curing himself from the
grievous Impressions of Pain.

After all this Discourse, I conclude, that Insensibleness and Repose should
make the chiefest Good of Epicurus infirm and languishing: but for a Man that is
in Health, for a Man that is in a Condition to taste of Pleasures, I Am of
Opinion that Health makes it self discerned by something more lively than a
Want of Sense, and that a good Disposition of the Soul would have something
more enlivening than a peaceable State.

We live in the midst of an Infinity of Goods and Evils, and with Senses
capable of being affected with the one, and prejudiced with the other: Without
so much Philosophy, a little Reason will make us taste good things as sweetly
as it is possible, and adapt us for Misfortunes as patiently as we can.

REFLECTIONS UPON RELIGION.
TO consider purely the Repose of this Life; it would be well if Religion had
more or less Influence upon Mankind. It compells, and does not subject enough;
like some Politics, that take away the Sweetness of Liberty, without bringing
the Advantages of Subjection.

The Will makes us aspire gently to those good things, which are promised to
us, because it is not excited enough by an Understanding, that is not enough
convinced.

We say by Compliance, that we believe what one says with Authority, we ought
to believe: But without a particular Mercy we are more disturbed, than
persuaded of a thing, that does not fall under the Evidence of the Senses, and
which affords no manner of Demonstration to our Minds.

Behold what is the effect of Religion, in respect of ordinary Men; now see the
advantages of it for the true and perfect Religious Man.

The true Devout Person breaks with Nature, if one may so speak, to take
pleasure in the abstinence of pleasures; and in the Subjection of the Body to
the Mind, he renders to himself in some measure delightful the use of
Mortifications and Pains.

Philosophy goes no further, than to teach us to endure Misfortunes. The
Christian Religion makes us triumph over them, and one may say seriously of it,
what has been gallantly expressed of Love.

All other Pleasures are not worth its Pains.

The true Christian knows how to make his advantages of all things; the evils
which he suffers, are the good Things which God sends to him. The good Things
which he wants, are evils which Providence has secured him from. Every thing's
a benefit to him, every thing in this World is a Mercy, and when he must
depart, by the necessity of his Mortal Condition, he looks upon the end of his
Life, as a Passage to one more happy, which is never to conclude.

Such is the Felicity of a true Christian, whilst uncertainty and trouble make
an unhappy Condition to all others.

Indeed, we are almost all unresolved, little determined to good and evil.

There is a continual turn and return from Nature to Religion, and from
Religion to Nature.

If so be we abandon the care of happiness to satisfy our Inclinations, these
very Inclinations rise immediately against their Pleasures, and the distaste of
Objects, which have flattered them the most, sends us back to the cares of our
happiness.

If so be we renounce our Pleasures by a Principle of Conscience, the same
thing happens to us in the Application to happiness, where habit and
tediousness sends us back to the Objects of our first Inclinations.

Behold, how we are upon Religion in our selves: now see the Judgment which the
Public makes of it.

Should we forsake God for the World, we are treated as Impious Persons.

Should we forsake the World for God, we are looked upon as weak, and decayed
in our Understanding, and we are as little pardoned for Sacrificing Fortune to
Religion, as Religion to Fortune.

The Example of Cardinal Retz will suffice singly, to justify what I say.

When he was made Cardinal by Intrigues, Factions, and Tumults, they cried out
against an Ambitious Man, that sacrificed (said they) the Public, his
Conscience, and Religion to his Fortune. When he left the cares of Earth for
those of Heaven, when the Persuasion of another Life made him regard the
Grandeurs of this as Chimaera's, they said that his Head was turned, and that
he made a scandalous weakness of what is proposed to us in Christianity, as the
greatest Virtue.

An ordinary Mind is but little favorable to great Virtues, a lofty Wisdom
offends a common Reason.

Mine, as common as it is, admires a Person truly persuaded, and would admire
still more that this Person, absolutely persuaded, could be insensible to any
advantage of Fortune.

I question a little the Persuasion of those Preachers, who offering us the
Kingdom of Heaven in Public, solicit in particular a small Benefice with the
utmost importunity.

The sole Idea of eternal profits renders the Possession of all the rest
contemptible to a believing Man: but because there is but a few that have
Faith, few Persons defend this Idea against Objects; the hope of what is
promised to us, naturally yielding to the enjoyment of what is given us.

In the greatest part of Christians, the desire of believing holds the place of
belief: the will gives them a sort of Faith by desires, which the Understanding
refuses them by its Lights.

I have known some Devout Men, that in a certain contrariety between the Heart
and the Mind, loved God perfectly without a strong Faith in him.

When they abandoned themselves to the Motions of their Heart, there was
nothing but zeal for Religion; all was fervency, all love. When they turned to
the Intelligence of the Mind, they were amazed at their incomprehension of what
they loved, and at their Ignorance how to answer themselves upon the Subject of
their love. Then they wanted Consolations, to speak in Spiritual Terms, and
they fell into that sad State of Religious Life, which is called Aridity and
Dryness in Monasteries.

God alone is able to give us a certain, firm, and real Faith. That which we
can do of our selves, is to captivate the Understanding in spite of the
resistance of the Lights of Nature, and to dispose our selves with submission
to execute what is ordained for us.

Humanity easily mingles its errors in what relates to Faith; it mistakes a
little in the practice of Virtues; for it is less in our power to think exactly
upon the things of Heaven, than to do well.

One can never be disappointed in the Actions of Justice and Charity.

Sometimes Heaven ordains, and Nature makes an Opposition.

Sometimes Nature demands what Reason will not consent to. Upon Justice and
Charity all Rights are concerted, and there is, as it were, a general agreement
between Heaven, Nature, and Reason.

A Fragment of Friendship without Friendship.
THE Love of Women had softened the Courage of Men; the Virtue of good Men was
altered by it. The Grandeur of a Magnanimous Soul might be weakened, but true
Wisdom incurred little danger with the Female Sex.

The Wise Man, above their weakness, their inequalities, and their fancies, can
govern them at his pleasure, or gets rid of them as he thinks convenient. As
long as he sees others in slavery, tormented by some unfortunate Passion, he
tastes a sweetness that charms the senses, and frees him from the sense of
Misfortunes, which are not to be made insensible by Reason alone.

Not but that he may fall into an error. Humane Nature leaves no certain state
to our Souls: but it is not long before he finds again his dispersed Lights,
and reestablishes the Repose he had lost.

Scarce do we begin to grow Old, but we begin to be displeased by some distaste,
which we secretly frame in our selves. Then our Soul, free from Self-love, is
easily filled with that which is suggested to us, and what would have pleased
us heretofore but indifferently, charms us at present, and enslaves us to our
own weakness.

By this Mistresses dispose of their Old Lovers to their Fancy, and Wives of
their Old Husbands: by this Syphax abandoned himself to the will of Sophonisba,
and Augustus was managed by Livia. And not to draw all my Examples from
Antiquity, 'twas thus Monsieur de la Ferte-Senectere, worthy to be named with
Kings and Emperors by the single merit of Gentleman; 'twas thus this Courtier,
as wise as he was polite, let himself go to the Friendship of a Woman, whom he
married in his Old Days. If you should know, said he to his Friends, what is
the Condition of a Person of my Age, that has nothing but himself to represent
in his Solitude, you would not admire that I have sought for a Companion that
pleases me, be the purchase of what value it will. I never discommended him.
And why discommend a thing that... has authorized by his Example? In the mean
time, in spite of his Authority, I shall esteem a Person that has strength
enough to preserve the taste of his Liberty to the end of his Days. Not that a
full independance of Persons so free and so disengaged, of all those
indifferent and those ungrateful Men, is always commendable. Let us avoid
Subjection in an entire liberty; to preserve a sweet and sincere contract, as
agreeable to our Friends, as to our selves. If so be they demand of me more
than fervency and cares, for the Interest of those I love; more than my small
assistance, whilst they are in necessities; more than discretion in Commerce,
and a taste in Confidence, let them go and seek for Friendships elsewhere, mine
can dispense with no more.

Violent Passions are unequal, and make the disorder of a change to be feared.
In Love, they should be abandoned for the Polexander's, and the Cyrus's in
Romances; in Friendship for Orestes and Pilades in Plays. These are things to
read, and to see represented, which are not found in the Use of the World. And
happily they are not practiced; for they would produce very extravagant
Adventures.

What has Orestes done, that great and illustrious person of Friendship? What
has he done, that ought not to give Horror?

He killed his Mother, assassinated Pyrrhus, and fell into such strange Furies,
that it costs the Players their Lives, that endeavor to represent him.

Let us observe with Attention the Nature of those Obligations which are sold
so dear, and we shall find them composed of a hideous Melancholy, that makes up
all Man-haters.

Indeed, to dispose ones self to love but one person, and to hate all the rest,
is what is taken for Virtue in particular: In the mean time it is a Vice against
all the world.

He that makes us lose the Acquaintance of Men by a Desertion like his own,
makes us lose more than he is worth, had he a considerable Merit. Let us act
the disinteressed as long as we please, and shut up all our desires in the
Monuments of our Passions, thinking of nothing that proceeds not from thence,
yet we shall grow faint in this Noble Friendship, if so be we don't draw from
Society a part of the Conveniences and Agreements of Life. The love of Two
Persons made fast one to another, this fine Union has need of Foreign things
to excite the Taste of Pleasure, and the sense of Joy; with all the Sympathy of
the World, the Counsel and Intelligence, it will be troubled to furnish some
Consolation from the Tiresomness, it is the Occasion of. It Is in the World, and
amongst Divertisements, and Business, that the most agreeable Contracts are
formed. I esteem the Correspondence of Monsieur d' Estrees, and Monsieur de
Senectere, that lived Fifty Years at Court in an equal Familiarity: I esteem
the Confidence that Monsieur de Turenne had with Monsieur de Ruvigni Forty
Years together, more than the^e Friendships always extravagant, and never
rightly used between Women and Men.

There is nothing that contributes more to the sweetness of Life, than
Friendship. There is nothing that disturbs its Repose so much as Friends, if we
have not Judgment enough to choose them well.

Importunate Friends desire to be thought indifferent; the scrupulous give us
more trouble by their Humor, than they bring advantage by their Services. The
imperious ones are Tyrants to us: We must hate what they do, be it never so
agreeable: We must love, what they love* when we find it rigorous and
unpleasant: we must do Violence to our Nature, enslave our Judgment, renounce
our Parts, and under that sweet Name of Complaisance have a general submission
for all that they impose.

Jealous Friends disturb us; averse from all Counsel they don't give, troubled
at the good, which happens to us without their Participation, and glad of the
Misfortunes, which come by the Ministry of others. There are Friends of
Profession, that take a pride in following our Party at random, and upon all
Occasions. These sort of Friends serve for nothing else, but to incense the
World against us by imprudent Contests. There are others, that justify us when
no Body accuses us; who by Indiscretion make us commit Offenses in Places where
we were not, and bring us into what we would avoid. Let him, that will, be
contented with these Friendships; as for me I am not satisfied with a single
good Will, I would have it accompanied with Discretion and Prudence.

The Affection of a Man does not make amends for what he has spoiled: I thank
him for his impertin^nt Zeal, and advise him to display its merit amongst
Fools. If so be the Lights of the Understanding direct not the Motions of the
Heart, Friends are more proper to incense us, and more capable of injuring than
serving us. Notwithstanding one speaks of nothing but the Heart, in all the
Discourses, which they are heard to make upon Love and Friendship. Poets become
troublesome therein, Lovers tedious* and Friends ridiculous. One sees nothing
^lse in our Plays but Kings Daughters, that yield the Heart, but refuse the
Hand; or Princesses, that give the Hand, and cannot agree to yield the Heart.
Lovers become insipid in asking eternally the Purity of this Heart, and Friends
raised to esteem would have it, as well as the Lovers. It is not in knowing the
Nature, where for a little Heat ill managed, for some unequal and uncertain
Tenderness it might have, one observes otherwise nothing but Fancy,
Ingratitude, Infidelity, which one ought to fear.

Love is called blind very improperly, not to displease the Genius of Poets,
and the Humors of Painters. Love is for the most part a Passion, of which the
Heart often makes an ill Use.

The Heart is a blind thing, to which are owing all our Errors; it is that
which preferrs a Fool before an ingenious Man, that loves silly Objects, and
disdains amiable Persons; that yields to the most ugly, and most deformed, and
refuses the most handsome, and most genteel.

It Is that, which confounds the most regular, that lifts up the most wise to
Virtue, and disposes Saints to Grace; as little subjected to Government in
Monasteries, as disposed to love in Families; unfaithful to Husbands, less
secure to Lovers; it troubles the first, and puts a Disorder amongst the rest.

It acts without advice, and without Knowledge. Weak against Reason that should
conduct it, it moves secretly by hidden Springs, which it does not discover; it
gives, and withdraws its Affections without Occasion, it engages without
design, breaks without measure, and in a word, produces Fantastical Noises,
which dishonor those that make them.

Behold the end of Love and Friendships.

Upon the Heart, by Reasons just and reasonable, whose Division the Mind can
take, there is no Rupture to be apprehended; for either it remains the whole
Life, or it is insensibly disengaged with Discretion and Diligence. It is
certain that Nature has put in our Hearts something of Laughter, if one may
say so, some secret Principle of Affection, that conceals what is tender, that
explains it self, and is communicable with Friends. But the use of it has not
been received and authorized amongst Men, but only as much as to render Life
more peaceable and more happy.

That Is the Foundation, that Epicurus so much recommended to his Disciples.

That Cicero exhorts us to it, and invites us by his own Example; that Seneca,
as wrinkled and severe as he is, becomes sweet and tender, so soon as he speaks
of Friendship.

That Montagne excells Seneca by more lively Expressions.

That Gassendus explains the Advantages of this Virtue, and disposes the
Reader, as much as lies in his power, to procure them.

All reasonable Persons, all honest Men unite Philosophers therein, upon the
Foundation, that Friendship ought to contribute more, than any other thing, to
our Happiness.

Indeed, a Man would not break with himself upon no Account whatsoever, to
unite himself to another, if so be he did not find more Sweetness in this
Union, than in the first Sentiments of Self-love.

The Friendship of wise Men finds nothing in the World more precious than it
self.

That of others, imperious, and confused, disturbs the Peace of public
Society, and the Pleasures of particular Conversations.

It Is a savage Friendship, which Reason disowns and which we could wish to our
Enemies, to be revenged of their Hatred.

But as honest, and as regular as Friends may be, it is an inconvenient thing to
have too many: Our separated Cares don't leave Application enough for those
that affect us, nor also for what relates to others in the overflowing of a
Soul, that disperses it self upon all remote Actions, and applys it self
properly to nothing, nor we our selves for few Persons living. As for us, let
us seek the Advantage of Commerce with all the World, and the Benefit of our
Affairs with those that can.

A FRAGMENT UPON THE ANCIENTS.
THere is no Person that has more admiration than I have for the Works of the
Ancients. I admire the Design, the Economy, the Elevation of Spirit, the
Extent of Knowledge: but the change of Religion, Government, Customs, and
Manners, has made so great a one in the World, that we must have, as it were, a
New Art, to enter well into the Inclination, and Genius of the Age, we are in.
And certainly my Opinion ought to be found reasonable by all those that will
take the pains to examine it; for if one gives Characters quite opposite to....

Take away the Gods of Antiquity, you take from him all his Poems. The
Consti^ution of the Fable is in disorder, the Economy thereof is turned upside
down.

Without the Prayer of Thetis to Jupiter, and the Dream which Jupiter sent to
Agamemnon, there would be no Iliad; without Minerva, no Odysseus; without the
Protection of Jupiter and the Assistance of Venus, no Aeneid. The Gods,
assembled in Heaven, debated what was to be done upon Earth; they formed
Resolutions, and were no less necessary to execute them, than to take them.

The Immortal Captains of the Party of Men, contrived all, gave Life to all,
inspired Force and Courage, engaged themselves in fight, and except Ajax, who
asked nothing but Light, there was no con^iderable Warrior, that had not his
God upon his Chariot, as well as his Squire.

The God to conduct his Spear, the Squire for the management of his Horses. Man
was a pure Machine, whom secret Springs put upon Motion, and those Springs were
nothing else but the Inspiration of their Goddesses and Gods.

The Divinity, which we serve, is more favorable to the Liberty of Men. We are
in his Hands, as the rest of the Universe, by dependence; in our own to
deliberate, and to act. I confess that we ought always to implore his
Protection.

Lucretius asks it himself, and in the Book where he engages Providence with
all the force of his Spirit, he Prays, he Conjures that which governs us to
have the goodness to avert Misfortunes.

Quod procul a nobis ^lectat, and natura gubernans.
In the mean time, we must not introduce this Formidable Majesty in all things,
whose name it is not permitted to make use of unseasonably. That false
Divinities are mixed in all sorts of Fictions, those are Fables themselves, the
vain effects^ of the Imagination of Poets.

As for Christians, they should give nothing but Truth, to him who is Truth in
Perfection, and they should adapt all their Discourses to his Wisdom, and to
his Goodness.

This great Principle is followed by that of Manners, which by reason of their
being civilized, and sweetened at present, cannot suffer what they had of
wildness in those times.

It Is this change, that makes us find so strange, the fierce and brutish
injuries, which Achilles and Agamemnon boast of.

It Is by this Agamemnon appears odious to us, when he takes away that Trojan's
Life, which Menelaus had pardoned.

Menelaus, for whom the War was made, pardons him generously. Agamemnon the
King of Kings, who owed Examples of Virtue to all the Princes, and to all the
People, the cowardly Agamemnon kills this miserable Person with his own Hand.
It Is then Achilles becomes horrible, when he kills the young Lycaon, who
entreated him so tenderly for his Life.

It Is then we hate him even to his Virtues, when he ties the Body of Hector to
his Chariot, and drags him inhumanely to the Camp of the Greeks. I had a
kindness for him, when he was the Friend of Patroclus. The cruelty of his
Action makes me abhor his Valor, and his Friendship.

It Is quite otherwise in Hector. His good Qualities return into our Minds; we
pity him* we lament him more; his Idea is become very dear, and draws all the
Sentiments of our Affection.

Let it not be said in favor of Achilles, that Hector killed his dear
Patroclus. The resentment of this Death does not excuse him with us. An
affliction that permits him to suspend his Revenge, and to tarry for his Arms,
before he goes to the Combat; an Affliction so patient ought not to have pushed
him to this unusual Barbarity, after the Fight's over.

But let us disengage our Friendship from our Aversion; the sweetest, the
tenderest of Virtues does not bring forth effects so contrary to Nature.

Achilles found them in the bottom of his Nature. It is not to the Friend of
Patroclus, but to the Inhumane and Inexorable Achilles, that they belong.

All the World will easily consent to it. However, the Vices of the Hero will
not fall upon the Poet. Homer's Intention was more to describe the Nature, such
as he saw it, than to make Heroes very accomplished.

He has described them with more Passions, than Virtues; Passions being in the
Foundation of Nature, and Virtues purely established in us by the Lights of an
instructed Reason.

Policy had not as yet united Men by the Knots of a reasonable Society; it had
not turned them well to others. Morality had not yet formed them well for
themselves.

Good Qualities were not distinguished enough from the Bad.

Ulysses was prudent, and fearful, cautious against dangers, industrious to get
out of them, valiant sometimes when there was less danger to be so, than not to
be.

Achilles was valiant, and fierce, and what Horace would not set down in his
Character of him, relaxing sometimes to very great Puerilities, his Nature
uncertain, and irregular framed Manners, sometimes fierce, sometimes childish.
Now he drags the Body of Hector in a Barbarian manner, now he prays the Goddess
his Mother, as a Child, to drive away the Flies from that of Patroclus his dear
Friend.

The ways are not less different, than the manners. Two Hero's ready for the
Combat would not amuse themselves now a days in declaring their Genealogy: but
it is easy to observe in the Iliads, and even in the Odysseus, and the
Aeneids, that such a Method was practiced. Men discoursed, before they fought,
just as they make Speeches in England, before they die.

As for Comparisons, Discretion shall make us do less than they. Good sense
will render them more just, Invention more new.

The Sun, the Moon, the Elements, will lend us no more an easy stateliness.
Wolves, Shepherds, and Flocks, will not afford us a simplicity too much known.

It seems to me, that there is an infinite number of Comparisons, that are more
alike, than the things compared. A Kite that grounds upon a Pidgeon, a
Spar-Hawk that sets upon little Birds, a Faulkon that makes his descent; all
these Birds have more Relation one to another in the swiftness of their flight,
than the Men have, whom they compare to them, in their impetuosity. Take away
the Distinction of the names of Kite, Spar-hawk, and Faulkon, you will find but
the same Thing.

The violence of a Whirlwind, that roots up Trees, more resembles that of a
Tempest, which makes some other disorder, than Objects with which they are
compared.

A Lion, whom Hunger drives from his Den, a Lioness pursued by Hunters, a Lion
furious and jealous of his Whelps, a Lion against whom a Village assembles, and
who ceases not to retire fiercely with Pride: this is a Lion differently
represented, but still a Lion which does not afford Idea's different enough.
Sometimes Comparisons take us from Subjects that employ us most, by the vain
Image of another Object, that makes an unseasonable Diversion.

I oblige my self to consider two Armies, that are ready for the engagement,
and I take the Spirit of a Man of Courage to observe the Behavior, Order, and
Disposition of the Troops. Of a sudden, I am transported to the Banks of a Sea,
which becomes swelled by the Fury of the Winds, and I am more likely to behold
Ship-wrack'd Vessels, than broken Battalions. These vast Thoughts, which the
Sea affords me, extinguish the former.

One represents to me a Mountain all on Fire, and a Forest absolutely inflamed.
Whither does not the Idea of a Conflagration extend? If so be I were not full
Master of my sense, one might insensibly conduct me to the Imagination of the
World's end.

From so terrible a Conflagration, I pass to a hideous Lightning, and with much
Diversion, I am so much interrupted from the first Image that employed me, that
I lose entirely that of the Battle.

We think to embellish Objects in comparing them to eternal, immense, infinite
beings, and we stifle them, instead of extolling them.

To say, that a Woman is as handsome as Madam Mazarin; is to praise her more,
than if she were compared to the Sun; for the sublime and miraculous, make
esteemed.

The impossible and the fabulous destroy the Commendation, which one would give.

Truth was not the Inclination of the first Ages; an unprofitable Lie, a lucky
Fal^^ood made the Interest of Impostors, and the Pleasure of credulous Persons;
'twas the Secret of the great and the wise to govern the People, and the simple
Men.

The Vulgar, who respected mysterious Errors, despised naked Truths, and
Wisdom consisted in the abusing of it.

Discourse was fitted to so advantageous a Use; there was nothing in it but
Fictions, Allegories, and Similitudes; nothing appeared as it is in it self,
Specious and Rhetorical outsides covered the inward part of all things; vain
Idea's, concealed Realities, and too frequent Comparisons turned men from the
Application to true Objects, by the Amusement of Resemblances.

The Genius of our Age is quite opposite to this Spirit of Fable, and false
Mysteries.

We love open Truths, good Sense takes an advantage over the Illusions of
Fancy, and nothing satisfies us nowadays, but the Solidity of Reason.

Add to this Alteration of Humor, that of Knowledge: we look otherwise upon
Nature, than the Ancients did.

The Heavens, that eternal Mansion of so many Divinities, are no more, than an
immense, and fluid Space.

The same Sun shines still upon us, but we give it another Course, and instead
of going to set in the Sea, it goes to enlighten another World.

The Earth immovable heretofore in the Opinion of Men, turns now, and is not
to be equaled in the Swiftness of its Motion. Every thing is changed, Gods,
Nature, Politics, Manners, Humors, and Ways. Will not so many Alterations
produce some change in our Works?

If Homer was living at present, he would make admirable Poems, fitted to the
Age, wherein he should write. Our Poets, make bad ones, framed to that of the
Ancients, and guided by things, which time has altered.

I know that there are certain eternal Rules to be grounded upon a good
Judgment, upon a firm and solid Reason, that shall always subsist. Yet there
are but few, that bear the Character of this incorruptible Reason. Those that
relate to the Manners, Affairs, and Customs of the Ancient Greeks have no
effect upon us at present. One may say of them what Horace said of Words; they
have their Age and their Duration, they die of old Age. Ita verborum interit
aetas.

Others perish with their Nation, as well as the Maxims of Government, which
subsist not after the Empire.

There are then but very few, that can direct our Minds in all Times, and it
would be Ridiculous always to Rule new* Works by extinguished Laws. Poetry
would be to blame to exact from us, what Religion and Justice do not.

It Is to an Imitation, servile, or too much affected, that is owing the
disgrace of all our Poems.

Our Poets have not force to escape the Gods, nor address to employ well what
our Religion could furnish them with.

Tied to the Humor of Antiquity and confined to our Sentiments, they give the
Air of Mercury to our Angels, and that of the Fabulous wonders of the Ancients
to our Miracles.

This mixture of Ancient and Modern has made them succeed very ill. And one may
say, That they (...) not known how to draw any advantage from their Fictions,
nor make a good use of our Truths.

We conclude that the Poems of Homer will always be a Masterpiece, and not a
Model in all things. They will form our Judgment, if so be we determine them
with Discretion, and pursuant to the Disposition of present Affairs.

The Character of a Woman that is not, and never will be found.
IN all the handsome Persons I have seen, if so be there were some Passages to
be admired, there were also some, that one ought not to observe, or at least
disguise them with much artifice; for, to speak the truth, it is hard to commend
all, and be sincere. I am obliged to Aemilia for leaving me purely in my
Nature, as much disposed to speak well, as to remain exactly true. As she wants
neither favor nor kindness, I have no busin^^^ either with Disguises or
Flatteries. By her means I can praise to day without Complaisance. Observators
too exact loose a Malicious Nicety, which is applied but to examine Faults; and
in a new Spirit which she inspi^^s them with, they pass with pleasure from
their usual Censure, to real Approbations.

It is certain that the greatest part of Women are more indebted to our
Complements, than their own Merits, in all the Praises which are given to the^.
Aemilia is obliged only to her self for (...) ^^stice which is rendered to her,
and secure of the good one ought to affirm of her, she has properly no
Interest, but for that which may be procured from her.

In effect, if her Enemies speak of her, it is not in their power to betray
their Conscience, and they confess with as much truth as anger, the advantages
which they are obliged to acknowledge in her: if so be her Friends enlarge
themselves upon her Commendations, it is not possible for them to add any thing
to the Merit which affects them. Thus the former are forced to submit to
Reason, when they would follow the Malice of their Motions; and the others
merely just with all their Friendship, without a Capacity of being either
officious, or favorable. She expects then nothing from the Inclination, as she
apprehends nothing from an evil Will, in the Judgments that are made of her.
But since one is free to conceal his Opinions, Aemilia will have Reason to fear
the Malice of Silence, the single prejudice that Rivals and Enemies can offer
to her.

It Is necessary to leave things somewhat general, to come to a more particular
Description of her Person.

All her Features are regular, which is very seldom observed. All her Features
are regular and agreeable, which is as it were never seen; for it seems that a
Fancy of Nature may produce the Agreements of Regularity, and that complete
Beauties, who have always something to be admired, rarely enjoy the Secret of
Pleasing. Aemilia has affecting Eyes, the Complexion parted, delicate, smooth;
the Whiteness of Teeth, the Vermilion of Lips are Expressions too general for a
secret and particular Charm, which I cannot describe. Without her, that Shape,
that lower Part of the Face, where was placed the great Beauty of the Ancients,
would be found no where but in the Idea of some Painter, or in the Descriptions
which Antiquity has left us; and to enliven so many fine things, you see upon
(...) Face a lively Clearness, an Air of Health, a fullness in a good Degree,
that leaves nothing more to be apprehended.

Her Stature of an exact Height, well proportioned, easy, of a Freedom as far
from Constraint, as that excessive Beauty, wherein appears as it were a sort of
Looseness, which ruins the good Grace, and the good Carriage. Add to this a
noble Gate, a serious Behavior, but natural, which is neither starched, nor
confused; the Laugh, the Speech, the Action, accompanied with Agreements and
Decorum's.

Her Spirit is extensive without being Vast, never rambling so far in general
Thoughts, as not to be able to return easily to singular Considerations;
nothing escapes her Penetration, her Judgment leaves nothing ^nknown: And I
cannot tell, whether she is more fit to unravel hidden things, than to judge
soundly of those, which appear secret to us and not Mysterious; knowing equally
how to be opportunely silent, and speaking. In her ordinary Conversation, she
says nothing with study, and nothing at a venture, the l^^st Matters mark
Attention, there appears no endeavor in the most serious; what she has of Life
ceases not to be exact, and her most natural Thoughts are expressed with a
delicate Turn: But she hates lucky Imaginations, that escape from the Mind
without Choice and without Judgment, that are as it were always admired, and
for the most part little esteemed by those, that have them.

In all her Person you see something of Great and Noble, which is found by a
secret Relation in the Air of the Face, the Qualities of the Mind, and those of
the Soul.

Naturally she would be too Magnificent, but a just Consideration of her
Affairs retains this noble Sentiment, and she chooses rather to constrain the
Generosity of her Humor, than to fall into a Condition, where she should stand
in need of that of another, as fierce to refuse any Favor from her own, as
officious with Strangers, and full of Heat in the Interests of her Friends. Not
that these Considerations make her lose an Inclination so noble, she regulates
it in the use of her Estate; her Nature, and her Reason form an Unconcernedness
without Negligence.

She has good Sense and Dexterity in Affairs she enters in voluntarily, if so
be she finds therein a substantial Advantage for her self, or for her Friends:
But she hates to act by a Spirit of Restlessness; equally against an unuseful
Motion, and the Softness of a Repose, that takes a Pride in the Name of
Tranquillity, to cover a true Indifference.

After having described so many Qualities so fine, it is proper to see what
Impressions they make upon our Soul, and what is doing in her own.

She has something of Majestical, that imprints Respect; something of sweet and
ingenious, that wins the Inclinations. She attracts you, she retains you, and
you always approach to her with Desires, that you cannot show.

To pierce into the inward Part, I don't believe her to be incapable of the
Sentiments she gives: But imperious upon her self, as well as upon you, she
masters in her own Heart by Reason, what Respect constrains in yours.

Nature being infirm in some Souls, does not leave there force to desire any
thing; impetuous in others, it brings forth transported Passions: exact in
Aemilia, it has made the Heart sensible, which ought to feel, and has given to
Reason, which ought to command, an absolute Empire over her Motions.

Happy she, that lets her self go to the Tenderness of her Sentiments, without
interessing the Curiousness of her Choice, nor that of her Conduct: Happy, that
in a Correspondence established for the Sweetness of Life, contents her self
with the Approbation of ingenious Men, and her own Satisfaction; that fears not
the Murmurs of the envious, who are jealous of all Pleasures, and malicicious
against all Virtues.

One knows by an Infinity of Experience, that the Mind is blind in loving; and
Love has as it were, never well established his Power, till he has ruined that
of our Reason: Upon the Subject of Aemilia our Sentiments become more
passionate, according as our Knowledge becomes more refined; and the Passion,
which always appeared a Mark of Folly, is here the true Effect of our Happiness.

The great Enemies of Aemilia are those that have a false Knowledge of things,
her Friends, all that know how to judge of things with Discretion. One has
more, or less of Friendship for her, according as one has more or less of
Nicety; and every one thinks to be the most curious, by knowing every day new
Passages, in order to love her more.

Some Persons have no Occasion for this long discerning, and for so slow a
Meditation. At the first sight they are touched with her Merit without the
Knowledge of it, and feel secret Motions of Esteem, as well as Inclination for
her. Scarce has she uttered six Words, but they find her the most reasonable in
the World: No body ever appeared to them so ingenious, nor so wise, and as yet
they know neither her Procedure, nor her Conduct. They frame, as it were by
Instinct, the most advantageous Thoughts of her Virtue; and Reason being since
consulted, instead of hiding the Surprise, does but approve of such happy, and
just Preventions.

Amongst the Advantages of Aemilia, one of the greatest, in my Opinion, is to
be always the same, and always pleasing. For one sees that the finest Humor
does at length become tiresome: The most fertile Spirits come to exhaust
themselves, and make you fall with them into a Langour; the most enlivened
Vivacities either repulse you, or weary you. From whence comes it, that Women
have need of Fancies sometimes to stir us up, or else are obliged to mix in
their Entertainments Diversions, that revive us? That which I describe pleases
by her self alone, and at all times an eternal Equality never affords us a
quarter of an Hour's distate. One is glad to be able to find with others one
agreeable Hour; with her one would complain of a tedious Moment. Go and visit
her in what Condition soever it be, upon what Occasion soever, you go to a
certain Pleasure, and to an assured Satisfaction.

It Is not an Imagination that surprises you, and presently after is troublesome
to you. It Is not a serious thing, that makes you purchase a solid Conversation
by the loss of its Gayety: it is a Reason that pleases, and a Judgment that is
agreeable. I Will conclude by the Quality, which ought to be considered before
all the rest. She is devout without Superstition, without Melancholy; far from
that Infirmity, which frames Miracles particularly, and persuades it self at
all Moments of supernatural Fopperies; averse from those retired Humors, which
insensibly diffuse in the Mind the Hatred of the World, and an Antipathy
against Pleasures.

She is not of Opinion, that one ought to retire from Humane Society, to seek
God in the Horror of Solitude: She does not believe that to be disengaged from
a civil Life, to break the most reasonable and dear Correspondences, is to be
united to God, but to be tied to ones self, and foolishly pursue ones own
Imagination: She thinks to find God amongst Men, where his Goodness is most
active, and his Providence appears to be more worthily employed; and there she
seeks with him to enlighten her Reason, to perfect her Manners, to regulate her
Conduct, both in the Cares of Salvation, and the Duties of Life.

Behold the Description of a Woman that is not to be found; if so be one may
make the Description of a thing that is not. It Is rather the Character of an
accomplished Person. I was not disposed to seek it amongst the Men, because
there is always wanting to their Commerce something of that Sweetness, which
one meets with in that of Women; and I thought it less impossible to find in a
Woman the strongest and soundest Reason of Men, than in a Man the Charms and
Agreements natural to Women.

THE END.

