Miscellany ESSAYS: BY Monsieur de St. EVREMONT, UPON Philosophy, History,
Poetry, Morality, Humanity, Gallantry, etc.


VOL. II.

Done into English by Mr. BROWN.

Iam senior, sed cruda Deo viridisque Senectus. LONDON. Printed for John
Cheringham at the Star in Ludgate Street; and Abell Roper at the Mitre near
Temple Bar. 1694.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, ROBERT EARL OF SUNDERLAND; Baron Spencer of
Wormleighton.
MY LORD,
IT IS the Fate of Illustrious Persons to be often visited by such Importunate
Addressers. Their Quality, which privileges them on so many other occasions,
does but the more expose them to frequent Persecutions of this nature. Nay,
their Retirements are not able to protect them; for a true Town-Dedicator will
Invade their most private recesses, and attacque them even in their Solitude.
As I own my self somewhat interested in the Reputation of my Author, I was
resolved, that whatever Injuries he suffered in the Translation, he should have
right done him in the Choice of a Patron; and therefore to pitch upon one who
was no stranger to his Person or to his Merit; and who best understood his
value, because he has the truest and most accurate Judgment in the World. It Is
true, my Lord, he needs no Patronage, as he shines in his Native Language, for
there his own Merit abundantly secures him; but I am sensible, that after all
the care that has been taken with him, he will stand in need of it, as he
appears in ours: With this view, my Lord, I have presumed to give you the
trouble of this bold Address; and perhaps your Lordship is the first Person in
the World, that has suffered upon the score of being the Friend of Monsieur de
St. Evremont.

But besides this, my Lord, you have another Title to this Translation. We have
long labored under a Mean, but unjust Character with our Neighbors, who lie
more to the Southward, and are particularly obliged to your Lordship for
reversing it. For I don't at all question but that your Lordship's
extraordinary Merit, drew from our Author that Ingenuous Confession, which in
his admirable Discourse to the Marescal de Crequi, he makes does but the more
expose them to frequent Persecutions of this nature. Nay, their Retirements are
not able to protect them; for a true Town-Dedicator will Invade their most
private recesses, and attacque them even in their Solitude. As I own my self
somewhat interested in the Reputation of my Author, I was resolved, that
whatever Injuries he suffered in the Translation, he should have right done him
in the Choice of a Patron; and therefore to pitch upon one who was no stranger
to his Person or to his Merit; and who best understood his value, because he
has the truest and most accurate Judgment in the World. It Is true, my Lord, he
needs no Patronage, as he shines in his Native Language, for there his own
Merit abundantly secures him; but I am sensible, that after all the care that
has been taken with him, he will stand in need of it, as he appears in ours:
With this view, my Lord, I have presumed to give you the trouble of this bold
Address; and perhaps your Lordship is the first Person in the World, that has
suffered upon the score of being the Friend of Monsieur de St. Evremont.

But besides this, my Lord, you have another Title to this Translation. We have
long labored under a Mean, but unjust Character with our Neighbors, who lie
more to the Southward, and are particularly obliged to your Lordship for
reversing it. For I don't at all question but that your Lordship's
extraordinary Merit, drew from our Author that Ingenuous Confession, which in
his admirable Discourse to the Marescal de Crequi, he makes of the Partiality
and unjust Prejudices of his own Countrymen; your Lordship's Acquaintance has
convinced him that colder Climates than his own, may produce Persons of as
sprightly a Wit, and strong a Judgment; and that Politeness and Elegance were
not confined to France. Thus our whole Island, my Lord, reaps the benefit of
your Noble Qualifications. They have procured one of the most Authentic
Testimonies in the World, to pass in its Favor. No Foreigner will urge our
distance from the Sun, or have the hardiness hereafter to impute Barbarity to
us. St. Evremont has acquitted us from that Imputation. St. Evremont has owned
us not to be inferior in Wit to any of our Neighboring Nations; and it is to
your Lordship that we stand indebted for so advantageous a Confession.

I said, My Lord, one of the most Authentic Testimonies in the World. For I
believe it will be agreed on all hands that since the Declension of the Roman
Eloquence and Empire, there never was a truer or nicer Judge of Men and manners
than our Author, or one in whom a fruitful Wit and a profoundnefs of reason
were so happily reconciled. Amongst his own Countrymen or indeed any where
else, I find none that can dispute the prize with him but Montagne; who was in
truth an extraordinary Genius, and has left those remains behind him that will
entertain and instruct, as long as Mankind preserves any Taste for Wit and good
Sense. Though he writ in a very impolite Age, and his Language derives an unhappy
tincture from one of the worst Provinces of France, yet there is something so
forcible, so vigorous, and so masculine in his expression, that after all the
considerable improvements the French Tongue has received since his time, it
still pleases, nay it Charms and affects us. Now as all this, and a great deal
more, may deservedly be said in his Praise, yet his warmest Admirers* must be
forced to confess with me, that Nicety was never his Talent; that amongst his
infinite Variety of Citations (for as our Author says very well of him, he is no
troublesome Host, but when his own Conversation fails him, he has some Friends
to keep it up, till he has got Breath again,) some never deserved to be
mentioned, and others are urged Mal a Propos; in short, that his way of writing
is too Pindarical, and his Excursions too frequent. It Is true, he is so
Complaisant to his Reader, as never to leave him in any Barren Uncultivated
places; he gives him an agreeable Vista of Groves and Meadows: The Scene varies
every moment, and consequently, must delight him; but still he makes him
wander; still he leads him out of the way, or at least for the sake of one
Beautiful Prospect carries him a Mile or two about; and this at long run cannot
fail to disgust nice Persons who are in pain till they arrive at their Journeys
end. On the other hand St. Evremont is not only Master of all the good
Qualities of Montagne without any of his defects, but possesses several others,
to which the former was either altogether a Stranger, as Gallantry and a
Delicateness of Discernment, or else was but slightly acquainted with. To
dismiss this Comparison, he has a greater depth of penetration; a greater
justness in Reasoning; a better taste of polite Learning, and a more exquisite
knowledge of the World. Not to speak of his Language, which will admit no
comparison. I cannot conclude this Article without observing, that even in his
Misfortunes, our Author has received an honorable Elogy from one of the most
Judicious Writers in France, but a Member of that Order, which is seldom guilty
of paying Incense to Persons in disgrace; and what is remarkable, an Order to
which he himself had expressed no great Respect.

But I humbly beg your Lordships pardon, for dwelling so long upon a Subject
which your Lordship better understands than any person whatever. I am sensible,
I should Commit the same Solecism, should I enlarge upon all your several
Eminent Qualities since they are as well known to the greater part of mankind,
as St. Evremonts Character is to your Lordship. That Air of politeness which
distinguishes every thing you say or do; that Unwearied Generosity in extending
your Favors; that greatness of Mind, that admirable Sagacity and Experience in
all Affairs, are so readily ackowledged as well by those that have the honor
to be admitted into your Conversations, as others that behold you at a
distance, and only view you in your Character as it is universally established;
that as they cannot be set in a better light, so the proclaiming of them would
be no New Discovery.

And yet my Lord, as in all Ages of the World, it has been (if I may be allowed
the expression,) the Appennage of a conspicuous Merit to meet with many
Enemies; you have not been without your share of them; but Heaven be Praised
for setting such great Odds between their discretion and their Malice. 'Twas
your Lordships happiness that they charged you with things so disproportioned
and absurd, that none seemed to believe them, but those who receive every thing
without examination, or those whose interest it was to spread them. For as it
was impossible for them to say the least injurious thing of you without having
recourse to fiction, they managed it so profusely, that like the Old Relators
of Heroic adventures, they destroyed that very belief they endeavored to
Propagate. Even that Instrument, which by one of the most industrious Agents of
Hell was designed to ruin your Reputation with the rest of mankind, for which
purpose no Artifices of Threats and promises were left unpracticed; that very
Instrument, my Lord, served to proclaim your Lordships Virtue to the World; and
never was Innocence more triumphant, and never did Truth gain a more glorious
Conquest.

And now, my Lord, if your Candor has not been wholly exhausted in forgiving
these injuries, I humbly beg you to employ it once more in pardoning the
imperfections of this Translation. My Friends and I did our best endeavors,
but found to our expense, it was equally difficult to imitate and Translate St.
Evremont. The periods every where so Harmonious and yet so unaffected, the
Language so comprehensive and yet so clear, so Polite and yet so Natural, that
though we could pretend to have reached his meaning in all places, which is no
easy matter in an Author so very nice and penetrating, yet we cannot without a
sensible regret, observe how much we have fallen below the Original. Your
Lordship has received better presents from other hands, but this is offered
with no less sincerity. And in this single presumption, I was glad of this
occasion to declare to all the World with what Zeal and Integrity,

I am, my Lord, your Lordships most Humble, and most Obedient Servant, T. BROWN.

Preface.
I Had designed to have made some Critical Remarks and Observations upon those
Chapters in the Second Volume of Monsieur de St. Evremont, where the occasion
Naturally required them.

But the Book happening to swell larger by several Sheets than was expected, I
have no room here to insert them. Mr. Dryden indeed, who in his excellent
Preface before the first Volume, has given us a very good account of our
inimitable Author, seems to have spared me this labor; but however, he has not
so exhausted the Subject, but that there is still a very ample Field for those
that come after him to Cultivate.

I shall here take no notice of what our Author, both in his Discourse to the
Marshall de Crequi, and in his Letter to Monsieur Justel, the late Learned
Library Keeper at St. James's, has advanced upon the Score of Religion. For
besides that he has managed the Controversy like a Gentleman, and not en
Theologue; it is certain he drew his Character of the Reformed from the
Huguenots of France, a sort of People whom we are not obliged to justify.

The first Volume will speedily be Reprinted, with great Amendments, and
Additions; where I shall have a proper opportunity to prefix Dissertation,
which I am forced for want of room here to omit.

TO MONSIEUR THE MARSHALL de CREQVI, Who asked the temper of my Mind, and my
Thoughts of things in general.
By Dr. DRAKE.
WHEN we are young, the Popular Opinion sways us, and we are more solicitous to
gain the Esteem of others then of our selves. But arrived to Old Age, we are
apt to have a less value for Foreign things, and are most taken up with our
selves, when we are ready to abandon our selves.

Life is like our other Possessions, all vanishes, when we think our stock
greatest: Our measures are seldom rightly understood, till little remains to be
managed. Hence we see young Men squander (as it were) their Being, in which
they think they have a long term of Years to come. We grow more chary of our
selves, as we grow nearer to lose our selves.

The time has been, when my roving, uncontrol'd Fancy rambled after every thing
strange to it: At present my Mind contracts it self to the Body, and unites
more straightly with it: Nor is this out of any sense of Pleasure from such an
Alliance, but out of necessity of the mutual Succor and Assistance, which they
endeavor to afford one another.

In this feeble Condition, I yet retain some pleasures, but I have lost all
sense of Vice, without knowing whether this change be owing to the Infirmity of
a decayed Body, or the moderation of a Mind better improved in Wisdom than
heretofore. I fear my Age has a greater share in it than my Virtue, that I have
more reason to complain, than bragg of the Obedience of Inclinations.

In vain should I ascribe to my Reason the Four of subjecting my desires, if
they are too weak to raise themselves; and what Wisdom soever Men at my Years
may boast of, it is hard to distinguish, whether those Passions, we now no
longer feel, be subdued or expired.

Howsoever it be, when our senses are no longer touched with their Objects, nor
our Souls moved by their Impressions, it is properly no more then a State of
Indolence: Yet is not this indolence without it is Charms, To think himself
exempt from all uneasiness, is enough to give Joy to a reasonable Man.

The Enjoyment of Pleasures is not always required; the privation of pain well
used, renders our Condition sufficiently happy.

If any misfortune befall me, I am naturally little sensible of it, without
dashing this happy Constitution with any thoughts of Constancy. For Constancy
is only dwelling longer upon our Miseries. It appears the most aimable Virtue
in the World to those who are under no afflictions, but is truly a new load to
such as are.

Resistance only Fretts us, and Instead of easing one grievance adds another:
Without Resistance we suffer only the evils inflicted on us, with it our own
improvements too. For this reason under present Calamities, I resign all to
Nature; I reserve my prudence for times of tranquillity. Then by reflecting
upon my own Indolence, I take pleasure in the pains, I endure not, and by this
means make happy the most indifferent State of Life.

Experience grows with Age, and Wisdom commonly with Experience: But when I
ascribe this Virtue to Old Men, I mean not that they are always Masters of it.
This is cerrain that they have always the Liberty to be wise, and to knock off
decently those Fetters which prejudice has put upon the World. They only are
allowed to take things for what they really are.

Reason does as 'twere plant every thing in our Education; which is afterward
in a manner quite overrun by Fancy. Age only has the power to drive out the
one from what she had usurped, and reestablish the other in what the had lost.

For my self, I observe religiously all real Duties. The imaginary I refuse or
admit, as I like or dislike 'em. For in things to which I am not obliged, I
think it equal reason to reject what does not please me, or to accept what does.

Every day frees me from one link at least of the Chain, nor is it less for the
advantage of those from whom I disengage my self, then me, who regain my
liberty. They are as great gainers in the loss of an useless Man, as I should
have been a loser, by idely devoting my self any longer to 'em.

Of all Ties, that of Amity is the only one that has, in my Opinion, almost
irresistible Charms, and were it not for the disgrace that attends no Return, I
could love merely for the pleasure of Loving, even where I was not beloved
again.

In Love ill placed, the Sentiments of Amity entertain us purely by their own
agreeable sweetness. But we ought to divest our selves of a just hatred for the
Interest of our own quiet.

Happy is that Mind which can entirely deny some Passions, and only unbend it
self to some others. It would then be void of Fear, Sadness, Hatred, or
Jealousy. It would desire without violence, Hope without impatience, and Enjoy
without transport.

The state of Virtue is not a state of Indolence. We suffer in it a perpetual
Conflict betwixt Duty, and Inclination. Now we do what disgusts us, and now
oppose what relishes well: Being almost always under force, both in our
Actions, and Abstinence.

That of Wisdom is sweet and calm. It reigns Peaceably over our movements,
being only to Govern well as Subjects, what Virtue Combats as Enemies.

I can say one thing of my self, as extraordinary as true, that is, that I have
never in my self felt any Conflict between Passion, and Reason. My Passion
never opposed what I resolved out of Duty; and my Reason readily complied with
what my Pleasure Inclined me to.

I pretend not that this easy accord is praise worthy; on the contrary, I
confess I have been often the more Vicious for it. Not out of any perverse
disposition to Evil; but because Vice covered the Crime, with an appearance of
Pleasure.

It is certain, the nature of things is much better discovered by reflection on
'em, when past, then by their impressions at perception. Now the great Commerce
with the World, hinders all attention in Youth. What we see in others hinders
us from examining well our selves.

Crowds please us at an Age, when we Love (as one may say) to diffuse our
selves. Multitudes grow troublesome at another, when we naturally recoil to our
selves, or instead of numbers come to paucity of Friends, who are more united
to us.

It Is this humor, that insensibly withdraws us from Courts. We begin through
that to seek some Mean between Hurry and Retirement. We grow afterward ashamed
to show an old Face amongst young Fellows.

Let us not flatter our selves with our Judgments: A brisk Buffoonery will run
it down; and the false glittering of a youthful Fancy will turn to Ridicule our
most delicate Conversations. If we have Wit, the best use of it is in private
Companies; for in a Crowd the Spirit maintains it self but ill against the Body.

This Justice which we are obliged to do our selves, ought not to make us
unjust to the young Men. We ought not perpetually to cry up our own Times, or
enviously always condemn theirs. Let us not rail at Pleasures when we are past
them, or censure Diversions, whose only Offense is our Incapacity.

Our Judgments ought to be always the same. We may live, but must not judge by
Humor. There is in mine an odd peculiarity, which makes me measure
Magnificence more by its trouble than pomp.

Shows, Feasts, and great Assemblies, invite not me to the sight of 'em: The
Inconveniences I must suffer, deter me. The elegant harmony of Consorts
engages not me so much, as the difficulty of adjusting 'em disobliges me.
Abundance disgusts me at my Meals, and Rarities seem to me an affected
Curiosity. My fancy cannot recommend any thing to my palate by my scarcity. My
choice should be of things easily to be had, that my Delicacy may not be ruled
by Fancy.

I am as fond of Reading as ever, because it depends more particularly on the
mind, which tires not like the Senses. In truth, I seek in Books my Pleasure,
rather than my Instruction.

As I have less time for Practice, I have less desire to learn. I have more
need of a stock of Life than of methods of living; and the little that remains,
is better spent in things agreeable, than Instructive. The Latin Authors afford
me the most, and I read whatever I think fine, a thousand times over without
being cloyed.

A nice Choice has confined me to a few Books, in which I seek rather found
than fine Wit; and the true Taste (to use a Spanish Expression) is ordinarily
found in the Writings of considerable Men. I am pleased to discover in Tully's
Epistles, both his own Character, and that of those Persons of Quality that
Write to him. He never divests himself of his Rhetoric, and the least
recommendation to his most intimate Friend is as artificially Insinuated, as if
he were to prepossess a Stranger in an Affair of the greatest Consequence in
the World.

The Letters of the rest want those fine turns; but in my Mind, they have more
good Sense than his, and this makes me judge very Advantageously of the great
and general Abilities of the Romans at that time.

Our Authors prefer the Age of Augustus upon the account of Virgil and Horace;
and perhaps more yet upon the score of Maecenas, who encouraged Men of
Learning, than for those Men of Learning themselves.

It is neverthelsess certain, that their Parts as well as Courages began at
that time to decay. Grandeur of Soul was converted to Circumspect Conduct, and
sound Discourse to Polite Conversation: I know not what to think of the Remains
of Maecenas, unless it be that they had something of Grimace, which was made to
pass for delicate.

Maecenas was Augustus's great Favorite; The Man that pleased, and whom all
the Polite, and sprightly Wits courted; now is it not likely that his judgment
overruled the rest, that they affected his Air, and Ap'd, as much as they
could, his Character?

Augustus himself leaves us no great Idea of his Latinity. What we see of
Terence, what was reported at Rome of politeness of Scipio and Laelius, the
Relics of Caesar, and what we have of Cicero, with the complaint of this last
for the loss of what he calls, Sales, Lepores, Venustates, Vrbanitas,
Amaenitas, Festivitas, Iucunditas; all together make me believe, upon better
consideration, That we must search some other time than that of Augustus, to
find the sound and agreeable Wit of the Romans, as well as the pure and natural
Graces of their Tongue.

It may be said, That Horase had a very nice Palate in all these Matters; which
persuades me, that the rest of his Contemporaries had not. For the nicety of
his Relish consisted chiefly in finding that of others ridiculous. But as for
the Impertinencies, false Manners, and Affectations which he laughed at, his
sense would not at this day appear so very just.

I own that of Augustus to have been the Age of excellent Poets; but it follows
not, That it was that of Universal Genius's.

Poetry requires a peculiar Genius, that agrees not overmuch with good sense.
It is sometimes the Language of Gods, sometimes of Buffoons, rarely that of a
Civil Man. It delights in Figures, and Fictions, always besides the reality of
things, though it be that only, that can satisfy a found Understanding.

Not but that there is something Noble in making good Verse; but we must have a
great command of our Genius, otherwise the mind is possessed with something
Foreign, which hinders it from the free management of it self.

He Is a Block-head (say the Spaniards) that cannot make two Verses, and a Fool
that makes four. If this Maxim prevailed over all the World, we should want a
thousand fine Works, the reading of which gives us a very delicate pleasure;
but this Maxim respects Men of Business, rather than professed Poets. However,
those that are capacitated for such great Works, will not oppose the force of
their Genius, for what I can say; and it is certain, that amongst Authors,
those only will write few Verses, who find themselves curbed more by their own
natural Unaptness, than by my Reasons.

Excellent Poets are as requisite for our pleasure, as great Mathematicians for
our use: But it is sufficient for us to be acquainted with their Works, and not
engage our selves in the solitary Enthusiasm of the one, or to exhaust our
Spirits in Meditation like the other.

Of all Poets, Comedians are most proper for the converse of the World: For
they oblige themselves to paint naturally what passes in it, and to express
after a lively manner the Thoughts, and Passions of Men.

How new an Air soever, may be given to old Thoughts, that sort of Poetry is
very tedious which is filled with Similies of the Morning, the Sun, Moon, and
Stars. Our Descriptions of a calm and a tempestuous Sea, represent nothing
which the Ancients have not done much better.

Now we have not only the same Ideas, but the very same Expressions, the same
Rhymes. I never hear of the Harmony of Birds, but I prepare my self for the
murmuring of Brooks; the Shepherds are always lolling upon Fern, and you may
sooner find a Grove without a Shade in its proper sight, than in our Verses.

This must necessarily at length be very tedious; which cannot happen in
Comedy, where with pleasure we see our own Actions drawn, and are touched with
Parallel Motions.

A Discourse of Woods, Rivers, Meadows, Fields, and Gardens, make but a very
languishing Impression upon us, unless their Beauties be wholly new: But a
discourse of Humanity, its Inclinations, Tendernesses, and Affections, finds
something at the bottom of our Souls prepared to receive it; the same nature
produces and receives 'em, and they are easily transfused from the Actors to
the Spectators.

The Delicacy of Love sooths me, and its tenderness touches me; and as in Spain
they love the best of any Country in the World, I am never weary of reading in
their Authors Amorous Adventures. I am more affected with the Passion of one of
their Lovers, than I should be with my own, were I yet capable of any. The very
Imagination of those Amors raises in me certain motions for the Gallant, which
I could never feel for my self.

There is perhaps as much Wit in the other Writings of that Nation, as in
ours; but it is a Wit that gives me no satisfaction, except that of Cervantes
in Don Quixot, which I could read all my life without being disgusted one
single moment.

Of all the Books I have ever read, Don Quixot is that, of which I should be
most ambitious to have been the Author. Nothing in my Opinion, can contribute
more to the forming in us a true relish of every thing. I wonder how Cervantes
could, as it were out of the Mouth of one of the greatest Fools in the World,
show himself maiter of all the Understanding and Knowledge imaginable. I admire
the diversities of his Characters, which are of the most uncommon stamp in the
World, and at the same time the most natural.

Quevedo indeed appears a very Ingenious Author, but I esteem him more for
wishing all other Books Burnt, when he had read Don Quixot, than for having
been able to read 'em.

I am not acquainted enough with Italian Verse, to taste their delicacy, or
admire their Grace and Beauty; I meet with some Histories in that Tongue above
all the Moderns, and some Treatises of Politics even above what the Ancients
have Written.

As for the Morality of the Italians, it is full of Conceits, which savor
more of a Fancy that aims to Sparkle, than of solid Sense founded on deep
Reflections.

I am very curious of every thing that is fine in French, and am very much
distasted at a thousand Authors, that seem only to have written for the
Reputation of being Authors. I read not for the credit of having read
abundance, and this is it which ties me up to certain Books, where I Am assured
to meet satisfaction.

Montagne's Essays, Malherbe's Poems, Corneille's Tragedies, and Voiture's
Letters have established to themselves, as it were, a Title to please me during
Life.

Montagne has not the same success with others through their whole Course. As
he particularly lays open Men, the Young and the Old are pleased to see
themselves in him by the resemblance of their Thoughts. The space intermediate
to these Ages, takes 'em off from Nature to other Professions; and then they
find less in Montagne that fits 'em. The Art Military employs the General;
Politics the Statesman; Divinity the Church Man; and Law the Judge.

Montagne returns upon us, when Nature has brought us back again to our selves;
and the approach of Age, when we truly feel what we are, recalls the Prince as
well as his meanest Subjects from his Engagements to his Function, to the more
near and sensible interest of his Person.

I Write not this out of any impulse of vanity, which urges Men to make their
Fancies public. I instruct my self by what I say, and understand my self
better by expressing the Notion I have formed of my self, then I could by
private thoughts, and Internal Reflections.

The Idea a Man has of himself by simple attention to Internal Meditations, is
always a little confused. The Image which is outwardly expressed is much more
exact, and gives us much truer Judgment of our selves, when it is again
submitted to the Examination of the mind, after having been laid before our
eyes.

Besides, the flattering Opinion of our own merit loses half its Charms, as
soon as it comes into the light; and the complaisance of self Love insensibly
vanishing leaves behind it only a disgust of its sweetness, and shame for a
vanity as foolishly entertained as judiciously quitted.

To equal Malherbe to the Ancients, I find nothing finer then his own
compositions. I would only in his works retrench what is not worthy of him. It
were injustice to postpone him to any one whoever. But he must bear with us, if
for the honor of our own Judgments, we make him give place to himself.

Almost the same we may say of Corneille. He would be above all the Tragedians
of Antiquity, if he were not in some of his pieces much below himself. He is so
admirable in what is fine, that he take saway all patience for what is
indifferent. What in him is not excellent, methinks is naught; not that it is
bad, but that it wants the perfection of the rest. It is not enough for him to
please us lightly, he is bound to touch us to the quick.

If he ravishes not our minds, they employ their utmost penetration, enviously
to discover the difference between him and himself.

Some Authors may simply move us. But those are petty ticklings, pleasing
enough when we have nothing else to mind. Corneille prepares our minds for
transports: If they be not elevated, they are left in a condition more uneasy
than languour.

It is, I confess hard, always to Charm: Very hard at pleasure to raise a mind
from its temper, to unhinge a Soul. But Corneille by having done it so often,
has laid upon himself an Obligation to do it always. Let him expunge what is
not noble enough for him, and he will leave us in a full admiration of those
Beauties which no one can Parallel.

I should not excuse Voiture for a great many of his Letters, which he ought to
have suppressed, had himself been the Publisher: But he was like some Fathers,
equally kind and prudent, who have a natural affection for their Children, and
in secret cherish those that want worth, thereby to avoid exposing their
Judgments to the Public by their Indulgence.

He might have showed all his Fondness to some of his Works; for there is
something in 'em so unaccountably ingenious so polite, so fine, and so
agreeable, that it takes away all taste of the Sales Attici' and the Roman
^rbanitas; ecclypses quite the Spirit and Wit of the Italians, and the
Gallantry of the Spaniards.

We have in French some particular pieces of admirable Beauty; of which number
is the Funeral Oration of the Queen of England by Monsieur de Meaux. There is
a certain Spirit diffused through the whole discourse, which gives as great an
opinion of the Author before he is known, as of his Work, after it is read. His
Character is impressed on all that he says; so that although I have never seen
him, I pass easily from the admiration of his Discourse to that of his Person.

Nor am I less affected with the Abridgment of General History done by the same
Prelate. Such reach is there in his Reflections: The sense so sound, so great a
purity of Reasoning! What a capacity of mind must he have in one Scheme to
comprehend so great a variety of Events, so far disjoined both in time and
place? What Judgment to reconcile 'em as he does, and draw from 'em
Consequences so advantageous to the true Religion?

How great soever the pleasure of Reading is to me, yet that of Conversation
will ever be more sensible. The acquaintance of the Ladies would afford the
sweetest, if their Charms did not put us to too much pain to defend our selves
from doing Homage to 'em. Yet this is a violence I rarely suffer; as my Age
renders me unacceptable, my Experience makes me nice; and if they cannot be
pleased with me, I am by way of return as little satisfied with them.

There are some whose Merits make a considerable impression on my mind, but
their Beauty has little influence on me. And if I am at any time surprised by
it, I presently reduce my Passion to a pleasing reasonable Amity, that has none
of the uneasinesses of Love.

Amongst Ladies, the most meritorious person with them, is the Lover; the next,
the Confident of their Inclinations; the third, he that ingeniously sets off
all that is amiable in 'em. If nothing will win their hearts, we may at least
gain their Favors by Complements; for next to the Lover, to whom all must give
place, he pleases 'em most, that can make 'em please themselves best.

When you converse with 'em, avoid carefully all indifference, they are from
their Souls Enemies to such coldness, or love your self, or flatter what they
love, or paint 'em so as to plunge 'em still deeper in Love with themselves,
For Love of some sort or other they must have, it is a Passion their Hearts are
never unfurnished with. Direct a poor Heart how to employ it.

It Is true, some of 'em can have esteem, and even tenderness too without Love;
and others there are as worthy of our Confidence and Secrets as the most trusty
of our Friends.

I know some that have no less Wit and Discretion, then Charms and Beauty: But
those are Rarities, that Nature wantonly bestows on the World, whether by
design or caprice, and we can draw no Consequences in Favor of the General,
from things so particular, and from Qualities so uncommon. Women so
extraordinary seem to invade the Character of Men; and perhaps it is a kind of
revolt from their Sex, to shake off the Natural Conditions of it for the real
Advantages of ours.

I confess I have formerly been more difficult in the choice of the Men, with
whom I Conversed, then at present I am; and I think my self not so much a Loser
in point of Delicacy, as a gainer in point of Sense. I then sought for Men that
could please me in every thing, I now seek every thing that may please me in
any Man.

A Man in all respects agreeable, is too great a Rarity, and it is no Wisdom to
hunt for what we are hardly ever like to find. That Delicacy of pleasure, which
our imagination paints to us, is what we seldom enjoy; the sickly nice Fancy
gives us a disrelish of those things, which we during the whole course of our
lives might obtain.

Not that, to say Truth, it is impossible to find such Jewels, but it is very
rarely that Nature forms 'em, and that Fortune favors us with 'em. My good
Stars made me know one of this rank in France, and another of equal merit in a
Foreign Country, who was the whole delight of my Life. Death has robbed me of
this Treasure, and I can never think on that cruel day on which Monsieur
Daubigny died, but I may with a sad and sensible regrett, say, -- Quem semper
acerbum,
Semper honoratum, sic di voluistis, habebo.


Among your other measures for the conduct of Society, you must take care to
apprehend the good things seperately; beware to distinguish Solidity from
Prolixity, good Nature from want of Sense, Science from Ridicule. You will find
these Qualities promiscuously blended, not only among those Men whom you may at
pleasure make choice of, or repudiate, but even among those whom your interest,
or other ties as obligatory, shall bind you to.

I have seen a Man of the gayest natural parts in the World, lay aside the
happy facility of his Genious, and engage in Arguments of Science and Religion,
in which he betrayed a ridiculous ignorance.

I know one of the most Learned Men in Europe, of whom one may Learn a Thousand
things curious or profound, in whom nevertheless you will find an impotence of
Belief in every thing extraordinary, fabulous, or exceeding Credit.

That great Master of the Stage, to whom the Romans are more beholding for the
Beauty of their thoughts, then to their own Wit or Virtue: Corneille who
sufficiently discovers himself without naming, speaks like an ordinary Man when
he speaks for himself. He exhausts all his stock of thought for a Greek or a
Roman: A Frenchman or Spaniard abates his courage; and when he speaks for him,
he is quite dispirited. He racks his imagination for all that is noble to adorn
his Old Hero's, and you would say, that he debarred himself the advantage of
his own proper Wealth, as, if he were not worthy the use of it.

If you know the World perfectly, you will find in it abundance of Men valuable
for their Talent, and as contemptible for their failing. Expect not they should
always display their good Qualities, and discreetly cover their Infirmities.
You shall see 'em slight their Virtues, and fondly indulge their defects. It
rests upon your Judgment to make a better choice then themselves, and by your
Address, to draw from 'em that worth, which they could not easily communicate.

For these Ten Years, which I have spent in a Foreign Country, I have found as
much pleasure, and been as happy in the enjoyment of Conversation, as if I had
been all the time in France. I have met with Persons of as great Worth as
Quality, whose Society has been the greatest comfort of my Life. I have known
Men as witty as any I have ever seen, who have joined the pleasure of their
Friendship to that of their Company.

I have known some Ambassadors so delicate, that it seemed to me a considerable
loss, whenever the Duty of their Character suspended the exercise of their more
peculiar Excellencies.

I have formerly thought that there were no Man of Honor but in our Court;
that the effeminacy of warmer Climates, and a kind of Barbarity in the colder,
hindered the Natives from being raised to this pitch, except very rarely. But
experience has at length convinced me, that there are such every where, and if
I have not discocover'd it soon enough, it is because it is difficult for a
Frenchman under long use to relish any but those of his own Country.

Every Nation has it is excellence, with a certain turn proper and peculiar to
its Genious. My Judgment, too much wedded to our own Air, rejected as faulty
what was Foreign to us. Because we see 'em imitate us in the Fashion of things
Exterior, we would impose upon 'em the imitation of us, even in the Dress of
Virtue too.

In truth, the grounds of any Essential Quality, are every where the same; but
we endeavor to fit the Extrinsicks to our Humor, and those among us that pay
the greatest deference to Reason, must have with it something to gratify their
Fancies.

The difference which I find between the Air of us and other Nations, to speak
ingenuously, is that ours is industriously affected, and that of other Nations
impressed by Nature, as it were in an indelible Character.

In all my life, I have never known but two Persons that were universally
taking, and those differently. The one had agreeable Qualities of all sorts;
for the ordinary sort of Men, for the Humorists, and even for the Fantastical;
he seemed to have in his Nature, wherewith to please every body. The other had
so many rare Accomplishments, that he might assure himself of esteem wherever
Virtue was revered. The first could insinuate himself, and never failed to gain
the Affections. The second was somewhat morose and fierce, but commanded
esteem. To complete this difference, a Man gave himself up with pleasure to the
insinuations of the former, and submitted oftentimes with reluctance to the
worth of the latter. I had a strict Friendship with 'em both, and can say, That
I never saw anything in the one, but what was agreeable; or in the other, but
what was valuable.

When I want the company of men of Conversation, I have recourse to the
Learned; and if I meet with Men skillful in polite Learning, I think my self no
great loser by exchangeing of the delicacy of the present, for that of past
Ages. But there are very few that have a true Judgment: Polite Learning is by
most Men's management rendered very nauseous.

Of all the Men I ever knew, Antiquity is the most indebted to Mr. Waller, not
only for the nicety and fineness of his apprehension, which he employs to dive,
even into the Soul of the Ancients for their true meaning, but likewise for the
Beauty of his Fancy, with which he embellishes their Thoughts too.

I have seen in few Years abundance of Critics, and but few good Judges. I
affect not that sort of Learned Men, that rack their Brains to restore a
Reading, which is not mended by the Restitution. The whole Mystery of their
Learning lies in what we might as well be ignorant of, and what is worth the
knowing, they never understand. They never imagine, never think nicely enough
to taste the delicacy of the Sense, or the elegance of a Thought. They may
serve well enough for Expositors to Grammarians; they drudge the same way, and
are made of the same Lump: but they can never rightly apprehend any Man of
Sense among the Ancients; such a Talent is diametrically opposite to theirs.

In History, they neither mind Men, nor matters; they lay the whole weight on
Cronology; and for the date of a Consul's Death, neglect the knowledge of his
Character, or of the Transactions during his Consulate. Tully with them had
been no more then a Compiler of Harangues, or Caesar then a Scribler of
Commentaries. The Consul, the General slip by 'em without notice, the Spirit
that animates their Works is unperceived, and the principal Matters they treat
of unknown.

I value infinitely a Critic of Sense, if the expression may be allowed. Such
is the excellent Work of Machiavel upon the Decades of Livy; and such would be
the reflections of Monsieur de Rohan upon Caesar's Commentaries, had he pierced
deeper into his Designs, and exposed to a clearer light the secret Springs of
his Conduct. Notwithstanding, I must own that he has equaled, if not
outreach'd the penetration of Machiavel in his remarks upon the clemency of
Caesar in the Civil Wars. But we may see that his own experience of such Wars,
gave abundance of light to those judicious Observations.

After the Study of polite Learning (for which I have a more particular
affection,) I Love the Science of those great Lawyers, who might themselves be
Legislators; who reascend to that Original Justice that rules Humane Society,
that know what liberty Nature permits in established Governments, and what for
the public Good, easies private Men of the burden of Politics.

The Conversation of Mr. -- affords these instructions with as much pleasure as
profit. From Hobbs, that great genious of England, we may receive these shining
Lights, yet not altogether so true; for somethings he mistakes, others he
pushes too far.

Were Grotius yet alive, all things might be Learnt of that universally Learned
Man, who is yet more valuable for his Reasonings than for his Learning. Though he
is Dead, his Writings still resolve the most important difficulties; and were
Justice only regarded, they might be a standing rule to all Nations in points
of War, and Peace. His Book, de Iure Belli and Pacis, ought to be the chief
Study of Sovereign Princes, their Ministers, and whoever else have any share in
the Government of the People.

Nay, even the knowledge of that Law which descends to the affairs of private
Men, ought not to be slighted. But this is left to the care of the Gentlemen of
the Gown, and denied to Princes as a thing below-them, though every moment of
their Reign, they issue out Warrants that extend to the Fortunes, Liberties,
and Lives of their Subjects.

They are only entertained with Harangues about Valor, which is only an
instrument of Destruction, and Discourses of Liberality, which is but a more
regular method of squandering, unless it is bounded by Justice. They ought
indeed to suit the Virtues they preach to the necessities of every ones temper:
To infuse Liberality into the Covetous, to spur the unactive with the thirst of
Glory, and curb, as much as is possible, the ambitious with the Reins of
Justice. But amongst all the diversity of Tempers, Justice is still most
requisite; for it keeps up order as well in him that does it, as in them to
whom it is done.

This is not a constraint that lessens the power of a Prince, for in doing it
to others, he learns to do it to himself, and so it is in him a voluntary act,
though we necessarily receive it from his power.

I read not in History of any Prince, better Educated then Cyrus the great.
They were not contented exactly to inform him what was Justice in all respects,
but they made him put his Instructions in Practice as often as occasion was
offered; so that they did at the same time imprint the notions of it on his
Mind, and establish an habitual Justice in his Soul.

The Education of Alexander was of somewhat too large an extent: He was Taught
the knowledge of every thing in Nature, but himself. His ambition afterward
diffused it self as far as his Learning; and knowing all, he grew desirous to
Conquer all. But he had little or no method in his Conquests, and abundance of
irregularity in his Life for want of knowing what he owed to the public, to
private Men, and to himself.

No Men Whatsoever can take too effectual a care to make themselves just, for
they have naturally too strong a Biass the contrary way.

Justice is the foundation and the Fence of all Society; without it we should
still be Strowlers, and Vagabonds; our impetuosity would soon reduce us to our
primitive confusion, out of which we are happily extricated, yet instead of
cheerfully acknowledging the benefit, we find a regret to submit to that happy
Subjection it keeps us in, and still long after that Fatal Liberty which would
be the unhappiness of our Lives.

When the Scriptures tell us that the Just are few, it means not in my Opinion,
that Men are not yet inclined to good Works. But it seems to intimate how
little an Inclination they have to 'em out of a principle of Justice.

Indeed were Men's good Actions examined, they would most of em be found to have
their source from the consideration of some other Virtues. Bounty, Friendshi^,
and Benevolence are the ordinary Spring^ from whence they flow: Charity
supplies our Neighbors wants; Liberality bestows, and Generosity obliges.
Justice which ought to partake in all, is laid aside as burdensome; and
necessity alone gives it a share in our Actions.

Nature endeavors to find a kind of self complaisance in these first
qualities, where we act upon pleasing Motives: But in this she finds a secret
violence, where another Right extorts from us what we owe, and we only acquit
our selves of our own Obligations, not lay any upon them by our beneficence.

It is a secret aversion to Justice that makes us fonder of giving than
returning, of obliging than acknowledging. Thus we see the most liberal,
generous Men are not usually the most Just. Justice includes a regularity that
bridles 'em, as being founded on a constant method of Reason, opposed to those
natural impulses, which are the Hinges upon which liberality almost always
moves.

There is something, I know not what, heroical in great Liberality, as well as
in great Valor; and there is a great Analogy between those two Virtues, the
one raises the Soul above the Consideration of Wealth, as the other beyond the
management and desire of Life. But with all these gay and generous Motives,
without good Conduct, the one becomes ruinous, and the other Fatal.

Those whom cross accidents of Fortune have undone, are pityed by all the
World, because it is a misfortune the Conditions of Humanity submit us to: But
those that are reduced to Misery by vain profusion, raise more contempt than
commiseration; because it is the Issue of a peculiar Folly, from which every
Man has the good conceit to think himself exempt.

But besides Nature is always a sufferer little by compassion, and to relieve
her self of an uneasy thought, She represents to her self the Folly of the
Prodigal, rather than rest on the prospect of the Beggar. All things
considered, it is enough for private Men to be Benefactors.

As this ought not to be merely through a softness of Nature which lukewarmly
lets go what it has not its strength to keep; I despise the weakness which we
call ill placed Bounty, and hate no less the vanity of those that never do a
kindness but for the pleasure of boasting of it.

There are not so many ungrateful Men, as there are thought to be; because
there are not so many generous Men as we imagine. He that in silence suppresses
a favor received is an unthankful Fellow, that deserved it not. But he that
publishes one that he has done, turns it to an Injury, showing to your disgrace
the necessity you had of him.

I would have an honest Man cautious of receiving obligations, and sensible of
'em when received: I would have him that obliges satisfied with the generosity
of the Action, and not think of any acknowledgement from the Party obliged.
When a return is expected, it is no longer liberality; it is a sort of Trade,
which the spirit of Interest would introduce into Favors.

It Is true, there are some persons in whose nature ingratitude is rooted:
Ingratitude is the main ingredient in their composition; with that their Heart
their Soul, and every part is seasoned: Then make no returns to Love, not
because they are hard and insensible, but because they are ungrateful.

This ingratitude of the Heart is of all the kinds of it the most opposite to
Humanity. For a generous Man may be sometimes necessitated to banish the
thoughts of a past kindness, to ease himself of the trouble that some
Obligations are apt to give. But Friendship knitts, not fetters us together;
and without some extraordinary violence to Nature, it is impossible to resist
its tender engaging Charms.

The Ingratitude of the Soul is a Natural indisposition to acknowledge a
Service, even without regard to Interest. Avarice may sometimes suppress an
Obligation, to avoid the expense of a return. But pure Ingratitude is without
farther design in it self averse to all acknowledgements.

There is another sort of Ingratitude founded on a Conceit of our own worth;
our Vanity mistakes services done us, for dues paid to us.

The ambition of Liberty has likewise its ingratitude as well as Vanity. The
only subjection it allows is to the Laws; out of abhorrence of a dependence, it
hates the memory of Obligations that show a superiority in the Benefactor. This
makes Republicans ungrateful. They think that a Diminution of their liberty,
which others impute to their Ingratitude.

Brutus thought it meritorious to sacrifice his Obligations to his liberty. All
the kindnesses heaped on him were converted to Injuries, when he began to look
upon 'em as Fetters. He could kill a Benefactor that aimed to be his Master. An
abominable Villainy amongst the Patrons of gratitude. An admirable virtue with
the Sticklers for liberty.

As there are Men purely ungrateful, out of a mere sense of ingratitude, so
there are some merely thankful out of a pure sense of thankfulness. Their
Hearts are sensible not only of good turns, but even of good will too; and have
of themselves a propensity to acknowledge all manner of Obligations.

There is as great a diversity of thanks, as of ingratitude; there are some
poor Spirits that think themselves obliged by every thing, as well as vain
Humors that do so by nothing.

If self-conceipt has its proud ingrates, distrust of Merit has its weak
thankful ones, that take common Justice for an Obligation.

This diffidence of themselves gives 'em an inclination to subjection, and that
obliges them to make another sort of acknowledgment. These Persons as they are
encumbered with liberty, and ashamed of servitude, raise up chimerical
Obligations, to give an honorable color to their submission.

I will not reckon among the grateful, those poor wretches that think
themselves obliged to us for not hurting 'em. They are not only Slaves, but
Slaves that have not the Courage to hope well. To these transported Wretches
all treatment that is not rigourous is favorable, and every thing that is not
an injury, they think a kindness.

I shall only now consider Court Acknowledgments, which have not so much
respect to the past, as design upon the future. They acknowledge obligations to
all that are in any post to oblige; and by an affected gratitude for favors
never done insinuate themselves into those, in whose power it is to do 'em, and
industriously put themselves in the way of 'em. This trick of thanks as it is
undoubtedly no Virtue, so neither is it a vice but cunning, which it is lawful
to serve our selves with, and guard our selves from.

The great ones in requital have a trick as artificial to excuse themselves
from doing kindnesses, as the Courtiers can have to engage 'em to it. They
reproach men with Services never done, and complain of ingratitude, though they
have hardly ever obliged any one, to draw from hence a specious pretense to
oblige no body.

But let this affected Gratitude, and these mysterious Complaints of
Ingratitude pass; let us see what is to be wished in the pretenses to, and the
distribution of Benefits. I could wish in the Pretenders more merit than
Address, and in the Disposers more Generosity than Ofsentation.

Justice respects every thing in the distribution of Favors: It regulates the
liberality of the Donour, and weighs the merit of the Receiver.

Generosity thus circumstantiated is an admirable Virtue: not so, it is the
motion of a Soul truly noble, but ill governed; or of a wild Ostentatious
Humor, that thinks Reason a clogg to it.

There are so many things to be considered in the distribution of kindnesses,
that the safest way is always to observe strict Justice, and consult Reason
equally about those we make the Objects of 'em. But even among those that
intend strict Justice, how many are misguided by their tempers to reward or
punish? When we give way to Insinuation, and yield to Complement, Self-Love
represents to us as Justice a Lavishness to them that flatter us; and we reward
'em for the Artifice they use to deceive our Judgments, and prevail upon the
imbecility of our Wills.

They cheat themselves yet more easily, that mistake a morose Temper for an
inclination to Justice. The itch of punishing is ingenious in 'em to set an ill
gloss upon every thing. Pleasure with them is Vice, and Error a Crime. A man
must divest himself of Humanity to escape their Rigor. Misled by a false
Notion of Virtue, they think they chastise Criminals, while they torment the
Miserable.

If Justice appoints a great Punishment, (which is sometimes necessary) it is
proportioned to some great Crime, but is never harsh or rigorous. Severity and
Rigor are no part of it, but spring from the humor of those persons that
execute it. As these sorts of Punishments flow from Justice without rigor, so
likewise does Pardon in some cases rather then from Clemency. To pardon Faults
of Error is but Justice to the failings of our Nature.

I might proceed to several other particulars of Justice, but it is now high
time to think of Religion, which ought to be our principal care.

After the manner that I have lived in the World, People will not easily
believe that I am very solicitous about Salvation. Yet I can safely aver, that
no man e're thought of the next World with more Application than my self. It Is
stupidity to set up our Rest in a Life that may terminate every moment.

Mere Curiosity will make us inquisitive to know what shall become of us after
our Death. We are too dear to our selves to agree to the irrecoverable loss of
our selves. Self Love secretly opposes the Notion of annihilation. We are
desirous to exist always, and the Soul as it is interess'd in its own
conversation, improves this desire we have of receiving some light into a thing
so obscure.

Yet the Body finding by certain experience that it must die, and unwilling to
die alone seeks reasons to involve the Soul in one common State. But the Soul
which knows its Actions are independent of those Organs, is sensible that it
can subsist without 'em. I have called all the light I could both from the
Ancients and Moderns to assist my reflections to dive into so dark a matter: I
have read all that has been Written on the Immortality of the Soul, and after I
have done it with all my attention possible, the clearest Proof that I find of
the Eternity of my Soul, is my own perpetual desire that it may be so.

I wish I had never read Mousieur Descartes's Meditations: The great reputation
of that excellent Man among us gave me some hope of finding that demonstration
he promises; but there appears to me rather probability then certainty in his
arguments; and how desirous soever I was to be convinced by his Reasons, all
that I can do in his favor or my own, is to rest where I was before.

I leave the Study of Metaphysics to make an enquiry into Religion, and
looking a Book upon that Antiquity of which I am so fond, I find among the
Greeks and Romans, nothing more then a Superstitious Idolatrous Worship, or
politic humane contrivances established for the Government of Men. It is not
difficult for me to see the advantages of the Christian Religion over all the
rest; and submitting my self the best I can with reverence to the Belief of its
Mysteries, I leave my Reason to taste with pleasure the purest, and most perfect
Morality in the World.

Amidst the diversity of Beleifs that divide Christianity, the true Catholic
engages me as well by my own free Election, were I yet to choose, as by the
habitual Impression it has long since made upon me.

What we now call Religion is indeed but a difference in Religion, and not a
different Religion. I rejoice that my Faith is more sound then a Heretics; yet
instead of Hating him for this difference, I Love him because he agree's with
me in the Fundamentals. The means at length to agree in the whole, is always to
commuicate in something. A desire of Reunion can never be inspired till the
enmity that arises from division be suppressed. Men may seek one another as
sociable, but they never join with their Enemies.

Besides, the difference of Doctrine in some points affected in every Sect, I
remark, as it were, a sort of particular Spirit that distinguishes 'em. The
Catholic tends particularly to the love of God, and good Works. We look upon
this first Being, as an Object soveraignly amiable, and tender Souls are
touched with the sweet and agreeable impressions it makes on 'em.

Good Works follow necessarily from this Principle; for Love once received
within, actuates us without, and puts us upon endeavoring all we can to please
him we love. All we have to fear in this case is, lest the source of this Love,
the Heart, should be corrupted by the mixture of any Passion altogather humane.

It is likewise to be feared, that instead of obeying the Ordinance of God, we
should frame methods of serving him according to our own Fancies. But if this
love be real and pure, nothing in the world yields that true sweetness and
satisfaction.

The inward joy of devout Souls rises from a secret assurance they have of
being agreeable to God; and the true Mortifications, and holy Austerities are
nothing else but pious Sacrifices of themselves.

The Reformed Religion divests men of all confidence in merit. The Opinion of
Predestination, which it dares not forgo, leaves the Mind languid, unmoved,
without Affection, under prerence of waiting with submission for the Will of
Heaven. It is Content barely to obey, and seeks not to please; and in a set
common Worship, makes God the Object rather of their Regularity than Love.

The Calvinists abstract from Religion every thing that appears humane, to
preserve its Purity: but in endeavoring to debar Man of what is humane, they
frequently retrench too much of what is addressed to God.

Their dislike of our Ceremonies, makes 'em industrious to refine upon us. Yet
when they have attained to this dry naked Purity, they have not so much
Devotion. Those that are pious among 'em, raise up a private Spirit, which they
think inspired; so much dissatisfied are they with a Formality that to them
seems too common.

There are in matters of Worship two sorts of Humors. The one would be always
adding to, and the other always retrenching what is established. In the first,
there is a hazard of giving too much outside to Religion, and covering it with
so many Exteriors, that the real ground of it cannot be seen through 'em. In
the other, the danger is least after having cut off all that appears
superfluous, Religion it self should be pared.

Though the Catholics have abundance of Ceremonies, yet that hinders not but
that men of understanding may see well enough through 'em.

The Reformed use too little, and their ordinary Worship is not sufficiently
distinguished from the common Occupations of Life. In places where it is not
tolerated, the difficulty heightens their disgust, and the Dispute raises a
warmth that animates 'em. Where it rules, it produces only an exact Compliance,
as the Civil Government, or any other Obligation might do.

Good manners among the Huguenots are only the effects of their Faith, and the
Subjects of their Belief. We are agreed on both sides, that every Christian is
bound to Believe, and live aright, but our ways of expressing it differ: they
say that good Works without Faith are but Dead Works, and we, that Faith
without good Works is but Dead Faith.

They that began the Reformation accused us of Corruption and Vice; and we now
object against them our good Works.

Those that reproached us with ill living, will now take no other advantage of
us then that of an imaginary purer Faith. We allow the necessity of Belief, but
Charity was commanded by Jesus Christ, and the Doctrine of his Precepts is much
more plain then that of his Mysteries. Our Faith is obscure, but our Law is
very clearly expressed. The necessary points of our Faith are above the
apprehension of abundance of Men, but those of our Duty are suitted to the
capacities of all the World. In a word, God has given us light enough to do
well; and we would serve with it our curiosity of knowing too much; and instead
of acquiescing in what he is pleased to discover to us, we would pry into what
he has concealed from us.

I know that the contemplation of Heavenly things does sometimes happily
disengage us from the World: But it is frequently no more then mere
speculation, and the fruit of a vice very Natural to Mankind.

The immoderate Ambition of knowledge extends it self beyond Nature even to
inquire into what is most misterious in its Author, not so much out of a design
to adore him, as out of a vain curiosity of knowing all things.

This vice is close followed by another: curiosity breeds presumption, and we
as boldly define, as we rashly inquire, we erect a Science of those things that
are to us altogether inconceiveable. So depravedly do we use the will and
understanding. We proudly aspire to know every thing and cannot; we may
Religiously observe every thing and will not: let us be just, charitable, and
patient according to the principles of our Religion, and we shall know and
observe all together.

I leave it to our Doctors to refute the errors of the Calvinists, it is enough
for me to be persuaded that our opinions are the sounder. But if rightly
apprehended, I dare say the Spirit of both Religions is differently grounded on
good Principles; only one more extends the exercise of good Works; with the
other, the cautions to avoid Evil, take deeper root.

The Catholic with an active resolution, and Loving industry is perpetually
seeking some new way of pleasing God. The Hugenot with all circumspection and
respect dares not venture beyond a known Precept, for fear by imaginary
novelties of giving too much sway to his Fancy.

To be always disputing points of Doctrine, is not the means to reunite us.
Arguments are inexhaustible, and the controversy will last as long as there
are Men to manage it. But if we would leave these disputes, that only serve to
exasperate us, and return without passion to that Spirit that distinguishes us.
I think it not impossible to find some general in which we may agree.

Let us Catholics bridle the restless Zeal, that makes us act a little too
much of our own Heads. Let the Huguenots quit a little their unactive
regularity, and animate their languour without departing from their submission
to Providence. Let us do something in condescension to them, that they may
return as much in complaisance to us. Then without thinking of Free will, or
Predestination, we shall frame insensibly a true rule for our actions, which
will be followed by that of our opinions.

If we come to a reconciliation of wills upon the good conduct of Life, it will
soon produce a good understanding in doctrine. Let us do what we can to join in
good works. and we shall not long be of separate Faiths.

I conclude from the little that has been said, that it is an ill Method of
converting Men, to Attack 'em by affronting their Judgments. A Man defends his
Notions either as truth, or as his own; and however it be, he raises a hundred
objections against the Person that would convince him.

Nature has given to every one his proper Sense, and seems to have engaged him
to it by a secret fond Iudulgence, He can submit to the will of another, though
he be free: he can own himself inferior in courage and Virtue; but to confess
a submission to another Man's Sense, is what he is Scandalized at: And he is
most naturally averse to acknowledge a Superiority of Reason in any one
whomsoever.

The chief advantage of humanity is to be born reasonable, and to hear another
pretend more of it then our selves gives us the greatest jealousies. If we
Consult the conversions of Ancient Times, we shall find that their Souls were
moved, but their Understandings very little convinced. The first disposition to
receive the truths of Christianity is formed in the Heart.

Things purely Natural, the Mind may conceive, and it is knowledge Springs from
it is Relation to the Object. With supernatural the Soul is taken, it is
affected, it adheres, and unites it self, without ever comprehending 'em.

Heaven has better prepared our Hearts for the impressions of grace, then our
Understandings for illumination. It Is immensity confounds our narrow
Intellects. It Is bounty agrees better with our Love. There is I know not what
within us that secretly pleads for a God, which we cannot comprehend, and hence
it is that to succeed in the conversion of Men, we must settle a pleasing
commerce with 'em, by means of which we may inspire 'em with the same
movements: For in disputes of Religion the Mind in vain strains it self to make
us see, what we see but too much. In a sweet and pious familiarity it is easy
for the Soul to infuse the same sentiments.

To consider well the Christian Religion would make one think, that God had
deprived it of the light of our minds, that it might turn more upon the motions
of our Hearts. To Love God and our Neighbor includes all, says St. Paul. And
what is this, but to require a disposition of Heart as well toward God as Man?
It is to oblige us to do out of a principle of Love, what the civil Government
enjoins by rigorous Laws, and morality requires by a severe order of Reason.

Charity makes us relieve and succor, while Justice forbids us to do wrong.
The one with difficulty hinders opposition, the other with pleasure procures
Relief.

Those that have the true Notions that our Religion inspires, cannot be
unfaithful to a Friend or ungrateful to a Benefactor. With these good
sentiments a Heart innocently Loves these objects God has made amiable, and the
most innocent of our Love is the most Charming and tender.

Look upon Man in a civil Society, if Justice be necessary to him, yet it is a
restraint. In the State of Nature, his liberty will have something of Barbarity
in it; and if he govern himself by morality, his reason is austere. All other
Religions raise in our Minds tempestuous Thoughts, and troublesome Passions.
They erect against Nature superstitious Fears, and a furious Zeal: sometimes to
the Sacrificing our Children, like Agamemnon, at other times to the devoting
our selves, like Decius. Only the Christian Religion composes all our
inquietudes; softens all our Feirceness; sets all our tender movements a going,
not only for our Friends and Neighbors, but for the indifferent, and even for
our Enemies.

This is the end of the Christian Religion, and this was once the practice of
it. If it be otherwise now, it is because we have let it lose its influence on
our Hearts, and given way to the Encroachments of our Imaginations. Hence
springs the division of our minds about Faith, instead of the Union of our
wills in good Works: so that what ought to be a band of Charity betwixt Men, is
now become the Subject of their quarrels, their jealousies, and their ill
Nature.

From this diversity of Opinions has arisen that of Parties, and the adherence
to Parties has caused Revolts and Wars. Many Thousands have Died in disputing
the manner of taking the Sacrament, which they have agreed must be taken. This
mischief will last till Religion quits the curiosity of our Minds for the
tenderness of our Hearts, and discouraged by the Foolish presumption of our
enquiries, shall return to the sweet motions of our Love. (...) him capable of
perceiving his Folly, and by this means to kill himself out of mere shame and
despair.

The greatest and most prudent of the Goddesses favors scandalous Passions,
and lends her assistance to carry on a Criminal Amor.

The same Goddess employs all sorts of Artifice to destroy a small hand-full of
innocent People, who by no means deserved her indignation.

She thought it not sufficient to employ her power and that of the other Gods,
whom she solicited, to ruin Aeneas, but even corrupts the God of sleep to cast
Palinurus into a Slumber, who so ordered affairs, that by his Treachery the
poor Pilot dropped into the Sea, and there perished.

There is not one of these Gods in these Poems that does not bring the greatest
misfortunes upon Men, and set them on the most Fatal attempts. Nothing is so
Villainous here below, which is not executed by their Order, or authorized by
their Example, And this is one of the things that principally contributed to
give Birth to the Sect of the Epicureans, and afterward to support it.

Epicurus, Lucretius, and Petronius would rather make their Gods lazy, and
enjoying their Immortal Nature in an uninterrupted tranquillity, than see them
active, and cruelly employed to disturb our Repose.

Nay, Epicurus by doing so, pretended he showed his great respect for the Gods;
and from hence proceeded that saying which Bacon so much admire. Non Deos vulgi
negare profanum, sed vulgi Opinionem Diis applicare profanum.

Now I don't mean by this, that we are obliged to discard the Gods out of our
works, and much less from those of Poetry, where they seem to enter more
Naturally than any where else. A Jove principium Musae. I am for introducing
them as much as any man, but then I would have them bring their Wisdom,
Justice, and Clemency along with them, and not appear, as we generally make
them, like a pack of Impostors and Assassins. I would have them come with a
conductto regulate all matters, and not in a disorder to confound every thing.

Perhaps it may be replied, that these extravagancies ought only to pass for
Fables and Fictions, which belong to the jurisdiction of Poetry. But I would
fain know what Art and Science in the World has the power to exclude good
Sense? If we need only write in Verse to be privileged in all extravagancies,
for my part I would never advise any Man to meddle with Prose, where he must
immediately be pointed at for a Coxcomb, if he leaves good Sense and Reason
never so little behind him.

I wonder extremely that the Ancient Poets who were so scrupulous to preserve
probability in Actions purely Human; violated it after so abominable a manner
when they come to recount the Actions of the Gods. Even those who have spoken
of their Nature more soberly than the rest, could not forbear to speak
extravagantly of their Conduct.

When they establish their Being, and their Attributes, they make them
Immortal, Infinite, Almighty, Perfectly wise, and Perfectly good. But at the
very moment they set them a working, there is no weakness to which they don't
subject them; there is no folly or wickedness which they don't make them commit.

We have two common sayings, which appear to be directly opposite to one
another, and yet I look upon both to be true. The one is, that Poetry is the
Language of the Gods; the other, that there is not such a Fool in Nature as a
Poet.

Poetry that expresses with force and vigor those impetuous Passions that
disturb Mankind, that Paints the Wonders of the Universe in lively expressions,
does elevate things purely Natural, as it were above Nature, by the sublimity
of its Thoughts, and the magnificence of its Discourses, which may justly
enough be called the Language of the Gods.

But when Poets come once to quit this noble Field of Passions and Wonders, to
speak of the Gods, they abandon themselves to the caprice of their own
Imagination, in matters which they do not understand, and their Heat having no
just Ideas to govern it, instead of making themselves, as they vainly believe,
wholly divine, they are in truth the most extravagant Sots in the World. It
will be no difficult matter to be persuaded of the truth of this Assertion, if
we consider that this absurd and fabulous Theology, is equally contrary to all
Notions of Religion, and all the Principles of good Sense.

There have been some Philosophers that have founded Religion upon that
Knowledge which Men may have of the Divinity by their Natural reason. There
have been Law givers too that have styled themselves the Interpreters of the
will of Heaven, to establish a Religious Worship without any concurrence of
Reason. But to make, as the Poets have done, a perpetual Commerce, a familiar
Society, and if I may use the expression, a mixture or hotch potch of Men and
Gods, against Religion and Reason, is certainly the boldest, and perhaps the
most unaccountable thing that ever was.

It remains for us to know, whether the Character of a Poem has virtue to
rectify that of impiety and folly. Now, as I take it, we don't give so much
power to the secret force of any Charm. That which is wicked, is wicked for
good and all; that which is extravagant can be made good Sense on no respect.

As for the Reputation of the Poet, it rectifies nothing any more than the
Character of the Poem does. Discernment is a Slave to no body. That which is
effectually bad, is not a jot the better for being found in the most celebrated
Author: And that which is just and solid, is never the worse for coming from an
indifferent hand.

Amongst a hundred fine and lofty thoughts, a good Judge will soon discover an
extravagant one, which a great Genius threw out when it was warm, and which too
strong an imagination was produced in defiance of good; On the other hand, in
the course of an infinite number of extravagant things, this same Judge will
admire certain Beauties, where the Spirit in spite of its impetuosity was just
and regular.

The elevation of Homer and his other noble Qualities, don't hinder me from
taking notice of the false Character of his Gods: And that agreeable and
judicious equality of Virgil, that pleases all Learned Men, does not conceal
from me the least defects of his Aeneis.

If amongst so many noble things which affect me in Homer and Virgil, I cannot
forbear to remark what is defective in them; yet amongst those passages that
displease me in Lucan either for being too flat, or weary me for being too far
carried on, I cannot forbear to please my self in considering the just and true
grandeur of his Heroes. I endeavor to relish every word in him, when he
expresses the secret movements of Caesar at the discovery of Pompey's Head; and
nothing escapes me in that inimitable Discourse of Labienus and Cato, where
they debate whether they shall consult the Oracle of Jupiter, Ammon, to know
the destiny of the Commonwealth.

If all the ancient Poets had spoken as worthily of the Oracles of their Gods,
I should make no scruple to prefer them to the Divines and Philosophers of our
time, and it is a passage that may serve for an Example in this matter to all
succeeding Poets

One may see in the concourse of so many People that came to consult the Oracle
of Ammon, what effects a public Opinion can produce, where Zeal and
Superstition are mingled together.

One may see in Labienus a pious sensible Man, who to his respect for the Gods,
unites the consideration and esteem we ought to preserve for true Virtue in
good Men.

Cato is a religious severe Philosopher, weaned from all vulgar Opinions, who
entertains those lofty thoughts of the Gods, which pure undebauched Reason and
a truly elevated Wisdom can attain to.

Every thing here is Poetical, every thing is consonant to Sense and Truth; it
is not Poetical by the ridiculous Air of a Fiction, or by the extravagance of
an Hyperbole, but by the daring greatness and Majesty of the Language, and by
the noble elevation of the Discourse. It Is thus that Poetry is the Language of
the Gods, and that Poets are wise. And it is so much the greater wonder to find
it in Lucan, because it is neither to be met in Homer or Virgil.

OF RETIREMENT.
By Mr. BROWN.
WE see nothing more ordinary with Old Men than to desire a Retirement, and
nothing so rare with them as not to repent of it when they are once retired.
Their Souls that are in too great a Subjection to their Humors, are disgusted
with the World for being tiresome, but scarce can they quit this false Object
of their misfortune, but they are as angry with solitude as they were with the
World, disquieting themselves where nothing but themselves can give them any
disquiet. This infirmity in some manner is peculiar to Old Age: But it is not
impossible for a wise man to preserve himself from it.

A wise man that knows what is really good in every thing, draws all the
assistances and agreements which they have, as well in a Retirement as in
Society.

The essential reason that obliges us to withdraw our selves out of the World,
when we are Old, is to prevent that laughter and contempt which Age brings
along with it.

If we quit the World to good purpose, we shall still preserve the Idea of that
merit, which we had there. If we tarry too long in it, we shall proclaim our
own defects, and what we are then, will efface the memory of what we were.
Besides it is a shame for a Person that values his credit to drag about him the
infirmities of Old Age at the Court, where the end of his Services occasions
that of his interests and merit.

Nature does redemand us to liberty, when we have nothing more to hope from
Fortune. Behold what a sense of decency, what the care of our Reputation, what
good Manners, and Nature it self require from us.

Nor is this all, for the World has still a right to demand the same thing of
us. Its Commerce furnished us with pleasure so long as we were capable of
relishing it: And it would be the highest ingratitude to be a charge to it,
when we can give it nothing but disgust.

As for my self, I am fully resolved to live in a Convent or a Desert, rather
than give my Friends an occasion to pity me, or to furnish those that are not
so, with a subject for their malicious Mirth and raillery. But the mischief is,
that a Man is not sensible when he becomes weak and ridiculous.

It is not enough to know that we are wholly worn away, but we ought to be the
first that perceive this declension, and like prudent Men to prevent the
public knowledge of this alteration.

Not that every alteration that Age brings along with it, ought to inspire us
with the resolution of retiring. It Is true, we lose a great deal by growing
Old, but amongst the losses we sustain, some of them are recompensed by
considerable advantages.

If after I have lost my Passions, the affections continue with me still; I
shall find less inquietude in my Pleasures, and more discretion in the conduct
of my Life.

And in respect of others, if my imagination diminishes, I shall not please so
much sometimes, but I shall be infinitely less importunate for the general
part. If I quit all Company, I shall be less Embarassed. If I come from large
Companies to the Conversation of a few, it is because I know how to make the
better choice.

Besides this, it is to be considered, that if we change, we do it amongst
People that change as well as our selves; Men of equal Infirmities, or at least
subject to the very same And therefore I shall not be at all ashamed to search
in their presence some relief against the weakness of Age; nor shall I be
afraid to supply by Art what begins to fail me by Nature.

The greatest precaution against the injury of time, the nicest management of a
Health that daily becomes more feeble, cannot scandalize any Men of Sense, and
we ought not to trouble our selves with those that are not so.

For to say the Truth, that which displeases in old People, is not too affected
a care of their own preservation. We should easily forgive them every thing
that relates to themselves, if they had but the same consideration for others.
But the authority they assume is full of injustice and indiscretion; for they
unadvisedly oppose the Inclinations even of those that bear the most with their
infirmities. Their long course of life has untaught them how to live amongst
their fellow Creatures, for they show nothing but a Spirit of rudeness,
austerity and contradiction to those very Men, from whom they are so
unreasonable as to exact affability, condescension and obedience. All that
themselves do, they imagine to be virtuous, and place amongst the rank of Vices
every thing that lies out of their power. In a word, as they are constrained to
follow Nature, where she is tiresome and offensive, they would by their good
will, almost always oppose themselves to her, where she is sweet and agreeable.

It Is an envious Humor that hates in other Men the good we possess no longer,
or a temper purely Melancholy, that disposes the Mind to find fault with every
thing.

There is no part of our Life wherein we ought to Study our own humor with
more application than in Old Age, for it is never so difficult to be discovered
as then.

An impetuous Young Fellow has a hundred returns, when he his dissatisfied with
his Extravagances: But Old People devote themselves to their humors as if it
were a virtue, and take pleasure in their own defects, because they carry a
false resemblance of commendable Qualities.

In effect, proportionably as they render themselves more difficult, they
vainly imagine that they become more Delicate. They take up an invincible
aversion to pleasure, believing that they are justly opposing the current of
Vice. A serious Air passes with them for Judgment, Phlegm for Wisdom, and hence
proceeds that imperious authority they allow themselves to censure every thing.
They look upon Melancholy to supply the place of an indignation against sin,
and gravity of sufficiency.

The only sure Remedy, when we once have proceeded so far, is to consult our
reason in the intervalls when she is disengaged from our humor, and if by its
assistance we can arrive to the knowledge of our defects, we ought out of that
little force that remains in us to form a resolution of concealing them from
the sight of mankind. It Is all that our Wisdom can do at this juncture to hide
them, and it would be a superfluous labor to endeavor wholly to get clear of
them.

It Is at this point of our life that we ought to assign some time between it
and death, and to choose a convenient place to pass it in devotion if possible,
at least with prudence, or with a devotion that gives us confidence, or with
reason that promises us Repose.

When our reason, which is so serviceable for the World, is, if I may use the
expression worn out with long useing, a wise man forms another out of it to
serve him in his retreat, which of ridiculous Sots, as we appear to be in
Conversation, makes us truly wise in respect of our selves.

Of all the retreats that a man can possibly make when he is Old, I should
infinitely prefer that of a Convent to all the rest, if their rules were less
severe, and mortifying.

It Is certain that Old Age shuns a crowd out of a Delicate and retired Humor,
that cannot suffer either importunity, or an embarrass; and yet it avoids
solitude with greater diligence, where it is delivered up to its own black
disquietudes, or to sullen vexatious imaginations. The only remaining releif
against all this is the Conversation of an honest Society: Now what society can
better agree with it than a Religious one, where all manner of human helps are
afforded with more Charity than else where, and where their vows all unite to
demand those succors from Heaven, which cannot reasonably be expected from
Men? I confess we sometimes meet a Religious (As the World calls them) of
inestimable merit, such as thoroughly know the vanity of the World which they
quitted. They are your truly virtuous and truly devout persons, that improve
the Sentiments of Morality by those of Piety. They live not only exempt from
the Tyranny of their Passions, but enjoy a most admirable serenity of Mind.
They are more happy in desiring nothing, than the greatest Monarchs upon earth
in possessing all -- I could wish that we had established Societies, where
honest Gentlemen might Commodiously retire after they have done the public all
the service they were capable to perform. When they were once entered here,
whether out of a consideration of their future State, a dislike of the World,
or a desire of tranquillity, which is to succeed the different agitations of
Fortune, they might taste the delight of a pious retreat, and the innocent
pleasure of an honest and agreeable Conversation.

As for my self, I would freely retreat to such a place from the delights of
the World at an Age, when a Man's relish of pleasure is as it were
extinguished; but then I would not be without the Conveniences of it at this
time, when we more sensibly feel whatsoever incommodes us, as in proportion we
become more nice in the pursuit of what pleases us, or are less tender in
Relation to what affects us.

These conveniences so desirable in Old Age ought to be as far removed from
abundance, that occasions disorder, as from those Anxieties that follow the
heels of necessity; and to explain my self more clearly upon this Chapter, I
would have a true frugality rightly managed.

I was formerly acquainted with a certain person that had several pleasant
thoughts about this affair. How happy might a man live, said he, in any Society
where he disarms Fortune of that jurisdiction she pretends to have over him. We
sacrifice to this Fortune, our Estates, our repose, our years, and perhaps
unprofitably, and if we arrive to possess its Favors, we purchase the
short-lived Enjoyment, sometimes at the expense of our liberty, and sometimes
of our Lives. But suppose all our greatness should continue as long as we
lived, yet it would at least expire with our selves: And what use of their
Grandeur have these great Favorites made, who never beheld the course of their
Fortune interrupted? don't they seem to have acquired this mighty stock of
Glory, and to have heaped these prodigious Riches for no other end, than to
make themselves more sensible of the torment of being neither able to quit nor
keep them. These were his usual Sentiments, and this agreeable Courtier, whose
Conversation gave the greatest delight imaginable to his Friends, suffered
himself to be entirely possessed with this train of thoughts, sometimes
judicious, but always serious.

I truly acknowledge there is a certain time when the wisest Action we can do,
is to quit the World; but as fully persuaded as I am, of the truth of this
Assertion, I should infinitely sooner be directed by Nature to my Retirement,
than by my Reason.

Hence it proceeds, that in the midst of the World, I live after such a fashion
as if I were retired out of it. I still continue in it as far as I seek what
pleases me, and am still out of it as far as I avoid whatever incommodes me
there. Every day I steal away from Acquaintances that weary, and Conversations
that tire me. Every day I establish a sweet Commerce with my Friends, and find
the most sensible pleasure in the delicacy of their Entertainment.

After my way of living, I neither enjoy a full Society, nor a perfect
Retirement. It Is only an innocent bringing of my self to that station which
does most square with my Inclinations. And thus I possess all those harmless
sweetnesses that are most suitable to the Repose of Old Age, and are justly
fitted for the proportion of what I am able to relish agreably.

When the last moments of our Lives draw near,
Nature delights in Innocence and Ease:
And she that ruffled the gay Scene before,
Now whispers soft repose and holy Peace.
Love once Expired, our Golden days are gone:
But then our Mind disarmed of all wild Passions,
Preserves its strength and vigor for its Exit.
We learn vain gaudy Pleasures to despise,
And justly in our own defense turn Wise.
A NOVEL.
By another Hand.
AT the time that Monsieur de Comminges was Ambassador from the most Christian
King to the King of Great Britain, there came to London a Physician, who called
himself an Irishman: This Person passed for a great Philosopher, and a mighty
performer of Wonders, according to the opinion of the Credulous, and his own
persuasion; and the way he made use of to Cure the Distempered, made him to be
suspected in many places for a Magician.

Some Persons of Quality having entreated Monsieur de Comminges to send for him
to his House in order to see some of his Prodigies, he was very willing to
grant them that satisfaction, as well through his Natural curiosity, as his
complaisance for them. Whereupon he sent notice to this pretended Magician,
that he should come to his House.

Upon the Noise, which was every where dispersed of this News, the House of
Monsieur de Comminges was soon filled with sick People, who came with a full
assurance of their Cure.

The Irishman made them wait for him some time; and after an impatient
expectation, the Sick and curious saw him arrive with a grave, but simple
Countenance, which carried in it not the least mark of an Impostor.

Monsieur de Comminges prepared himself to examine him nicely, hoping to be
well enabled to enlarge himself at his pleasure upon all that he had read in
Elmond and Bodin: but he could not effect it, to his great concern: for the
crowd became so troublesome, and the infirm pressed on so eagerly to be Cured
the first, that they had much a do with Menaces and even force to regulate
their ranks.

The Irish Physician referred all indispositions to Spirits, and all
infirmities were, in his Sense, Possessions.

The first that was presented to him, was a man oppressed with Gouts, and
certain Rheumatisms, which it had been impossible for him to get Cured of.
Which Our Wonder-Maker observing, I have seen long since, says he, this sort of
Spirits in Ireland. They are Water-Spirits which bring Coldness, and excite
superfluities of Humors in these poor Bodies. Thou Evil Spirit, who have left
the habitation of the Waters to come and afflict this miserable Body, I command
thee to abandon thy new abode, and to return to thy Ancient residence. This
being said, the Sick Man retired; and another supplied his room, who said he
was Tormented with Melancholy Vapors.

Indeed, he was one of those who are ordinarily called Hypocondriacks and sick
of imagination, although they are but too much so in effect. Airy Spirit, says
the Irishman, return into the Air to exercise thy Trade in raising of
Tempests, and stir up no more Hurricanes in this sad and miserable Body.

This sick person gave way to another who was disturbed, according to the
Opinion of the Physician, with a simple Hobgoblin, which would not have force
enough to withstand his discourse a moment. He supposed that he had
sufficiently observed him by certain Marks, which did not appear to us; and
smiling upon the Assembly. This sort of Spirit, says he, are seldom
troublesome, and almost always diverting.

In short, he pretended he was ignorant of nothing in matter of Spirits. He was
acquainted with their Number, their Ranks, their Names, their Employments, and
all the Functions to which they were destined; and he made a familiar boast of
understanding the Intrigues of Demons, much better than the affairs of Men.

You cannot imagine what Reputation he gained in a very little time. Catholics
and Protestants came to him from all parts; and you would have said that the
power of Heaven was lodged in the hands of this Man, when an unexpected
Adventure, destroyed the wonderful Opinion which the Public entertained of him.

A Man and Woman of the Country, who were Married together, came to seek some
relief in his Miracle-working Virtue against certain Spirits of Discord, said
they, which disturbed their Marriage, and ruined the peace of the Family.

It was a good Gentleman, aged about 45 years, who looked like one of Estate
and Quality. Methinks I have the Lady before my Eyes. She was about 30 years
old, and seemed to be of a goodly make; but one might already see in her face,
that there had been formerly more Delicacy in the Features of her Beauty. I
have Named the Husband first by reason of the dignity of his rank; yet the Wife
would speak first, whether it was because she believed her self to be more
tormented with her Spirit, or that she was only pressed with that Ambition of
talking, which is natural to her Sex.

I have a Husband, said she, who is one of the best Men of the World, to whom I
give a thousand disquiets, and who gives me no less in his turn. My intention
would be to live comfortably with, and I should always do so, if a strange
Spirit, wherewith I feel my self possessed at certain times, did not render me
so fierce, and insupportable, that it is not possible to endure me: After these
Agitations are ceased, I return to my natural good humor, I then forget no
care, nor no agreement that conduces to the obliging of my Husband: But his
Demon possesses him, when mine forsakes me; and this Husband who has so much
patience for my Transports, has nothing but fury for my Reason. And alas! I
have no less to endure from him, than he from me. Here stopped a Woman in all
appearance sincere eenough, and the Husband, who was no less, began his
discourse as follows.

Whatsoever reason I have to complain of my Wive's Devil, I am however under an
Obligation to him, in that he has not taught her to lie; and I must
acknowledge, that she has said nothing but what is very true. All the time she
appears to me to be in agitation I am composed, but as soon as her Spirit
leaves her in peace, mine Torments me in its turn; and with a new Courage, and
new forces, which I find myself stirred up with, I make her discern with all
possible vigor the dependence of a Wife, and the superiority of a Husband.
Thus our lives pass either in committing or enduring mischief: Which renders us
in a worse condition, than the most miserable. Behold our Torments, Sir; and if
it be possible that you should know a Remedy, I conjure you to be our
Deliverer. The cure of a Distemper so strange as this of ours, will procure you
no inconsiderable Honor.

These are neither Hobgoblins, nor Faries said the Irishman, they are Spirits
of the first order, and of the Legion of Lucifer: Proud Demons, great Enemies
to obedience, and very hard to expel. You will not take it amiss, Gentlemen,
pursued he, turning to the Assembly, that I examine my Books a little; for I
have occasion for words that are not of the common stamp. Thereupon he with
drew into a Closet, in order to turn over his Books and Papers; and after
having made use of a hundred forms, as too weak against such powerful Enemies,
he fell at last upon one, that was capable in his opinion, of confounding and
expelling all the Devils in Hell.

The first effect of the conjuration was upon himself; for his Eyes began to
roll in his Head, with so many Grimaces and Convulsions, that he might very
well appear distracted to those who came to seek his assistance.

After having turned his Staring Eyes on all sides, he fixed them at length
upon this Virtuous Couple, and striking both of them with a Wand, which was not
without Virtue: Be gone, Devils, says he, go ye Spirits of dissension, and
exercise discord in Hell, and by your departure let that happy Union be
re-established, which you have impiously broken. Then he approached softly to
the Ears of the pretended Possessed, and raising a little the tone of his
voice, I hear you murmur Devils, at the obedience which ye are forced to render
me: But were ye to burst with madness, ye must be gone. Depart, depart, and you
my Friends, go and enjoy that repose, which ye have been deprived of so long.
It is sufficient, Gentlemen, I protest to you that I am all in a Sweat with the
Labor, which the opposition of these obstinate Devils has given me. I Believe
I have had to do with two Thousand Spirits in my life time, who all together
have not given me so much pain and trouble as these. Which being done, the
Irishman retired, and all the company went out of the House, and our good
People returned to their Lodgings, with a satisfaction more wonderful, than
the Prodigy which had been effected in their Favor.

When they were come home, every thing appeared agreeable to them by this new
alteration of mind, which created a strange severity in their Senses They found
a smiling Air in all things; they looked upon themselves with pleasure, and were
not wanting in sweet and tender words to express their Love. But, vain
delights, how little dependence is there upon your duration! and how
unseasonably do persons rejoice, that are born to Misfortunes, when they obtain
a small happiness.

Such was their tranquillity, when a Lady of their acquaintance came to express
to them the general joy of the Town for their Cure.

They answered this civility with all the discretion in the World; and the
usual Complements on this occasion being made and returned, the Husband began a
very pertinent Conversation upon the happy condition they were in, after so
long a train of miseries. Our Wife, either to cause a greater admiration of
these wonders, or else to please her own malicious humor, enlarged her self
with satisfaction upon the tricks which her Devil had suggested to her, to
torment her Husband. Upon which the Husband jealous of the honor of this
Devil, or at least, of his own authority, gave her to understand, That she
talked too much of things past, the remembrance whereof was irksom to him. He
added that in the state wherein they found themselves re-established, she ought
to think of nothing else, but that obedience, which a Wife ows to her Husband;
as he would only consider on his side, how to make a lawful use of his
privileges, in order to make their condition as happy for the future, as it
had been unfortunate hitherto.

Our Wife being offended at the word Obedience, but especially at the cruel
injunction to be silent, forgot no arguments that might serve to prove an
equality in Marriage, saying; That the Devils were not at such a distance, but
they might be recalled, in case this equality was violated.

This Lady above mentioned, who was as discreet and judicious as any of her
Sex, wisely represented to her the duty of Wives, not forgetting the Conduct
and good management, whereto Husbands were obliged. But her Reason instead of
composing, did but incense her the more, and she became more insupportable than
before. You are in the right, dear Wise, replied the Husband, the Devils were
not gone so far, but they might be recalled; or rather, you have been so kind
to yours, that he was resolved to continue with you, notwithstanding the
command which was given him to leave you. I am too weak of my self to be
concerned alone with you and him; which obliges me to retire, exposed as I am
to such dangerous Forces. And I likewise retire, say she, with this Spirit,
that will not abandon me. He must be a very ill humored, damned sort of a
Devil indeed, if he is not more tractable than so troublesome and so cursed a
Husband. Then turning toward her Friend. Before I go, said she to her, I am
glad I have an occasion, Madam, to tell you with freedom, that I expected quite
another Treatment from your Friendship, and that you have forgot the interest
which obliges you, to take a Wives part against the violence of her Husband.
It Is a very strange thing to see my self run down by one that should support
me. Adieu, Madam, adieu; your visits do me a great deal of honor, but one may
very well dispense with them, if they do no more good than this.

This good, but too discreet Lady was extremely amazed; instructed by her own
experience, that even Wisdom has its excess, and that for the most part one
makes an ill use of ones Reason with those who have none.

You may judge that she did not stay long alone in a House, where nothing was
talked of but Devils, and nothing done but what was of the highest pitch of
extravagance. The Husband passed the rest of the day and all the Night in his
Chamber, ashamed of the short-lived joy he had received, vexed at the present
state of his Affairs, and reflecting upon what might happen to him from this
sudden return of his Wives distemper, with great anxiety of Mind.

As the agitation of the Wife had been much greater, so it remained not so
long; so that returned soon to her Senses, she made sad reflections upon the
loss of those Pleasures, whereof she found her self deprived. There are certain
tempers in the World, that after a few moments come to themselves again, and
demand of their Reason why they should sacrifice their Interest and their
pleasure to a foolish Spirit of Contention that does them no good at all. This
consideration that sometimes prevails with Women, and chiefly a Nights when
they cannot sleep, had its desired effect upon our Lady, in so much that
resigning her self up purely to the Conduct of Nature, she awaked her Husband
as soon as it was day, designing to ascribe all past disorders to a strange
power, which was neither Natural nor Human.

I know, said she, in the lucid interval I enjoy at present, that our Spirits
did not surrender themseves at the command of the Irishman; and if you believe
me, my dear, but too unhappy Husband, we will return and ask him for a stronger
and more effectual Charm.

The poor Husband oppressed with grief, as he was, and fainting under the
severity of his destiny, judge if he were not very glad to find so unexpected a
calm, and tenderly affected with this amorous return of his Spouses submission:
Let us bemoan, my Dear, says he to her, let us bemoan our common misfortunes,
and go a second time to search a remedy, which the first could not give us.

The Wife was agreably surprised at this discourse; for instead of a
troublesome Demon whose insults she expected, she happily found a Man tender
and compassionate, who gave her Comfort for the Evil she had done him.

They spent an hour or two in inspiring one another with a mutual confidence,
and after having placed all their hopes in the virtue of the Physician; they
returned to the House of Monsieur de Comminges, in order to seek a more
powerful releif, than that which they had experienced before.

Scarce were they entered into the House, but the Irishman perceived them, and
calling them pretty loud that he might be heard of all the Company, Come, says
he to them, and Publish the Wonders which are effected in you, and make an
acknowledgment to that all Puissant Virtue, which has Delivered you from that
miserable slavery under which ye groaned.

The Wife immediately replied without consulting, that instead of the Testimony
he demanded, they were ready to give him a very fine one of the obstinacy of
the Devils, and not of his skill. For in truth, venerable Father, added she,
since your fine Operation they have Tormented us, as it were out of spite, more
violently than ever.

You are incredulous ( cried out the good Irishman in a wonderful passion,) or
at least ungrateful, who maliciously deny those benefits ye have received.
Approach hither, approach; that I may convict you both of incredulity, or
Malice.

When they were come near, he nicely examined all the lines of their Faces. He
particularly observed their Looks, and as if he had discovered in the Apple of
their Eyes some impression of these Spirits; ye are in the right, says he, all
amazed, ye are in the right, they are not yet dislodged. They were too deeply
rooted in your Bodies, but they shall hold fast indeed, if I don't turn them
out by the Virtue of a few words I am going to pronounce.

Leave, cursed Race, an Habitation of Repose too sweet for you, and go and rave
for ever in places where dwell Horror, Madness, and Despair.

It Is done, my Friends, ye are most certainly Delivered: But return no more, I
entreat ye. I owe my time to all the World, and ye have had as much of it as ye
ought to have.

Now our Patients supposed themselves at the end of all their Misfortunes: This
day seemed to them as it were the first of their Marriage, and the Night was
expected with the same impatience, as that of their Nuptials had been formerly.
This Night so much desired came, but Alas! how ill did it answer their desires?

Too much Love causes the shame of Lovers, and I leave to the imagination of
the Reader the great confusion of an Adventure.

Where excess of desire,
Does extinguish the fire.
'T was happy for the Husband, that the Wife accused the Devils that were
innocent; But our Physician, so much celebrated abroad, was no more in her
esteem than a poor Irishman, who had not skill enough to conjure down an Ignis
Fatuus. Sometimes she imputed to her self this nonperformance of her Husband,
after the Examples of the Spanish Women, who attribute to themselves, in these
occasions, the failings of their Lovers, in regard of a persuasion they have,
that the force of their Charms ought neither to submit to the infirmity of
Nature, nor to the power of Witchcraft.

Thus the Wife, who accused the Husband in every thing else, when he was most
innocent, justifies him when he was most deficient in Family Duties, choosing
rather to impute a Want of Love in him, to a want of Charms in her self, than
to impute it to a real defect, which would prove eternally destructive of her
Pleasures. But as a Lady does not willingly entertain a thought that hurts the
Interest of her Beauty; she immediately recalled in her mind the Malice of the
Devils, and turned her confusion into Anger against the Irish Man, who had not
been expert enough to cure them.

It is a long time, said she blunty, and as if she had been inspired, it is a
long time since the simplicity of the Irish Man has amused us, and I know very
well, that we shall expect in vain our deliverance from him. But it is not
enough to be undeceived; justice obliges us to undeceive others as well as our
selves, and to make known to the World, the vanity of these Quacks.

Sweetheart, replied the Husband, it is undoubtedly true, that the misfortune
of this Night is the pure malice of our Devils. The Irishman had a mind to
laugh at them, but they were resolved to ridicule him and us in their turn. You
know me, and I know my self; such a strange Impotence could not naturally
happen, and behold how strangely Conjuration has prevailed upon us. As for the
rest, Sweetheart, when you shall make your reproaches to this fine Physician,
take care that you descend not to any particulars of this nature; and that you
let nothing slip, I beseech you, which may tend to our shame. All Family
secrets ought to be concealed: But this in a more particular manner than any
other.

The Wife was ready to be offended upon seeing her self suspected of such an
indiscretion: But not to embroil things anew, that were tending to a good
accommodation, she promised so to manage her self, that the Irish Man alone
should find fault with her proceeding.

We usually seek the Night to conceal our shame, but the day here appeared to
disperse it; and these unhappy Persons, who were not yet well recovered of
their Misfortune, got up with the Sun, who enlivens all things, in hopes of a
better success for the time to come.

They rose out of their Bed with more tranquillity, than they had remained
there, and after a small Breakfast and a little Conversation to fortify their
Bodies, and reconcile their Minds, they went in peace and good Union toward
the House, where they had been twice with Confidence, and from whence they had
twice returned without any relief. They received advice there, that the
Irishman was gone to St. James's to perform some Wonders there, at the
instance of Monsieur d' Aubigny.

It was the same Monsieur d' Aubigny so well known of all the World, for the
most agreeable Man that ever was. Behold then some of the Prodigies which I
remarked at St. James's with less credulity than the Multitude, and less
prejudice than Monsieur d' Aubigny.

Already did the Blind suppose they saw that light they did not see; already
did the Deaf imagine they heard, and heard not; the Lame already thought they
were grown well, and the impotent resumed in imagination the first use of all
their members. A strong Idea of Health had made the Sick forget their
Distempers; and imagination which was no less active in the curious, than in
the Sick, gave the first, a false prospect out of a desire of seeing, as it did
a false Cure to the second, out of a desire of being Cured.

Such was the power of the Irishman upon our minds: Such was the force of our
Minds upon our Senses. Thus nothing was the Subject, but Prodigies; and these
Prodigies came from so great an Authority, that the astonished multitude
received them with submission, whilst some more knowing Persons durst not
reject them by their knowledge.

A Timorous and slavish knowledge always pays respect to an imperious and
Authorized Error: The Soul was feeble, where the understanding was sound; and
they, who saw best in their imaginary Cures, were afraid to declare their real
Sentiments amongst a prejudiced and Enchanted people.

Such was the triumph of the Irishman, when our Couple courageously broke
through the crowd in order to come and insult over him in all his Majesty. Art
not thou ashamed, said the Wife to him, to abuse the simple and credulous
People as thou do, by the ostentation of a power, which thou never did
enjoy? Thou have directed our Devils to leave us in Repose, and they have only
Tormented us the more. Thou have commanded them to go out, and they persist to
remain notwithstanding thy orders, equally deriding our sottish credulity, and
thy ineffectual impotence.

The Husband continued the same reproaches with the same contempt, so far as to
refuse him the name of Impostor, because there was need of Capacity, said he,
for an Impostor, and this miserable wretch had none.

The Physician lost his Speech in losing the Authority which made him
venerable; and this formidable Power, established only in a superstitious
Subjection of Spirits, came to nothing, so soon as there appeared persons bold
enough to disown it; surpised, nonplust, confounded, he withdrew, and went out
at the Backdoor.

His confusion extremely mortified the Assembly; there being nothing that the
mind of Man receives with so much satisfaction, as the opinion of Miraculous
things, nor leaves with more difficulty and concern.

As for Monsieur d' Aubigny, he soon placed this Physician in the rank of
others, whom he had tried; being resolved for the future to keep to those of
the Country, without an ambition to make use of New Comers, merely because they
were Strangers.

All the company retired, ashamed of their easiness to be abused, and yet vexed
at the loss of their Error. Our married couple, glorious and Triumphant,
enjoyed the pleasures of Victory, without any further thoughts of the Devils;
and Monsieur d' Aubigny, who passed from one Opinion to another, with an
incredible facility, quitted his former belief of our Miracle-monger, to give
himself the pleasure of laughing with me, at what had happened.

At my breaking out into a sudden fit of laughter, the Husband turned his Head
toward us, and perceiving Mr. d' Aubigny, he came civilly to excuse himself
for what he had done at his House, without asking his permission. Mr. d'
Aubigny replied to him very civilly, giving him thanks not only for having
disabused the public, but also for having undeceived himself in particular.

The Wife immediately took her part in the Conversation, which did not render
it less agreeable; for although she was really extravagant, yet it was a sort of
extravagance which did not proceed so much from her Mind, as from her Humor:
But now she took care to conceal it; and we talked of nothing but mirth and
pleasantry, when Mr. d' Aubigny entertained them with the the gravest discourse
in the World, which I little expected.

I am a person of an acknowledging temper, said he to them, and I should be
ungrateful, if I did not draw you from your Error, after the obligation I am
under to you for having drawn me from mine. Is it possible that ye should have
Devils in reality? As if it was not enough for your own Minds to torment ye,
and that there must be something else, besides a long Marriage, to afford ye
that trouble, which has harrassed you this pretty while. There is no Man, but
is sometimes at a loss with himself. The wisest are weary of themselves after
they have been weary of others. And would ye have a Husband and Wife, who are
almost always of different minds, and different humors, be able to live
eternally together without disgust, without offense, and without disputes?
Believe me, Sir, of a hundred married couple, fourscore and ten at least are
possessed, after your fashion, but without any intervening of the Devil. The
only difference I find between you is, that they suffer their misfortunes with
patience, and conceal them with discretion, whereas you importune Heaven and
Hell for yours, in accusing Demons that are innocent of your unhappiness, and
in going to seek a supernatural assistance when there is no occasion for it.

That which was a great Prodigy, was the alteration of the Mind of the Husband
and Wife upon the Discourse of Mr. d' Aubigny; they looked upon themselves with
astonishment, ashamed of having been their own Devils, and to find nothing of
Possession, but the contrariety of their Humors.

The Husband was the first who returned from his confusion to give a thousand
thanks to Mr. d'Aubigny, for having given them the true knowledge of their
misfortune. But, replied the Wife, does this knowledge make us e're the less
unhappy? And have we not as much need of a remedy against the torment of
Marriage, as we supposed we had against that of the Devils?

When I observed Mr. d' Aubigny just ready to say something pleasant upon a
Subject that was sufficiently so; I had a mind to preserve to him the merit of
a gravity, which was not ordinary with him. Whereupon I immediately took up the
Discourse.

Of all the Remedies one can seek against a troublesome Marriage, I know none,
said I to them, more sure, nor more wisely practiced, than that of believing
ones self more happy than others; and to remain in this Error, in case one is
mistaken in it, you will like an English Proverb, better than all the Reasons I
can allege to you. He that lives in this World without being deceived, is an
unhappy Man. To see, Sirs, how far the pleasure of Deceit goes, the greatest of
your Enemies makes himself agreeable, when he imposes upon ye; and the best of
your Friends seldom undeceive ye, but you are offended at it.

Monsieur d' Aubigny, weary of his gravity, was now minded to end the
Conference; and after the usual civilities at parting, every one returned to
his home, extremely well satisfied.

Mr. d' Aubigny had afterward a very particular Conference with the Woman, and
in spite of the Rules of Marriage, she told him all that happened during their
imaginary Possession.

A LETTER To Monsieur D'OLONNE.
By the same Hand.
AS soon as I heard of your disgrace, I gave my self the honor of writeing to
you, in order to testify my great concern for you; and I write to you at
present to let you know that you ought at least to avoid so troublesome a
Companion as Melancholy is, at a time when it is not in your power to relish
any joy.

If such valuable commodities, as Men of good Sense are to be had in the place
where you are, their Conversation may in some manner repair the loss of the
Correspondences you have quitted. And if you find none there, Books and good
cheer may be a great assistance to you, and give no ordinary consolation.

I speak to you like a Master that designs to prescribe Lessons: not that I
presume much upon the force of my Reasoning, but I fancy I have some right to
assume an Authority over persons that are Unfortunate, by the long experience I
have had of Misfortunes and unhappy Revolutions.

Amongst the Books you are to choose for your entertainment in the Country,
apply your self principally to those that strike in with your humor by their
agreements, rather than those that pretend to fortify your Mind by Arguments
and Reasons. The last engage with your Distemper, which is always done at the
expense of the person, in whom this troublesome Scene is Acted; The first makes
it to be forgotten, and it is no hard matter to make a sentiment of Joy succeed
to an obliterated Grief.

Systems of Morality are only proper to set the Conscience in good order, and
retrieve it from confusion; and I have seen several grave and composed Men come
out of its School, who were not over-stocked with the Rules of a prudent
behavior.

Your true Men of Sense need not hunt Books to read these Lessons, but only to
make Lessons for themselves; for as they know what is good by the singular
exactness of their Taste, so they are disposed to it by their own voluntary
motion. Not but that there are certain occasions, wherein such assistances are
not to be rejected; but where it is a Man's fortune to have need of its aid, he
may easily deliver himself from these perplexities. If you were reduced to the
necessity of having your Veins opened, I would permit you to read Seneca, and
to imitate him: Yet would I choose rather to fall into the carelessness of
Petronius, than to study for a constancy which is not obtained without a great
deal of difficulty.

If you were of a humor to devote your self for your Country; I would advise
you to read nothing else but the lives of those Romans, who courted a glorious
Death for the good of their Nation: But considering your present Circumstances,
I think you lie under an Obligation to live for your self, and to spend the
remainder of your life as agreeably as you can.

Now things being in this situation, leave off all study of Wisdom, which does
not contribute to the lessening of your troubles, or to the regaining of your
Pleasures. You will seek for Constancy in Seneca, and you will find nothing in
him but severity. Plutarch will be less troublesome, however he will make you
grave and serious, rather than sedate.

Montagne will instruct you better in what relates to Man, than any other. But
after all, this rational Tool, this Man with all his mighty stock of knowledge,
which is useful indeed in good Fortune to teach him moderation, has nothing
but sad and afflicting Thoughts, which serve to deject him in the bad.

Let not the unhappy then seek in Books to be disturbed at Our Miseries, but to
rejoice at Our follies. For this reason you will prefer the Reading of Lucian,
Petronius, and Don Quixot, before that of Seneca, Plutarch, and Montagne. But I
recommend to you Don Quixot above all. What pressure soever of affliction you
have, the fineness of his ridicule will insensibly conduct you to the taste of
Joy.

You will tell me perhaps, that I am not of so pleasant and easy a humor in
my own Misfortunes, as I appear to be in yours; and that it is indecent for a
Man to afford all his concern to his own unhappiness, when at the same time he
preserves an indifference, nay, and even a gayety for the misfortune of his
Friends. I should agree with you in that respect, if I behaved my self so: But
I can affirm to you with reality, that I am not less concerned at your Exile
than your self; and the joy which I advise you to, is in order to have a share
of it my self, when I shall see you capable of receiving any.

As for what relates to my Misfortunes, if I have formerly appeared to you more
afflicted under them, than I seem to you at present, it is not that I was so in
effect. I was of opinion that disgraces exacted from us the decorum of a
Melancholy Air; and that this apparent Mortification was a respect we owe to
the will of Superiors, who seldom think fit to punish us without a design to
afflict us. But then you are to know, that under this sad outside and
Mortified Countenance, I gave my self all the satisfaction I could find in my
self; and all the Pleasure I could take in the correspondence of my Friends.

After having found the vanity of that grave temper we learn from Morality, I
should be ridiculous my self, if I continued so serious a discourse; upon this
score I shall quit the Subject, and give you some Counsels that shall be less
troublesome, than Instructions.

Adapt, as much as possibly you can, your Palate and Appetite to your Health;
it is a great secret to be able to reconcile the agreeable and the necessary in
two things, which have been almost always repugnant and opposite.

Yet after all, to arrive to this great secret, or mystery, we want nothing but
Sobriety and Judgment; and what ought not a sensible man to do, that he may
learn to choose those delicious Dishes at his Meals, which will keep both his
Mind and Body in a good disposition all the remainder of the Day?

A man may be Sober without being Delicate; but he can never be Delicate
without being Sober. Happy is the Person that enjoys both these qualities
together! He does not separate his Diet from his Pleasure.

Spare no cost to obtain the Wines of Champagne, were you 200 Leagues from
Paris. Those of Burgundy have lost all their credit with Men of good taste, and
scarce do they preserve a small remainder of their old Reputation with the
Merchants.

There is no Province that affords excellent Wines for all Seasons, but
Champagne. It furnishes us with the Wine of Ay, Avenet, Douille till Spring;
Tessy, Sellery for the rest of the Year.

If you demand of me which of all these Wines I prefer, without falling into
the several tastes, which are introduced by those who have a false sense of
delicacy; I will affirm to you that the good Wine of Ay is the most natural of
all Wines, the most wholesome, the most extracted from all Terrene smell, and of
the most exquisite agreeableness, in regard of its Peach-taste which is
peculiar to it, and is in my opinion, the chief of all tastes.

L. X. C. V. F. I. and H. VIII. had each of them their several Houses in Ay, in
order to the more curious making of their Wines. Amongst the greatest affairs
of the World, which those Princes were concerned to disentangle, it was not the
least of their cares to have some of the Wine of Ay.

Express but little curiosity for extraordinary dishes, and show much choice in
what may be obtained with convenience. A good wholesome, natural Pottage, which
is neither too high nor too little seasoned, nor too much Jelly is to be
preferred for common use before all others, as well for the exactness of its
taste, as for the advantage of its use.

Mutton tender and juicy, good sucking Veal, white and curious; your Barndoor
Fowls, your fat Quail taken in the Country, your Pheasant, Partridge, and
Rabbet, all which have an agreeable Savor in their taste, are the true Meats
which are able to furnish your Table all the different Seasons of the Year.
Your Wood-Hen particularly, is estimable for its excellency, but is not to be
sought after where you are, or where I am, because of its great rarity.

If an indispensible necessity obliges you to dine with some of your
Neighbors, who shall have excused themselves from the Arrier-ban either by
their Money, or their address, you may commend the Hare, the Stag, the
Roe-Buck, the Wild-boar, but eat none of them: Let Dogs, and nets partake of
the same praises. Of all Black-Meats, the Snipe alone is to be commended, in
Favor of its taste, though it is somewhat prejudicial to Health.

Let all mixtures and Kitchin-compositions, called Ragoo's, or Outworks, pass
with you for a sort of Poison. If you eat but a little of them, they will do
you but a little harm; If you eat a great deal, it is impossible but their
Pepper, their Vinegar, and their Onions must Ruin your taste at last, and soon
cause an alteration in your Health.

Your Sauces, if you make them as simple and plain as is possible, can do no
great harm.

Salt and Orange are the most General and most natural Seasonings.

Fine Herbs are wholsomer, and have something in them more exquisite than
Spices; but they are not equally proper in all things. One must employ them
with Judgment in Meats where they are most agreeable; and distribute them with
so much discretion, that they may improve the proper taste of the Meat, without
making their own discerned.

After having Discoursed to you of the Quality of Wines, and the condition of
Meats, it is necessary to come to the most proper counsel for the agreement of
Taste and Health.

Let Nature incite you to drink and eat by a secret disposition, which is
lightly perceived, and does not press you to it through necessity.

Where there is no Appitite, the most wholesome nourishment is capable of
hurting us, and the most agreeable of disgusting us.

Where there is hunger, the necessity of eating is an Evil which causes another
after the Meal is over, by having forced a man to an excess of Eating.

The Appetite prepares, if I may so speak, an exercise for our heat in the
digestion: Whereas Greediness prepares Labor and Pains for it. The way to keep
us always in an agreeable disposition, is to suffer neither too much emptiness,
nor too much repletion; to the end that Nature may never have wherewithal to
fill it self greedily with what it wants, nor to ease it self with eagerness of
its oppression.

Behold all the Counsels that my experience has been able to furnish me with,
in relation to reading and good cheer; I will not end without giving you a word
or two concerning Love.

If you have a Mistress at Paris, forget her as soon as possibly you can; for
she will not fail to change, and it is good to prevent the unfaithful.

A Person aimable at Court will be Loved there, and where she is Loved, she
Loves to the end.

They who preserve a Passion for persons that are absent, raise but little in
those who see them; and the continuance of their Loves for the absent is less
an Honor to their Constancy, than a Scandal to their Beauty.

Thus, Sir, whether your Mistress lov's another, or whether she Loves you
still, good Sense ought to make you leave her as deceitful, or contemned.

Nevertheless, in case you live to see an end of your disgrace, you ought not
to put an end to your Love; so short an absence excites passions, whereas a
long one destroys them.

What way soever your mind turns, give not a new weight to it by the
ponderousness of too serious things. Disgrace carries but too much heaviness
along with it.

Do in your Exile, what Petronius did at his Death. Amove res serias, quibus
gravitas, and constantiae gloria peti solet. Tibi, ut illi, Levia Carmina, and
faciles versus.

There are some whose Misfortunes, have rendered them devout by a certain
compassion, and a secret pity, which a man is apt to entertain for himself,
proper enough to dispose Men to a more Religious Life. Never did my disgraces
give me this sort of compassion.

Nature has not made me Sensible enough of my own Misfortunes. The loss of my
Friends might be able to excite in me those tender sorrows, and those nice
afflictions, out of which the Sentiments of Devotions are formed in process of
time.

I will never advise any one to resist that devotion, which is formed out of
compassion, nor that which gives us an assurance.

Both the one and 'tother agreeably touch the Soul, and confirm the Mind in a
sweet Repose; but all men, and particularly the unhappy, ought to defend
themselves with care from a superstitious Devotion, least it should mingle its
blackness with that of their Misfortune.

Of the PLEASURE that WOMEN Take in their BEAUTY.
By Mr. BROWN.
THERE is nothing so natural to persons of the Fair Sex, as to take a pleasure
in their own Beauty. They please themselves as much as it is possible for others
to please them, and are the first that discover their own Charms, and fall in
Love with them.

But the motions of this self-love are so sweet and so pleasing, That they are
scarce sensible; for self-love only flatters; but Love of another nature, when
it comes to visit us, makes us feel it with a Vengeance.

This first sort of Love is congenial to all Women, it is naturally formed in
them, and has themselves only for its Object. The second comes from without,
and is either caused by a secret sympathy, or by the violence of an amorous
impression.

The one is a Good that only occasions Pleasure, but yet it is always a Good,
and lasts as long as their Beauty does. The other is capable of touching them
more sensibly, but is more subject to change and alteration.

To this advantage of duration, which the pleasure that the Ladies take in
their Beauty, has above the influence of an Amor, we may add the following
one, viz. That a Beautiful Woman is more concerned to preserve her Beauty than
her Lover; and shows less tenderness for a Heart already vanquished, than she
expresses vanity and ostentation, in extending her Conquests. Not but that she
may very well be allowed to be sensible for her Gallant; but in all
probability, she will sooner resolve to suffer the loss of what she loves, than
lose and ruin what causes her to be beloved.

There is a certain sort of a pleasure, though it is in a manner impossible truly
to describe it, which we feel in deploring the death of one we love.

Our Love supplies the place of a Lover in the Reign of grief; and thence
proceeds that affection to this mourning which has its Charms.

Cease, Thyrsis, cease, by an ill timed relief,
To rob me of my best Companion, Grief.
Sorrow to me all lovely does appear,
It fills the place of what I held so dear.
But it is not so with the loss of Beauty. This loss is a full consummation of
all other Calamities; it cruelly robbs the Ladies of the hopes of ever
receiving any pleasure as long as they live.

As long as a Woman is in full possession of her Beauty, no Misfortune can
befall her, which she cannot in some measure alleviate. But when once that
Blessing has left her, all the other advantages of Fortune will never be able
to give her any tolerable satisfaction. Wherever she goes, the remembrance of
what she has lost, or the consideration of whashe is at present, will give her
a thou sand uneasinesses.

In such a case, her best remedy will be to employ all her discretion to make
her self easy under that unfortunate Condition. But alas! what an unpalatable
remedy is it for a Woman, who has once been adored, to abandon so dear a
vanity, and come back to her Reason. It Is a new and mortifying experiment this,
after a person has been used to entertain her self with such agreeable Thoughts.

The last Tears that beautiful Eyes reserve, are spent in bewailing themselves,
after they are effaced out of all Hearts. The only person that still laments a
lost Beauty, is the miserable Possessor.

One of our best Poets, endeavoring to comfort a great Queen for the loss of
her Royal Spouse, would make her ashamed of the extravagance of her Affection,
by citing to her the Example of a certain Princess in despair, who so wholly
abandoned her self to this weakness, that she reproached the Stars, and accused
the Gods for the loss of her Husband.

Boldly she charges every Power above.
(So much her Reason's governed by her Love.)
With all that fruitful anger can inspire,
When Grief indulged, renews the glowing Fire.
But finding that the horror of Impiety was not strong enough to make any
impression on a mind so disordered by grief; for his last and concluding
Reason, he represents to her that it was her Interest to be sedate, as if he
had no better a remedy against this excess, but to put her in mind of the great
injury it did her Beauty.

Those charming Locks the rudest Hands would spare,
And yet they suffer by your own despair.
Alas! what Crimes have those fair Tresses done?
Think what a train of Conquests they have won.
Is grief so cruel, or your rage so blind,
That to your self you must be thus unkind?
He excused the Ladies for paying some Tribute to their Sorrow, but he never
pardons them the Sin of making themselves less amiable. This is a Transgression
that he imagins will easily create an horror in them, without urging any
farther Considerations.

It had been mere impertinence to endeavor to reduce them by reason; but to
set before their Eyes the interest of their Beauty, was the strongest Argument
he could think of to oppose to the obstinacy of their Grief, and he knew
nothing beyond that, which was capable to reform this extravagance.

That we may fully know how far the Ladies are devoted to their Beauty, let us
consider the most retired and solitary amongst them. There are some in that
station who have renounced all Pleasures; who are weaned from the Interests of
the World; who endeavor to please no body, and whom no body pleases. But
amidst all this coldness and indifference for every thing else, they secretly
flattor themselves, to see they are still agreeable enough.

There are others that abandon themselves to sorts of austerities; yet if they
accidentally happen to see themselves in a Glass, you shall hear them sigh, to
behold so Melancholy an alteration. They do every thing that helps to
disfigure their Faces with all imaginable readiness, but cannot endure the sight
of them when they are once disfigured.

Nature that can consent to destroy herself out of Love to God, secretly
opposes it self to the least change of Beauty, out of a principle of self-love
that never dies with us.

Let a Fair Person retire into what place she pleases, let her condition be
what it will, yet her Charms and Features are still dear to her. They will be
dear to her even in the time of sickness, and if her sickness goes as far as
Death, the last sigh that passes from her is more for the loss of her Beauty,
than for that of her Life.

A LETTER TO Monsieur the Count de B. R.
By the same Hand.
YOU ask me what I have been doing in the Country, and since the place could
not furnish me with agreeable Conversations, whether I did not take great
Pleasure to entertain my self in Contemplation. I will tell you then without
affection, that I endeavor to divert my self as much as possible, where I am.
Every Country has its Rarities, which we learn not without satisfaction; and
the most Savage places have their Pleasures, if we are in a capacity to use
them.

It cannot otherwife happen, but that every thing must displease me, whenever I
begin, I employ my self in Meditation; for to speak soberly upon the matter, we
never fail to be tiresome to our selves, in too long and too serious a commerce
with our own Thoughts.

Solitude has this peculiar to its self, that it imprints upon us I don't know
what sort of a Mournful Air, barely with thinking upon the wretchedness of our
State. Oh strange condition of Man! If he intends to live happy, he must make
but few reflections upon life; nay he must often depart as it were, from
himself, and amidst the Pleasures which exterior Objects furnish him with,
steal from the knowledge of his own Miseries.

Divertisements have their name for the diversion they give us from tiresome
objects, to those that are Pleasant and agreeable. Which sufficiently shows how
difficult a matter it is to overcome the hard-ships of our Condition by any
force of Mind; but that a man may turn them away from him by dexterity and
address.

In effect, choose the firmest Soul upon Earth; can she digest without regret
the knowledge of what we are, and of what we shall one day be? As for my part,
I believe it is almost impossible; but though by a long habitude and solid
reasoning, we may arrive to such a pass, as to look indifferently upon all
troublesome objects whatever; yet they will at least give us an austere humor,
far from any Sentiments of Pleasure, nay from the very Idea of joy.

It Is the distinguishing Character of God alone, that he can view himself, and
there find perfect Felicity and Repose. We can scarce cast our Eyes upon our
selves, but we there discover a thousand defects, which obliges us to seek
elsewhere that which is wanting in us.

Glory, Reputation, and Fortune, are a mighty relief against the rigours of
Nature, and the miseries of Life. Thus we had Wisdom given us for no other end,
but only to regulate these Goods, and to direct our conduct; but let our stock
be never so great, we shall find it stands us in small stead, when we are
alarmed with the pains and approaches of Death.

I know there are several persons who prepare themselves against it by solid
judicious reflections, and by designs well concerted: But it generally so
happens, that the extremity of pain dashes all these fine resolutions to
pieces; that a Feavour throws them into a delirium, or that by doing every
thing out of Season, they are strangely fond of Life, when they ought to take
up a Resolution of quitting it These empty Pretenders, so vain and high Flying,
That Preach up a Constancy without Relenting,
Resemble the Fop, who as he lay dying,
Begged his Maker to give him three Years to Repent in.


All the circumstances of Death regard only those that remain behind. The
Weakness, the Resolution, the Tears, the Indifference, all is equal at the last
moment; and it is very ridiculous to imagine that this ought to be considered as
a great matter by those, who are going to be nothing themselves.

There is nothing that can effectually conquer the horror of this dissolution,
but a firm persuasion of another Life; we must put on a Spirit of confidence,
and place our selves in such a situation, as to hope every thing, and fear
nothing.

In truth, it is impossible not to make some reflections upon a thing so
Natural; nay, a man must be guilty of a strange effeminacy not to dare to think
of it.

We may say the same thing of sadness, and indeed of all sorts of grief; it is a
Chimera for Man to wish to disengage himself absolutely from them. I may add,
they are sometimes lawful, and I think they may be reasonably used on certain
occasions.

An indifference is perfectly scandalous in some sort of Misfortunes. A
tenderness is justly paid to the Calamities of a faithful Friend; but then we
are to observe, that as grief ought to be rare, so it ought to be soon laid
aside.

After having observed the greatest part of People that hunt after their
pleasures, I have found four sorts of them, and I am apt to persuade my self,
that I know all their Sentiments exactly: They are the sensual, the hasty or
Choleric, the voluptuous, and the delicate.

The sensual apply themselves more grossly to that which is most Natural; and
like other Animals, follow their own simple Appetites

That which touches the Voluptuous, makes an impression upon the Senses, which
reaches as far as the Soul. I don't mean that intelligent Soul, from whence
proceeds the light of Reason, but a Soul more mixed, and interessed in the Body;
which the passions cause to languish, and which may be tickled with all manner
of Pleasures.

The Choleric have a more lively Sense, and a more violent Soul; sensible of
impressions, and full of Heat in all their Movements.

The Mind has a greater share in the taste of the Delicates, than in that of
others. To these do we owe our inventions and refinements in Luxury; without
them Gallantry had been unknown; Music harsh and rude, and our Eating mean and
ill ordered. To these are we indebted for the eruditus luxus of Petronius, and
all the exquisite discoveries, the politeness of our Age has made. But it must
be confessed, that if these Persons are ingenious in preparing Pleasures for
other Men, they are fruitful in disgusts for themselves, and having too great
an Idea of the perfection of things, are over difficult to be pleased.

I have made some observations too upon the objects that please us; and
methinks I have remarked very particular differences in them.

There are a slight sort of impressions, that if you will pardon the expression,
only glance upon the Soul, and employ it for the time upon agreeable things,
where it is fixed with complacency, without the least invention of care to
disturb it. This we call agreeableness; and it is conformable enough to the
humor of the most Virtuous Persons, who mingle this sort of Pleasure with
their most serious Occupations.

I have observed another, which the Ancients called Mollities, a soft
voluptuous impression, that flatters and tickles the Senses, and diffuses it
self deliciously all over the Soul. From hence arises a certain Laziness that
insensibly robs the Mind of its vivacity and vigor; insomuch that being once
Charmed with it, it is a difficult matter to shake off so sweet a Lethargy.

Offensive disagreeable Subjects are felt after a manner quite opposite to
this. They do violence to the Senses; the Soul is wounded by them, and this
proceeds so far as to give a disturbance and inquietude to the Mind.

But the highest degree of merit in Objects, is that which is touching; which
penetrates even to the bottom of the Heart, which raises the finest Images in
our Minds, and moves us after the most tender manner imaginable.

It is hard to speak of it well, and there is no expression but comes
infinitely short of what those persons enjoy that are affected by it. These
transports and deliquiums proceed from the want of proportion between the
Objects and the Soul that receives the impression of them. Whether it is,
because not being able to contain our selves, we are as it were, carried out of
our selves by a sort of ravishment, or that overwhelmed with excess of
pleasure, we faint away under the weight of it.

I should never have done, if I were minded to pursue all the differences that
are to be found in so copious a Subject. The best way is to choose what we find
most conformable to our taste, to our Inclination, or to our Genius.

Let gay Persons search after diversion and joy; let the indifferent content
themselves with what is agreeable; let the Delicate refine upon the most
curious things; let passionate Souls suffer themselves to be touched with
tender Objects, provided that Reason banishes all disorder, and corrects the
excess of them.

This is all I had to say to you, upon the Article of Pleasure. It now remains,
that I say something of a Mind which is restored to it self, and enjoys a
perfect degree of tranquillity.

We are not always possessed by our Passions; and it is to be feared, that
instead of tasting true liberty, a lazy, unactive Scene of Repose, may throw us
into a state of wearisomness. However that time which a Man renders tedious to
himself by his sullen Humor, is no less placed to his account, than the
sweetest part of Life; and those Melancholy hours, we desire to pass away with
so much precipitation, do full as much contribute to fill up the measure of our
days, as those that escape us with regret.

I am not of their Opinion, who spend their time in complaining of their
condition, instead of thinking how to relieve and sweeten it.

Unhappy knowledge, source of all our Woes,
Destructive of our Pleasure and Repose;
Why, when some dire mischance has been sustained,
Should the ungrateful Image be retained?
Must we to Grief this slavish homage pay,
As sigh our best, our dearest Hours away?
Or to improve the pressures of our doom,
Must we bewail the past, and fear the Ills to come?
I freely leave these Gentlemen to their Murmurs, and take what care I can to
extract some comfort from those very things they complain of: I endeavor to
entertain my self with an agreeable remembrance of what is past; and furnish my
self with pleasant Ideas of what is to come. If I am obliged to regret any
thing, my regrets are rather sentiments of tenderness than of grief.

If in order to avoid any Evil, we must of necessity foresee it, my foresight
never goes so far as Fear. It Is my aim, that the knowledge of feeling nothing
that troubles me, and the consideration to see my self free and Master of my
self, should give me the spiritual pleasure of good Epicurus. I mean that
agreeable indolence, which is not, as the vulgar imagine, a state without
grief, and without pleasure; but the sentiments of a pure and delicate joy,
which proceeds from a repose of Conscience, and a serenity of Mind.

After all, whatsoever sweetness we find in our selves, let us take care to
keep it there as long as we can. It Is an easy leap from these secret joys to
inward griefs; and there is no less good Husbandry required in the Enjoyment of
our own proper goods, than in the use of those that are external. Who does not
know that the Soul is tired to be always in the same posture, and that at long
run, it would lose all its vigor, if it were not awakened by the Passions?

In short, a man must make but very few reflections upon life, if he designs to
pass it happily; nay, he ought to use a quite different Conduct. He must often
steal as it were from himself, and amongst the pleasures that other Objects
give him, forget the knowledge of his own Misfortunes.

A Letter to Monsieur D. L.
YOU left me yesterday in a Conversation that insensibly became a furious
dispute. There was every thing said that can be alleged pro or con, either for
the disgrace or advantage of Learning.

It is not necessary to acquaint you with the parties; you need only know they
were both of them interested very much to maintain their own cause. B. having
little obligation to Nature for his Genius; and N. might say, without being
ungrateful, that he owed his Talent neither to Arts nor Sciences.

The occasion of the dispute was this. Some body happened to commend the great
variety of Madam G -- 's knowledge: When N. all on the sudden rose from his
Chair, and taking off his Hat with a scornful Air. Gentlemen, says he, if I am
apt to believe from what follows, that the famous Christina is here meant, who,
as all the World knows, was a Woman of great learning, and abdicated the Crown
of Sweden.
Madam G. had known no more than the customs of her own Country, she had
continued there still. To learn our Language and Customs; to put her self in a
condition of making a Figure eight Days in France, she has lost all that she
had. See what good is come of her Knowledge and fine Learning, which you boast
of so much.

B. seeing such an injury done to Madam G. whom he esteemed so highly; and to
learning in general which he has so great a value for, lost all manner of
consideration; and beginning his discourse with an Oath. One must be very
unjust, answers he, to impute to Madam G. for a Crime the noblest action of her
life. As for your aversion to the Sciences, I don't at all wonder at it; this
is not the first time that you have made merry with them. If you had read the
most common Histories, you would then be sensible, that her Conduct is not
without Example. He means Charles the Fifth.
C. V. is no less celebrated for the renouncing of his Kingdoms, than for his
Conquests. Did not Dioclesian quit the Empire, and Sylla the Dictatorial power?
But all these things are utterly unknown to you, and it is down right madness to
dispute with an Ignorant. To conclude, where can you find me any extraordinary
Man, who was not a Man of Letters, and exquisite knowledge?

He began with Monsieur the Prince, and went on as far as Caesar; from Caesar
to Alexander the Great; and God knows how far the matter had gone, if N. had
not interrupted him with so much vehemence, that he was forced to hold his
Tongue.

In troth, says he, you do mighty feats here with your Caesar's, and Alexanders.
For my part, I don't know whether they were learned or unlearned, it does not
signify a farthing: But this I am sure of, that ever since I knew the World,
no Gentlemen were obliged to study, but only those that were designed for the
Church; and now for the generality of them, they content themselves with the
Latin of the Breviary. As for those that are designed for the Court, or for the
Army, they go fairly and honestly to an Academy. There they learn to ride the
great Horse, to Dance, to handle their Arms, to play upon the Lute, to Vault.
Then comes a little spice of the Mathematics, and that is all. We have in
France several thousand Soldiers, and all of them Men of honor. By this
means, such and such Gentlemen I could name to you, if I were minded, made
their Fortune. Latin! I thank myStars for it, ever since I was born, Latin has
been thought scandalous for a Gentleman. I know the great qualities of Monsieur
the Prince, an am his Humble Servant. But I must tell you, there was a certain
person of Quality that knew how to maintain his Credit in the Provinces, and
his Interest at Court, yet was not able to Read; with the Devil a word of
Latin, but only good French on his side.

It happened luckily for N. that his Adversary had the Gout; otherwise he had
revenged the Quarrel of Latin with something more effectual, than mere
blustering and big words.

At last the Contest was renewed a fresh. The former being resolved to dye a
Martyr for his Opinion, and the other still maintaining the cause of ignorance
with great ardour and resolution. When a charitable Father who chanced to be in
the Room, interposed to accommodate the difference; being ravished to meet so
favorable an opportunity to show his Wit and Learning. He cough'd thrice very
Methodically, and then turning himself toward the Doctor, he thrice sneer'd
(as your Men of the World use to do) at our pleasant Ignoramus. When he thought
he had composed his Countenance well enough, digitis gubernantibus vocem, he
spoke after this manner.

I must tell you, Gentlemen, I must tell you, that Learning adds to the Beauty
of Nature; and likewise that a natural Genius gives a grace to Learning. A
genius of it self, without Rule and Art, is like a Torrent that pours down
irregularly: And Knowledge without a natural Talent, resembles those dry and
barren Fields that are so disagreeable to the sight. Now, Gentlemen, the
business is how to reconcile what you have so unadvisedly divided, to
re-establish an Union where you have made a Divorce. Learning is nothing in the
World, but a perfect knowledge, and Art is nothing but a Rule that directs
Nature. And would you, Sir, addressing himself to N. be ignorant of the things
you speak of, and value your self only upon your natural force, which is
irregular and far from perfection? And you Mr. B. will you renounce the natural
Beauty of the Mind, to render your self a slave to troublesome Precepts, and
borrowed Knowledge?

Come, come, replies N. very briskly, let us make an end of this Discourse; I
would rather bear with his knowledge than with the great Harangue you have made
us here. At least he is Laconic, and I understand you no better than I do him.

The good Man, who was not of an irreconcilable Nature, soon suffered himself
to be sweetened; and to quit scores with N. preferred his agreeable ignorance to
the Magnificent words of the Father.

A Letter to Madam L.
HOW violent soever my Friendship is, it has left me force enough to write to
you with less concern than I used to do. And to tell you the truth, I am
somewhat ashamed to send you Country sighs, which have neither the sweetness
nor delicacy of those you hear. But let them be what they will, I must of
necessity hazard them; and endeavor to make you remember me at a time when all
the World endeavors to make me be forgotten.

I don't question but that the interview of your Pious Mother, and the rest of
your godly Family was accompanied with abundance of Tears To be sure to such a
Mother's Tears, you paid a civil and respectful return like a well-bred
Daughter. But then you know the World too well to exchange a real tenderness
for the grief of Hyppocrites, whose Virtue is nothing else but a mere Artifice
to deprive you of those Pleasures, which themselves regret.

It Is enough you showed your obedience once, and Sacrificed your Repose to a
complaisance, which perhaps you did not owe her; she is unjust, if after she
has exacted so severe an obedience from you, she pretends to regulate your
Inclinations, and constrains the only thing she has left in your power.

We Love that which pleases us, and not what is barely permitted to us; so that
if you must demand leave of your Parents, before you are suffered to Love, so
well am I acquainted with their humor, that I dare assure you, you will have but
a little occaon to be accquainted with that Passion, should you live as long as
a Sibill.

But perhaps this discourse may seem very impertinent to you, and considering
your present circumstances, I ought rather to be apprehensive of those persons
that counsel you to Love, than those that forbid it. Perhaps you may follow the
advice I give you, and laugh at the reprimands of your Mother. How do I know
but that this poor Mother of yours, to whom I wish so much mischief, may be in
my interests; and that to stifle a growing Friendship in its birth, she does
not give you the liberty to Love a Person so remote from you.

Hitherto I have had all the reason in the World to commend your constancy and
resolution; but I doubt whether a mere Idea will be able to dispute it long
against a Face, and memory against Conversation. I have too great a concern
upon me, to leave the advantage of being present with you any longer, to those
Gentlemen that daily behold you and within a few days; no manner of business
shall hinder me from throwing my self at your feet. While you are expecting
that I should come and entertain you with my passion, remember how many
Thousand Oaths you have sworn to Love me, and only me as long as you Live.

Another Letter to the same Person.
YOU imagine, Madam, that I hate you, and so far you are in the right on it,
that if you consult the reason I have to do so, you may well believe that I
hate you most abominably. But then if you consider what a mighty power you have
always had upon me, you conclude rightly enough, that it is not in my power to
hate you; and to my shame I acknowledge it, that I still Love and Dote upon
you, after all the cruel injuries you have done Men.

The difference between your and my way of procedure is extraordinary enough;
you wish me ill because you have been obliged by me; on the other hand I wish
you all the Prosperity in the World, in spite of the ill treatments I have
received at your hands. For God sake, Madam, pardon me the injuries you have
done me; forget what I have done for you, and you will remove all the occasion
you have to hate me.

Let us therefore, if you please, begin a new sort of Friendship, where neither
reproach, nor Justification, nor Quarrels, nor Reconcilements, shall have any
thing to do. The only motive of my Friendship is, because you are lovely in all
respects; that of yours ought to be the opinion you now have, or at least, I
desire you to have, that I am an honest well meaning Admirer of yours.

Excuse my Vanity. The practice and custom of the Gascons could not give me a
less share of it, and provide I keep my self here without making further
advances, you and I are sufficiently even with one another; but I will by no
means promise to imitate those People in all things, particularly where you
have any manner of Concern.

A Letter to Madam O.
I Remember, Madam, that as I went to the Army, I begged of you to Love the
Count of B. In case I should be so unfortunate as to meet my Death there; in
which particular I have been so well obeyed, that you do not hate him at all
during my life, to learn (I suppose) how to love him the better after my Death.
Madam, you have punctually obeyed my orders, and should I continue to give you
the same Commission, in all appearance you would see it carefully executed.

You may imagine, Madam, that I design to hide a real grief under a pretended
grievance; and being so well acquainted with my Passion, you cannot without
difficulty persuade your self, that I suffer a Rival without jealousy. But do
you not know, Madam, that if I dare not complain of you for obliging me to Love
you too much, I dare complain of him, for your Loving him not much less. And if
you must of necessity make me angry, teach me whom I am to be most angry with,
either the person who goes to rob me of my Mistress; or you who steal my Friend
from me.

Let the matter be how it will, you need not give your self much trouble to
appease my indignation. My Passion is too violent, to allow the least Interval
to my Resentments; and my tenderness will always make me forget the injuries, I
have received from you. I Love you, though you are perfidious and faithless, and
only fear that a sincere Lover is none of the Favorites of Heaven. Farewell,
let us enter I beseech you, into a new unknown sort of Confederacy, and by a
strange Mystery, let his, let your, and my Friendship be only one and the same
thing.

A Letter to Madam D. D.
I Thought you had utterly forgot me, but by the most ingenious, and surprising
conduct I ever saw, you treat me as if you only now began to know me. Upon my
integrity I never saw such a Civil Letter in my Life, and at the same time so
very little obliging as yours. You have found out a way to treat me with so
nice, so delicate an indifference, that I cannot complain of you without
regret, nor commend you without the just imputation of Sottishness.

Generosity, Gratitude, and Obligation are the least words in all your Letter.
It seems for my sake alone, you have been at the expense of learning all the
terms that are used in Complements, and have forgotten all those that express
the real sentiments of Amity and Friendship.

I must frankly own to you, Madam, that you imitate your Mother's style
perfectly well. At first sight, I thought I had received some Mark or other of
her Ladyships good Memory: Besides this, Madam, that miserable Iargon of
Calamities, and Misfortunes, and Destinies, with which it is all along stuffed,
don't agree with your humor, but seems to proceed from some person that
labors under some very Mysterious discomposure indeed.

As for your self, who as far as I can hear, never made a false representation
of affliction, how came you to pitch upon me, a Gods Name, to tell your
stories, and frighten with a Relation of the Miserable Fair one! What am I good
for nothing in the World, but to be the Confident of your Melancholy thoughts
and studied sorrows?

As it is impossible for you, Madam, to become so indifferent to me; as to my
cost I find I am to you, I was asking M. N. after you, who told me that you
danced to'ther day from Morning till Night, and that one could not be more
agreeably diverted, then you did the whole Company.

Adieu, miserable Person, perplexed with a long series of Misfortunes, full of
gratitude and acknowledgement to those, who to'ther day take any part in your
Miseries. Adieu more tenderly, a thousand times, than ver you writ civilly to
me. I conjure you to believe that you have not civility enough to discourage
me; and that I would rather choose to be all my Life time the Confident of your
Misfortunes, than to have no manner of Commerce with you at all.

A Letter to A. N.
YOU are upon the point of making a very sorry Gallant of a very good Friend;
and I perceive that what I called satisfaction, when I was last with you, is
now become insensibly some sort of a Charm. I don't speak this to Ridicule you:
The very same person who put his malicious imagination so much upon the Rack,
now discovers in you such touching qualities, that they even make him disgust
your first Agreements.

You always appeared very amiable to me; but I now begin to feel with emotion,
what I was used to see with pleasure. To speak plainly to you, I am afraid I am
in love with you, if you will suffer me to love you: For at this present
writing I am in such a condition, that I can let it alone, if you don't like it.

You must not expect from me any fine Thoughts, or any pretty Passions. I am
wholly incapable of them, and freely leave them to the Admirers of Madam C. Let
the Ruells make their profit of them: At least, permit Madam de N. to define
Love by her own Fancy; and don't envy those vain, but miserable Creatures, who
in the Ruins of their Faces, value themselves upon their Wit that still
continues with them, at the expense of their Beauty, that has deserted them.

Perhaps finding me so Brutal as to despise these pretty Notions, you imagine I
may make an Atonement for it some other way; Pray hearken how the case stands
with me. I am indifferent in every thing; and neither Nature nor Fortune have
done any thing for me but what is common.

As I scarce see, without envy, those people that are sumptuous and magnificent
in their expenses; so I cannot without some displeasure, behold those that are
too much given to their Pleasures; and if I durst use the expression, I hate in
some measure the V's and the S's, because I cannot resemble them.

My affairs go always in the same Track; I never permit my self to use any
irregularity, and I stand in need of a little Economy to make things even at
the Years end, and pass a Winter's Night.

Not that I am reduced to the last necessity neither. But to explain my self
honestly, my Expense is small, and my Revenue indifferent.

Behold now the condition of my Affairs; behold the circumstances of my
Fortune. Tell me now whether with these qualities I may presume to set up for
your Lover, or whether I am still to continue your Friend?

As for my self, I am resolved to take what part you assign me; and if I pass
from Friendship to Love without difficulty, I am able, with as little violence,
to return from Love to Friendship back again.

A Letter to Madam de N.
I Am injustly accused for having too great a Complaisance for Madam de
Mazarin. There is no Person that she has greater reason to complain of, than my
self.

For Six Months together I was maliciously spying out something in her which
might displease me but in spite; of all my endeavors, I could discover nothing
there that was not too Lovely, and too Charming.

An ill-natured curiosity made me examine every Lineament of her Face, with a
design to meet either some irregularity there to disgust me, or some
disagreements to render me less her Adorer. But how unluckily did I succeed in
my design? Every Feature about her has a particular Beauty, that does not in
the least yield to that of her Eyes: And her Eyes, by the Consent of all the
World, are the Finest Eyes in the Universe.

Her Teeth, her Lips, her Mouth, and all the graces that accompany it, are
confounded amongst the great and different Beauties of her Face; if we compare
them to those pretty Mouths, that are the greatest Charms about those Persons
whom we most admire. They extinguish, and efface every thing which is but
little distinguished in them; and don't give us leave to consider what is most
remarkable in others.

The Malice of my curiosity did not stop here; I proceeded to find out some
defect in her shape; and I found, I know not what graces of Nature so happily
and so liberally scattered in her Person, that the Charms of other Persons only
seem to be constraint and affectation.

When Madam de Mazarin pleased me too much in her negligent Air, I counseled
her to have recourse to Art, hoping that her Ornaments and her Dress would not
fail to ruin those Natural agreements. But scarce had she Dressed her self, but
I was forced to confess that I never saw in any Person, so great and so Noble
an Air as hers.

My ill Nature was not satisfied with all this; I had a mind to see her in her
Chamber amongst her Dogs, her Squirrels, and her Birds; hoping that the
disorder of her Dress would make her lose the Majesty of that Beauty that
astonished us at Court. But here it is that she is a hundred times more
amiable; here it is that a more Natural Charm gives us a disgust to all that
Art and Industry can do; here it is that the freedom of her Wit and of her
Humor leave none to the Person that beholds her.

What could the greatest of her Enemies do more? I wished some sickness might
invade her to undermine her Graces; but alas we had more reason to complain
than she had in her pains. Her very pains have a Charm that does us a greater
mischief than she suffers by them.

After I had waited some time to see what would be the consequence of her
Indisposition, I endeavored to raise her some Enemies, or to be of the number
of them my self: With this design I purposely contradict all she says; I excite
her Anger by some dispute; I imagine she wrongs me at Play: I insinuate to my
self all the circumstances of my oppression, to furnish me with a pretense for
a real Resentment. But alas! to what purpose is all this troublesome industry?
Her ill treatment pleases instead of provoking; and her injuries, more charming
than the Caresses of others, have so many Charms that they engage me to her
will.

I pass from her serious moments to those of her gayety; I was willing to see
her serious, out of hopes to find her less agreeable; I was willing to see her
more free, thinking to find her indiscreet. When she was serious, she made me
admire her good Sense; when she was pleasant, she made me Love her Judgment.

She knows as much as any Man can know; she conceals her knowledge with all the
discretion that a reserved Woman ought to have.

She has some acquired Learning, which upon no occasion betrays the study that
was employed to acquire it. She has some happy thoughts that are as far from an
affected Art that displeases us, as from a natural excess that offends us.

I have seen some Ladies that have got themselves Lovers by the advantage of
their Beauty, and lost them again through a defect of Wit. I have seen others
that have engaged Us to them by being beautiful and witty together; and
discouraged us from a farther pursuit by their Indiscretion, and want of good
Conduct. But in Madam de Mazarin, pass from her Face to her Wit; from the
qualities of her Mind, to those of her Soul, you will find that every thing
attracts you, that every thing fastens and binds you, and that nothing can
disengage you.

We defend our selves from the Triumphs of other Ladies by our Reason. It Is
Reason that either frees us, or else subjects us to its power. Our Love begins
or ends our Reason. Here our Love cannot end, unless we lose our Reason.

What I observe to be most extraordinary in Madam de Mazarin, is that she daily
inspires new desires; and that in the habitude of a continual Commerce, she
makes us feel all the tender sweetnesses of a growing Passion.

She is the only person of her Sex, for whom one may be eternally constant; and
with whom one may enjoy every Hour the diversion of Inconstancy. We never
change for her person: we change every moment for her attractions. One relishes
in some manner, all that new, that lively Joy which unfaithfulness in Love
makes us feel.

Sometimes her Mouth is abandoned for her Eyes. Sometimes we leave her Eyes to
gaze at her Mouth. Her Cheeks, her Nose, her Eyebrows, her Forehead, nay, her
Ears (so much pains has Nature taken to make every thing perfect in this
beautiful Body) her Ears attract our Inclinations in their turn, and make us
taste the pleasure of Change.

To consider her Features separately, one would say that there is a secret
jealousy between them, and that they are still busied to attract Lovers. To
consider them in conjunction, and as they are united and joined together, we
see they form a Beautv, that neither suffers inconstancy for it self, nor
infidelity for others.

A Conversation of Monsieur de St. Evremont with Monsieur d'A --
BY the following Discourse it appears, that our Author was not over much a
Friend of the Jansenists, whom he considered as the Recommenders of too austere
a Morality, to pass with the generality of Mankind. I am en passant, to inform
the Reader, that in the French Copy, the word Jansenists is not writ out at
length, but only the first Letter: However, since it is plain the Author meant
them; whatever Reasons he had, not to name them at large, the Translator did
not think himself obliged to follow that Conduct.

Having one day recounted to Monsieur d'A -- the Conversation which I had with
Father C. -- it is not reasonable, says he to me, that you should find more
freedom amongst the Iansenists than amongst us. Take the pains to hear me, and
I dare be confident you will find me no less a Man of Honor, than the Reverend
Father whom you mentioned to me.

I must tell you that we have a World of Ingenious Men that take the part of
the Iansenists in their Works; of vain impertinent Discoursers; that to do
themselves the honor of being thought Iansenists, and raise continual Disputes
in all Houses where they come; of wise able Men, that prudently manage both the
one and the other.

You will find amongst the first great Learning, a Faith well enough
principled, oftentimes too much Heat, and sometimes a little Animosity.

In the second Class there is much obstinacy and Fancy. The least useful of
them fortify their Party by their Numbers; and those that are considerable,
give it some credit by their Quality.

As for the Politicians they employ each of them their Talent to govern the
Machine, by ways and resorts unknown to the particular People whom they set on
work.

Those that Write or preach upon Grace, that handle this Question which is so
celebrated, and has been so often discussed. Those that place the Councils
above the Popes; who oppose themselves to Innocent their Pastor; who defeat the
great pretensions of the Court of Rome, act with a good Faith, and are
effectually persuaded of the truth of what they say.

Our Directors are but little concerned for the different Sentiments of the
Doctors. Their aim is to set Catholic against Catholic, and Church against
Church, to make a great Party in the Church, and a great Faction in the State.

They are for making a Reformation in the Convents, but don't think of
reforming themselves; they exalt Penance to the Skies but never practice it;
they recommend the eating of Herbs to those People that have a mind to
distinguish themselves from the rest of their Brethren, by a few singularities;
but at the same time, they are so complaisant to their own Bodies, as to eat
every thing that persons of the best Rank use to eat.

After all, our Politicians, such as I have described them, do the Jansenists
more service by their Directions, than our Writers do with all their Books.

It Is their Sage and prudent Conduct that supports us; and if ever Monsieur de
G. B. Monsieur de L. Monsieur de C. Monsieur de B. fail us, unless I am
mightily mistaken, we shall find a great change amongst the Iansenists. The
reason is, because our Opinions will hardly subsist of themselves. They commit
an everlasting violence upon Nature; they take away from Religion all that
comforts us, and in the room of it, place Fear, and Grief, and despair.

The Iansenists, who by their good will, would make every Man a Saint, are
scarce able to find out ten Men in a Kingdom, to make such Christians as they
would have. Christianity without question is divine, but they are Men still
that receive it; and whatever measures we take, we ought to accommodate our
selves to Human Nature.

Too austere a Philosophy makes few wise Men; too rigorous a Government few
good Subjects; too harsh a Religion, few religious Souls, I mean, that will
long continue so.

Nothing is durable that is not suited to Nature. Grace it self, of which
Monsieur A -- speaks so much, accomodates it self to it. God makes use of the
docility of our Minds, and the tenderness of our Hearts, to cause himself to be
received and loved by us.

It is certain that your austere Casuists cause a greater aversion to
themselves, than to Wickedness. The Penance they preach up, persuades the
Ignorant to prefer the Ease they find in continuing to be wicked, to the
difficulties in getting free from Vice.

The other Extreme appears equally Vicious to me. I hate those Sullen,
Melancholy Spirits, that fancy there is Sin in every thing; no less do I hate
those easy complaisant Doctors that admit it no where; that favor the
Irregularities of Nature, by making themselves secret Partisans of Evil
Manners. In their hands the Gospel allows us more indulgence than Morality
does; and Religion as it is managed by them, opposes all manner of Crimes more
feebly than Reason.

I respect virtuous intelligent Persons, that judge soundly of our Actions;
that seriously exhort to what is good, and dissuade us, as much as in them
lies, from what is Wicked.

I heartily wish that a just and nice discernment wonld make them know the real
difference of things; That they would distinguish the effect of a Passion from
the execution of a design; That they would distinguish a Vice from a Crime, and
Pleasures from Vices; That they would excuse our Weaknesses and condemn our
Disorders; That they would not confound light, simple, and natural Appetites,
with wicked and perverse Inclinations. In a word, I am for a Christian
Morality, neither too severe, nor too indulgent.

Of Friendship.
By another Hand.
THE first Friendship which arises in the World, is that which is formed in the
Bosom of Families: The continual habitude of being always together, and of
considering our selves as being of the same Blood; the same opinions in which
we are brought up; the conformity there is between us; the communication of
secrets of affairs, and interests: All these things contribute as much to its
production, as Nature it self: They Consecrate at least the Name of Brother,
Sister, and the rest, as much as the tie of the same Blood. For whatever is
affirmed of certain Natural inclinations, which a Man feels at the meeting of
those Relations, who are as yet unknown to him; it is certain that the Examples
thereof are either aggravated, or extraordinary; and that we should use them
like mere Strangers, if we were not accustomed to consider our near Relations,
as our selves. This therefore is the first conjunction of our Hearts.

It were to be wished that this first Friendship would continue during Life ni
the same condition, wherein we find it in our first Years. But it decay's
insensibly. In the first place, by the great number of Persons whereof a Family
is composed: For it is a certain Principle, that Friendship cannot long subsist
between several Persons. Besides, a Man leaves his Family in order to establish
himself in the World. He enters by Marriage into new alliances, or by the
profession of a particular Piety, he goes out of his Family without having the
Pleasure of adopting another. Thus he contracts on one side, in some sort, an
obligation to forget his Parents; and on the other, a Duty of Loving new ones.
What shall I say of the interest which so often divides Families? Admit a
regulation of all these things, yet a single separation, lessens something of
the first affection. During this absence, a Man insensibly contracts particular
manners, whether for the the Conduct of his Life, or for his Fortune, or in
Relation to the Government of his Family. The first Bond of Friendship is
scarce of any further use afterward, than to express it self a little more,
than we would do, if they were our Rrelations; to have a little more curiosity
in their respect, and to behave our selves with care enough not to appear
inferior in any point to others.

Not but that when there happens any essential occasion of being serviceable to
them, we take a pride in not being wanting therein. Thus this first Friendship,
which is tender in the first Years, which admitts some degrees of relaxation in
the succession of Life, appears notwithstanding always strong, when any
important Interest is in agitatiou. And as for me, I believe that of all sorts
of Friendship this ought to be managed with most Care.

There is a Second kind of Friendship, which has also its perfections and
imperfections, as well as the first we have spoken of. It is that, which is
between a Husband and Wife, when they enter without constraint into the State
of Matrimony, and preserve a good intelligence on both sides. It has somewhat
of that Friendship which is between a Superior and inferior; since the Laws
have declared that Women ought to consider their Husbands as their Masters; and
that the civility of Men obliges them to receive marks of respect from their
Wives; only to quit them immediately, and to depend on them by their own choice,
as they depend on their Husbands by the Laws and Customs. When People live
together after this decent manner, they maintain a continual commerce of
esteem; they taste all the Delicacies of Love; they have the Pleasure of
Loving, and of being beloved, and even make a glory of this Friendship. I am of
opinion that it is this mixture of tenderness, this return of esteem, or, if
you will, this mutual ardour to prepossess one another by obliging Testimonies,
wherein consists the Sweetness of this Second Friendship. I speak not of other
Pleasures, which are not so much such in themselves, as in the assurance which
they afford us of the perfect possession of those persons whom we Love. Which
appears to me so true, that I am not afraid to affirm, that if a Man were
assured of meeting the perfect affection of a Wife else where, he would easily
support himself under the loss of his Spouse at home; and that they ought not
to enter into the order of Friendship, but as tokens and proofs that it is
without reserve. Few Persons, it is true, are capable of the purity of these
Thoughts. Thus a perfect Friendship, is rerely observed in Marriages, at least
they seldom continue long. The Object of gross Passions is not able to support
so noble a Commerce as Friendship. After it has produced it, and maintained for
some time the shadow and resemblance of it, Indifference, Contempt and other
new Passions, soon arise to efface it. Even the constraint one is under, always
to keep the same Society, lessens somewhat the value of perseverance. We lose
by degrees, the assurance we had of being loved: We enter into suspicions,
Jealousies, and disquiets, and can hardly conceal them in the necessity we lie
under of living eternally together. From thence arise Mistrusts, Complaints and
Quarrels. The Children are at that time, the only Bonds which retain Man and
Wife in their duty. These are the Pledges and Fruits of their first Affection:
It Is an Interest that binds them at the very moment, when their Hearts incline
to a separation. But when a Man speaks of friendship, or hears it every day
mentioned; he is not to understand it either of this first, or second kind. It
is of a Species altogether particular. The World would have it only between two
Persons; that it requires whole years to form it self; that Virtue alone is the
Foundation of it; that it continues for ever; that it is a perfect
communication of all things: In a word, that there is made of these two persons
a Metamorphosis so general, that they mutually transform themselves into one
another. Authors triumph upon this Portraiture. They even give it finer Colors
than I do. Notwithstanding I believe I may without rashness assert, that these
ingenious Painters, who afford us such Illustrious Coppies of Friendship, never
saw the Originals. In truth, it is natural for us to take a pleasure in
exaggerating matters; and the first moment we begin a Book, or a Discourse, we
forget that our Heroes are but men, and that we speak to men.

But a man must avoid likewise to take for friendship I know not how many
Correspondences he meets in the course of life, which certainly deserve not
this glorious Title.

To partake together in some diversion, to be engaged sometimes in the same
Conversations; to meet often at Court, or in the City; such kind of obligations
cannot assure one of a solid Friendship. All these things generally happen by
pure chance; and it is Fortune that produces these different occassions. What
share can the Heart enjoy herein, but the interest of some pleasure? and can
this Interest beget a truly perfect Friendship? It Is true, we love persons that
may be useful to us, or such as are pleasant and agreeable; we are delighted to
be where they are, and give them a favorable reception. We have also more
particular regards for those that have the Reputation of having great numbers
of Friends; of being Men of Intrigue, and of being able to serve us upon
occasion. For to speak agreeable things, and to be capable of doing useful
ones, are two great steps toward an introduction into the most inaccessible
Hearts.

But it is no less true, that those persons whom we only know upon this bottom,
should not put that Friendship we entertain for them, to too strong proof. A
Man will hardly purchase the pleasure which the Conversation of a Wit affords;
and it is ordinary enough to refer to others, the care of serving a person, who
does nothing but divert us.

If we make but a little reflection upon this, we shall observe that it is this
sort of Friendship, which as imperfect and as common as it is, does not cease
to form a Civility, by which our Conduct is regulated, and which is as it were
the Foundation of the public Peace.

It Is that which instructs us how to live; and this manner of living
comprehends an infinite number of small inferior Duties, without which all
things would be in confusion.

A friendship more exact is prodigious; whose Examples are so rare, that a Man
may easily compute them.

The Character of Madam, the Countess of d'Olonne.
By Mr. BROWN.
I Don't expect to be more successful at your Character, than our Painters have
been at your Portraiture, where I may safely say, the best performers have lost
their Reputation. Till now, we never beheld any Beauties so finished, but they
were obliged to these Masters; either for bestowing some new graces upon them,
or else for concealing some of their defects. Only you, Madam, are above those
Arts, whose peculiar Character it is to flatter and embellish. They never took
the Pencil to copy you without a shameful foil to their skill, and doing an
infinite injustice to the Original; in short, without making so accomplished a
Person as your self lose as many advantages, as they usually give to those that
possess them not.

If you have not been much obliged to the Painters, you are much less I am sure
to the curiosity of your Dress: You owe nothing either to the skill of other
People, or to your own Industry: And may safely rely upon Nature for the care
she takes of you. As there are very few Persons upon whom negligence sits well,
I would advise them not to depend too much upon it.

To say the truth, the generality of our Ladies are not pleasing any farther
than their Habits make them so. Every thing they employ to set them off,
conceals some defect. On the other hand, the more you take from your Dress, the
more Graces you display; and it is as much your Interest to return to the
primitive simplicity of Nature, as it is for their advantage to keep at a
distance from it.

I will not amuse my self with any general Praises, that are several Ages old.
The Sun shall not furnish me with a Comparison for your Eyes; nor the Flowers
for your Complexion. I might speak of the regularity and delicacy of your Face;
of the Charms and agreeablenesses of your Mouth; of that Neck so well turned
and polished; of those bewitching Breasts; but after a Man has made the most
curious observations, there are a thousand things may be thought of in you,
which cannot be well discribed, and a thousand things better perceived than
comprehended.

Take my Advice, Madam, and don't repose the care of your glory on any other
person; for certainly you are no where so well as you are in your self. Appear
in the midst of your Portraitures and Characters, and you will defeat all the
Images that it is possible to frame of you.

After having well admired you, what I find the most extraordinary is, that you
have as it were heaped together in your self, the several Charms of different
Beauties. You are Mistress of those Graces that surprise, that please, that
flatter, that forbid, and affect us.

Your Character, properly speaking, is not a particular Character; it is that of
all the rest of your Sex. One Man maintains his Heart against an imperious,
that suffered himself to be Conquered by a delicate Beauty: Delicacy gives
disgust to another, who was proud to surrender his Heart to his imperious
Mistress.

You alone, Madam, are the Foible of all the World. The ravished Lover finds in
you an unexhaustible Subject for his Transports: Passionate Souls find their
tenderness and languishments. Different Spirits, different Humors, contrary
temperaments, all contribute to the largeness of your Empire. In this
confusion, you cause the unhappiness of Persons between both Ages; you trouble
the Repose of the most serene, and the Reason of the most advised.

Those persons that were born neither to give nor to receive Love, preserve the
first of these Qualities, and unhappily lose the other. From hence it proceeds,
that there is some resemblance between the heat of your Friends, and the
Passion of your Lovers; that it is impossible to love you without Interest, and
that the judgment of the most simple Spectators is never free. From hence in
short, it proceeds, that every one commences a Lover that sees you, except your
self alone, who continue still insensible.

I beg your pardon, Madam. Something would be wanting to your glory, if you
continued such an insensible all your life. Once, and only once, you may quit
this indifference. But to make you quit your resolution of never being in Love,
we ought to find out Subjects worthy of you. If there be any such, Madam, I
don't doubt but that drawn by your Charms, and disgusted by the defects of
others, they will soon sigh for you; and then you must remember that cruelty
has bounds, and that what ever goes beyond them, is rudeness and insensibility.

Hitherto I have paid one part of the Duty I owe your Beauty, and it is none of
your least praises, that I have been able to praise you so long. At present,
it is but just I should have some consideration of my self; and that in speaking
of your Wit and Humor, I should indulge my self to talk of my own.

I will deliver nothing but Truths, and least you should imagine them to be
disadvantageous to you, I will begin with the Charms of your Conversation,
which are not in the least inferior to those of your Face.

Yes, Madam, we are no less affected with hearing you, than with seeing you.
You may inspire love even when you are veiled; and may make France resemble
Spain, in being the Scene of the Adventures of the Fair invisible.

Never was there more Politeness than we find in your Discourse; and what is
surprising, nothing is so lively and yet so just; Things so happy and so well
thought. And to Crown all, a quick Understanding, and a vivacity of Sense equal
that of your Wit.

But let us conclude these Praises, the length whereof is always tiresom, though
they be never so true; and now, Madam prepare to suffer patiently a recital of
what I have found to blame in you.

If you cannot, without difficulty, hear your defects: I am sure I could not
without greater difficulty discover them. To find out any faults in you, I was
obliged to make very profound Enquiries, and after a long but narrow
Examination, behold what Faults I have remarked.

I have often beheld you too respectful, and condescending to ordinary Persons;
and submit your judgment to that of others who were inferior to you.

I am likewise of Opinion, that you suffer your self too much to make new
acquaintances. That which at first sight you have rightly judged to be gross
and dull, has after some time appeared to you to be delicate without Reason;
and when you come to rectify these Errors, it is rather by a return of your
Humor, than by the reflections of your Mind.

Sometimes, Madam by a contrary Motion you think too much, and pass by the
truth in Debate; so that the Opinions you form, are rather more strongly
imagined, than solidly conceived.

As for your Actions, they are equally innocent and agreeable; but as you may
very well neglect those little formalities, that are in truth, but so many
Fetters of Life, you must expect to meet the calumnies of Sots, and the ill
Nature of those People whom your merit has made your Enemies.

Those Ladies, who are your professed Enemies, have been constrained to own to
us that you have received a Thousand advantages from Nature. There are some
certain occasions when we are obliged to own to them, that they might be better
managed, and that you don't always make the good use of them, as others in your
Station might do.

I shall end all with the unequalities of your temper, of which you your self
have made an agreeable representation. They are afflicting to those that suffer
undet them; as for my self I always find something mortifying in this Scene;
and I see that when we most complain of any one's Humor, it is then when we
must interest our selves in the Person.

However it is, the more we are obliged to take any advantage over you, we are
apt to take it without measure; we easily disoblige you without thinking of it;
nay the very design to please you has more than once made us so unfortunate as
to displease you.

Believe me, Madam, a Man must be very happy to find out your good moments, and
very just to make use of them.

What we may truly say, after we have well examined you, is, that there is
nothing so unfortunate as to fall in Love with you, yet nothing so difficult as
not to do it.

Behold, Madam, the observations of a Spectator, who to judge the more
impartially of you, has endeavored to continue free. The means he took to keep
himself so, was to shun you as much as was possible for him. It Is not enough
for one not to see you, after he has once beheld you; and this remedy which is
elsewhere infallible, does not carry an entire safety with it in Relation to
your self.

Perhaps you will tell me that a Man, whose Sentiments are somewhat tender, is
not generally Master of so rigorous a Judgment. But although you should give your
self the trouble to tell me what displeases you, I shall scarce take the Pains
to undeceive my self; a discernment which does not seem advantageous to you,
cannot subsist but in your absence; for to repeat what I have already told you,
do but appear, Madam, in the midst of your Portraitures and Characters, and you
will soon efface all the Images the most fruitful imagination can form of you.

A Letter to Madam, the Countess of d' Olonne, and sent with the foregoing
Character.
I Have here sent you your Character, which tells you the general Sentiments of
the World concerning you; and which will inform you, if you never knew it
before, that there is nothing so Beautiful in all France as your self. Don't be
so rigorous to your own merits, as to deny your self that justice which all the
World pays you. The greatest part of Ladies suffer themselves to be easily
persuaded, and receive these sweet errors with Pleasure; and it would be very
strange indeed if you could not be prevailed upon to believe the truth.

Besides the Public Opinion, you have the Judgment of Madam d'Longueville on
your side. Submit to so authentic a Testimony without further scruple, and
since she believes it, believe your self to be the most Charming Creature that
was ever beheld.

From your Beauty, Madam, I pass to the mischiefs it has occasioned, and to the
infinite numbers of those that daily languish and dye for you. It Is not my
design to render you compassionate; on the contrary, if you will follow my
advice, it shall cost one of your unfortunate admirers his Life. Our Poets and
Authors of Romances have too long entertained us with false Deaths; I demand a
true one of you, which will be a new addition to your other achievements. To
counsel you only to Love Subjects that are worthy of you, is to reduce you to
an impossibility; and properly to counsel you never to Love.

Nothing now remains but to excuse my hardiness in finding out your faults; and
indeed I could hinder it, for otherwise I had gone against the rules of
Character, whose perfection consists in well separating the good and bad
qualities.

After all, I have infinitely more occasion to complain, than you have; one
quarter of an hour is time sufficient for you to read them over, but I passed
whole Nights to discover them. These were the first difficulties of this Nature
I ever met; and for a mark of a very extraordinary merit one of our nicest
Critics here in Town has found my praises easy and natural.

A LETTER to Monsieur D. B.
I Don't know why you should admire my Verses, since I don't admire them my
self; for I must inform you that in the opinion of a celebrated Master in
Poetry, a Poet is always the most affected with his own compositions. As for my
self, I acknowledge abundance of faults in mine, which I might correct, is
exactness were not extremely troublesome to my Humor, and did not take up too
much time for a Person of my Age.

Besides this, I have another excuse in reserve, which you will admit too unless I
am mightily mistaken. Essays are not often the best Masterpieces; and my
praises of the King, being the first true and sincere one I ever gave, you are
not to admire if my success was not extraordinary great.

Your commendations of me are an ingenious Irony, which figure I was so great a
Master of formerly, that the Marshal d'Clarambaut thought no one but my self
capable to dispute the merit of it with you. You ought not to employ it against
a Man who has lost the use of it, and who is so much your humble Servant as I
am.

You see I am sufficient proof against laughter; and yet in spite of all my
precautions, I cannot forbear to take in good part, the Praises you give me
upon the score of my Judgment. It Is your interest it should be good, just, and
delicate, for the Idea of yours, which I always preserve by me, is the rule of
mine.

That Miracle of Beauty which I formerly saw at Bourbon, is the same Miracle of
Beauty which I see at London. Some Years which have arrived to her since, have
given her more Wit, and taken away none of her Charms.

Fair Eyes so sweetly Charming and Divine,
That Cause such Transports where you Shine.
Oh! never to grief your Crystal Treasures pay,
Your Pearls on grief are thrown away.
Tears from those Orbs let no misfortunes move,
So rich a Tribute's only due to Love.

A Panegyric upon the Duchess of Mazarine.
By Mr. BROWN.
I Have undertaken to day a thing without President; I have undertaken to make
the Funeral Oration of a Person, who is in better Health than her Orator. This
will surprise you Gentlemen. But if we are permitted to take care of our Tombs,
to order Inscriptions for them, to give a greater extent to our vanity than
Nature has been willing to give our Lives: If those that are alive may appoint
the Place where they are to lie, when they shall be no longer in the Number of
Living: If Charles the Fifth caused his own Funerals to be celebrated, and for
two Years assisted at them in Person; can you think it strange, Gentlemen, that
a Beauty more illustrious by her Charms than that Emperor was for his
Conquests, is willing to enjoy the happiness of her Memory, and hear whilst she
is alive, what may be said of her after her Death.

Let others endeavor to excite your sorrows for one that is dead, I will
command your Tears for one who is Living, for a Person who is to dye one day by
the necessary misfortune of humane condition, and who ought to live for ever
for the sake of her admirable qualities.

Weep Gentlemen, and not tarrying to bewail a Beauty till she is lost, afford
your Tears to the Melancholy consideration that we must once lose her. Weep,
weep. Whoever expects a certain and unviolable Misfortune, may already Style
himself unfortunate.

Hortensia will dye. That Miracle of the World will dye one day. The Idea of so
great a calamity deserves your Tears.

Yes Charminng Goddess you must leave us,
Death will remove the heavenly prize:
And of those numerous Charms bereave us,
That now employ our hearts and Eyes.
Let us turn our imaginations from her Death to her Birth; that we may steal
one moment from our grief. If your see her come into the World, you will
immediately remember that she is to depart out of it.

HORTENSIA de MANCHINI was born at ROME, of an Illustrious Family. Her
Ancestors were always considerable, but tho they had all of them governed
Empires, they had not brought her so much Glory, as she reflects back upon them.

Heaven formed this great Masterpiece by a Model unknown to the Age we live in.
To the shame of our time it bestowed upon Hortensia the Beauty of ancient
Greece, and the Virtue of old Rome; Let us pass over her Infancy in silence,
without stopping our Discourse there.

Her Infancy was attended with a thousand pretty simplicities, but had nothing
of Importance enough for our Subject. Gentlemen, I demand your Tears, I demand
your Admiration. To obtain them I have both Misfortunes and Virtues to
represent to you.

It was not long before Cardinal Mazarine was sensible of the Advantages of his
beautiful Niece, and therefore to do Justice of the Gifts of Nature, he
destined Hortensia to carry his Name, and to possess his Wealth.

After his death, she had Charms that might engage even Kings to court her out
of Love, and a fortune capable to oblige them to do it out of interest. But
what occasion had you, Madam, to become a Sovereign? Does not your Beauty make
you reign wherever you go? There is no Nation that does not pay a voluntary
Submission to the Power of your Charms; there is no Queen that has not a
greater ambition for your Beauty, than you can possibly have for her Grandeur.

All Climes and Countries do adore her,
Fresh Triumphs on her Beauties wait.
The World injustly calls her Rover,
She only views the limits of her State.
In effect, what Country is there which Hortensia has not seen? What Nation has
seen her that has not at the same time admired her? Rome beheld her with as
great Admiration as Paris did. That City, in all ages of the World so glorious,
boasts more upon giving her to the World, than producing such a race of Heroes.
She believes that so extraordinary a Beauty is preferable to the greatest
valor, and that more Conquests were to be gained by her eyes, than by the Arms
of her Citizens.

Italy, Madam, will be everlastingly obliged to you for abolishing those
importunate Rules, that bring a greater constraint than regularity with them:
for freeing her from a science of Formality, Ceremony, and Civility mixed
together; from the tyranny of premeditated respects that render Men unsociable
even in Society itself.

It Is Hortensia who has banished all Grimace, and all affectation from thence;
who has destroyed that art of Trifles which only regulates appearances; that
Study of exterior things that only composes men's Countenances.

It Is she who has rendered ridiculous a stiff awkward Gravity, which supplied
the place of Prudence; and who has triumphed over a politic Itch without
concern and without interest, busied only to conceal the defects a Man finds in
himself.

It Is she who has introduced a sweet and innocent Liberty, who has rendered
Conversation more agreeable, and made Pleasure more pure and delicate.

A Fatality caused her to come to Rome, and a Fatality caused her to leave it.

Madam, the Constable Colonna's Lady had a mind to quit her Husband, and
imparted this resolution to her Sister. Her Sister, as young as she was,
represented to her upon this occasion all that a Mother could have done to
hinder it. But seeing her unalterably fixed to execute her design, she followed
her out of Love and Affection, whom she could not dissuade by her Prudence; and
shared with her all the Danger of flight, the Fears, the Inquietudes, and the
Inconveniences that always attend such sort of Resolutions.

Fortune who has a great Power in our Enterprises, but a much greater in our
Adventures made Madam the Constable's Lady wander from Nation to Nation, and
threw her at last into a Convent at Madrid.

Right Reason advised Hortensia to seek her repose, and a desire of retirement
obliged her to settle her abode at Chambery. There she found in her self by her
Reflections, by a Commerce with learned Men, by Books, and by Observations, all
that solid Satisfaction which a Court does not give Courtiers, who are either
too much taken up with business, or too much dissolved in Pleasures.

Three whole years did Hortensia live at Chambery, always in a state of
Tranquillity, but never obscure. Whatever Inclinations she might have to
conceal herself, her merit established for her a small Empire in spite of her,
and made a Court of a Retreat.

In effect she commanded that City, and all the Country about it. Every one
acknowledged with pleasure those Rights which Nature had given her, even He who
had them over all the rest by virtue of his Birth, forgot them freely, and
entered into the same subjection with his People.

Those of the greatest merit and quality quitted the Court, and neglected the
Service of their Prince, to apply themselves particularly to that of Hortensia:
and considerable Persons of remote Countries made a Voyage to Italy to furnish
themselves with a pretense to see her.

It Is an extraordinary thing to be able to establish a Court at Chambery. It Is
as it were a Prodigy that a Beauty, which had a mind to conceal it self in
places almost inaccessible, should make a greater noise in Europe, than all
Europe together The most beautiful Persons of every Nation had the displeasure
to hear a continual mention made of an absent Fair. The most lovely Women had a
secret Enemy that ruined all the Impressions they could make. It was the Idea
of Hortensia; which was pretiously preserved in those places, where she had
been seen* and was formed with pleasure in those where she had never been.

Such was the Conduct of Hortensia, such was her Condition, when the Duchess of
York, her Relation, passed through Chambery in the way to find the Duke her
Husband.

The singular merit of the Duchess, her Beauty, her Wit, and her Virtue
inspired Hortensia with a desire to accompany her, but her Affairs would not
permit her. So she was obliged to delay that Voyage till a more favorable
opportunity; the curiosity she had to see one of the greatest Courts in the
World, which she had never beheld, fortified her in this Resolution: the death
of the Duke of Savoy determined it.

This Prince had the same Sentiments of her as all People that had the
happiness to behold her. He had admired her at Turin, and this Admiration Madam
of Savoy interpreted to be Love. A jealous black Impression produced a
behavior very little obliging toward the person who had caused it.

There needed no more than this to oblige Hortensia to depart out of a Country,
where the new Regent was in a manner absolute. To separate herself from the
Duchess of Savoy, and approach the Duchess of York was but one and the same
Resolution.

Hortensia acquainted her Friends with this determination, who employed all
their Arguments to dissuade her from it, but 'twas in vain; never was seen so
great a profusion of Tears. As for her own part, she was not insensible of the
general Grief that was occasioned by the thoughts of her departure. Persons so
lively affected as they were, knew how to affect her. In the mean time this
Resolution was taken up, and in spite of all their Regrets she concludes to
depart.

What other courage but that of Hortensia would have undertaken so long, so
difficult, and so dangerous a Voyage?

Before she could accomplish it she must traverse savage Nations, and Nations
that were up in arms; she must sweeten the one, and make herself be respected
by the other.

She understood not the Language of any of these People, but they understood
her. Her eyes speak an universal Language, which causes her to be understood by
all mankind.

What Mountains, what Forests, what Rivers had she not to pass? What did she
not suffer from the wind, the snow, and the rains? What Dissiculties of the
ways, what Rigor of the season, what mighty Inconveniences had she not to
struggle with, which yet did but little Injury to her Beauty.

Never did Helen appear so charming as Hortensia was. She had the air, the
habit, and the equipage of a Queen of the Amazons! She seemed equally fit to
charm, and to fight.

It was said, she went to give Love to all the Princes, whom she was to meet in
her Passage, and to command all the Troops which they commanded.

The first of these things she had in her Power, but it was not her design. she
made some Essay of the second; for the Troops received her Orders more
voluntarily than those of their Generals.

After she had traveled more than three hundred Leagues she arrived at last at
Holland. She made no longer a stay at Amsterdam than was necessary to view the
Rarities of so remarkable and famous a City. After she had satisfied her
curiosity she came to the Brill, where she embarked for England.

An extraordinary Tempest happened in this Voyage, which lasted five days. The
Storm was as as furious as it was long; and made the Seamen lose all their
Conduct and Resolution, and the Passengers all their hopes.

Hortensia alone was exempt from Lamentation; less importunate with Heaven to
preserve her, than submitting and resigning herself to its Will; But it had
decreed she should visit England. She landed there, and in a short time came
safe to London.

All People had a great curiosity to see her. But the Ladies had a greater
Allarm at her Arrival.

The English who were in possession of the Empire of Beauty saw It lost, not
without great regret, to a stranger; and it is natural to be sensibly concerned
for the loss of the sweetest of all Vanities.

So considerable an interest was the only thing in the World that could unite
them. Old Enemies were reconciled; those that were indifferent now began to
visit one another, and Friends linked themselves more strictly together than
before. This was the first Conspiracy I beheld in England. A Conspiracy as
fatal to the Beauty of Hortensia, as the the latter was to the Arms of the King
of France.

These Confederates very well foresaw their Misfortune, but not being willing
to advance it, they prepared to defend an Interest, which was dearer to them
than that of their Country.

Hortensia had nothing to defend her but her Charms, and her Virtues. This was
enough to make her apprehensive of nothing.

After she had kept her Chamber some time, less to recover herself from the
Fatigues of her Journey, than to have her habits made, she appeared at
Whitehall, Fair Beauties of Whitehall give way,
Hortensia does her Charms display.
She comes, she comes! Resign the day,
She must reign, and you obey.


From that day they never disputed the Prize with her in public: But they
carried on a secret War against her within doors; where all ended either in
private Injuries which never arrived to her knowledge, or in vain Murmurs which
she despised.

The World now beheld an extraordinary turn. Those that were the most violently
transported against her were the first that imitated her. They would dress and
apparel themselves like her: but this was neither her dress nor habit. For her
Person gave a new Grace to every thing she wore, and those that endeavored to
take up her Air and her dress, wanted the principal thing, her Person.

One might say of her what was said of the late Madam, All the World imitates
her, and no one resembles her.

As for what regarded the Men, she made Subjects of all those judicious Persons
that beheld her. They were only Men of ill Palates and worse wit, that could
defend the Remainder of their Liberty against her; Happy in the Conquests she
made! more happy in those she did not make!

Hortensia no sooner arrived to any place but she established a House there,
which caused the rest to be abandoned. The greatest Freedom in the World was to
be seen there, and an equal Discretion* every one was more commodiously treated
there than at home, and more respectfully than at Court.

It Is true they dispute often there, but then it is with more Knowledge than
Heat; it is not done out of a Spirit of Contradiction, but fully to discover the
Matters in agitation: rather to animate Conversation than to exasperate it.

The Playing there is very inconsiderable, it is the Diversion only that makes
the Play. You can neither discover in their faces the fear of losing, nor a
concern for what is lost. Some of them are so far disinterested, that they are
reproached with rejoicing at their own losing, and afflicting themselves at
their winning.

Play is followed by the best Repasts in the World. One may there see every
thing that comes from France for-the delicate, and all that comes from the
Indies for the curious; and the Common Meats become rare by the exquisite
Sawces which are bestowed upon them.

It Is not a Plenty which may cause a Dissipation to be feared; it is not
Frugality that shows either Avarice or Penury.

They do not here love an Economy niggard and sullen, that contents it self
merely with satisfying the necessities of Life, and affords nothing to the
Pleasure of it. They love a good order that furnishes every that can be
desired, and that wisely manages the use of it, so that nothing may be wanting.

There is certainly nothing so well regulated as this Family. But Hortensia
diffuses throughout the whole I do not know what sort of an easy air. Something
free and natural that conceals the administration of it. One would conclude
that things moved of themselves, so secret is the ordering of them, and so
difficult to be perceived.

Let Hortensia change her Lodgings, no Man can know whether she has changed
them. The difference of places is insensible. Wherever she goes we see nothing
but her; and if we see her, we see every thing. The Novelty, the Alteration is
not to be perceived. She alone attracts our Eyes, and employs them.

Here no Visits are made, properly speaking. These Devoirs and Respects to any
one but her are mere slavery. The most regular Visitants secretly reproach
themselves for stealing from her the time of looking after her Family. They
never come soon enough, and never depart late enough. They go to bed with the
Regret to have quitted her, and they rise with the desire to behold her afresh.

But how great is the uncertainty of our human condition! At the time when
Hortensia seemed to enjoy her Health the best; at the time when she innocently
enjoyed all the pleasure which Inclination desires, and Reason does not
prohibit; that she tasted the Sweetness to see herself beloved and esteemed by
all the World; that those Ladies who had opposed themselves to her
establishment, were charmed by her Conversation; that she had as it were
extinguished self-love in the Soul of her Friends, every one expressing the
same kind Sentiments for her, which it is natural to have for ones self: At the
time when the most lovely of the fair Sex forbore to contend with her Beauty;
that Envy had concealed itself in the bottom of their Hearts, that all repining
against her was private, or appeared ridiculous as soon as she begun to appear.
At this happy time an extraordinary indisposition seizes her, and we were upon
the point to lose her, in spite of all her Charms, in spite of all our
Admiration, and Love.

You were just a perishing, Hortensia, and so were we. You through the violence
of your pains, we through that of our affliction. But is was more than being
simply afflicted. We felt all that you did, and were sick as you were. Your
unequal moments sometimes carried you to the brink of Death; and sometimes
recalled you to life. We were subject to all the Accidents of your Sickness,
and to know how it fared with you, it was not at all necessary to enquire after
your Health. We needed only to observe in what state we our selves were.

Praised be that universal dispenser of good and evil; praised be Heaven that
has restored you to our Vows, and given you again to your self. Behold you are
living, and so are we; but we have not as yet recovered the cruel fright that
this danger gave us, and a cruel Idea still remains behind, which makes us more
lively conceive what must one day befall you.

Nature will destroy this beauteous Fabric, which it has taken so much pains
to frame. Nothing can cxempt it from that lamentable Law to which we are all
subject.

She who was so visibly distinguished from others during her life, will be
confounded with the meanest at her death.

And do you then complain, you that have only an ordinary Genius, a common
Merit, or an indifferent Beauty, do you complain that you must die? Don't
murmur, injust as ye are, Hortensia will die like you. A time will come (Oh that
this unfortunate time would never come) when we may say of this Miracle.

She Is now resolved to common Clay,
She that did Beauty's Empire sway,
Fate, cruel Fate would have it so,
Fate that governs all below.
Now vulgar Souls learn to resign your Breath,
And without murmuring submit to Death.
In my opinion a Funeral Oration ought not to end without leaving some
Consolation to the Auditors. After we have drawn their Tears for a Person who
has quitted the World, It Is usual to tell them the party deceased is in heaven,
that the Idea of his Happiness may form in us some Sentiments of Joy.

Let us pass, let us pass from Grief to Pleasure, we have already wept because
we saw Hortensia upon the point to dye. Let us now rejoice to behold her
living. Our Sovereign is well. What can be greater? What can we desire more?

There are but few Reigns which we are not glad to see finished. The lightest
Chains are heavy to those that bear them. They appear easy to none but those
that wear them not. Your Reign, Madam, still continues, and we wish it may
continue for ever. Your Subjects find themselves happy under your Government.
There is not one of them but looks upon his Liberty at the greatest Misfortune.

Set us rejoice, our Sovereign is living, and we live. To live is the chief of
humane Blessings; and to live for her is the chief of them. It Is the sweetest
and the best use we can make of our Life.

REFLECTIONS Upon the DOCTRINE OF EPICURUS,
By Mr. Brown.
EVery one knows that the greatest part of Men condemn Epicurus, and reject his
Doctrine, not only as unworthy of a Philosopher, but what is more severe, as
dangerous to the Commonwealth: They solemnly declare that a Man becomes
vicious from the very moment he declares himself one of his Disciples; that his
Opinions are directly contrary to good manners, and thus they cover his Name
with all imaginable Scandal and Infamy.

Notwithstanding all this, the Stoics, who, were his greatest Enemies, never
treated him so ill: they combated his Hypothesis, but never invaded his
Reputation; and the Books they have left us plainly discover in abundance of
Places the singular Esteem and Respect they had for him.

From whence then proceeds this extraordinary difference? and why don't we
rather follow the opinion of the wise? It is an easy matter to give the true
Reason of it, which is, that we don't do as they do. We don't vouchsafe to
inform our selves of any thing, but blindly adhere to what is told us: without
instructing our selves in the nature of things we judge those to be the best
that have the most Examples, and the greatest Crowd of Admirers; we don't
follow Reason, but only the resemblances of it. We stiffly retain our Errors
because they are countenanced by those of other Men. We rather choose to believe
implicitly than to put our selves to the expense of judging; and are so
strangely injust as to conclude, that the Antiquity of an Opinion is a
sufficient Title to authorize us to defend it, even in defiance to reason it
self.

This, in short, is one of the Causes that has made Epicurus fall into the
public Hatred, and has prevailed with almost the generality of Mankind to
discard him out of the number of Philosophers. We have condemned him without
condescending to know him, we have banished him without hearing him speak for
himself; nay we have denied him the justice to explain his own Sentiments.

But after all, in my Opinion the chief and indeed the most plausible Pretense
that Men have had to despise his Doctrine, has been the irregular Life of some
Libertines, who as they abused the Name of this Philosopher, so they have
ruined the Reputation of his Sect.

These People have recommended their own Vices under the reputation of his
Wisdom; they have corrupted his Doctrine by their ill Manners, and came over in
vast Numbers to his Party, only because they understood that Pleasure was
mightily commended by them.

All the Mischief is, that they would not know what this Pleasure was, and what
these Praises meant; that they contented themselves with his Name in general;
that they have made it serve as a Veil to their Debaucheries; and that they
quoted the Authority of so great a Man to support the Disorders of their Life.
So that instead of profiting by the sage Counsels of this Philosopher, or
correcting their vicious Inclinations in his School, they have lost the only
good quality they had left them, and that is, the shame of sinning.

They have arrived to such a pitch as to commend those very Actions they
blushed at formerly; they take a Pride in those Vices they had the Discretion
to conceal before; and at last without the least remorse or shame, they blindly
followed the Pleasure they brought along with them, and not that which he would
have taught them.

In the mean time the World has passed judgment by these Appearances, and
observing that a sort of People who called themselves Philosophers, were
extremely debauched, that they made a public Profession of their Crimes, that
they cited Epicurus to authorize their Idleness, their Impurity, and their
Lewdness, they made no difficulty to pronounce the Doctrine of this Philosopher
to be pernicious, and to compare his Disciples to the uncleanest Animals in
nature.

-- Epicuri de grege porci. The Affairs of Epicurus had been in a very ill
condition of some disinterested Persons had not taken care to do him justice;
and freed themselves from the prejudices of the Multitude, whose Opinions are
generally opposite to those of the wise.

For some generous Persons have been found, who have thoroughly informed
themselves of this Philosopher's way of living; who scorning to be determined
by the common Belief, have penetrated farther into the matter, and after a due
Inquiry have produced very authentic Testimonies both of the Probity of his
Person, and the Purity of his Doctrine.

These Gentlemen have published in the face of the World, that his Pleasure was
as severe as the Virtue of the Stoics, and that a Man who had a mind to be as
debauched bauched as Epicurus, must also for his Comfort be as sober as Zeno.

And to say the truth, it is highly incredible that a Man to whom his Country
erected several Statues; whose Friends inhabited all the Cities of Greece; who
loved the worship of the Gods, and the Prosperity of his Country; who was
celebrated for his Piety to his Parents, his Liberality to his Brothers, and
his sweet Carriage to his Slaves; whose Modesty hindered him from meddling with
State Affairs, and whose ordinary Sustenance was nothing but Bread and Water:
It is highly incredible, I say, that such a Man should ever give Precepts of
Debauchery, or teach his Disciples the Practice of those Vices, which he
naturally abhorred.

On the contrary, as if this excellent Person had been apprehensive, that the
Title he gave his Philosophy might be so far abused as to encourage wicked
Inclinations; and that Men in after Ages might calumniate this Pleasure,
wherein he placed the Sovereign good: as if he had foreseen the unjust Aversion
of the following Ages, and the Irregularities of some Libertines that would
abuse his Doctrine, he took care himself to make an Apology for it, and
satisfied the World, that the Pleasure he speaks of was austere and sober.

I am not so vain as to believe that my bare Word will be taken for this, and
therefore will produce one of his Letters, wherein any one may be able to read
his true Sentiments. It is addressed to one Meneceus, and now pray observe
after what manner he explains himself.

Although, my dear Meneceus, we say that Pleasure is the end of Man, we would
by no means be supposed to speak of infamous lewd Pleasures that proceed from
Intemperance and Sensuality. This ill Inference can only be made by those
Persons who are wholly ignorant of our Precepts, or else combat them; who
absolutely reject them, or pervert the true meaning of them.

By this single Fragment one may perceive how careful he was to preserve the
Innocence of his Doctrine against Calumny and Ignorance; that he well foresaw
that only these two things were capable to decry it; and in effect, as we have
already observed, they have ruined his Reputation with the greatest part of the
World.

His Life, as sober and innocent as it was, could not escape censure, or free
him from an infinite number of Lies and Invectives: But those that have written
it, after having recounted the several Calumnies of his Enemies, have
immediately refuted them; and at the same time that they published our
Philosophers, History, have likewise published his Apology.

As it is not my Design to entertain you with a Narration of his Actions, but
only to defend his Pleasure, I shall send you back to Diogenes Laertius for the
Account of his Life; and shall content my self to Philosophize upon the nature
of this Pleasure, that has created him so many Enemies; and examine whether it
is of such a heinous Character, that we ought to cashier those Persons from the
number of honest Men that defend and follow it.

To live according to Nature, and not to feel any Pain, is what Epicurus calls
living voluptuously. Now I am of opinion, that there is nothing in this that
deserves to be condemned; that such a Life as this does not merit censure; that
no Republic in the World was ever so severe as to disapprove it.

To live according to Nature is to follow right Reason. The bounds she
prescribes us are those of Innocence. There is nothing in her but what is
equitable and equal.

It Is not along of her that Avarice came into the World. She industriously
concealed Gold in the entrails of the vilest Element, and we have dug it from
thence.

She is not the cause of that Ambition that torments us; she brings us all
equal into the World, and so she takes us out of it.

We don't differ one from another, any farther than we corrupt her. Do you
think it is she that excites us to Pleasures? The Poets themselves that have
lodged all manner of Extravagancies in Heaven, that so they might sin with
Authority, and who have represented Jupiter weak and vicious, out of a design
to copy a God in their own irregular Lives, were never guilty of the
Presumptien to do it. They have preserved its Purity whole and entire; and in
describing her Age, have not taken notice of the Luxury that became so rampant
in the following ones.

Hear what they say, and they will tell you, that Acorns were then the
nourishment of Mankind, that Rivers quenched their Thirst, that they dwelt in
Caves, that they had no Apparel to defend them from the Cold, and that they
followed Nature in all their Actions.

I know very well, that things did not pass after this manner, and that the
first Inhabitants of the earth never lived in this strange simplicity, which is
more proper to the stupidity of Beasts, than the politeness of Men. The Poets
have carried Matters too far, but their meaning was, that our Extravagancies
don't proceed from Nature, that she never recommended them to us, that it is
not she which says; Ales Phasiacis petita Colchis,
Atque Afrae Volucres placent palato
Quod non sunt faciles.
That she did not invent vain gaudy Equipages, purple Habits, and a long train
of Lacqueys; and in fine, that it is we who abuse the Gifts of Heaven, and the
Advantages we have over the rest of the Creation.

What then can be the meaning of living according to Nature? must we abstain
from those things she has made us Masters of? I don't pretend that, but am
rather inclined to believe, we ought to make use of them, provided it be done
pursuant to the Dictates of Nature.

We ought to use these things after such a manner, that we may easily part with
them; we ought to be Masters of them, and not Slaves to them; we ought not
impatiently desire to attain them, not to abandon our selves to despair upon
the Loss of them. Let us quietly enjoy them as occasion serves, but not search
after them with inquietude and pain.

There is no condition that does not sit well upon a wise Man. For this reason
I shall never quarrel with a Philosopher for living in a Palace, but shall at
the same time not excuse him if he cannot content himself with a Cottage. I
shall not be scandalized to behold him in the apparel of Kings, provided he has
not their Ambition.

Let Aristippus possess the riches of Croesus, it matters not; he will throw
them away as soon as they incommode him.

Let Plato sit down at the Table of Dionysius the Tyrant. Sometimes he will eat
nothing but Olives.

We don't at all blame the possession of Riches; we only condemn those Persons
that are mere Slaves to their wealth.

Poverty of it self will never make us wise; it may indeed render us incapable
of committing certain Disorders, but then there are others which it cannot
remedy.

The sordid eating of the Cynics did neither contribute to their Tranquillity,
nor to their Modesty.

Ambition followed Diogenes into his Tub; and there it was he had the
Presumption to command Alexander the proudest of all Men.

All external Accidents will become indifferent to us, if we have moderation of
Soul; that is, if we are wise, and follow the Dictates of Nature.

I own it is harder to follow them in abundance than in necessity; and that our
Moderation has much less to apprehend from the miseries of Adversity, than the
snares of Plenty: But then it is infinitely more glorious to surmount them, and
the loss of false Joys does only recommend to us the Possession of solid ones.

A Man does but faintly, if at all, relish that Felicity which costs him
nothing, and for which he is obliged to mere chance. It is necessary that Wisdom
should give it us: nay sometimes it is necessary that Pain itself should lead
us to Pleasure.

One that enters the Lists at the Olympic Games with a design to fight, in
case no body offers to appear against him, may well enough be crowned, but for
this does not deserve the Title of Victorious.

Storms and Tempests give Reputation to Pilots. Had the Chastity of Penelope
been never put to the Proof, it might have been said of her, that she wanted
Gallants to debauch her.

Let us not therefore fly the World; let us not abandon the Court; let us not
hide our selves in a Desert, from whence Philosophy drew the first Men. Let us
possess Riches, let us not refuse to enter upon public Offices. If we are
wise, we shall enjoy these things without the least danger; we shall steer
safely by these Rocks, we shall behold all these Objects with an indifferent
eye. And if they are taken from us, we shall testify to all the World, by our
not casting our Eyes back upon them, that we despise them, and that we were
never wedded to them.

It is scandalous for a wise Man to fly, and to be subdued by his Desires,
which as they are not in reality according to Nature, so they can boast of no
other Credit, than what the depraved Opinion of Mankind bestows upon them.

I have thus in part explained wherein the Pleasure of the Epicureans consists,
what it is they mean by living up to Nature, in short what their Doctrine and
true Sentiments are. Let us now consider whether this Opinion deserves the
hatred of Mankind, or whether we have any reason to ridicule it. Let us examine
whether this Pleasure favors Debauchery and Excess, or whether any thing in
the World can be more sober and chaste than it.

If you enquire of Epicurus what it is to live voluptuously, he will answer
that it is to disengage our selves from too vigorous a pursuit of Riches, to
resist and suppress evil Desires, to contemn Honors, to make our selves
Masters of Fortune; and in a Word, to enjoy an absolute and uninterrupted Peace
and repose of mind.

All his Precepts center here, true sincere Pleasure in only to be found here;
and in effect we ought only to search her here,; not in a brutal satisfaction
of the Senses, nor in any violent emotions of the Appetites.

It is too pure to depend wholly upon the Body; Reason is both the Mistress and
Rule of it, the Senses are only its Servants: and therefore whatever mighty
delights we may expect to find in good eating, or in the Pleasures of the eye,
or in Perfumes and Music, yet if we don't come to these things with a Calmness
and Tranquillity of Soul, we shall find our selves miserably disappointed; we
shall abuse our minds with a false Joy, and embrace a Phantom, a mere
appearance of Pleasure for Pleasure itself.

Consume, if you are so minded, all the odoriferous Wood of Arabia the Happy,
revel in the arms of Venus, feed upon Nectar and Ambrosia, enjoy all the
Pleasures that the most fruitful Poet ever formed in his Imagination. All this
will but create Vexation and Bitterness, if we feel the least Inquietude
within; and our Melancholy will force us to complain in the midst of these
sweet Entertainments.

I will give you an Example of this, that shall fully convince you how
impossible it is for a Man to relish Pleasure when his Mind is disturbed.

You have without question read of the mighty Feast which Tigellinus made for
Nero, and therefore may recall this great scene of Intemperance into your
memory, the Luxury and Fame of which make no little noise even in our times. In
all appearance it was the greatest Effort that the most excessive Prodigality,
joined to the most exquisite Niceness, could make; in short, it was impossible
for sensuality to advance a step beyond it. Agrippa's Pond was more chosen to
be the Scene of this extraordinary Feast it was kept on board a most
magnificent Vessel, which being drawn by an infinite number of others seemed to
move insensibly. All these Vessels were curiously enriched with Gold and Ivory;
the Rowers were so many beautiful Boys, or to speak better, so many Cupids or
Gods of Love. The Ocean furnished this Entertainment with Fish; and the several
Provinces of the Empire with a prodigious variety of other Dishes. Not to be
tedious, the great Plenty of it was only to be matched with the extreme
choiceness of the Provisions. I don't speak of the infamous Houses erected on
the banks of this Pond, that were all filled with Ladies of Quality. I don't
speak of the Courtisans that were here beheld naked. The Night itself
contributed to the Pleasure of this Debauch; its Darkness was overcome by an
infinite number of Illuminations; and its Silence agreably disturbed with the
harmony of several Consorts.

Would you now know whether Nero took pleasure in all these things, and whether
he parted from the Banquet satisfied and content? You need only consider with
your self that he carried the remembrance of his Crimes, and the remorse of his
Conscience about him. Having done this, you will soon conclude that Despair
accompanied him, that he suffered as much as the greatest Criminal, and that
although his outside carried the show of a Triumph, yet he was acting a
terrible Tragedy in his Soul.

If he felt any Joy 'twas that of frantic Persons; he owed his Pleasure to his
Fury or his Drunkenness, and was no longer happy than he was abandoned by his
Reason.

I say the same thing of those Sots that accompanied him; for I cannot believe,
that either Seneca, or Thraseas Paetus, or Bareas Soranus, who lived up to
Nature amidst the universal corruption of their Age, were in the number of his
Guests: without doubt he had none but such whom a Life full as irregular as his
own made him love; who advised him to all his Crimes, who were the Executors of
them, and before whom he might not be obliged to blush.

A Herd of such profligate Wretches never aspired to true Happiness; there was
not one wise Man in the whole Company; now Pleasure has no influence on Minds
that are corrupted and spoiled with all sorts of Debauchery and Excess.

-- Quemvis media erue turba
Aut ob avaritiam, aut misera ambitione laborat.
Hic nuptarum insanit amoribus, hic puerorum.
In short, they lay open to all those Passion that disturb the Peace of the
Soul, and consequently were not in a condition to relish the Pleasure we speak
of.

I could wish that Fpicurus had been present at this Assembly, and declared his
Opinion in the face of the World. I am confident he would have spoke the truth
before Nero himself; that he would never have dreaded Death, which was looked
upon by him to be a thing indifferent, and am apt to imagine he would have
explained himself after this manner: Oh unfortunate Prince! how strangely art
thou infatuated to believe, that Pleasure consists in Intemperance, which is as
far removed from all Excess, as thou art from the true felicity of Life. Thou
draggest thy misery about thee wherever thou go, and in spite of all thy
endeavors, thou art not able to purchase one moments repose from thy
Conscience. Load thy Tables with the most exquisite Dainties that were ever
eaten; drink the most generos Wines that Greece and Italy can afford; and after
this wallow in all the most abominable Varieties of Luxury and Incontinence.
Thou will find nothing there that can satisfy thee, and when thy body is
surfeited with them, thy mind will still be upon the search after Pleasure.
These are not the things that render Life happy; it is Prudence only which
causes the Sovereign good; which will teach thee to regulate thy desires
according to Nature, and in this regular state thou will find what thou will
never be able to find in these Disorders. If thou want any thing cast thy
eyes upon this common Mother, and she will give thee wherewith to content thy
self easily. Art thou thirsty? She has carefully provided Rivers and Fountains
in every place to quench it. Art thou hungry? there is no part of the Universe
so barren, but thou may meet with Fruits to relieve thy self: if thou can
not be satisfied with these things, much less shall thou ever be satisfied with
excess. Pleasure is nothing but a privation of Pain. Consult thy hunger and
thirst, and they will make thee find Pleasure in the simplicity of Nature; and
Bread and Water will supply the Place of the choicest Repast thou can think
of, when once thou have need of them. At present thou art not in this
Condition, thou do not allow thy stomach time to digest thy Meat: thy
Intemperance daily lays in a new stock of Crudities, and hastens that Death
which gives thee so many cruel Apprehensions. Thus thou sit down at Feasts
without finding any pleasure in them, because thou do commit a violence upon
Nature, and force her to obey thy desires: but know for a certain truth, that
they are contrary to her, and that the Irregularities of thy Body darken the
light of thy Reason. Don't imagine therefore to find any relish in those
Pleasures thou proposest to thy self: it is only to be found in those that are
permitted by Nature. The Ambition of servants carries them to a fond longing
after Crowns. If they were once Kings, they would then desire to be the only
Monarchs of the World; and when arrived to that height they would be calling
out for Incense and Sacrifices. The Fable of the Giants instructs us, that
Earth has presumed to dispute the Pre-eminence with Heaven. It Is the same in
all other wild disorderly desires: No one is happy but the Person that knows
how to regulate them; and as this can be done by no one but a wise Man, whose
peculiar Talent it is, so it only belongs to him to command the Universe. He,
and only he, can extract Pleasure from all things; he alone uses these delights
with sobriety, and despises them even while he possesses them. As for thee, who
dishonourest the race of Augustus, and who art the infamy of Mankind, over whom
the Indignation of the Gods has placed thee: do what thou will, thou will be
always miserable, thou will always carry thy Tormenters about thee: thou will
never free thy self one minute from the horrors of thy Conscience, and in the
midst of the Regale thou will not taste one drop of Wine, which shall not
represent to thy Imagination the Blood of those Innocents, that thy Cruelty has
shed.

Behold, unless I am mistaken, what Epicurus wonld have said upon this
occasion. Behold how he would have justified his Philosophy; behold how he
would have reprimanded the Vices of the Emperor.

But since it is utterly impossible that the Mind, which is the Judge of
Pleasure, should perfectly relish it, if the Body, whose Ministry it uses, does
languish under any torment; Epicurus teaches, that all privation of bodily
pain, as well as that of the mind, is necessary toward the consummation of
that sovereign Good, which he calls Pleasure.

And to say the truth, there is so immediate a Communication between the Mind
and the Flesh, that it is very difficult to separate their Pleasures and their
Suffering. It is hard to comprehend how the Soul can be perfectly happy, while
Diseases afflict its Companion the Body: how it can think of Joy whilst the
violence of pain extorts Complaints from it, or how it can be sensible of
Pleasure, whilst it is present at all those Places where the Indisposition
rages.

Let the Stoics boast as long as they please of the insensibility of their
wise Man, and of this rigorous Virtue that laughs at Pain. When they come once
to the suffering part, they will find that their Body is by no means of this
Opinion, and that although these Discourses are really magnificent and lofty,
yet for all that they are neither to be reconciled to Nature, nor to Truth.

I will not justify this Proposition by the Examples of the generality of
their Philosophers. I will not cite any name which they may have the least
Pretense to reject, nor urge any Man upon them whose Virtue may be called in
question: Hercules alone shall assert the truth of what I have delivered.

This Hercules, who is reckoned amongst the Gods, whom so many Exploits have
made immortal, and whom the Stoics have chose for a perfect model of their
Strength and Wisdom. Let us a little reflect upon the dying behavior of this
Hero, and consider the last Actions of his Life. Without doubt this invincible
Man will depart out of the World, as he came into it, by doing something
Heroical and great. To be sure he will not let a syllable drop from him that may
dishonor his mighty Exploits, or seem unworthy of his former Character.

We shall find our selves extremely mistaken if we are of this Opinion. The
force of his Pain triumphs over his Courage, his Constancy yields to the rage
of the Poison that burns him. He does not only complain, but he weeps, he
cries, he stamps, he flings about -- At circum gemunt petrae
Locrorum, and alta Euboeae promontoria.
And by these his last effects of Rage and Despair he quits his life to go and
take his place amongst the Gods.

Let the Stoics therefore come over to our party; Let them amuse us no more
with their insensibility, let them not pretend that their wise Man can be happy
amidst his Tortures, and let them not despise pain with their usual insolence
since they see Hercules himself could not support himself under the Pressure of
it.

But if they answer, that the Poet has been guilty of a great Solecism in
representing Hercules after this manner, and continue to give other Relations
of this Hero contrary to the Authority of Books, and the Consent of the
Theater, Posidonius heretofore one of the Masters of Cicero, and the greatest
of all the Stoics, (for so this celebrated Disciple of his calls him) will
furnish us with a notorious Example, and we shall see one of the strongest
Pillars of the Porch shaken by a slight Indisposition.

The Gout which at last attacqued this Philosopher, proved to be the rock on
which his Constancy split. He complained of his pain with as much impatience as
any ordinary man would have done: and tho he reproached it by vaunting that all
its Efforts should never constrain him to own that it was an Evil, yet he could
not forbear to afflict himself with it, to complain of it, and herein he
testified more Opiniatrete than Constancy and Reason.

It seems that Cicero was scandalized at weakness of this wise Man, or at least
that he was astonished at it. I have beheld, says he, Possidonius the greatest
Man amongst the Stoics suffer the pains of the Gout with as little Resolution
and Bravery as my Landlord Nichomachus the Tyrian, whom he esteemed but as an
ordinary Man.

And indeed I am so far from believing that the Felicity of Humane Life is
compatible with pain, that I am of Opinion it would be the Action of a wise Man
to quit it, in case he were not able to set such an uncomfortable Attendant as
some distance from him. And although I have the memory of Maecenas in great
Veneration, and think that no one ought to mention his Name but with the
profoundest respect; yet I could wish, if it were possible to be done, that
some Verses of his were utterly lost, and that he had never informed us, that
he was more fond of a wretched Life than (I don't say a Philosopher) but a Man
of the meanest Courage ought to be.

You cannot offer him Life upon never so disadvantageous Terms, but he readily
accepts it. Let him be deformed it signifies nothing, let him be crooked he
still comforts himself that he is alive. Let him endure all the united Torments
of the most violent Diseases, he is still contented, if they are not mortal;
and though you should condemn him to the most cruel Death imaginable, yet, by
his good will, he would not be brought to quit his Life, provided he could
still preserve it amidst the most terrible Punishments.

Debilem facito manu,
Debilem pede, coxa,
Tubber astrue gibberum,
Lubricos quate dentes
Vita dum superest, been est.
Hanc mihi vel acuta
Si sedeam cruce, sustine.
His effeminacy, no doubt on it, dictated these Verses to him, whilst he tasted
all the pleasures of Life. He had never experimentally known what pain was
before; and I dare boldly aver, That if he had found himself in this lamentable
Condition of his own choosing, he would have earnestly desired Death to rid him
of his Torments.

By this it is an easy matter to conjecture that Maecenus, was a Man of
Pleasure, but not an Epicurean; since those Philosophers had too elevated a
Soul to condescend to such ignominious Conditions. They were less apprehensive
of Death than of Pain, and sometimes renounced Pleasure for the sake of Pain.

And the reason is, That Epicurus very well judging that the generality of Men,
corrupted by the enjoyment of Pleasures, and suffering themselves blindly to be
hurried on by their Appetites, would not be in a Condition to foresee the
Griefs and Afflictions, which would be the certain consequences of their
irregular Courses: And on the other hand, fearing that the love of Ease, and an
effeminacy of Spirit, joined to the fear of Labor and Pain, would oblige them
to be deficient in their respective Duties, and render them inserviceable in
the whole course of their Life; he was of opinion that at some certain times,
when a wise Man had full liberty to choose for himself, and nothing hindered him
to pursue his full Satisfaction, he might abandon himself to Pleasure, and
entirely remove himself from Pain: But then that there were certain
conjunctures, when the obligation of his duty, and the necessity of affairs,
ought to incline him not to refuse Pain, and to reject Pleasure.

It was this generous Maxim that obliged Cato Vticensis to dye. For although he
might have continued safe upon the Ruins of his own Party, and Caesar would have
been proud to have given him his Life: Nevertheless the Shame to survive the
loss of the public Liberty, and the Infamy of Servitude, would not permit this
generous Person to deliberate, Whether he ought to choose the Pain of dying
gloriously, to avoid the Pleasure of living after a manner, which to him seemed
unworthy of a Roman.

It was this Maxim that obliged Regulus to deliver himself into the hands of
his Enemies, where the cruelty of his Executioners was less sensible to him,
than the remorse for having broke his word would have been.

It was this Maxim, which as it made Fabricius despise the Treasures of the
King of Epirus, so it made him despise those evil desires which attend the
possession of Riches, to preserve the repose of his Mind, and the chief
Pleasure.

In fine, it was this Maxim which compelled Cicero to declaim against Anthony,
and to devote himself for the preservation of the Republic, at a time when he
might have lived peaceably at his own House, and enjoyed all the ease of Life,
and the diversions of Study.

There is nothing commendable in the World which cannot be reduced to this
Maxim; and whatever Heroic Actions these great Men have done, you will find
that if they chose one Pain it was to avoid a greater; and on the other hand,
if they have not practiced certain Pleasures, it was only to acquire by this
abstinence others that were more satisfactory and solid.

For to what other cause can you assign their illustrious Actions? Do you
imagine that they parted out of this World with so much Indifference? That they
rejected the possession of Gold? That they drew dangerous Enemies upon their
Heads, and did not at the same time think that what they did was either for
their Profit or Pleasure?

Don't let us do them this Injustice. Don't let us impute the effects of their
Wisdom to the efforts of their irregular Minds. Let us believe that in all
these things they acted with Deliberation; and let us not represent them in a
worse Condition than the most savage Animals; which are never so strangely
transported, but that we may easily to conclude whither the impetuosity of
their Motion tends.

Cato parted with his Life; it was become a Burden to him. He found much less
Pain to quit the World than to submit to Caesar, whom he did not believe to be
an honest Man; and much more Pleasure in not Living at all, than in Living
under an ignominious Servitude.

Regulus returned back to Carthage: had he not done so, he had been accused of
Perfidiousness.

Fabricius could not be corrupted by Pyrrhus: in this he testified his
Integrity, he served his Country; and with the bare pleasure of refusing
Riches, satisfied himself infinitely more, than if he accepted them.

In short, Cicero publicly reproached Antony, and declared himself his capital
Enemy. If he had no reason to do so, he deserves indeed to be blamed; but if he
designed to establish the tranquillity of the Republic, though it were at the
expense of his own; if he endeavored to ruin Anthony that he might save Rome:
besides that by this Conduct he contributed to the Safety of his Fellow
Citizens, wherein his own was in a manner wrapped up, so much more did he deserve
the praises of all the World, and the love of the Roman People.

These great Men, in Truth of History, were not of the Family of Epicurus; nay
one of them, in some of his Writings, has attempted to confute his Opinions;
but it is sufficient that the Authority of their Examples is to be found in the
Doctrine of this Philosopher; and that the World should be informed that Virtue
alone was not their chief Motive, or at least that what they call Virtue, ought
to be named Pleasure.

Not but that several Persons of the greatest Bravery have been bred up in this
School; who in a degenerate corrupt Age have done Actions full as vigorous, and
noble, as those of the ancient Romans in the most Flourishing days of their
Republic.

Under Nero's Empire the World no less admired the Death of Petronius, than
they had done that of Seneca. The Emperor's Tutor did not purchase any Glory
by dying, which his Master of the Revels did not afterward acquire: And the
common opinion was, That this Stoic, who had all along preached up a contempt
of Life, did not quit it more generously, than Petronius who studied all the
Pleasures of it.

I am obliged for the honor of Epicarus to enlarge somewhat upon the Life and
Death of this Courtier, who was one of his greatest Disciples; and it will be
impossible for me to handle this Subject without giving you a sensible
Entertainment. Since you are not at this time of day to be made acquainted with
the Qualities of illustrious Men, I am sure you will not be unwilling to allow
Petronius a place in this number, and to observe, en passant, the marks of his
Generosity and Wisdom.

This famous Epicurean, far from resembling our modern Debauchees, that eat and
drink away their Estates, made profession of a cultivated polite Luxury, and
minded nothing but refined Pleasures. And as Industry and Diligence give a
Reputation to the rest of Mankind, he was the only Person in the World that
acquired it by his ease, and sitting still. His Words and Actions were very
free and negligent; and as they showed the candor and sweetness of his Temper,
and carried an air of Simplicity, they were always received with a great deal
of Satisfaction and Delight.

Nevertheless this excellent Man, very well knowing that there is a time when a
wise Man ought to quit the repose and tranquillity of his Life to serve the
Public, abandoned this happy way of Living, when he was elected Proconsul of
Bithynia, and afterward Consul; and by acquitting himself worthily in these
illustrious Employs, he demonstrated by his vigor, and by his conduct, that he
was capable of managing the greatest Affairs.

At his leaving these Offices he betook himself to his old way of Living, and
afterward happening to become one of Nero's greatest Friends, although this
Prince had none but vicious Inclinations, yet he was so strongly enchanted by
his merit, that he made him the Arbitrator or Comptroller of all his Pleasures;
and believed that amidst all his Affluence and Plenty, he ought not to esteem
any thing as sweet and agreeable, unless Petronius first approved it.

I speak here only of Lawful Pleasures, and Virtuous Delights for our Epicurean
was so far from having any Share in Nero's brutal Excesses, that this Prince
was in a strange Confusion when he knew they were arrived to the knowledge of
Petronius, who reproached him with them in some Writings; and caused Silia to
be punished, because he suspected that she had revealed them to him.

From that moment Tigellinus looked upon him as his Competitor; and fearing
least by the means of this wise and honest Pleasure, whereof he made
Profession, he might effect what Seneca could not by the Authority of his Sect,
that is, recall Nero from the disorders of his Life; he resolved to destroy him,
imagining there was no other way to establish himself but by ruining him.

To this end he awaked that Prince's Cruelty, to which, as being his
predominant Passion, all his other Pleasures gave way. He accuses Petronius
with being a Friend to Scevinus, who was in Piso's Conspiracy: he corrupts one
of his Slaves to impeach him, takes from him all means of defending himself,
and gets the greatest part of his Domestics to be chained and imprisoned.

In this condition, a Man of less Generosity would either have flattered
himself with the prospect of his Prince's Clemency, or at least have prolonged
his Life to the last extremity.

As for him, he does quite otherwise: he believed it was downright Weakness or
Shame to bear any longer the Torments of Hope or Fear; and being resolved to
die, he searched a way to do it with the same Tranquillity wherein he had lived.

So not being willing to quit life with Precipitation, he ordered his Veins to
be opened, and afterward to be bound up again; and then taking the Ligatures
off as he pleased himself, he entertained his Friends with agreeable
Conversations; not affecting to make any serious Discourses before them, by
which he might pretend to the glory of Constancy.

Nor would he employ the last Hours of his Life in speaking of the Immortality
of the Soul, nor of the Opinions of the Philosophers; but having pitched upon a
more voluptuous and more natural sort of Death, he rather chose to imitate the
Sweetness of a Swan; and therefore caused some delightful moving Verses to be
repeated to him.

Nevertheless he reserved a few moments to dispose of his own Affairs; he
rewarded abundance of his Slaves, and some of them he ordered to be punished.
Then perceiving the Hour of his Death approached, after he had used a little
exercise he laid himself peaceably down to sleep; that his Death, which was
violent, might however resemble, as much as possible, one that was fortuitous
and natural.

People, if they please, may still talk of Socrates, and mightily commend the
Constancy, with which he drank the Poison. Petronius is not at all inferior to
him; nay he may justly pretend to have the advantage over him; as having
abandoned a life infinitely more delicious than that of this wise Grecian, with
the same Tranquillity of mind, and the same Equality of Soul.

But that you may better comprehend the great value of this Pleasure, which I
am here maintaining, I will give you the Portraicture of a Man, who perfectly
possesses it, and by a Representation of his Counterpart, which I will
afterward give you, put you out of all manner of doubt, that Epicurus's
pleasure is to be infinitely preferred.

Imagine to your self a Man in perfect health, plenty and affluence; innocently
enjoying the Delights of this World; his Soul peaceable, serene and easy;
possessing always, and that in abundance, the most agreeable Pleasures of the
Body and Mind; being neither troubled with the presence, nor threatened with the
fear of any Grief whatever.

What Condition can you propose more excellent, or more desirable than this?
For before a Person can arrive to this exalted state, it is necessary that he
possess a Force of Soul proof against Death and Pain; that his Mind be entirely
disengaged from all the false Opinions of the vulgar; that it be not disturbed
with impertinent Fears; nay, that it suffer not the Pleasures it has tasted to
be lost; but always entertain it self with a sweet remembrance of them. This is
to arrive to the highest Period of Felicity; where the defect of nothing can be
pretended, as to the full consummation of Humane Happiness.

On the other hand let us represent to our selves a Man o'erwhelmed with all
the Evils that can afflict Humane Nature; deprived of all hopes to see them
ever diminished; neither feeling any present Pleasure, nor having ever tasted
any, nor daring to promise himself any for the time to come: and after we have
owned that nothing can be imagined more miserable than this Condition, let us
at the same time confess, that nothing can be more happy than the voluptuous
Epicurean.

Now if you think that this happy Person, whose Picture I have drawn, is no
where to be found but only in my own Imagination; and that so perfect a Scene
of Felicity cannot be among Men, any otherwise than in Idea; I protest you have
wrong Sentiments both of Humane Condition and the goodness of Heaven; and I am
obliged to draw you out of this Error, that you may no longer murmur at our
Misery, and the Injustice of our Destiny.

I find this Original done by the hand of one of the greatest Masters, placed
in the Cabinet of one of the most curious Authors that ever writ. It is
Felicity it self painted under the Character of Orata, for so does Cicero call
him, and here follows a faithful Translation of what he recounts concerning his
Happiness.

Nothing was wanting in Orata, (a Man extremely rich, very polite, and very
delicate) of all that contributes to make a Man live voluptuously, and to make
him be loved, and to enjoy a perfect and entire health. For he possessed a very
plentiful Fortune in the finest Country in the World; he had always store of
Friends about him, serviceable, pleasant and diverting; and he dexterously
managed every thing to the best Advantage of Life. And to comprehend all in a
few Words, his Designs met always as happy a Success, and as favorable an
Accomplishment as Man could wish.

I don't believe that there is any thing to be blamed in this condition,
provided no sudden Change befalls it. We must therefore conclude Orata to be
perfectly happy, if he can still continue in the fortunate state, wherein we
have showed him.

Thus I have given you, unless I am mistaken, a Portraicture that very well
resembles the first Design which I was to lay before you; and which you mistook
for a Work of Fancy, and the Product of mere Imagination.

Now let us turn the Tables* and find out some miserable Wretches to oppose to
this Orata. Let us compare to him, if you please, some of those unfortunate
Persons, whom we behold on the ancient Theater; one of whom judges himself too
criminal to weild the Scepter of the Greeks; who is afraid to dishonor the
race of Pelops, from whence he owns himself descended; who dares not show
himself before Men, who dares not enter the Temples.

Let us compare to him another of the same rank, who making Signs to his
Friends not to approach him, looks upon himself to be so unfortunate, that he
is apprehensive, lest his very shadow should prove contagious. Or rather let us
think no more of Atreus and Thyestes; let us forget their Crimes, the
remembrance of which still inspires us with horror; let us not cast our eyes
any longer upon a Family which has forced the Sun to go backward; and which has
furnished Hell with one of its most famous Punishments. -- Occulte
Noxitudo obliteretur Pelopidum.
Let us rather choose Heroes, but Persons full as unhappy as the Offspring of
Tantalus. Let the Son of Amphiareus make his Entrance, frighted with Visions,
and demanding help against the Furies that press him.

What do I see! Whence do these Flames arise!
From gaping Tombs they seem to strike my eyes.
Oh help me to put out this cruel Fire,
In whose embraces I shall soon expire.
At me their Whips the restless Furies shake,
Their angry Snakes a dreadful Consort make.
See, see, they come! I feel the pointed Pain,
And in my laboring soul unruly Tempests reign.
And after Alcmeon has made us see the Tortures of Conscience, and Pressures of
the Soul; let Philoctetes entertain us with the Miseries to which he finds
himself reduced; let him speak, let him complain of his ill fortune. Does he
not paint out a very wretched Person when he says? Who ever thou art, in what
ever Country known,
Whom Winds upon the Lesbian shore have thrown.
Pity a Wretch, abondon'd by his Stars,
Who for the space of Nine revolving years
Has been devoured by Sicknesses, and Cares.
Behold these Cliffs, whose tops invade the Sky:
Here tortured with my pains I piecemeal die.
View but the frightful horrors of this place:
The Scene of all my Sorrows and Disgrace,
Where robbed of Glory, to a Rock confined,
I bear all Plagues of Body and of Mind.
And my keen Arrows for the Birds prepare:
Their Plumes my raiment, and their Flesh my fare.


After this let him show us the pains of the Body; when his Ulcer being
inflamed he despairs, he bemoans himself in these following Lines: Alas! What
Friend to ease me of my Pain,
Will kindly send me headlong to the Main.
Now, now, quick Shootings all my Sinews tear,
What Racks, what Torments can with this compare?
A raging Ulcer angry Heaven did send;
Which an eternal Fever does attend.
Thus in Complaints the day, in Groans the night I spend.


Or if these Misfortunes are not sufficicient, let us heap together, as Ovid
has done, all the Plagues, all the Calamities that old Fables afford us; and
wish they may light upon one single Person, and then judge whether his
Condition is happier than that of Orata, or of the famous Vatia, who merited
heretofore this Exclamation, O Vatia, you alone know what it is live; and
conclude all with an Exclamation of the like nature; O Epicurus, you and only
you know how to Philosophize.

From all these evident Truths it is an easy matter to conclude, that Pleasure
is not only worthy the Commendations of all Men; but that it is the sovereign
Good, and only end.

Nevertheless, since this first Proposition makes the principal point in the
Doctrine of Epicurus; and as it is the truest, so it is also the most
contested; since I say we have begun to undeceive the Enemies of this
Proposition, we ought to conclude with Instructions, and leave the truth of
this Opinion so well established in their minds, that they shall have no
occasion to question it, without being guilty of the greatest Injustice.

That they may therefore submit to so Catholic a Truth, I only desire them to
turn their eyes on the side of Nature; the Effects of which are reasonable, and
the Experiences certain.

They will not only find that it authorizes what we have asserted; but it will
likewise give them such clear, such visible Demonstrations of it, that unless
they hoodwink themselves on purpose, they must be forced to submit to it.

Let them consider what this Common Mother does in the Birth of Animals; that
is to say, in its perfect Purity and before its Corruption. They will soon
observe that it inspires them with the love of Pleasure, and an aversion to
Pain; that it carries them toward what pleases them, and teaches them to avoid
what would hurt them; that it instructs them (if I may be allowed the
Expression) both in what is good and what is bad; and when they attain the
former, she causes them to rejoice, and be satisfied with it.

This is the Reason why our Philosopher following the Dictates of Nature,
pronounces a voluptuous Life to be the end of Man; but does not give himself
the Trouble to prove so obvious a Proposition.

As he imagined there was no necessity of force of reason to persuade People
that Fire is hot, that Snow is white, and that Honey is sweet, because they are
all sensible things; so he believed, that to make Men comprehend the Love of
Pleasure, which may easily be known by the Effects of Nature, there was
occasion for no more than a bare Observation of these Effects, and an ordinary
Reflection.

Nevertheless, though we have Nature on our side, that is to say, an infallible
Decision; though we find in our Souls a natural Inclination to avoid Evil, and
to follow Pleasure; though the very beginnings of our Desires, of our Disgusts,
and of all our Actions, derive their Original from Pleasure and Pain; yet
because some Philosophers pretend that Pain ought not to be reckoned amongst
Evils, nor Pleasure amongst things that are good, and that to establish this
Opinion they bring abundance of plausible Arguments, we must not so strongly
rely upon our own Opinions, as we ought to keep up to the simple Truth.

We must therefore produce Reasons in behalf of Epicurus's Doctrine, and show
that Reason as well as Nature is of his side.

And in effect in those Philosophers that have condemned this Pleasure had well
considered her beforehand; if they had thoroughly known her before they
attacked her, they would easily have discovered, that it was not she they
meant; that they were mistaken in their Invectives, and only rejected her out
of a consideration of those Pains that sometimes attend her; they would have
perceived that those Pains did not proceed from her, but from the
Irregularities of those Persons that use her ill. And then they had never
decryed her after so furious a manner.

For they must be forced to acknowledge, That there is not one single Person in
the World that hates Pleasure, as it is Pleasure; or loves Pain, merely as it
is Pain.

Now because those that abuse the most innocent Pleasures, do afterward feel a
great deal of Torment and Uneasiness, and that on the other hand, there are
certain times when Labor and Pain produce and prepare some sort of Pleasures:
this has been the reason, that these Philosophers, who only considered the
consequences of an ill managed Pleasure, and the Advantages of a profitable and
necessary Labor, have effaced the former out of the number of good things, and
then placed Pain amongst those that are desirable.

But now it is high time to employ all our Forces to carry our Enterprises.
This is the hour we ought to Combat in good earnest, that so we may obtain a
glorious Victory.

It is not our business here to defend Pleasure, nor to consider it as the
Sovereign good of humane Life: we must elevate her above the throne of Virtue
itself that disputes this Title with her; and although we don't banish this
Virtue from it, whereof we make Profession, we must nevertheless constrain her
to resign the first place to Pleasure.

In short, as all the Philosophers in the World are agreed, that the ultimate
end a Man ought to propose to himself here, is a quiet and agreeable Life;
several of them have been mistaken in placing this Life in Virtue, and not in
Pleasure; and Suffered themselves to be led aside by the gaudy Splendour of a
Name that imposes upon them, without considering a Truth which Nature it self
forces them to own.

For certain it is, if they would but consult and believe her, they would
confess that these same Virtues, which they are used to call Magnificent and
Pompous, are no farther to be esteemed than as they contribute to Pleasure; and
consequently that not being courted for their own sake, they ought not to be
preferred to the motive from which they receive all their merit, and all their
value.

It Is after the same manner that we approve Physic, not upon the account of
the Art, but because of our Health; and the Skill of Pilots deserves
Commendation for no other reason, but the great utility of Navigation. After
the same manner we should not desire Wisdom, which we may call the Art of Life,
if it were not serviceable to us, and did not ^irectly lead us to the
possession of Plea^ure.

There is no necessity to repeat in this place what this Pleasure is; or to
desire you once more not to despise this Name, which Men have corrupted.

You know well enough how severe Epicurus makes it; and you ought to own to me
that it is no disgrace for Wisdom to yield to it, and to be respected only for
her sake.

We will confess to you likewise on our side, that unless a Man is a
Philosopher he cannot be happy, and that Wisdom is the only way to arrive at
Pleasure.

In a word, the weakness of humane of Nature laboring under the ignorance Good
and Evil; floating generally between these two things, without being able to
discern them, and often choosing with Joy what it ought to have studiously
avoided; in so strange a Blindness it so happens that Men instead of the
felicity they desire, get at a farther distance from it; that they become
miserable instead of finding themselves satisfied; and that in exchange of the
Pleasures they proposed to meet, they plunge themselves in Sorrows that torment
and trouble them.

It is necessary therefore that a right application of Wisdom should draw them
out of so miserable a Condition, that its light should direct them in this
wretched darkness, that its force should deliver them from the Servitude of
wicked Desires, unjust Terrors, and rash Opinions, and in imitation of
Hercules clear an open passage for them through so many Monsters, and safely
conduct them to Pleasure.

Wisdom alone performs these great things like a faithful, generous Guide; she
removes the difficulties of the way where she leads us.

It Is not sufficient that we don't wander; what is more, we must march in
security with her; and while the Winds and the Sea overwhelm those poor Vessels
that sail without her conduct, others that are steered by her enter the Harbor
without fearing the Tempest.

It Is in this Harbor that a wise Man finds Pleasure. Here it is that he
quietly contemplates the Pains of other Men; that he discovers all the
impertinent Errors wherewith their weakness is persecuted; that he observes
with what eagerness they strive to satisfy their Passions; that he sees them
press forward in throngs toward him, that shall advance himself highest in
Power, Riches, and Fortune. Certare ingenio, contendere nobilitate,
Noctes atque dies niti praestante labor
Ad summas emergere opes, rerumque potiri.
And that he cries out, having considered all these things, O miseras hominum
mentes! O pectora coeca!
Qualibus in tenebris vitoe, quantisque periclis
Degitur hoc aevi quodcunque est!
As for himself, nothing disquiets, nothing molests, nothing troubles him. He
is happy, he follows nature, he enjoys a perfect felicity; and in this
Situation, gives thanks to wisdom, which procured him this Pleasure.

Let us act like him, if we have a mind to be happy like him; let us cast our
selves into the arms of this Wisdom, let us endeavor to arrive at this
Pleasure, let us suppress those ill desires that rob us of it: They are
insatiable and dangerous; they don't only ruin private Persons, they destroy
whole Families; they ravage Kingdoms, they occasion Hatred, Division, Discord,
Sedition, and War; they tyrannize over those Souls that nourish them, and if we
carefully examine the Poets, we shall find that by the Torments of the Damned
they had a mind to represent those Persons whom these inward Plagues afflict.
Cui vultur jecur ultimum pererrat,
Et pectus trahit, intimasque sibras,
Non est quem Tytium vocant poetae,
Sed cordis mala, livor, atque luxus.
And thus, since by the only assistance of Wisdom we are able to crush these
Vipers; since she alone instructs how to resist Fortune, and that through her
means we arrive to obtain tranquillity, why should we fear to conclude that she
is not desirable, but only as she creates Pleasure, and secures us from Pain?

We must say the same thing of Temperance, and not desire her only for herself;
but because she preserves that peace, that serenity in our Souls, without which
we cannot be happy, and by the concord she inspires appeases our Trouble, and
gives us Pleasure.

It Is this Virtue that always comes to the relief of Wisdom: It Is she that puts
in execution what the other does only resolve; and as that shows us what we are
to avoid, and what we are to follow, this stops us in our career when we go
against the Counsels of the other, and believe our Senses rather than our
Reason.

It Is the oridle that keeps us in, when we are posting toward any unlawful
Pleasure; the hand that surely conducts us to the way of truth. In short, it is
the Virtue without which we can neither be happy nor wise.

And in truth what advantage is it to know what is Good, if we are too feeble
to put it in practice? To what purpose is it to see a Precipice, if we suffer
our selves to tumble down it? To give Wisdom leave to speak, but not to permit
her to act?

The generality of Men are reduced to this pass. All of them conclude in favor
of Wisdom, but don't know how to live up to what they have concluded.

They know that there are Pleasures the consequences of which are dangerous,
and severely prohibited by our Epicurus: but they laugh at the prohibitions of
this Philosopher, and abandon themselves to the tyranny of their disorderly
Passions.

They resemble the unfortunate Phaedria in Terence, and his Character, as it is
drawn by that excellent Man, suits them all from the highest to the lowest.

This outrageous Lover is sensible that he should do a foolish Action in
endeavoring to set himself at rights with his Mistress. He knows she is a
Coquette, and that himself is miserable. This gives him disturbance; this makes
him uneasy. But to what purpose? he does not amend his Condition. He still
suffers his love to control him; and at that very instant when he sees himself
ready to perish, at that very instant he perishes deliberately.

It Is certain that Phaedria does not want Wisdom; he only want Temperance. He
knows well enough what measures he ought to take to be at ease, but does not
put them in execution. He sees what is best for himself, and approves it, but
for all that follows what is worse.

Behold now the manners of those Men, whom we describe, admirably well expressed.
Behold an image of their Thoughts and Infirmities. Behold how for want of true
Wisdom, it is impossible for them to find Pleasure.

You loose your labor when you tell them that the Pleasure they pursue is
unreasonable, that it is not necessary, that the privation of it does not cause
any pain: In vain do you represent to them the Sicknesses, the Losses, the
Infamy that attend the enjoyment of it. In vain do you threaten them with the
punishments of the Laws, and the severity of the Magistrates. You can tell them
nothing but what they know, and what they are able to say upon occasion. What
are they the better for all this? They are Slaves to that very Folly they
detest as well as you, and resemble the Greek Philosophers who were allowed the
liberty to make a great Parade of those very Virtues they never practiced.

Besides these, there is another race of Men who in truth are not Philosophers,
but for all that manage their Cause with a world of Spirit and Vivacity.

These People, whom we may properly call the Prophaners of the Pleasure of
Epicurus, will by no means be persuaded to acknowledge Temperance for a Virtue,
but after their imperious way pretend that all happiness depends on mere fancy.

It is not worth the while to enter into a solemn dispute with such
unreasonable Creatures as they are. The severest return one can make them is to
leave them at liberty to do as they desire.

It Is sufficient for us to know that their Opinion is false, and that true
felicity consists only in those desires which flow from Temperance.

For it is not only a miserable thing to desire what is dishonest, but it is
infinitely more advantageous not to obtain what we desire, than to obtain what
we cannot desire without shame. In this view it is better to be of the Opinion
of that Ancient, who passing his Judgment of Camillus that was banished out of
Rome, while Manlius was Master there, preferred the Exile of the virtuous
Refugee to the Splendour of the dishonest Citizen.

Now in truth those that study Temperance, and manage the fruition of Pleasure
with that discretion that they find no After-claps; those certainly may call
themselves happy, and deserve the title of wise Men.

Their Pleasures are durable, because they are regular; and all their Life is
calm and serene, because it is innocent.

They have no inclination to run after forbidden Pleasures; nay, their felicity
consists in abstaining from them. They sometimes embrace Pain, but then it is
done with a design to avoid a greater. The use they make of Wisdom is by her
means to attain to a state of Tranquillity; and this makes it clear, that there
is no other way to enjoy this Pleasure, wherein Epicurus supposes the sovereign
Good to consist, but by the means of Virtue.

You would be amazed, and perhaps angry, if examining the rest of the Virtues,
and bringing them to the Touchstone of Pleasure, I should maintain that Valor
depends upon her no less than Wisdom and Temperance; and that this Virtue that
dares encounter Lions, that despises danger, and that without any concern or
emotion could behold the entire ruin of the World, produces nothing illustrious
but only as it regards Pleasure, and flows from no other source than it.

For in the first place we ought to take it for granted, that the Fatigues we
undergo, and the Pains we sustain, have nothing in them to induce us to court
them, if we view them simply, and separate them from other Considerations: That
Industry and Diligence, so much commended in affairs of Life, and that Valor
itself, of which we are now talking, are never put in execution but for some
design and motive.

This is not all; we may affirm, that these things have been introduced merely
for the ease of Life, and that the only reason we follow them is, that we may
live without trouble and fear; that we may free, as much as in us lies, our
body and our mind from those Maladies and Vexations which may afflict it, and
to taste with greater serenity that indolence which makes one part of
Epicurus's Pleasure.

And indeed how can you expect a Man should live happy when he perpetually
fears death? How can you imagine the famous Sicilian, whose Name is upon
record, should taste any Pleasure in the midst of his Feasting and Music, if
he everlastingly dreads the falling of the Sword, that threatens his Head, and
his Diadem.

Is it not an aggravation of misery to faint under our Pains, and not to have
courage enough to suffer those Misfortunes, which it is not in our power to
avoid?

This weakness of mind has it not led abundance of People to those Extremities
that are a disgrace and scandal to humane Nature?

What was it in your Opinion that gave occasion to the Poets to turn Hecuba
into a mad Bitch, but the Grief that overcame her, and constrained her to
imitate the fury of those Creatures?

Had she suppressed and conquered her Grief, or had she at least endeavored to
forget those subjects that occasioned it, without question she had never passed
from tears to despair, and from despair to rage.

Listen I pray to the Complaints she makes. Observe how by representing to
herself the miserable Condition she finds herself in at present, and from what
a height she is fallen; how by this conduct, I say, she feeds her sorrow upon
the Stage, and of her own accord provokes the motions of that Rage which is
ready to seize her.

Oh the severe Oppressions of my Grief!
What Place can give me refuge or relief?
To what far distant Region shall I run
The wild disorders of my Soul to shun?
Unhappy Troy, our late delight and pride,
By Grecian fraud and malice lies destroyed.
Tell me, ye Gods, where I my steps must bend?
Who will a poor despairing Queen befriend?
Pressed by my Wants, wandering from place to place,
While meager Famine stares me in the Face.
See how the insulting Argive Flame devours
Those Shrines that once received the heavenly Powers.
If the proud Flames their Temples will not spare,
But sacred Piles the common Fate must share.
After this she remembers herself of the Beauty of these Structures, and the
Riches of Asia, in order to raise her own Grief, and that of the Spectators;
for who is it that can avoid being sensibly touched with this Discourse? Must
Ilium then, the Scene of all my Joys,
Must all this Wealth be made a Grecian prize.
The rich aspiring Mansions of the Gods,
Worthy their names, their presence, and abodes,
And glittering Roofs --


Or what heart would she not inspire with horror and pity, when she thus goes
on? All this I saw consumed by impious Fire,
And Priam by a barbarous hand expire.
^ove's Altar with the Royal Victim stained,
And Hector's Blood by common dust profaned; Nor was this all.
But my prevailing Miseries to Crown,
From a high Tower his Son thrown headlong down.


So that I don't at all wonder if the people of Rome were strangely affected
when they heard these Verses repeated; or if when I read them my self I cannot
forbear the Tribute of a few Tears.

To say the Truth, Hecuba had great reason to complain of her ill Destiny, she
had lost her Husband, her Son, her Kingdom and her Liberty. If she had beheld
these Calamities without lamenting them, she had been insensible; and we should
be inhumane, if after so many Losses we should hinder her Tears.

But then, after she had for some time wept, we should not be at all unjust to
prescribe bounds to her Grief, to regulate her Complaints and her Sorrow; and
lastly, to advise her to oppose strength of Reason to that of Despair.

Some Persons that are touched with her Complaints may perhaps allege in her
Justification, that those who would limit her Grief, and not suffer it to
exceed its first Motions, would resign themselves up to it till the very last
Moments of their Life, if they once shared with her those Misfortunes the
weight of which they can only conjecture: and that our Philosophy which speaks
of nothing less than Conquests and Triumphs, would faint under such a pressure
of Calamities, if it saw them present and inevitable.

Now, for my part I wish a perpetual Sunshine of Prosperity to so tender, so
melting a Man as this is: for no doubt on it, if any Disgrace happens to him, he
will discover his Infirmities very plentifully: on this condition that by way
of requital to me for my Wish he will dispense with me for not believing what
he says, nor oblige me to judge of the strength of Philosophy by the weakness
of his Reason.

For without losing any time to refute word by word this sort of Reasoning,
which can obtain credit no where but amongst effeminate Men; I shall content my
self to convince those Persons that make use of it by two known Examples that
ought to overwhelm them with confusion.

These Examples are drawn from two Persons, whom their Age and their Sex ought
to render extremely feeble; but who notwithstanding all this weakness preserved
such a presence of mind, that I shall despair to find the like among the
Philosophers.

Let us consider Astianax and Polixena as they are going to die: one is a Boy,
the other a young Maid. The Greeks had condemned both of them to Death. Observe
Ulysses, who advances first leading the former by the hand, and marching
hastily to throw him down the Precipice. But see the Child does not follow him
with less Assurance.

-- Sublimi gradu
Incedit Ithacus, parvulum dextra trahens
Priami Nepotem, nec gradu segni puer
Ad alta pergit moenia. --
Consider that amongst all those that accompany him and weep for him, he is the
only Person whose eyes are dry, and who refuses to pay Tears to his own death.

Observe that whilst these barbarous Executioners invoke the Gods to this
bloody Sacrifice, he throws himself headlong from the Tower, from the top of
which they were to cast him, and voluntarily puts an end to that Life which he
had scarce begun.

But now turn your eyes on the other side; for by this time Polixena is placed
upon Achilles's Tomb, and only waits the fatal Blow which is to appease the
Anger of the Greeks, and to rejoyn her Soul to that of her Parents.

Admire her Beauty that still appears so charming and so serene. Her
Countenance is not at all changed with the Apprehensions of Death. On the other
Hand this Sun, which is going to set for ever, seems to receive a new Splendour
at the last moments of its light.

Nay there is something in her air more bold and undaunted than her Sex, and
her present Circumstances ought to promise.

And to do her right she is not content to wait the Blow, for without avoiding
it she goes to meet it with an Heroic Bravery.

Conversa ad ictum stat truci vultu ferox. And when Pyrrhus has given her the
cruel stroke, it seems that her last Action is an Action of Courage, that she
does not suffer herself to fall upon the Sepulcher of Achilles, but with a
design to make the earth lie more heavy upon him, and to revenge herself upon
him even as she dies.

Tell me now freely, is it not a shame for Hecuba to see her Children more
courageous than herself?

Tell me whether it looks well for her to shed so many Tears, when Astianax and
Polyxena die without shedding any?

Tell me whether you don't think these two Persons infinitely happy in
comparison of this miserable Creature?

Or if you have nothing to say for her, confess at last with us, that she has
too little courage in her Misfortunes, and that she wanted strength of Mind to
resent them less cruelly.

Now if it be true that Weakness is the only thing that renders our Misfortunes
insupportable to us, and which causing us to abandon the Helm in the most
violent Tempests makes us suffer Shipwreck in those places where we might have
rode securely; ought we not to search after this strength of Mind to serve us
instead of an Anchor, to oppose it to the fury of the Wind and Water, and
preserve us from the violence of the Storm?

We ought to sustain our selves by this Pillar, which serves as the Basis to
Pleasure, and to join this Virtue to Temperance and Wisdom; and that we may
live in repose and in a privation of Misery, believe that by her influence a
courageous persevering Spirit is above all Pain and ill Fortune; since it
despises Death, and is so prepared for Pain that it always reshembers itself
that Death is the remedy of the most violent ones; that the lesser have
abundance of good Intervals, and that it is the Master of the ordinary ones.

Matters being thus, we ought to say that we don't blame Cowardice and
Weakness, as also that we don't practice Temperance and Valor for their own
particular respect; but that we are to reject the former, and desire the
latter, because those foment Griefs, but these preserve us from them.

It only remains now for us to examine Justice, and then we shall have
dispatched the principal Virtues. But these things one may say on this Chapter
are almost the same with the preceding ones, and Justice is no less united to
Pleasure, than Prudence, Temperance and Fortitude, which cannot be separated
from it.

In effect this Virtue is so far from bringing any uneasiness to our Mind, that
by its Influence and Power it perpetually nourishes in them those Sentiments
that render them quiet, and never leaves us without this hope, that we can want
nothing that Nature desires, as long as she is not corrupted. And after the
same manner that Folly, Intemperance, want of Resolution incessantly torment,
plague and afflict us; so Injustice no sooner enters the Soul, but it throws
her into Disorder and Confusion, and makes her unfortunate even when she does
not make her criminal.

For if an unjust Man suffers himself to commit some wicked Action, although he
commits it after such a manner, that neither the Sun nor Men can give any
Testimony of it, yet he can never assure himself that it will be always kept
private; and for all the obscurity of the night that covered it, he will still
be under terrible apprehensions that Truth will at last discover it.

Suspicion commonly follows the Actions of the wicked; and though the Judges
should never concern themselves with them, yet their own Conscience forces them
to betray themselves.

But if any Person believes that their Riches, their Power and Authority shall
secure them from the Injustice of Men, and place them above the Laws, and out
of the reach of Punishment, yet they can never cover themselves from the Divine
Justice.

They never lift up their eyes to Heaven, but their Conscience alarms them with
horror, and the cruel Inquietudes that devour them without intermission, are
the secret Executioners of that punishment which the Divinity makes them endure.

For what Power, what Wealth, when they are injustly obtained, can so far
diminish the difficulties of this Life, but at the same time remorse of
Conscience, fear of Punishment, the hatred of Mankind augment them infinitely
more?

These ill, these unlawful Remedies don't they often turn to Poison? and what
we have sometimes chose to extinguish our sorrow, has it not made it burn with
greater Fury and Vehemence?

Are there not prodigious numbers of Persons that don't know how to prescribe
Limits to their desire of being more rich, of having more Honors, of reigning
more absolutely, of living more voluptuously, of feasting more deliciously, and
of carrying their evil Inclinations too far?

And don't we see that the mighty heap their Extortion and their Avarice has
amassed together, instead of satisfying their unreasonable Appetites, does but
inflame them still the more, and that these People has more need to be
corrected by the Laws, than inflamed by Remonstrances.

Reason therefore invites all Men that have their Judgment sound, to preserve
Justice which the Laws have established.

Equity which derives its Original from Nature, and which may properly be
called the knot of Civil Society, tells us plainly enough, that an unjust
Action ought never to be committed, neither by those that are weak, because
they would attempt it without success; nor by the powerful, because after the
business is completed, they would not find repose, nor this accomplishment of
their desires.

In short, she forces us to own that Justice is not desirable for it self, but
because it gives us a world of Satisfaction, makes our Life more assured, and
our Pleasure more accomplished.

Now if the Praise of Virtue it self, on which Subject principally the other
Philosophers have employed their most magnificent Discourses, produces no other
effect than Delight or Pleasure; and if this Pleasure alone, which is the end
of all the Virtues, calls us to itself, and attracts us by its proper Nature,
we may fafely conclude, that she is the sovereign Good; and the most perfect of
all other, and no longer doubt but that a happy Life is that which Epicurus has
taught us.

Oh holy and severe Pleasure! O admirable Philosophy! What Misfortune was it
that decry'd you amongst Men? Who is it that drew upon you the aversion of so
many virtuous Persons that knew you not? Who has hindered them to see that
their Virtues are owing to you, and that they speak injuriously of you, at the
same time you contribute to their Felicity.

But happy the Men who have been of the Sect of that Wise Man that followed
you: happy those who have imitated him: happy even those who being born in an
Age, when many believe that Vice and the Pleasure of Epicurus are but one and
the same thing, have had understanding enough to discover the contrary, and
have at least force of Mind sufficient to defend it, if they have not Courage
enough to practice it.

CHAP. I.
Of the Use of LIFE.
By Mr. SAVAGE of the Inner Temple.
That a Man ought to Apply himself to a diligent search after Happiness, since
it is wholly in his power to augment his Ioys, and diminish his Miseries.
AFter having a long time Reflected on the condition of Men, I have found but
two things that can reasonably deserve the care of a Wise Man: The first is the
Study of Virtue, which makes a Man Honest; and the second, The Use of Life,
which renders him Content, If he can possibly become such; or at least less
unhappy, if he cannot deliver himself from his Troubles.

It Is true, that it is but folly to think of Sovereign Good here below: All the
Idea's that Ancient Philosophers have given of it, are but confused Images of
that which might fill the vast capacity of our desires; and the uncertainty of
their Opinions which varied so often on this Matter, makes us easily see how
doubtful this Happiness was which they promised us nevertheless with so great
Pride and Ostentation.

In effect, the perpetual Motion of Things of this World, the continual
revolutions of our Minds, and the inconstancy of our Passions, will not permit
us to establish a fixed repose and tranquillity of Life: And when I consider the
inability of Objects to content us, and the weakness of our own Senses to
receive their Impressions, then I renounce all vain pursuits of this false
Happiness; and I am not very far from entering into a general neglect of all
things. For what sweets are there in the World which are not mixed with bitter?
Are not our Senses often interupted in their functions by the disorder of our
Organs? And has not our Mind its unsteadiness from the same disturbance? A
Disease, a Winter, a bad Day, and sometimes less than any of these, changes us,
and all things relating to us: And though there were no alteration in Us, or any
thing about us, In the most easy situation our Soul can be placed in, and
with the best constitution that a Body can have, it is certain we are incapable
of tasting a pure and true Content.

Neither the Conversation of virtuous Men, which gives us the most agreeable
satisfaction; nor the delicacies of a Feast, nor the Charms of Music, which
create the most sensible pleasures, have ever had power to give me a greater
relish of delight than my Imagination promised me: And I may truly say, that
amongst the greatest liberties of my Senses, I have enjoyed the pleasure with
so little confinement, that ordinarily I have Meditated upon my most serious
Affairs.

The divertisement of the Theater, whither we see so many people flock daily,
Has it created any true delights in its most professed Followers? For my part, I
could never see the most part of them without being tired; and the best Plays,
which seemed to ravish all the Audience, have had no other power over me, than
to make me grieve for the Misfortunes of a Heroine who suffered no more, what
afflicted me; or for those of some Imaginary Hero, whose false griefs drew
from me true Tears, and filled me with Indignation against my self.

Neither the beauty of the Tuilleries which enchant all eyes, nor the
Magnificences of Courts, adorned with the glorious confusion of haughty
Equipages, nor the most shining Assemblies of the fairest Ladies, nor Shows,
nor Balls, nor Art, nor Riot, nor Riches, can give a full satisfaction to any
Man in this World.

Those that frequent but seldom public Representations, are as it were forbid
'em, and cannot digest the hurly burly of these great divertisements; those
that visit 'em osten are insensible of 'em; and both together through ecstasy
or stupidity, cannot peaceably enjoy their Charms. Those who out of the
abundance of all things flatter their Minds with whatever is excellent, Do not
they give us marks of their Melancholy amidst their Pleasures, complaining (as
it were) that excess of delights rendered 'em odious.

But if ever any Man desired to be happy, it must be granted 'twas that great
Prince who had Wisdom his Lot, without ever burthening his Mind with Chimera's,
he carried himself to the search of solid Good; His Abilities gained him
immediate possession. Every thing succeeded according to his wishes; and the
enjoyment always followed close his desires: Nevertheless he declared, That he
found so much vanity in Pleasures, that he could scarce forbear to hate Life,
and to have in abhorrence his very Being. Then we must conclude there is no
perfect happiness for Man here below; and ought rather to think of defending
our selves against the Mischiefs that oppress us, than to sigh after a Bliss
that is out of our reach.

But although it be true, that we cannot find in this Life the Imaginary
Happiness we look after, yet we ought not to wish for death, nor abandon our
selves, as through despair, to our Miseries: For thence springs our ordinary
folly, to look for Happiness where we cannot find it, and to overlook it when
it is under our hands. Our Pleasures are short, it is true, and they are not
freed from Gall; but as they are Pleasures they overweigh our sorrows; and it is
one of the greatest Uses of Life, to manage 'em with Address.

As we ought to be capable to support the Ill, so we ought also to know how to
enjoy the Good; we ought to have it equally in our power to lull asleep our
senses for Grief, as to awaken 'em for Pleasure; for Temperance is far removed
from all Excess: She is no less an enemy of excessive Fasting, than excessive
Debauchery; and he that should suffer himself to die with hunger, would as much
offend her Laws, as he that should choke himself with too much eating. Madmen
that we are, always complaining of the rigours of our Birth, the uncertainty of
our Life, and the misery of our Death; nevertheless we every day add new
miseries to the old; and it looks as if we were only rational to Render our
selves the more wretched.

This sort of Conduct is very different from that of the Wiseman we mentioned
just before* He made, as it were, an Essay of all things of this World, for
which we have the most ardent desires, and presently knew the vanity of them:
But yet he did not suffer himself to go to a general disgust of all things that
he had looked after; but remaining always in the same station, he enjoyed
peaceably his pleasures.

But let us return to our Subject, and see how we ought to manage the Good and
the Evil for the Use of Life.

CHAP. II.
Of the Existence of GOD.
WHen I make an exact Reflection upon all my Life, I acknowledge I have had
sorrows and satisfactions according to the different Opinions I had a mind to
assume: My Thoughts have as well created my Griefs as my Ioys; and I have
always found within my self the source of my Miseries or Happiness.

I Will not dissemble my Thoughts, The Persuasion of a Deity, and the uncertainty
of our Condition after Death, have many times very much entrenched upon my
Repose; and in these moments of confusion, I considered that all our Watchings,
all our Knowledge, all our Employs, our Profits, and our Honors, must end in
Death; and that none of those things being eternal, we ought to search
elsewhere for refuge. But I often suffered my Soul to think licentiously of
these things; and not respecting enough the first Truth, I met with nothing but
doubts and difficulties about the Immortality of the Soul.

And as I always relied in this Affair, upon the Reasons of other Men, so I
could never have certain Notions; and the confusion of the different Opinions
of our Authors, gave me Insupportable uneasinesses; never were my Mind and
Conscience of one Opinion. I was constrained to suffer the shocks of these two
Parties which combated incessantly within me; and nothing equaled my disquiet
so much, as the difficulty to resolve the Question which was the Subject.

At length finding my self foiled by all this Foreign Assistance, I was
resolved to rerire within my self, and consult my own Thoughts; as those sick
Men do, who finding themselves abused by the Ignorance of their Physicians,
undertake to cure themselves. 'Twas here I cut off Commerce with all Books,
where I never found any thing but difficulties and uncertainties. 'Twas here I
resolved to consider with my self, and consult my own Opinion upon the
structure of the Universe, and the Admirable Order and Symmetry which Reigns in
all things.

And when I considered the Heavens, the greatness of those wonderful Vaults
filled me with astonishment, and with I know not how awful a respect! The
beauty of the Stars, the silence and the solitude of the Night, pierc"d me with
such a secret horror as disposed me insensibly to Religion.

Can it be possible, said I to my self, that the Motions of the Spheres, so
just and regular, should not have an Intelligent Being for their Author? If
these wonderful Globes know and govern themselves, are they not the Gods who
command the World as they please? And if they suffer the control of some
Superior Power, who can sway these fearful Machines but a supreme Hand? Who can
move these Huge Bodies but an unaccountable Force? Who can reconcile their
various Motions but an Infinite Wisdom? This glorious Sun, continued I, which
shines equally upon all Men, could it ever give us its light by chance? And
that exquisite proportion that we may observe in it, could it ever proceed but
from an eternal Wisdom?

After these Meditations I considered the perpetual Disagreement of the
Elements; and I could never enough admire that Happy War which entertains the
World with so many wonderful Motions.

But above all, I made my Reason give place, and my whole Soul bend to that
Prodigy of the Flux and Reflux of the Sea. The vast extent of Waters amazed me.
But when I came to consider, that the most Threatening Billows broke against the
smallest Rocks, and that having no sooner met 'em, but in despite of all their
forwardness, they were obliged to return with Violence into themselves; 'twas
here that I cried out, transported with Wonder, and seized with Astonishment:
The Sea eternally does roar,
Its angry Billows beat the passive shore.
But Mounds of Sand their might restrain,
And force them to their watery Realms again.
Neptune with Indignation sees
His Waves ingloriously retreat:
Then from the conquering Cliffs he flies,
And murmurs at his shame, and sighs at his Defeat.


At last, when I had sufficiently considered of these Objects, I took great
pleasure to descend into my self, and there to observe the Structure of an
Humane Body, and to contemplate all the Springs that move this admirable
Machine. I reflected upon the disposition of so many differing parts, and yet
all necessary to the composition and conservation of our Bodies; as Bones,
Nerves, Muscles, Blood and Spirits. I considered the mavelous Economy of all
these parts, and cried out with Admiration, Poor Man! who know not these
things but by means of thy senses; Nevertheless, can thou boast thy self
Author of so excellent a Work, Thou who understoodst it not till after 'twas
made? And must all the parts be exposed to thy Eyes to give thee the least
Insight? It Is certain, that the experience of many Ages has made thee
comprehend the cause of thy Living, Digestion, Motion, etc. and yet in despite
of thy most exact Observations, thou do not know it but after a very
imperfect manner.

On the other side, casting my Eyes on the rest of Creatures, I examined, with
admiration, the different Figures of Animals, the Scales of Fish, the Feathers
of Birds, the Furs of Beasts, and all those Things which regarded without
attention, represent nothing distinctly to the mind, but sensibly discovered to
me the greatest Wonders in Nature: For, call that Destiny, Nature, Knowledge,
or Divinity, which creates and governs all below, yet is it not always a
Sovereign Power? Is it not always an Infinite Wisdom? Then I remained
confounded, to think where I had been; and I could never enough wonder at the
malice of the wicked, or the blindness of the unbelieving: For a Man must
altogether forget himself, and lose the knowledge of all things, before he
loses that of his Creator.

On whatever part we cast our Eyes, we presently perceive the Character of the
Divinity; and whoever studies Nature thoroughly, shall find sensible Proofs of
the Power on which it depends.

But we have some lazy would-be-wits now adays, always bent to the imitation
of others, who, without ever examining themselves, or considering of the
matter, espouse the Cause of Impiety, only to be thought Partners with some
famous Libertines.

There are also some men, who by an extravagant reach of Soul, will in nothing
depend on their Maker; imagining, that the Obedience which they should pay to
this Infinite Majesty, would take away the Freedom of their Opinions.

Not but that we see sometimes the best and most knowing men in the world fall
under some sort of Incredulity or doubt. But these do not give themselves the
trouble to discover an Eternal Intelligence by the Order of the Universe. Their
Curiosity drives them to consider what is possible to be; and after having
stunned their Understanding with those Infinite Qualities which the Soul of Man
cannot comprehend, they oftentimes become incredulous, because they cannot
reconcile the Sentiments of their Conceptions to those of their Conscience. Now
as we ought to laugh at Sots, and abhor the Wicked, I think that we ought to
have compassion for the last, and to pity 'em, only because they are miserable.

Some people are upon the rack to persuade themselves to believe that which
they cannot comprehend. Others attack Heaven it self, through a fearful Malice,
and blaspheme a God whose Power they do not understand: So as they are always
in trouble and despair; and after having been tossed by the Fury of Impiety,
they find themselves torn by the Remorse of their own Conscience, especially
when the Light forsakes 'em, and the Company which upholds 'em, leaves 'em in
the Desert of Solitude. There is no passion so tormenting but they feel the
sting on it; Fear, Trouble, Disquiet and Madness torture 'em by turns. It were
better for their Quiet, if they never thought, than to have but the least
Commerce with their Conscience; for nothing equals the Torments of the Wicked.

If some lewd Blasphemies he pours,
In endless pains he spends the Conscious Hours.
Hagg'd by the Ghastly Image of his sin,
No safe retreat without, no peace within.
He flies the Day, he fears the Night,
He runs from Truth's all searching light.
His Conscience too would leave behind,
But in himself both Judge and Torturer does find.
The Unbelieving, though they are not altogether so faulty, are not less
Miserable. Tbey hunt after, with difficulty, a thing they never find, and at
every turn accufe Nature of being cruel only in regard of Man.

Thence proceeded the Complaints of that Great Man, who envied the Advantage
which Beasts enjoyed, of living in a commodious Ignorance of all things,
without disquieting themselves with a search after any Truth.

Thence also proceeds the discontent of those Men who cannot think, without
envying those of other Countries; Nor see any Beast in the sweetness of his
Repose, without envying the Tranquillity that Nature has bestowed on him.

It is then certain, That the Belief of a God makes the best foundation of all
Pleasures; and the Opinion we have of him, never suffers a Man to be without
satisfaction in his Prosperity, and comfort in his Adversity. A Mind well
ordered does not only taste delights in the enjoyment of a Good it receives, it
also finds Dainties to thank its Benefactor for; and every Reflection it makes
upon 'em is a new Subject of satisfaction.

It Is to God we must have recourse in Afflictions; and there is no Anguish so
great, but it may be sweetened by a total resignation to His Providence.

Then let every one judge how much Religion imports us, How much it advantages
us to acknowledge God, and to submit our selves to his will, as well in
consideration of our Duty, as for the interest of our Repose.

CHAP. III.
That we ought to restrain the Violence of our Appetites, by considering the
true Worth of those things we desire.
I Find nothing more profitable, and more important to any one that has a mind
to taste true Content in this Life, than to oppose his greatest Inclinations,
and reduce his desires to those simple Motions which we call Wishes.

Nevertheless, as there is no Man but has some particular Inclination and
Favorite Passion, so it is not an easy thing to come to an Indifference: But
one may, notwithstanding, weaken ones Chains; for there are no Bonds so strong
which Reason and Experience cannot break in time.

In effect, as the sweetest Objects have their Call, so there is no doubt but
the Heart looses much of the force of its desires by some disgust. At such a
time a Man lifts himself insensibly up above the World, the Pleasures that he
was wont to hunt after with so much earnestness, then appear Insipid to him. He
then sees how much it imports him to understand the True Price of Glory; What
pain, or what satisfaction one finds in knowledge, that so we may not attempt
any thing we may repent of; or expect any thing we cannot hope to enjoy.

With these prospects, Is there any Man whose Reformation one ought to doubt
of? He that has been always used to Submission and Obedience, shall not he
raise his desires to the glory of Command? The needy, shall not they establish
their happiness in abundance, though they have been oppressed with want? A Sluggard
that suffers the reward of his Idleness, and the remorses of a bad Life, shall
not he reckon him happy whom he sees in the esteem of all honest and good Men?
Those that are embarrass'd with a Crowd will they not with for the quiet of the
Private?

The Court and its Pomp tires us; The Woods and the Fields become uneasy to
us: But whoever has not tasted fully of Vexation, cannot easily be persuaded of
its strange effects.

In short, we may disgust our selves with our condition, but not with those we
have never experienced. And see here the manner we ought to make use of on this
occasion, to find the Vanity of all things.

Although one has not all the Riches, all the Merit, all the fair Qualities;
yet one may reflect on them who have acquired them by Fortune or Virtue, and
discover the Anxiety they labor under. We may see them then oppressed with the
same Maladies subject as we to the same Diseases that Nature afflicts us with.
We shall see a Wise Man not able to defend himself from humor and folly: An
Hero fe^ble, full of defects, and as much a Man as they which are below him.
And the greatest Originals of Europe, as subject to particular weaknesses as
the lesser Copies. We shall find in the end, that it is impossible to renounce
Nature, and to raise our selves above the condition that God has placed us in.
For in truth there are no great Men, if we compare 'em one with another, but
they are in themselves weak, unequal, and deficient in some part or other. Pomp
and Splendour do not satisfy all those whom they surround. The excess of
Delights palls our Appetites oftener than it pleases; and all the advantages of
Nature and Fortune, joined together, know not how to create a full and entire
Happiness. This confideration moderates the fierceness of our desires, and it
may be will destroy those Inclinations we have to the most sensible and
pleasing Objects: And then we shall search after our Content without disquiet,
enjoy it without eagerness; and lose it without regret.

CHAP. IV.
Of REPVTATION.
By Another Hand.
THere is no Passion which makes more unhappy people than this, which almost
all Men entertain for an Universal esteem: For excepting some Persons of truly
Heroical Minds, who act only for the satisfaction of their Conscience, and
perhaps too for the approbation of good Men, all the rest do that for Noise,
which ought to be done for Virtue, and suffer themselves to be enchanted with
the shadow and appearance of a Thing, whose real Body does not so much as
affect them.

They would have all their Actions be esteemed Virtuous, but not that they
should indeed be so; They wish nothing more than the applause of the people,
though in the midst of such a crowd and agitation it is almost impossible to
discern the Truth; and without considering the Opinion of the Wise, they
suppose that all things are to be decided by Numbers; and that the sentiments
of Learned Men, whom they are pleased to call Fantastical Persons, cannot
eclipse their Fame.

The most Ingenious demonstrate on this occasion a sufficient siness in their
Conduct; for being satisfied with themselves, and having had the luck to
content honest Men by some essential quality, they accommodate themselves in a
gross manner to the humor of the People, and gain the Vulgar by outward show
and appearance.

They commit voluntary Fopperies to agree with real Fops: They appear without
parts to the Stupid; Subile with Intriguzing Persons; Generous with Men of
Honor; and in a word adapt themselves to all sorts of Characters with so
dextrous a compliance, that one would say, Their humor is that of all others.

But besides that, in this way of proceeding we betray our proper sentiments,
and that we oppose ourselves to the design of Nature, which has made us more
for our selves than for other Men; I don't observe that these persons with all
their good humor and complaisance, with all their feints and their
dissimulations, ever arrive at the point which they propose to themselves. On
the other side, I have known it a Thousand times by experience, That those Men
who are so greedy of Reputation, almost always lose it by that very
irregularity and greediness with which they seek it; and that nothing so much
interrupts their design, as their excessive Passion to obtain it.

In effect, show me the Man who has at anytime had merit and good fortune
sufficient to acquire an esteem truly general? Who is he that was ever powerful
enough to suppress the calumnies of all his Enemies? And who is he that has
been able, hitherto, to stop the mouth of Envy?

I can certify, that I have known some Persons so very agreeable, and so
virtuous, that a Man could not converse with them without admiration, and love.
They made Partisans even of their own Enemies; and one must have been brutal
even to excess, either to withstand the Charms of their Conversation, or not to
be won by the Goodness of their Nature. Yet for all this, I have seen some
envious Devils oppose their malice to so conspicuous a Virtue; and according as
they had either address or power, stop the course of an esteem so just, and so
well established.

Now, since it is impossible to ca^ch this flying Vapor, after which I see the
whole World runs, What folly is it to labor to obtain it with so much
application, and pains so ill rewarded!

Besides this, a Fop that desires this esteem with passion, and does not
deserve it, cannot long enjoy it. A good Man on the otherhand, soon makes
reflections upon the weakness and frailty of this little Good; and feeling his
miseries even through the applauses which are given to his felicity, he suffers
disquiets and uneasinesses, when the World cries up his advantages and his
happiness. Verae gloriae cupidi nulla ratione quiescere possunt, cum non
inveniant unde possint aliquatenus gloriari.

In effect, Have not we seen a Vespasian, who amongst all his magnificence and
splendour, tired with the tediousness of the Triumph, and sensible of the vanity
of that glory for which the People flatter him, appear melancholy and sad;
nay, in the very festivals that were celebrated to thank the Gods for his
Fortune and Prosperity?

Have not we seen that great and formidable King of Sweden despise the
acclamations of the People? and reject the Panegyricks of Orators?

The Duke of Candale, whom we lately lost, regretted by all good Men, Had not
he as great an aversion for this kind of esteem, as our ordinary Courtiers
express a zeal to procure it?

It is then undeniably true, That it is impossible to acquire it, and that though
we should obtain, yet the possession of it would be absolutely unserviceable;
That as it depends less upon our selves, than upon Fortune, it is found liable
to her inconstancies; That it is a noise which strikes nothing but the Ear, and
which cannot form a sensible impression upon a Noble Soul.

If we have a mind then to labor for our happiness, let us endeavor to
satisfy the Minds of the Wise, who are, it is true, but few in number, but from
whom we may receive real Approbations.

Hatilius would not have a wise Man hazard his Life for the repose of Fools:
But since we owe our Services and our selves to the advantage of our Country,
and the good of our Friends, we ought always to do Actions worthy of public
Applause, and to despise that very renown, after we have once performed them.

I would not, at the same time, advise such a sort of disinteressedness as
should extend to the finding no satisfaction in the esteem we deserve; but as
Censures follow Approbations close at the heels, let us rebate the edge of
Malice, by withstanding those false praises which render it the more sensible
to us; let us take advantage of a good Reputation, and not to be so sottishly
stiff, as to forbid our selves all sort of complaisance relating to our own
Merits: And if the Public has unjust Thoughts of us, let us appear from their
Opinion to the Judgment of the Wise, and so retire within our selves to receive
comfort from the testimony of our Conscience.

CHAP. V.
Of Vexations and Displeasures.
By the same Hand.
IT IS one of the greatest Secrets of Life to know how to sweeten our Troubles,
and if we cannot get rid of our Afflictions, at least to weaken the influences
of them. Without this we must resolve to be often miserable; for being exposed
to an infinite number of Misfortunes, there hardly passes a day but presents us
with a taste of some new unhappiness.

Now, I don't know any Remedy so effectual for this purpose as foresight; and
whoever makes an exact reflection upon the disappointments and crosses of
humane Life, will find himself consolable at least in his severest disgraces.
For, as it is natural for us to make a vigorous defense against a premeditated
assault, the Soul which prepares it self for resistance, through the
consideration of danger, is much less shaken and concerned at it.

I would have every one then so to foresee and expect all kinds of Misfortunes,
that they may not be surprised at whatever happens.

Let a happy Courtier enjoy the favor of his Prince, and possess, as long as
it shall please him, the delights of his good Fortune; but let the example of
so many Falls dispose him to mistrust the firmness of his situation; Let him
not always raise his Eyes, because he is at the top of the Wheel, but humble
them sometimes; let him regard the place from whence he began to rise, and
consider the first degree of his Fortune, as a Precipice, to which he may every
moment fall again.

Let not a General of an Army be always secure of Victory, nor be puffed up
with the Glory he has won, as much by the assistance of his Troops, as by his
own Valor. One single day may determine his Fortune; but then after the loss
of a Battle, let not him, who was before encompassed with so many people,
suppose himself to be destroyed with them: He must be unconcerned, he must
return to himself, and enjoy himself again.

Let not a Prince confide in his Empire without Reason, nor let the obedience
of so many people rashly flatter his Self-Love: In Four and twenty hours we
have seen Kings in the Throne, and following a Chariot. In the course of a few
days, we have seen a Prince Triumph, and led in Triumph. The Revolt of the
People, or the loss of a Battle, may dispossess him of the Crown, and put his
Scepter into a Foreigners hand.

And here I cannot forbear to make an open confession: I adore the Romans, and
believe they were something more than Men. I cannot without a sensible emotion
consider Brutus and Cassius, who knowing the frailty of humane greatness,
agreed before the Battle began how to dispose of their Lives, and considering
the uncertainty of the event embraced one another as if they were never to meet
again. Methinks I see them giving their last Adieus with these noble sentiments
of Affection and Courage.

The Vulgar imagine there is a timorousness in foresight, and as they are
unable to conceive any sort of danger without fear, persuade themselves that a
Man cannot fall into it without blindness. But as it is the fault of such weak
Reasoners, to venture upon many things they don't understand, and to renounce
them as soon as they come to know them; so it belongs only to Men of sense to
foresee the dangers that threaten them, and to sustain with the same equality
of mind, the favors and disgraces of Fortune.

But it is not sufficient for us to prepare our selves only against the loss of
the prosperities of Life, for there are many other proofs of our Constancy: The
death of our Friends, and even our own, much more sensibly affect us; and
therefore we ought to expect it with a more solemn preparation, than a bare
simple privation of extrinsic things, which ought to be indifferent to wise Men.

I am thinking every day how many things are dear to me, and after I have
considered them as temporary and perishable, I then prepare my self to undergo
the loss of them without weakness.

When the Sun begins to shine, I don't rely upon seeing the Evening. The day
and the moment wherein I shall die, will it not resemble that which I spend to
day? A Man shall equally hear the hurry of the World, shall enjoy the light,
and live after the same manner. Now, since we must all die, and are in so great
uncertainties as to the time of death, let us prepare our selves, from this
day, to leave one another. There does not pass an hour but somebody loses a
Friend, I may then likewise reasonably expect every moment to lose one of mine;
and whenever such a thing happens, the circumstances of his death will not
increase my sorrow nor my affliction. Perhaps he will shed his Blood upon a
Scaffold; perhaps a Fire will reduce him to Ashes, or he shall be swallowed up
in the Sea: But don't imagine that the circumstances of his death should
redouble my grief, and that I should complain of nothing so much at his
Funeral, as the manner of his loss; It Is he that I find wanting, and it is of
no imortance whether he was taken from me by Water, Sword, or Fire,

Not that I would be here so wretchedly misunderstood, as if I would have a Man
become a Barbarian in order to exercise himself to Constancy; or that Nature or
Friendship have not a right to extract tears from us, I am so far from
advancing so Brutal an insensibility, that I maintain on the other side, it
would be inhuman to refuse them on certain occasions.

We sigh and weep justly enough in the first motions of our Grief, but a
strong, vigorous Soul ought soon after to retire within it self, and return to
that happy situation from whence the disorders of its Passion had removed it.
For can a reasonable Man consider the unprofitableness of his Tears, and the
vanity of his regret, but he must of necessity blush at a long and violent
Affliction?

Indeed in those cases where we are able to repair our ill Successes, I am
wholly of opinion that we ought to employ all sorts of Remedies: But in a fatal
Accident which is never to be retrieved, pray tell me what is the service of a
ridiculous affliction, and paying Tears which are at best troublesome to those
who shed them, and unserviceable to those for whom they are shed? Why do we
sigh, or why complain?
All these Tears are shed in vain;
Deaf to our sorrows and our grief,
The Dead receive not this relief.


Besides this, we are to consider, that the most sensible persons in the World
at length forget their tenderness; and the Soul which at first is afflicted to
excess, soon makes a relaxation of this violence, and is not long in exhausting
the whole stock of its sorrow.

Our Complaints wear with our Years, and as the Object begins to remove it self
from our imagination, our displeasure for its loss is insensibly removed from
our mind.

If we were wise then, Should we not without reluctance resign up those
sentiments of Grief to our Reason, which Weakness at last is constrained to
resign to the length of Years?

A Father who died but two or three hours ago, is as effectually dead as any of
our Ancestors; and that which is no more for us, ought no longer to affect us.

Your Father, summoned by his Fate,
Now mixes with his Brother-shades below.
Not the least tittle of your State,
Your Grief, or Sorrow does he know.
Though but last night he lost his breath,
Yet since He Is in the hands of Death,
He Is full as dead as Caesar, who we know
Died so many years ago.
This Reason alone is capable of sweetning our bitterness, and appeasing all
the motions of our Grief: He whom I lost but now, feels nothing, has no further
share in the day, and enjoys no more Life than those who were swallowed up in
the Deluge; Why then should I torment my self in vain after a shadow, that has
neither Voice nor Thought? Wisely your vain complaints give over,
This foolish Tribute pay no more.
For empty shadows why should Tears be shed?
Let Us bury even the memory of the Dead.


We ought further to consider, That in this rigorous separation of Soul and
Body, nature commits no more violence, and shows no more ill usage to us than
she does to the rest of the World: Of all these prodigious swarms of Men which
fill the Earth, show me one single person who is exempted from the cruelty of
her Laws.

I very well know that every one has a sense of his affliction, and that those
whose example I allege here, relent and complain as well as we: For as we
don't forbear to taste our own happiness, when we know the felicity of others;
so the knowledge we have of the miseries of our equals, deprive not us of the
sense of our own misfortunes: And since private Persons partake in the Public
Rejoycings, How should they otherwise than share in the General Sorrow?

There are some common misfortunes which have a relation to all Men, but every
Man has his particular sentiments of them, and so endures, in that sense, the
whole weight of his affliction singly.

Let us confess the Truth: That which affects us most in our disgraces, is to
see no body bear a resemblance to us. We cannot with any patience behold our
selves destined to suffer an unhappiness alone, which all the World may be
affected with as well as we. And to speak soberly, nothing so much augments the
sharpness of our afflictions, as the fierceness and pride of those who seem to
brave and despise them.

Now it is not mankind alone that attends us to death; all Animals, of what
species soever, arrive to the same end, and undergo the same Law. That
strength, dexterity and foresight which Nature has bestowed upon them for the
conservation of their Life, is of no use and service to them at their death.

The most insensible things have their end, which is a sort of death to them.
Those very Ramparts that were proof against all the batteries of the Cannon,
and the violence of Men, will sooner or later have their share in this
universal ruin. The Elements themselves, which compose all things, will be at
last destroyed. The Heavens will be turned topsy-turvy; The Sun and Stars will
lose their light; and all the Mass of the World will be confounded in a general
ruin: Can we then demand with justice the everlasting Health of our Friends,
or of our selves? And since we must dye of necessity, Is it not a comfort for
us to know, that all the things we have seen will perish, and suffer the same
destiny with us? The Stars shall lose their glorious light*
The Element shall jarr and fight,
And all be buried in vast night.
The Great Creator of this Ball,
Master and Sovereign Lord of All*
Who our of Nothing did display,
Air, and Earth, and Fire and Sea,
Will with the same Almighty Hand,
To Primitive Nothing All Command.
And this great Change, to our surprise,
May happen e're to morrows Sun does rise.


But behold now an Affliction, of which I am so sensible, that no Arguments, no
relief drawn from Philosophy, can make me support it: It Is that Concern which
public Calamities inspire me with, in which my Senses interest me in spite of
my self.

I am not able to hear the Groans of the People; I cannot understand their
Cries, nor behold their Tears, without feeling my self affected with a real
Compassion.

I cannot be a spectator of the disorders of my Country, nor consider the
ambition of its Oppressors, without conceiving an invincible aversion for them.

We likewise experience another sort of Vexation, which invades us in the midst
of Pleasure it self: It is nothing else oftentimes but a disgust of abundance;
for our Soul having not strength enough to digest it, suffers a mighty
remission in the vigor of its faculties, and yields at length to the violence
of these excesses.

Now for this, I find no better, and indeed, no other remedy, than to moderate
our Passions, and to manage our Pleasures with a prudent and wise Economy.

Thus Epicurus revived his Appetite by abstinence, and avoided all excesses to
shun the inconvenience of Debauchery; and as the continual society even of the
best Men, becomes at length tiresom or insensible, those persons that have a
delicate apprehension of Pleasure will voluntarily remove themselves from one
another, to avoid the disquiet that threatens them, and to have a better taste
of the charms of Conversation, by a new vigor which they bestow upon their
Thoughts.

There remains nothing more for me to speak of but another sort of Vexation,
whose Cause I am not able to divine; and as it is extremely difficult to know
the real subject of it; I find that it is hard to sweeten it, or to withstand
it: It is a Secret Displeasure which hides it self in the bottom of the Soul,
and which we feel much better than we can discover. It Is that which goes to Bed
with us, which awakes and rises with us, which attends us at our Repasts, which
follows us in our Walks, which we carry along with us, as well in a Crowd, as
in Retirement, and which does not forsake those whom it has once seized, till
it has exhausted all its power upon them.

I have had a wearisome experience of this Malady, and have often felt the
whole bitterness of it: I have gone with it to the Playhouse, and have come
out with the same. I have carried it into the best Conversations without any
relief; I have, during its excesses, used the most agreeable Diversions, but
was insensible to them all the while; and in the midst of the public Joy, have
been constrained to show my ill humor, and to appear disgusted (...) the
sweetest contentments of Life; and at last have found no other Remedy to Charm
it, but the pleasure of good Eating and good Drinking.

Good Cheer with our Friends is the Sovereign Remedy against this sort of
Vexation; for besides that Conversation, which then becomes more free and
pleasant, insensibly sweetens it, it is certain that Wine revives the forces of
Nature, and gives our Soul vigor sufficient to exclude all sorts of
Melancholy.

I know some morose, unsociable Persons will, at least in outward show and
appearance, declare a great aversion for this Remedy, whose Delights
notwithstanding they do not contemn. But let us banish all grimaces here; I am
little disturbed at their mistaken severities, since the most rigid Philosopher
of the World has prescribed us this very Remedy; since the severest of our
Illustrious Men have submitted, if I may so express my self, their most austere
Virtues to the charms of this agreeable pleasure; and since the best sort of
Persons disown not the Use of it; but are only content to condemn the Excess.

CHAP. VI.
Of PLEASVRES.
By Mr. MANNING of the Inner Temple. The same Hand with the former.
AFter having discoursed of our Disgusts, and the means of qualifying the
bitterness of them, it is not improper to entertain our selves about the
Pleasures of Life.

Although, to speak the Truth, extrinsic things contribute much to our
Pleasures, and it is not enough to have Senses, unless we have Objects to
content them; yet the multitude of them being almost infinite, as in effect we
find; it seems that our happiness depends in some measure upon ourselves, and
that our greatest diversions are unpleasant to us, if our Senses are not in a
disposition to receive them.

As for my self, I am of opinion that we should never debar our minds of those
innocent pleasures which occurr, but live free from all those disquietudes that
a consideration of what is past uses to infuse, as from the disturbance we
conceive for what is to come.

The present time only is ours, and if we were wise, we should manage every
moment as it were the last; but nothing is more ordinary, than the evil use we
make of that time which Nature has allowed us.

There are few Men but would live long enough, if they knew how to live well;
but it happens for the most part, that when we are a dying, we complain of not
having lived as yet.

If we are destined to a long Life, we disturb it by the fear of not arriving
to it; and when we are come to our limitation, we have nothing else left us but
the concern of having managed it very ill.

This Pleasure which now presents it self, is perhaps the last I shall be
sensible of; an infinite number of pains may overwhelm me a moment after, Who
then shall hinder me from enjoying my self innocently, whilst I may? Must the
difference of places, or the inequality of Objects, keep me always in disorder,
when I have power to live contented in all parts of the Earth?

I grant that indeed certain Persons are dearer to us, and more agreeable than
others; that as there are different Subjects to divert us, so there are
delights more and less affecting; But for the sake of a pleasure which I
earnestly hoped, am I to despise all others?

That Life which slides away in the Country, is no less mine than that I pass
at Paris. The days wherein I am wholly buried in Grief, will be reckoned to me
as well as my most joyful Festivals; and will contribute as much as they to
make up the number which must confine my years.

Why then should the charms of my Repose be troubled here by the remembrance of
those Pleasures I should have tasted, or by the imagination of those which I
pretend to enjoy?

It Is an imprudence to be desirous thus to return to those places we had
forsaken; and to endeavor to be present in those, where we cannot be so soon.

If the Pleasures we find in the Country are different from those of the
Court, let us endeavor to adapt our minds to them: For who can hinder us from
exalting and humbling our selves in this manner? We have here neither
Musick-meetings, nor Balls, nor Playhouse; but then we have no disgraces, no
servitude to fear or undergo.

Conversation is not so agreeable here. Admit it is not, a Man may have
Commerce with himself, and with Persons that however are not troublesome.

Cato entertained himself with Children, after he had applied himself all the
day to the Service of the Commonwealth; and our best Wits in France disdain not
to hear a Tale from one of their Servants, after the most serious Discourses.

A Man must endeavor to live easily in all places, and taste those Pleasures
which his respective abode can furnish him with.

Let us not play the Philosophers so much, as to condemn by our austerity the
Magnificence of the Court. I wish we could imitate the Virtue of the Ancient
Romans. Let us be Just, let us be Generous as they were; but we may very well
neglect those extravagant Maxitus, whose severity Corrects fewer Persons than
it scares.

If we have not wherewith to be splendid, let us not accuse others of an
immoderate splendour; for certainly one cannot condemn so much fine Workmanship
produced by human Industry, without being fantastically severe.

One may admire the Pomp of a glorious City, very innocently; one may partake
of the delights of Perfumes, and the satisfactions of Music; In short, one may
behold with pleasure the delicacy of Painting, and yet not infringe the Laws of
Temperance.

If, by constraint, or inclination, we have established our residence in the
Country, let us there leave off admiring the Labors of Man, in order to
Contemplate the Works of the Creator, and the Wonders of Nature: Let us remove
our thoughts from the Pride and Glories of the Court, and innocently taste the
sweets which occur in solitary places.

The Heavens, the Sun, the Stars, the Elements, have not they Beauties enough
to satisfy the mind that contemplates them?

The extent of Plains, the course of Rivers, the Meadows, the Flowers, the
Rivolets, have not they sufficient Charms to enchant the sight?

The Music of Birds, is that ever wanting in our Groves? And if it is true,
that men have learnt theirs from the Nightingales, What advantage may we
receive by having so great a number of these little Masters at our Service,
without being in our Pay?

WEll, whatever sins by turns have swayed me,
Ambition never reached my heart.
It Is lewd pretenses never betrayed me,
In public ills to act a part,
Let others Fame or Wealth pursuing,
Despise a mean but safe retreat,
I Will never contrive my own undoing,
Nor stoop so low as to be great.
The faithless Court, the pensive Change,
What solid Pleasures can they give?
Oh, let me in the Country range,
It Is there we breath, it is there we live.
The beauteous Scene of aged Mountains,
Smiling Valleys, murmuring Fountains,
Lambs in flowery Pastures bleating,
Ecchos our complaints repeating.
Birds in cheerful Notes expressing
Nature's bounty, and their blessing:
These afford a lasting pleasure,
Without guilt, without measure.
In a word, we may live contented in any part of the World, and we only change
our pleasure, when we change the place of our abode.

Here the mind finds its satisfaction in the study of Nature; Here our Senses
meet with their delights; and whoever is capable of moderation, may find in all
places but too fertile a scene for his contentment. Neither the limits of
Solitude, nor the little space of a Prison, can hinder a wise Man from finding
his tranquillity: He may meditate there, and with pleasure reflect on the good
Actions he has done, and comfort himself by the pleasing thoughts of his
Innocence.

A Man does not always lie under a necessity to enjoy the full extent of the
Fields in order to be happy. Our happiness for the general part lies in our
selves; and as we sometimes find our selves uneasy under the full enjoyment of
our Liberty, so it may very well happen, that we may be satisfied even in those
Prisons in which we are confined.

The most cruel Tyrants in the Universe could never yet find Dungeons for our
Souls; they cannot become Masters of it, unless we are willing to enslave it
ourselves; Their Chains cannot bind it, and let the Body be enclosed in what
place it will, it changes neither place nor habitation.

Thus we may find contentments every where; Let us endeavor only to enjoy them
with moderation; and rest persuaded that it is an error to condemn Pleasures as
Pleasures, and not as they are unjust and unlawful.

In truth, let them be never so innocent, the excess is always criminal, and
tends not only to our disgrace, but to our dissatisfaction. A Man that loses
his Reputation by Debauchery, very often loses his Health too, and hurts his
Constitution no less than his Honor.

If we are insensible to the Charms of Pleasure, let us excite our Taste and our
Appetite by a just consideration of those pains which are their contraries.

Let those who find themselves abound in the conveniences of Life, taste their
happiness by the opposition of the necessities of others; and let the thought
of misfortunes make them deliciously enjoy that felicity which they possess.

Let a good Man make reflections upon the state of his Conscience, and rejoice
that he finds neither remorse nor anguish in the bottom of his heart.

Let Health, which we ordinarily taste after the same manner as we do an
insensible Good; let this rich present of Nature, I say be felt more lively by
the comparison of Diseases and Infirmities, to which so many others are liable.

Let a Man of good Health, esteem himself happy, not only in the enjoyment of
his felicity, but let the thought of enduring nothing amongst so many
troublesome Objects that encompass him, render him still more undisturbed; Let
him rejoice not only for the good fortune which he enjoys, but likewise for the
unhappiness he has not: Let the Pleasure which he tastes, and the Pain which he
suffers not, contribute equally to give him new satisfactions.

As to what remains, let us banish that disorderly passion of Envy, that vile
infamous passion which corrupts all our Pleasures. Let not our Eyes or Ears
become in the least concerned for possessions that don't belong to us; but let
us partake, without Covetousness, of all the Charms of those places which we go
to see. Every thing that is made for the pleasure of sight, Does it not belong
to me, so long as it is exposed before mine?

The Louvre, Luxembourg House, and the Tuilleries, as much belong to me, when I
am gazing upon their Beauty, as to those whose legally they are. For, to speak
properly, nothing can be ours, but by an actual enjoyment. The conclusion which
I infer from all these Discourses, is, that we ought to rejoice with
Moderation. To apprehend this Assertion rightly, all that is done in the World,
is done only for pleasure; and tho we take different ways, yet we see all
mankind incline to the same end.

He that searches for Reputation in the Field, and breaks through all the
dangers of Fire and Bullets to obtain Honor, would not expose himself to the
least Danger, if he did not expect that satisfaction one finds in himself, or
that which is derived from Fame.

He that grows old in his Closet, amongst a parcel of Moldy, Moth-eaten Books,
would not employ the least pains in the acquisition of Sciences, if he did not
receive some pleasure in the pursuit: All our Actions have no real object, but
Pleasure; without that the most Laborious Persons would Live languishing and
idle. It Is that alone which makes us active; it is that which stirs all bodies;
it is that which gives motion to all the Universe: Let every one then follow
that method which suits best with his innocent inclinations, and enjoy all
Delights that present themselves to him, when they are not repugnant to the
true Sentiments of Honor, or Conscience.

To Mademoiselle L....A Consolatory Discourse upon the Death of Monsieur M...
By Mr. MANNING.
I Hear, Madam, that you lament the death of Monsieur M... and am sensible that
it is your Duty to lament it: He was a person of extraordinary Merit; he Loved
you tenderly; he had done you great Services: How cruel, how unjust, nay, how
ungrateful would you be, if you did not bewail his loss! I am so well persuaded
of the greatness of it, that I am even in pain to know if you have been able to
preserve your Senses all this while; I wish the abandoning of your Eyes and
Mouth to sorrow may be the utmost of your affliction: What way soever you
escape, you will give the World sufficient proofs of your Wisdom, if you don't
run Mad.

Let others shed Tears by measure, and proportion their sadness to the occasion
of it, I shall not be surprised; but it would be an amazing thing to see you
afflict your self by Rules; you, who may so justly mourn, you, who have no
other way to signalize your gratitude than by your lamentation.

Perhaps it may be represented to you, that you ought to weep with more
moderation, and that your Sex, your Age, and your Condition, exempt you from
abandoning your self entirely to your Grief: But believe me Madam, don't for
all that deprive your self of the satisfaction of Weeping; Answer the Duties of
a just Friendship to the full: Mourn without constraint for a Man, whose chaste
delights you were; and without shame lament a Man, who could not be but the
delights of the Chaste. In dying he has set all your Sentiments at Liberty; and
his death delivers you from those scruples, which tormented you during his Life.

It would be in vain for Slander to misinterpret your complaints: The Relation
that was betwixt him and you does but too highly justify you. It Is apparent, as
you were so nearly joined in blood, nothing but a lawful correspondence could
be established between you.

You could find nothing in him but Wit, Honor and Wisdom: These Qualities,
generally speaking, are not overmuch the favorites of our Senses. They are
fitter to raise Friendship than Love; and to serve as a support for Virtue,
than to afford matter for Passion.

You could not be tempted, either with Youth, Beauty, Riches or Splendour: He
had neither wherewith to purchase, or seduce you; and Nature and Fortune
equally conspired to deny him what might engage a Lady of your merit to Love,
and what might engage himself to miscarry. Alas! who is ignorant that if you
had been inclined to one of the two, either your Love might have chosen
Demy-Gods for its Objects, or your Wants might have found Treasures for their
Recompense?

Let them alone then, let them talk who have not the gift of silence: Innocence
and Virtue are not a sufficient sanctuary against Calumny. Sanctity it self has
not defended the Paul's, the Melanius's; and if Canonized Friendships have been
suspected, why should not yours, as untainted as it is, be brought into
question?

Besides, Where Is the advantage of constraining your self? you run an equal
hazard, both by dissimulation, and by divulging your Grief.

If you divulge it, you will perhaps awaken the Reproach; but if you dissemble,
you will undoubtedly increase it: And as it is always sooner fastened upon
concealed Actions, than those that are above-board, it will impute your
moderation to your Artifice, and the serenity of your Face to the easy
submission of your mind.

But, Madam, I would have your Grief keep to appearances, and take a
superficial Calm for a profound Tranquillity. What will you advance by this
Conduct? If it does not find you too tender, it will find you too ungrateful. I
leave it to you to judge, whether it is better to be accused of a Vice, or of a
Passion? And if it is more shameful to appear susceptible of Love, than capable
of ingratitude?

But why should I seek Reasons to encourage your affliction? Can it be possible
that you should fear to hazard your Tears upon the death of your Friends, and
that you must be heartned against the attempts of Calumny, to dispose you to
pay the last offices to Friendship?

In the mean time, what can my design be here? and who obliges me to wish that
your Grief may be free and violent, instead of being moderate and constrained?
I would have it free, lest it should prove dangerous; I would have it violent,
for fear it should be of continuance: It might attempt some violence upon you,
if you should keep it captive: It would be lasting if you should let it be
moderate. I consent to have it make your tenderness appear; but I pretend
likewise to have it demonstrate your force of Mind; you will acquit your self
of the Duty of a good Friend, in lamenting your Friend; As you will perform the
duty of an Heroic Woman, in not lamenting too long.

Manage your self then in such a manner, that your Grief may not be unworthy of
him, and that it may be worthy of your self: Lament then, if you please, as a
Hero; but lament him in the quality of a Heroine.

I allow you more than this; abandon your self for some time to your
affliction; but take care to see it so well satisfied in that time, that it may
require no farther a Tribute from you.

Entertain it as long as you think fit, with the Idea you conceive of your
Illustrious Deceased; Represent to your self that Noble Countenance, that
severe Air, those venerable Wrinkles; in a word, that Head of Socrates, which
denoted so well both the Soldier and Philosopher.

Then proceed to the qualities of his Mind: Reflect upon that natural elevation
which rendered things of the greatest moment entirely familiar to him. Consider
with what clearness he pierced into the obscurest matters; with what subtilty
he examined the most curious; with what fecundity he handled the most barren;
and with what solidity he made choice of the most important.

From thence proceed, if you will, to the equality of his Soul: Consider what
an absolute Command he had over his Senses; and his Moderation, that made him
renounce all Pleasures.

Then after you have considered the regularity of his Manners, consider also
how easy they sat upon him: What indulgence had he not for all those defects
that might be supportable in a civil Life? Did he not seem to believe that he
singly was obliged to be Wise? And (directly opposite to the rest of Men) did
he not more easily dispense with the greatest infirmities of his Friends, than
the meanest of his own imperfections?

Can you imagine any person to be more Virtuous? Yes, without doubt, Madam, his
Virtue went yet further, since he made it no less a scruple to discover the
Vices of his Enemies, than to publish his own Perfections.

You know, Madam, that one of the most powerful Men of Europe was his Enemy,
and proved the instrument of his ruin; and yet you know, Madam, that your
Friend never failed to pay the respect due to his Quality, nor the discretion
to conceal his defects.

No doubt on 't but he was perfectly acquainted, and consummate in this Wisdom
of condemning no body, since he preserved it even in favor of those who
oppressed him.

How many Thousands, in his Circumstances, would have exclaimed against the
Times and Manners! How many Thousands would at least have revenged themselves
of the injustice done them, by speaking the Truth! and in a word, sharpened
their Tongues to destroy their Enemy, to discover the Vices of his Mind, and
the disorders of his Soul; the baseness of his Designs, and the iniquity of his
Actions; the evil use of his Authority, and the misemployment of his Riches;
the indiscretion of his Conduct, and the indignity of his Person!

Your Friend was Master of a Soul too generous, as well as strong to evaporate
his Grief in Complaints and Invectives. He was convinced that nothing more
discredits the violence of wicked Men, than the moderation of the good. He knew
well that Persecutors never become more odious, than by the Wisdom of those
whom they Persecute. He was contented to let his silence and reservedness
declare him worthy of a better Age.

He would not say a Word that might deserve his disgrace. He would not do an
Action, that might acquit the Authors of it. In a word, He would oppose nothing
to their Ambition, but his Modesty; to their Violence but his Constancy; to
their Authority, but his Prudence: And without doubt the Conduct which he
preserved in his Disgrace, was a perpetual exercise of these Virtues.

I am persuaded that he practiced all the rest in Prosperity: But although
great Souls are always great in both Fortunes, I ever took more care to observe
them in the bad, than in the good. I look upon them in the good, as in a
carreer of Exercises and Sports; I regard them in the bad, as in a Field of
Hardships and Battles.

The Virtues of a happy Man are agreeable and easy; the Virtues of the unhappy
are difficult and troublesome. In a word, the happy Man has nothing else to do,
but to give himself up to his Virtues; and the unhappy must even sacrifice
himself to his.

I look upon your Friend then through the finest part of his Life, when I
consider him in his Adversity: Nevertheless I leave you the liberty to recall
the most agreeable ideas, that ever his good Fortune furnished you with.

You may still do more, and you will undoubtedly: You will recollect all the
Marks of Friendship which he gave you; you will recall all his tenderness, and
all his Services. Grief is too ingenious not to make an exact search after all:
things that may be of advantage to it: It is accustomed to live at the expense
of the memory, and as long as it can find any subsistence, I question not, but
it will rake up all its corners, and put all the subservient faculties in
agitation.

But after all, there must be a time prescribed to this Passion; and indeed
time it self will prescribe limits to it.

I know there are some obstinate people in the World, who have swore an Oath of
Fidelity to their Grief, and contracted with it for their whole Life. But what
offense has Nature done them, that they should thus throw themselves into the
party of her Adversary? It is true, she has deprived them of what they loved.
But what, if she makes us die without our own consent, can we take it amiss
that she destroys others without our permission? Are not other people of less
value to us, than our selves? And since we must learn to dye without
repugnance, should we not learn to see others dye without despair?

Let us refer then, both our own Death, and that of our Friends, to the order
of the Universe. Let us consider our Friends, whilst they live, as good things
we are obliged to part with. Let us consider them* when they are dead, as good
things, which we were to enjoy but for a short space. Thus we shall enjoy them
without too much inquietude; and shall lose them without too much concern.

You will alledg to me perhaps, that Precepts are of no service; that enjoyment
has always afforded pleasure, and that privation will always cause pain. But
examine well, Madam, whether you are not mistaken in some manner upon the
Public Faith.

The greatest part of the World believes that the privation of a great
happiness, is a great misfortune: The most judicious part believes the
contrary; great Men, it is true, have established this Error, but greater have
opposed it. I make you the Arbitrator. Is it not certain that there is no
medium between enjoyment and privation; but that there is one between pleasure
and pain, which is indolence? How then can you pretend we are obliged to fall
from pleasure into pain, just as we fall from enjoyment into privation?

The Philosophers that have received no grief by their Losses, and the Saints,
who have even extracted Joy from them, sufficiently justify, that privation is
not a natural cause of Pain.

The Blind, the Cripples, and the Infirm, whom neither their Reason nor
Holiness has raised above Sensibility, justify it yet more. We see them rejoice
like other men, yet they endure the most cruel of all privations. But we need
not admire at it. Nature teaches them to support themselves for the Pleasures
they have lost, by reflecting upon those which remain to them; and they have
always enough, provided their mind is not distracted with pain.

Observe then, if you please, that in Privations the Pain does not always
distract our Mind; that the cutting off of a hand, does not hinder us from
being Voluptuous: But that a Gouty-hand makes us insensible of all Pleasures.
For there needs no more to prove that Pain must have a real cause, and by
consequence cannot be the effect of Privation.

I don't disown, but that the loss of what has afforded us Pleasure, does
furnish us with an occasion of Grief; the experience of all Mankind would
contradict so Fantastical an Opinion. I should have against me the Tears of all
Widows, the Cries of all Orphans, the Mourning of all Relations, and the Voice
of all the Afflicted.

But must be granted also, that privation is not a cause of Pain; otherwise
Pain would be Eternal, as Privation is.

You know, Madam, that there is no Privation, but what is Eternal; and that
there is no Grief but what is Transitory. So that if to prove Privation to be a
cause of Grief, you alledg the Example of all those, who Mourn; to prove that
privation is but an occasion of Grief, I can use for my own justification, the
example of all those who are Comforted. Is it not true, that those who are
comforted are in a state of Privation, as well as those who are Afflicted? It Is
therefore probable that Privation is not precisely a cause of pain; and that we
must admit some other, which suffers degrees and variations.

I am of opinion Madam, it would not be improper here to discover to you this
Cause, and to let you see why it does not act upon some particular minds: Why
it acts upon others: Why it ceases or continues to act; and in a word, why it
acts with more or less Violence: But as this Discussion would engage me in too
large a Field, so it would put you to the expense of too intense an
Application, which perhaps in your present condition you are not capable of
making.

I would treat you as a Lady of Resolution and Learning, and also as a
languishing or a curious Person; I am for leaving to your She-Friends the care
of sweetning your Affliction by their Tears, and for reserving to my self the
employment of engaging it with my Reasons. But as I pretend to consine my self
to useful things, I will apply my self only to what may be proper for your cure.

To which end, Madam, you need only make a short Reflection upon the Causes of
Grief: You know that all Grief immediately proceeds from Separation, and that
there are two kinds of Separation: (For one relates to things continued, and
the other to things united,) But you are perhaps still to be informed that the
Separation of continued things occasions the pain of the Body; and that the
Separation of things united, causes the pain in the Mind.

In the mean time, it is of no great importance to dwell longer upon this cause,
by reason it is not possible to hinder Separation from producing Pain, and that
it is even impossible to hinder Separations.

We must ascend somewhat higher, and in that imitate the Conduct of the
Physicians, who seldom have any regard to the nearest Cause, but always apply
themselves to that which is remote, because it is that which seeds the
Distemper, and is the cause of ill Humors; and it is chiefly against this that
their Remedies exert their Virtue.

The remote cause of the pain in the Mind, is Opinion. But what is this
Opinion? Some say that it is an undertermined Judgment. As for my self, I take
it to be the evil Choice of our Judgment. At least I don't apprehend how
indetermination agrees with what one ordinarily calls Opinion. There is nothing
less indeterminate than that: For does it not principally proceed from the
force of Opinion that we expose our selves to Dangers, to Vexations, and to
Death it self? Would we incur so many Hazards for real Benefits? What
likelihood then is there that Opinion would engage us so far, if it was nothing
but an undetermined Judgment?

I have here great Discoveries to make to you, did I rather propose to my self
to satisfy your Mind, than to calm your Heart. I would then endeavor to show
you after what manner Opinion is formed, and how it moves the Mind and the
Body: But when you have well considered, that Opinion is the remote cause of
Grief, you will have almost all the Knowledge, which is necessary for your Cure.

Pleasure and Pain are the Sentiments which our Soul has of what is agreeable
or offensive to us: But because nothing can feel, if it does not touch, nor be
felt if it is not touched, it follows of necessity that what produces pleasure
and pain must touch the Soul; it is certain then that all sensible Beings
necessarily touch it: But all Beings are not necessarily sensible: There are
none but those, which are delightful or prejudicial to us in themselves, that
are so; and these are the Goods or Evils of Nature.

The rest, which are called indifferent, are not so but when they lose their
indifference; and they never lose it, but when Opinion fastens to them the Idea
of Good or Evil, and then they become the Goods or Evils of Opinion.

But the Idea of Good or Evil is no sooner fixed to an Object, but the Soul
unites it self with it, or separates from it. This Union is made by a kind of
touch, which gives pleasure to the Soul; and this Separation is made by a
motion which gives pain to it, and which cannot be better expressed than by the
word Divulsion, which Physic has appropriated to its own use.

You see then, Madam, that the separation of the Soul from its Objects, is the
immediate Cause of Pain; and that Opinion must be the remote Cause of it, since
it is the cause of this separation.

This Principle being once established, it is easy to explain all the degrees
and differences of Pain, by the greater or lesser violence which the Soul
endures, in disengaging it self from those objects to which it was fastened.

But we must pass to a more useful consideration, and observe after what manner
Opinion acts against us, that we may know how to act against Opinion.

I find then that Opinion cheats us three ways; Sometimes it gives us an Idea
of Good and Evil altogether false; oftentimes it gives us one that is false in
part, and almost always misapplies their real Idea to objects.

It gives us an Idea of good and evil altogether false, when it makes them pass
with us for what they are not: It gives us an Idea partly false, when it makes
us conceive them to be less, or greater than they really are. It misapplies
their real Idea to Objects, either when it applies it to an object, from which
it disagrees; or to an object with which it agrees less than with another, or
to an object with which it agrees no more than all other objects of the like
nature.

Thus, although Existence and Nothing, Life and Death, are neither Goods not
Evils, yet Opinion has made them pass for the greatest Goods and the greatest
Evils in the World.

Notwithstanding Health is the most valuable Gift of Nature, yet the Covetous
prefer the Gifts of Fortune to it; and fear less to become indisposed, than to
become poor.

After that Opinion has given us these Ideas, either absolutely false, or false
in part, or misapplied as to the Objects, it wholly puts the Soul upon
possessing the Good, or avoiding the Evil, which it presents to it. It
prepossesses it so much, that it hinders it from disposing it self to the
contemplation and enjoyment of other Goods; and leaves it no leisure to beware
of other Evils, and to avoid them: Insomuch that it seems the Soul knows but
one Single Good, and one single Evil; or at least but one great Good, and one
great Evil.

This state of prepossession is a kind of divorce that the Soul makes from all
other Goods, in order to unite it self more strictly to the Good it espouses.

This Good which proceeds from its choice, appears to be solely made for it,
and reduces it to the necessity of being no longer happy, than by its
possession.

It Is for this Reason, that too passionate Lovers cannot partake of other
pleasures than those which they receive from Love.

Notwithstanding this Good of Opinion, the Good of the choice of the Soul, is
not more solid, or more durable than the rest; and as soon as it comes to fail,
the Soul which knew nothing else for the object of its felicity, no longer
knows where to betake it self.

It sees nothing that can make amends for what it has lost; and till such time
as it has formed another Idea full as strong and as agreeable, it remains fixed
in the contemplation of the change it finds in its object, or else it acts in
the search of other objects. When it was fixed, its pain is stupid and dumb:
when it moves, its pain is restless and complaining.

To cure our selves of Opinion, and consequently of the pain it occasions to
us, we must do against it, the contrary of what it does against us; We must
frame to our selves a true Idea of Good and Evil: and either correct what is
false in the Idea we have; or if we conceive a just one, to apply it well to
objects.

In order to frame a true Idea of Good and Evil, a Man has nothing else to do
but to consult Nature; what it avoids is really bad; what it searches after is
unquestionably* good.

But we must take care, that there are things which it avoids or desires merely
for themselves; and likewise that there are other things which it avoids or
desires to shun or obtain others.

The first are pleasure and pain; the second are those which may afford us
pleasure and pain.

We must also remark, that the things which Nature desires for themselves, are
those one may call good of themselves; and that all others have but a borrowed
goodness.

Examine, as long as you please, all the Goods of the World, and you will
always find them much more desirable than really they are, till you have
enjoyed them. Examine likewise all the Evils, and you will always, find them to
be feared beyond what they ought to be, till you have made the experiment your
self.

You may demand of me here why Virtue opposes Pleasure, if Pleasure is the good
of Nature? And you may likewise add, That Virtue ought not to be called a Good,
if it is contrary to the essence of Good. But if you regard Virtue near at
hand, you will observe that it is not Pleasure which it opposes, but only the
species and excess of Pleasure. You will also see, that when it opposes either
the species or the excess of it, it is only done in its favor, to render it
greater, or more secure.

All moral Virtues are but means to preserve, both Pleasure in Nature, and
Nature in Pleasure.

Might I assume the freedom here to make a little digression, I would make you
sensible, that the severest Virtues are but honest Mediators between pleasure
and pain.

But what should we say of those Christian Virtues which have no other object,
or at least no other allurement but Pleasure; and which conduct us to God no
otherwise than as He is the source of Eternal pleasures?

What shall we say of those Expressions used by the Prophets, who say that God
will o'rewhelm us with a torrent of pleasure? In a word, what shall not we say
of the opinion of the greatest Doctors, and the greatest Saints, who believed.
That the joy of seeing God, would make up the essence of our Eternal felicity?

All these advantages would be of mighty use to establish pleasure for the
single good of Nature: But let us keep to the most simple and most evident
Reasons: and agree, That since there is nothing good but what affords pleasure,
and nothing bad but what affords pain, it is certain that pleasure and pain,
are really the good and evil of Nature.

All this being well understood, would you believe, Madam, that a pretended
Prince of Philosophers, has affirmed that Nothing was the greatest of all
evils; and that Death was the most formidable? Will not you maintain against
him, That they are not evils, since they represent no Idea of pain?

Can Nothing do an injury to what is not? And can Death prejudice what is no
more? Nothing takes away the subject of pain; Death destroys it; and neither of
them can be the principle of it, since they are both Nothing, and that to
produce, there must be existence in the Case.

You see theu, that by forming to your self a just and natural Idea of evil,
you exterminate presently the two most formidable Monsters, that opinion ever
brought forth.

I own there is an infinite number of things which we call evils. Shall we then
give the Lie to Mankind, or shall we force it to change its Language? No,
Madam, I know that the public Voice has right to impose Names; But have not we
also a right to interpret the names which it imposes?

We may say then, that this name of Evil, which properly belongs to pain, has
been transferred to all things that may produce it. We have divided them into
Evils, of Nature, of Opinion, and of Fortune.

The evils of Fortune and of Opinion only differ in this, That all the evils of
Fortune, are evils of Opinion; and that all the evils of Opinion are not evils
of Fortune: Wheresore we may reduce all evils to those of Opinion and Nature.

Under this term of evils of Nature, we understand all kinds of Pains and
Distempers, and all natural inconveniences.

And we use to comprehend them in three conditions of Life, in which it is as
it were impossible to be without pain: And they are. Indisposition of Body,
Slavery, and Poverty. But these three conditions sometimes leave us so much
indolence and tranquillity, that one cannot so much call them the evils of
Nature, as evils of Opinion.

It is not enough for us to have a just Idea of evil in general, we must also
have a just one in particular; and after having known that all evils are pains,
we must know what are those pains which are called evils of Nature; and what
are those, the World calls evils of Opinion.

It will likewise be of great service to learn how to regulate and put them in
order; to the end that we may not only avoid running the risk of taking Evils
for what they are not; but also that we may be exempt from the danger of
apprehending them for greater than they are.

The Evils of Nature are those which, without our thinking of them, excite in
us the sentiment of Pain; The Evils of Opinion are those which excite it only,
when we think upon them.

We may also say, That the evils of Nature are those, which not only make
themselves felt without our thinking of them; but which make us even think of
them, because we feel them: And that the evils of Opinion, are those which we
don't feel, but when we think of them, and because we think of them.

Upon this Rule, it will be judged that Hunger and Thirst are evils of Nature;
and that the death of a Father or a Husband, are evils of Opinion.

You may derive from thence four consequences, which will serve you to assign a
difference and order amongst all evils; to judge rightly of their greatness,
and in a word, to regulate your sense of them.

The first is, That the evils of Nature, are but the evils of the Body; and
that the evils of Opinion, are no more than the evils of the Mind: For they are
only the evils of the Body, that depend not upon our Thoughts; and evils of the
Mind, that depend thereon.

The second is, That the evils of Nature are in some sort the Masters of our
Mind, since they compel it to be present at all their actions, and fall upon
us, as it were, with full right; but that our Mind is Master of the evils of
Opinion, since to remove our selves from them, we need only remove them from
us; and that they cannot act upon us but by a borrowed Authority.

The Third, That the more the evils of Nature are Masters of our Mind, the
greater they are; and that the more our Mind can be Master of the evils of
Opinion, the lighter they are.

The Fourth, That the evils of Nature are sometimes so small, that they cannot
Rule over our Mind, and then they are but as evils of Opinion; but that the
evils of Opinion are sometimes so great, that our Mind cannot be absolutely
Master of them; and then they hold the place of evils of Nature: For which
Reason it is said to be natural to bemoan ones Father; and when any one is too
much possessed with the thought of a small indisposition, he is reproached with
being sick of Fancy.

After having thus established an Order between the evils of Nature, Is it not
likewise possible to establish one between the evils of Opinion?

But who can regulate what proceeds from so disorderly a Cause? Is it not too
adventurous a design to prescribe limits to the Caprices of Men; and to
endeavor to make out how far our Grief should extend, when it goes beyond the
evils of Nature? No, undoubtedly: And since our Mind can be Master only of the
evils of Opinion, it is against them alone that it is not amiss to afford
Instructions.

How is it, Madam, that one comforts the Afflicted? Don't we diminish the idea
of their misfortunes in order to diminish their Grief? Can that be done in the
evils of Nature? Can one deceive the sense of a Man Tormented with the Cholick?
Is it possible to make him believe that his Gripings are but illusions? Can one
even propose to render him attentive to such a Discourse? And if he could be
capable of harkening, what effects would remonstrances have, except it were to
add anger to pain, and join a great passion to a great disorder?

The best method we can take in the evils of Nature, is to cry out upon the
greatness of the Distemper, and the patience of the indisposed; and it is
exactly the contrary of what is done in the evils of opinion.

It is true, there are some conmforters in the World who begin by the
aggravation of evils; but that is only to obtain a free admittance in the mind
of the afflicted, and to surprise their belief.

Thus we may artificially oppose the Grief of feeble Minds: But we openly and
sincerely oppose that of Stronger ones. We consider what is the source, the
principle of their affliction, and attack it immediately.

But which way soever we proceed, whether with the strong, or with the weak,
either we don't comfort at all, or else we effect it by lessening the idea of
the evils, and this is no where possible but in the evils of Opinion.

So that it is no rashness to endeavor to establish some Order amongst evils;
and to give certain Precepts how to combat them.

The Order of the evils of Opinion is not harder to find than the Order of the
evils of Nature. For, if the greatest evils of Nature are those which expose us
most to pain, the greatest evils of Opinion should be those which expose us
most to the evils of Nature.

I see but two kinds of the evils of Opinion, that expose us to the evils of
Nature. One is the loss of Persons that are dear to us: The other is the loss
of Estates.

I understand by these words of dear Persons, both those whom we Cherish, and
those that Cherish us. For the loss of those whom we Cherish, and who don't
Cherish us, is not an evil of much consequence; and therefore no great strength
of Reasoning is necessary to comfort us upon this Article.

In the first of these losses we comprehend the Death of Relations, of Lovers,
and of Friends.

In the second we comprehend the loss of Lawsuits, Storms, Barrenness, Fires,
Pillages, and all things that bring a diminution to our fortune.

The last of these evils exposes us to Poverty, but the first exposes us to all
the evils of Nature. Wherefore we may allow it the first rank amongst the evils
of Opinion.

If we happen to be sick, by whom are we relieved but by Persons that are dear
to us? What are the cares of our Physicians, and our Chirurgions? These
Mercenary Cares are seldom confined to above a quarter of an hours useless
presence, or hazardous Operation; blind Advice, or frivolous Conference.

Of what consideration, of what advantage can these Cares be, in comparison of
the Charitable Offices, the continual Assiduities, and the kind Disquietudes of
our Friends and our Relations? How often are we delivered by their
indefatigable Zeal from that quickness of of Pain, wherein the insensibility or
negligence of Physicians often leaves us?

If we become Slaves, by whom are we redeemed, but by persons that are dear to
us? Do ordinary Friends contributed toward our Ransom? Do they undertake great
journeys for our Deliverance?

If we are reduced to Poverty, who shares his Fortune with us, but those dear
persons? The rest either abandon us to our Misery, or assist us but sorrily, or
only serve us out of Vanity; and whatsoever kindness they do us, it always
costs us both some repugnance to demand it, and shame to receive it.

A true Friend, a passionate Lover, prevents our necessities. They will not
suffer us to perceive that we are Miserable; They employ all their Addresses to
avert our Misfortune, all their force to oppose it, all their Power to
Alleviate it, and all their Discretion to conceal it.

What have we then that defends us better from the evils of Nature, than
persons that are dear to us: And consequently what have we that can pass for a
greater evil, in the Order of Evils of Opinion, than the Death of those Persons?

But as indisposition of Body, although it is the first evil of Nature, is no
great evil, if it does not expose us much to pain; the Death of Persons dear to
us, although it is the first evil of Opinion, is no great evil, if it does not
expose us much to the evils of Nature.

Let us examine then at present what consequences the Death of your Friend
draws after it: Whether it abandons you to an indisposition of Body: Whether it
gives you over to Servitude: Whether it reduces you to Poverty. And I believe
we shall soon discover that it draws down upon you none of the evils of Nature.

How should it abandon you to an indisposition of Body? Your Friend was Old,
and you are Young. He could not have dispensed with your cares, tho you could
have been without his assistance. He reached the end of his Race, before you
arrived to the middle of yours; and the time of his Death had much got the
start of your Infirmities.

It is true, if it was not impossible for you to have an infirm Youth. But all
possible evils are not formidable. Human Prudence does not look upon Objects
that are too wandering and too remote. We should not fear evils that threaten
not, and we should not much fear even those that threaten at a distance.

How should it give you over to Servitude? Thanks to our Religion, our Laws,
and our Manners, we are free; and if we except those whom the Service of God
and the State engage to cross the Seas, there are scarce any but Vagabonds that
can become Slaves.

But tho by the Revolution of Human Affairs, Servitude should come and seek
after you from one end of the World to the other, or should meet with you upon
its own Lands, would you not enjoy Consolatory means enough in all your great
Qualities? Would you not easily attract the veneration of your Masters? And
would not your Masters employ all their Power to hinder you from depriving them
of your presence?

Yes, Madam, you might always render your condition supportable to your self.
But in case it should appear uneasy to you your Friend would never be capable
of changing it. Your Ransom would exceed his Power. Your Merit would obstruct
your Liberty; and if they should exact your real value, it would be impossible
for you to find Redeemers.

In fine, how should it reduce you to poverty? Your Friend was not rich; and it
is hard that you should be poor. One cannot be so with the Graces, the Virtues,
the Sciences, and Arts which you possess; and the world is not yet become so
insensible of merit, as to give you leave fo fear extremities which would
dishonor your Age.

Don't apprehend then, Madam, any lamentable consequences from the Death of
your Friend. Nothing will be wanting to you in life, not even such Friends as
he, you have lately lost. There will arise some from the dust of him you
lament; and there is no Man of equal honor and wit with him, but will love you
as he did, and like him, will be devoted to your service.

But you are in pain perhaps whether there are still such perfect friends to be
found. Make no question of it, Madam. Virtue loses nothing, no more than
Nature. The seeds of goodness circulate eternally, and pass without
intermission from one subject to another, and the principles which contribute
to the production of the wise, no more annihilate than those, which concur to
the generation of Men.

Your Friend has made room for an infinite number of others to succeed him; and
it is only your province to elect him a successor in the most numerous Court,
that ever Sacrificed to the Graces.

You will find, that Heaven will restore you full as much, as it has' taken
from you. How do you know but it will give you even more? You will discover in
him, you shall make choice off, all that was in him you have lost, and perhaps
something more: possibly more youth, and a better mien: possibly a virtue less
severe, and a friendship more agreeable. Let the things we lose be of never so
great, yet we must not abandon our selves to immoderate grief, when we only
lose what we are able to recover.

You need only defend your self from this popular mistake; which makes us
apprehend, in second friendships, either the jealousy of the dead, or the
censure of the living.

The dead are offended at nothing, and the living are affronted at all things.
But the living are of a very scurvy humor, when they oblige us to sacrifice
our selves to the dead.

If the dead loved Sacrifices, they would take the pains to demand them of us.
They must needs have lost the taste of the things of this World, since they
entertain no commerce with us. And if they are so unmindful of us, why should
we be reduced to live only for them?

Assure your self, Madam, that their state is a state of Insensibility, or a
state of Repose; and that we can do nothing to make them either happy or
miserable.

What is it, in your oppinion, that has prescribed to us the duty of preserving
fidelity to the Dead, but the weakness and tyranny of the Living?

Every one would flatter himself with the thought of fixing another to himself,
when he is no longer fixed to any one.

Our Vanity is so great, that it exacts veneration for our Ashes, and
endeavors to make our shadows triumph over our Rivals.

It is not just, Madam, to have regard to this fancy. At the moment we are
buried, the world is quit of all obligations in relation to us.

The duties of interment are called the last duties; and beyond the Funeral,
all that is given to the Dead, is taken from the Living.

Lamentations, that are too long, not only hurt Nature, but Society likewise.
They render us incapable of the duties of a civi^ Life: And one may say that
out of complaisance to those Friends we have lost, they make us wanting to
those whom we still retain:

Observe all those people that indulge their sorrow, and seek to get reputation
by their Grief. Is it not certain that their affliction seems to suspend their
Friendship, or at least that it dispenses them from acting in favor of the
Friends. Nay, one may say that it is an Incivility to offer a petition to them,
and request a service of them: So much does Grief devote them to the Dead, and
render them unuseful to the Living.

But what, must there be no lamenting for the death of our friends? No, Madam,
there must be none, if it were possible. This passion is absolutely pernicious;
and if it were good in any respect, it would only be in demonstrating that we
knew how to Love.

But if tears were certain marks of love, the greatest weepers would be the
firmest Lovers; and we are sensible of the contrary. Weak Women cry more than
those of stronger courages; and the latter love more than the former.

I am not surprised to find. Tears were in so great reputation with the Poets,
and despised by the Philosophers: Poetry borrows its fineness from the
Passions, and the infirmity of Nature: And Philosophy derives what it has Noble
from the Virtues and force of the Soul.

A Poet represents to us a Niobe, who melts into Tears for the Death of her
Children: A Philosopher represents to us a Cornelia, who beholds with dry Eyes
the Death of all her Family: The one is very tender, the other is very
courageous: both are very Mothers. Whose part do you take? Without doubt you
have an admiration for Cornelia, and compassion for Niobe. You pity Niobe, and
you commend Cornelia. You have reason, Madam. Niobe submits to Grief: Grief
submits to Cornelia. We should pity those, whom Grief overcomes: But commend
those, who overcome Grief.

But if it is not possible for us to live without Grief, is it possible for us
to have as much of it, and as long as we please? You put a great question to
me, Madam, But to excuse my self from returning such an Answer as it deserves,
I must tell you, that if we are not able to get rid of our Grief, when we
please; we may however choose whether we will retain it: It removes of it self,
when we let it loose.

I can tell you more than this, Madam, we have the power of removing our selves
from it, since we can transport our thoughts from impertinent Objects, to those
that are agreeable; and all our Afflictions depend upon the Application of our
Thoughts.

But in fine, is it decent to think no more of our friends, when they are
interred? I could tell you, it is wholly indifferent to think, or not to think
of them: However, not to sirike too severely against the sentiment of all the
World, I will affirm to you, That at least it is not decent to maintain and
feed our Weakness by our Thoughts.

We decently remember the Dead, when we remember them Wisely; and we remember
them Wisely, when we preserve an easy rememb^^^^^(...) them.

All that disturbs Tranquillity, is not Wise; and whatever is not Wise, is not
Decent.

Till such time then as one is accustomed to reflect with easiness upon the
Death of his Friends, it is good to avert his mind from it, and to amuse it
else where. Wherefore it is no consequence, that because there is a Decency in
Loving, there is also in Lamenting what one has Loved; since friendship is a
virtue that cannot be but Decent, whereas Grief is a passion, that at most can
be but excusable.

Why then, say you, are we told that it is becoming to be Afflicted; and why
did the Romans appoint a time for Women to Mourn? Hearken to one of your good
Friends of Antiquity. Our Ancestors, says he, have given Women a year to Mourn
in; not that they should Mourn all this time, but that they should Mourn no
longer. He adds, that they prescribed no time for Men to mourn, because they
can never mourn with decency.

Thus you see the Wise men and Lawgivers of Antiquity have not set too great a
value upon Tears: That they have in some sort prohibited them to men; and that
they only permitted them to Women through a sort of precaution against their
Obstinacy, and through a kind of indulgence to their weakness. I leave it to
your consideration whether this difference makes for the honor of Women, and
whether a resolute Woman ought to make use of such a Privilege.

A Lady that has a true strength of Soul afflicts her self like a discreet Man:
She lets fighs escape from her, rather than sends them forth: She suffers her
Tears to slide away, rather than pours them down: She gives something to
Nature, without taking any thing from Reason. In a word, she employs the first
days after the loss of her Friends, so as to make it appear she is a Woman: but
she employs all the rest of her life, so as to make it appear she above these
weaknesses.

Bohold, Madam, how a Lady of your condition ought to be afflicted. It is not
possible but you must be concerned for the Death of your Friend: but then it is
possible for you not to resent it too long.

You ought to consider, that you will do no kindness either to your self, or to
him, if you consume all your days in lamenting his loss; He is deprived of his
sensibility, and no longer has a sense of yours.

In spite of all Romantic expressions, and all Poetical Fictions, there is no
Loving after death; and we don't preserve Fire under Ashes.

Monsieur M... is no more, or at least is no more your Friend. What Service
then do you propose to your self by persevering in a Grief, which he is not
obliged to you for? What advantage will you gain by losing your best days, for
which he will make you no compensation?

Would you follow the example of ordinary Women, who being unable to advance
themselves by eminent Virtues, would signalize themselves by vehement Passions?
Leave them to contrive Snares for their Lovers: Leave them to bemoan the dead,
in order to Mollify the living: Leave them to insinuate their Friendship into
those, whom they first convince of their Grief.

An amiable Person, like you, is above their Artifices; She does not weep to
obtain Love; She will not owe to the reputation of her tenderness, what she can
overcome by the force of her merit.

It is then of no service to you, Madam, to be afflicted, but it is not easy
to be not so; Grief is entered into you with a strong hand; Acknowledgment and
Friendship have introduced it into your Heart; you have not been able to
dispense with your self from admitting it there.

Well! Act your part, give up to Grief all the Tribute that acknowledgment and
friendship require you to give: But act so, that Reason may regulate what
Acknowledgment and Friendship ought to require.

Take care, Madam: they are often indiscreet; and they will be so, if they
suffer Grief to reside too long in your Soul: It Is enough they have had the
credit of introducing it, they should leave you that of driving it out; They
have shown you hitherto their power; do you show yours in your turn.

It is near a Month since your Friend died, and it is near a Month since you
have been dying. What would Acknowledgment and Friendship demand of you? Would
they encourage you to follow him? Reason will not.

Don't you observe, that Heaven has not designed to unite your destinies? It is
sufficiently shown by the interval, which it has put between your births. It
gave you a a Friend, already advanced in years, to instruct you how to live,
and not to engage you to die; and it was pleased to let you enjoy his
conversation for some time, that we might enjoy your Wisdom long.

Dispose your self then to follow the decrees of Heaven; Put your self in a
condition to improve the instructions you have received: Honor your Friend by
your constancy, after having paid homage to him with your Grief.

Imagine that you are to bemoan him in his presence, and don't force him to
disown your Tears; hitherto they have been becoming, but presently they will
not be so. Your Grief appears somewhat long. The Earth, which covers the Ashes
of your Friend, is almost stiff.

Think upon recalling your firmness; Reason and Decency do now oppose your
Grief: Your Friend opposes it himself; and if you make use of his Precepts,
hereafter you shall be only free to extol his Merit, to consider his Relations,
to cherish his Friends, and to respect his Memory.

CHAP. I.
Of the True and False Beauty of Ingenious Writings.
By Mr. SAVAGE.
IF the Idea which all Men have naturally of the True Beauty of Works of the
Mind, were not effaced by the great Number of false Judgments, there would not
be so many various Opinions about their Merit. For this Idea would be a certain
Rule which every one would be obliged to follow; unless one would expose
himself to the Universal Censure of Readers, who would easily discover when
they were out of the way.

I will not here take notice of the Causes that have created in the greatest
part of our Writers, the common custom of giving so many wrongful Opinions.
Some of them are general, which have so extinguished the light of the Soul upon
all objects which are not exposed to our Senses, that there are Infinite Errors
in all Sciences, and even reach to the distinguishing of Good and Evil.

There are some other particular Causes which are apt tohinder, of themselves,
the knowing the true or false Beauty of the Works of the Mind, when Reason
would be otherwise Just, Exact and Clear.

That which is must common is Precipitation: For every one flatters himself
that he is capable to judge, either through Pride, not to be thought Ignorant;
or through Affection and Hate, according as one is engaged in any Party; or
through Imitation, neither judging for or against, but only as one has heard
the World talk; or in fine, through Caprice, Chance, Elevatition and Sallie of
Humor, as happens oftentimes to persons of Quality, who pretend that their
Rank gives 'em all the necessary illuminations, to know the Price and worth of
the Gifts of the Mind.

But whatever these Causes are, General or Particular, the variety of Opinions
is too evident, to doubt the certainty of this truth, viz, that we don't judge
upon the same Idea, or by the same Rule, though it be not certain there is one.

It Is to form it in the Mind, that Rhetoric and Poetry, and the Art of writing
History has been employed: But the more rules are invented, the more they seem
to be neglected. And it is a wonder that the most expert Masters of the World,
as Aristotle, Cicero, Horace, Quintilian, etc. should have so few perfect
Followers.

It seems then, that we ought to forsake the way of Precepts, and search
elsewhere for sure and immutable Guides, either to Write Well, or to Judge well
of the Merit of Authors.

To give ones self a just and exact Idea, I think it would be necessary chiefly
to examine any Book, with some other which has acquired an Universal
Approbation.

Malherbe in the late Reign, excelled in the beauty of his Odes, and they have
preserved to this day the same Charms to their Intelligent and Judicious
Readers. Wherefore when you read any Ode to the Glory of this King, compare the
Style with that of Malherbe, and according as you find 'em agree, so you may
venture to decide.

But then the Piece you compare it to must be of established reputation, and
which you must be sure is like to continue such; we have seen several Authors
who have had very great Applause, but it only continued for a very few years:
during which the buzzing of the Readers, and the suffrage of their Friends,
gave 'em their short-lived worth.

There are but very few true Modells: Voiture himself is none, and much less
Balzac. The pretty Conceits of Voiture, and the Flights of Balzac, have both an
Affectation which naturally displeases; The one endeavors to be agreeable, and
make us laugh in whatever humor we are; The other would be admired and
esteemed by the number of his Words, and the excess of Amplifications. The two
Letters writ to By Monsieur Boileau, where they are to be found at the end of
his Satyrs.
Monsieur de Vivonne, imitating both their manners of Writing are an excellent
Satyr on their Style, and easily discover the ridiculousness of these two
Authors, who were not long since so famous.

It were easy to foretell that such will be the Fate of a certain Author, who
Composes his Works upon the Memoirs of the Streets, and Female Fooleries; who
believes that all the beauty of a Book, when the subject is the Life of a
Saint, consists in bringing in some new term, or smart expression; and is very
well satisfied with himself, when the Period, which has neither depth nor
solidity, rowls agreeably to the Point.

But not to make any further offensive Predictions, we know that Seneca writ no
otherwise, than scattering through all his Works, Points, Antithesis's and
Paradoxes. He surprised his Times with the Arrogance of his Decisions; and
there are some yet alive who hold him for a Model of Eloquence: But they must
write very ill that imitate him, and they may be assured to tire those Readers
that have any taste or relish.

It Is not with these extraordinary flourishes that Nature explains her self:
Whatever requires a continual attention displeases, because the greatest part
of Men are not capable of it. There is a force and weakness in all Writers
whatever. This Fantastical mixture makes us naturally conclude those Works to
be disagreeable, where we must have too intense a thought to conceive 'em; or
at least are so much below one, that they deserve not the least regard.

Nevertheless there are but few good Writings, where the Author excelled so far
as to stand for a Model. We have Homer and Virgil for Heroic Poetry. Horace is
a perfect Original of Satyrs, Epistles, and Familiar Discourses. I don't say the
same thing of his Odes, and I would explain my self farther, if the excellency
of some of 'em did not oblige me to a respectful silence of the rest. If the I
suppose he means Monsieur Dacier.
Author of the long Comments upon him disapproves my Opinion, I will add, what
may perhaps appease him: That those of Anacreon are more lively, more sweet,
more engaging; and by consequence more perfect.

Let Us return to the Authors of our own Language: Corneille and Racine are
admirable in Tragedies; nevertheless it were to be wished, that the cleanness of
Expression in Corneille suited with the variety, and abundant fertility of his
Thoughts. Few Authors can arrive to represent so many different Characters; To
invent so many Intrigues; To make so many Persons Reason with so much connection
and solidity. We assist at the very Action, whilst he does but represent it,
and pass immediately from the figure to the reality.

It Is Augustus that we hear speak in Cinna. It Is the Cid that we see in his
first work, who Cause so much talk in the Court and the City, and was as it
were the signal of the course, where he carried away the Prize. Not but that
the copiousness of his Subject, the whole exttent whereof he penetrates his
vast imagination, and his Inexhaustible Genius, sometimes has left in his
Expressions too much confusion, as if it were impossible to be profound and
solid, and yet clear enough at the same time to be understood. But these Faults
hinder not, but Authors of this Reputation may pass for excellent Models. If I
were obligd to speak precisely, which of the two I would choose for a Model,
when I were to write for the Theater; I would answer, That it were more
difficult to follow the former, and that 't would be more sure to imitate the
latter.

So much shall suffice upon this Subject; and I do not think it necessary to
tarry any longer upon the first Head.

At present I will make bold to add; That instead of asking your self, Would
Virgil have writ after this manner? Did Malherb sing his excellent Odes in such
a tone? Or, if you please, Is it thus that Corneille, or Moliere drew to their
Theaters, both the Court and the whole Kingdom? Ask you your self, Is there any
Method more confused, than that of this Work? Is there any Design less
ingenious? The Expressions, could they ever be more imperfect? Is there any
Imitation more low and servile than that of this Book?

This is a fault very common, and it oftentimes happens, that one becomes a
very bad Copier of a very good Original. We ought also to take a great deal of
care not to fall into the Whimsical design of that Painter, who being to draw
an extravagant Picture of Helena, which he designed to represent perfectly
beauteous, advised with himself to give her all the Graces that he had heard
commended in the fairest persons. In effect changing her Lips into Coral, her
Cheeks into Roses, and her Eyes into Suns, and unskilfully joining 'em
together, he made a Figure like to that which Horace describes in his Epistle
to the Piso's. It Is certain he had a mind to laugh. But Authors are serious
people, they are careful of their Reputation, and copy with gravity.

But in short, whatever good a opinion an Author may have of himself, It Is an
easy matter to mortify his self-pride, which these people cannot forbear
showing to their Friends* by defying them to write worse upon the same Subject.
In such a case we ought to show our sincerity in the utmost degree, and to
explain our selves with the greatest freedom, against the ridiculous
Opinionatrate of those Scriblers, who never read, but to court your applause,
and not your Critiscism, how reasonable and just soever it may be.

Nevertheless, we ought to take care that we don't mistake implicity as where
it is admirable for downright meanness. It Is the perfection of every Work, and
if I dare say so, the embellishment of Beauty it self. Horace has given us this
advice, when he would have the manner of explaining our selves appear so
natural, that thereupon an ordinary Reader might judge it would be very easy to
speak the same things, tho is nothing but a reflection upon all that is fine
and delicate, discovers the difficulty to express our selves with the same good
Fortune.

Truth has nothing changeable in it. Falsity imitates Truth in all sorts of
ways: We always find out the last, if we have recourse to the first, but are
often cheated if we are not very diligent to discover the Imposture. When we
follow Reason with steadiness, and arrive at thinking aptly, and expressing
truly our thoughts, it is impossible that the Reader should not be moved,
because there is in all men a natural propensity to Truth So that what is
really false, cannot please any longer than we are dazzled with the appearance
of Truth, under which only it shows it self.

Upon this score, if the Expression be mean, it will present without trouble, a
great number of the like to your mind: But if it be simple, do what you will,
it will please you, and you will think it the finest thing you ever saw, If
your Wit is not much superior to the Author's, and your Experience in the Art
of Writing much more advanced than his. For this simplicity has different
degrees of perfection as all other Objects have, that present themselves to us.
But it we have a mind to profit by the two Rules we have already proposed, we
must necessarily have some knowledge of the defects that are to be found in the
most perfect Authors: For it is not my design here to instruct ordinary
persons, but make some Remarks for the entertainment of the Curious.

The first is, That one ought not to make use of Metaphors too often, nor too
long: We are very much weaned from it in this age; and since the world has
taken a new measure of the taste of true Eloquence, all this pompous heap of
glittering falsities has disappeared. The Learned men of the last Age, who were
filled with it by reading some of the Ancients, be liev'd their Style was
adorned and set out by Metaphors; there was then* as strange a caprice in
Eloquence, as in their other Opinions.

At the vanishing of that profound Darkness, wherein the foregoing Ages were as
it were lulled asleep, we waked suddenly, and then knew not distinctly enough
which was the better side.

The use of Figurative and Metaphorical Expressions was first abolished from
that minute, when we begun to discern more clearly what we ought to say.

The French Genius, which is lively, natural, and sincere, cannot endure these
Languishing, Artificial and Embarras'd Discourses. Nevertheless, we have some
Metaphors still left; and it does not displease us to see That is, where
Metaphors are natural, and the Ideas obvious; they may be safely employed in
our Author's Opinion.
Flames in Anger and Love; but these Expressions are become proper and literal,
and can deceive no body.

The second Remark is; That it is an inexcusable fault to pass from one
Metaphor, by which we have begun, to a new one, and so to connect Images which
have no agreement amongst themselves. When a man is careful to write well, he
knows how to continue, and support the same Idea; I pity him, says the Author
of the Characters, I give him for lost, he is cast away. It is not thus that we
ought to make use of the Wind, to arrive at the delightsome Port of Fortune.

You see he takes care to mix nothing that is foreign with the first Image he
gave us to express what the Rich think of the conduct of Philosophy. This
person is represented as it were upon the Sea. The Rich Man saw he would be
Ship-wrackt. He saw him out of the road. He judged that 'twas not so, that he
ought to make use of the Wind, and that he would never arrive at the Port of
Fortune. There is not here one term which is not Allied with the rest.

But the Author had committed an unpardonable Solecism, If after all these
expressions taken from Navigation, he had happened to say, It is not thus one
ought to bear against the Wind, and build his fortune. This new Image of
Building, joined to th^^e of the Sea, which preceded it, would have produced a
disagreeable effect; whereas all being united, the discourse becomes clear and
easy.

The third remark resembles this, and chiefly consists in advising that we
ought never to pass from one person to another in the same Period. The same we
may also say of the Numbers, and of all that the Grammarians term Moods and
Tenses of Verbs.

I will give an Example of this fault, taken from an Author who is
extraordinarily regular in his Subject and Style. All that is here below, says
this excellent Writer, has no long duration. He should have stopped here, but he
was resolved to carry on his Period. Wherefore he adds, And this perpetual
Motion of Creatures, (you may take notice already that he passes from a subject
indefinite, all that is here below, to one which is determined; And this
perpetual Motion of Creatures, which have no other apparent connection but by
the Conjunction, and none at all in the Sense. He continues, which succeed one
another. (This adds an Image altogether unnecessary, since it was sufficiently
remarkt by the defect of Duration, and the perpetual Motion) render as it were
a continual Homage to the Immutability of God, who alone is always the same. I
say, That these Tails of Periods render 'em Intricate, Confused, and
Superfluous; and that this is truly the Style, not of an Orator, but a Declamer.

One might have expressed the same thing after this manner: All that is here
below, has no duration, and renders as it were a continual homage to the
Immutability of God. I know there are some People so extremely exact that they
will not permit one to join an Affirmative proposition with a Negative so close
together.

I say nothing of this Homage that Motion renders to Immutability. It is a
point which signifies nothing to my design.

But to quit this Digression; If Authors of the most accomplished exactness fall
under these sort of Faults, what must Vulgar Authors do? these remarks will
appear to them too severe, because they are sensible, it may be, that they are
not in a condition to practice 'em.

All that I can do at present in their Favor, is to propose no more of 'em.
Our general discourse is about Observations upon our Tongue. And we go no
farther than barely to examine, If a term be well used, and how long it has
been in Vogue. Tell me, I beseech you, may not your Discussion go farther. Can
a Work be said to be perfect, when it is only composed of choice words? If this
is your Opinion, you are easy to be contented; but there are a great many Men
more difficult, because they are more delicate.

CHAP. II.
Of the cleanness of Expression.
By Mr. MANNING.
I Was formerly too indulgent, and perhaps am now become too nice and severe.
In the heat of Youth, and those first ardours of Passion, a Man is not
acquainted with the discreet coldness of a Life somewhat more advanced; We
observe with pleasure, that Authors who have been admired both by the Ancients
and Moderns, have embraced the same follies, which our inclinations recommend
to us.

The Licentiousness and Debaucheries of Petronius's Style, have nothing then
that shocks our Nature: It is without any disturbance to our Modesty, that we
still represent its irregularities; and as if there was not obscenity enough in
his Fragments, we regret the loss of what is wanting with as lively a concern,
as if we had lost the only Discourse that could preserve Decency and Manners
amongst Men.

I bethink my self, too late perhaps, to make these Reflections; but it usually
happens, when we have arrived at our Journeys end, and are talking of our
Travels, and the Road we followed, that then and only then we perceive our
going a stray.

This is one sort of going astray, and I don't know if there be a grosser, than
to Address ones self to all ones Contemporaries, nay, to all those who shall
come after us, without having any thing but what is highly undecent and
unseemly to tell them: And this proceeds from Ignorance. They don't know, at
least they don't consider that there is a secret Pride in the bottom of the
Soul, which obliges us to take exceptions against too licentious a
conversation, as a want of respect. To this Pride we are obliged, that those
splendid names of Glory, Decency, and public Civility are still preserved.

But tho Pride were silent, and somebody had found out a Mystery to make it
hold its peace, which I confess is a very difficult task, yet Virtue would not
be silent; She has not as yet so utterly abandoned Mankind, but that they
still pay a great respect and veneration to her. The Modesty of one whole Sex
will be always armed for her defense; and the greatest part of the employments
of Men are only taken up for her sake.

Pleasure it self, I speak of lawful and indifferent Pleasure, dishonours
whosoever seeks it with affectation, or who procures it for another. Thus, I
know no Satyr, included in one word, more stabbing than that of being called
the Comptroller of Nero's Pleasures.

Since I declare so freely against my self, by disowning the Praises I have
given to Petronius, no one will expect that I should spare the Raillery of
Cicero in his Oration for Coelius.

I freely own, that he was brought up in business, and knew the World; that he
raised himself by his Merit, much above his Birth; that he was equal in dignity
to Pompey and Caesar.

But certainly he forgot himself, when indulging his natural propensity to
Raillery, he reproached, in full Senate, Clodia, for making her younger Brother
lie with her, Propter nocturnos quosdam metus. A Man may easily find out the
equivocation; but I wonder that so great a Man should tax Caelius with so great
a Crime only by way of Irony, if he believed it to be true; or that he should
give himself the liberty to accuse him of it, if he believed it not.

It were to be wished, that what has been required of Orators, were likewise
required of all Authors, and even Poets.

Virum bonum Oratorem esse oportet. We have mightily neglected this Precept in
our Language. Our old French Poets were almost all guilty of writing obscenely.
Desportes is the Man that fell into this vein, with the greatest affecta^ion
and impudence imaginable.

But since Voiture, who had a refined Genius, and who conversed with the
politest Company carefully shunned this sordid, this ungentleman like way of
Writing; the Theater it self has no longer suffered our Authors to write any
thing too licentious. Thus all this liberty is no more supported even in the
most familiar Conversations; and if our Age is not more chaste than the
preceding ones; at least it knows how to manage the outside, and to set it self
off with the appearance of Virtue.

Our niceness goes yet further; and we cannot ^^dure now adays to see the
description of any object that is apt to leave a bad Idea behind it. All that
we can suffer a sick Man to do, is to tell his Distemper: we give some ease to
his indisposition, in harkening to him with some little attention: But this
complaisance which we express to his infirmity, is no excuse for it; especially
if he descends into too long a relation of particulars.

But, except this occasion, it is not possible to make a description of things,
for which we have naturally an aversion, without offending the Company;
notwithstanding this has been the defect of many Authors. Buchanan has
described a Dream with all the luscious figures of Rhetoric. St. Amant has
discovered a World of Debaucheries with all the plainness peculiar to his
Style; but upon such subjects, both Rhetoric and plainness are unseasonably
lost.

Let us return to Cicero. Now ought this Consul, when he was declaiming against
Piso, in the presence of the Senate, to have made use of terms, which in so
lively a manner represent the most beastly circumstances of Drunkenness? His
description is charged with particulars, which must needs be very nauseous and
disagreeable.

Catullus also might have given to the Annals of Volusius another term, than
that of Cacata charta. This Poet, who pretended to a purity of Style, should
have abstained from an Epithet so gross and so licentious.

Martial found out a by-way to commend the cleanliness of his Mistresses
Lap-Dog, yet for all that he has fallen into a very unseasonable expression,

Gutta pallia nec fefellit ulia.
It had been more proper to have said nothing of it.

Without doubt these Authors were corrupted by their bad Morals. There was in
their times, how fine soever we may represent them, so total an ignorance of
what the Laws of true decency require from us, that they have not produced one
Author who has observed them with exactness.

But, in endeavoring to avoid this fault, be cautious least you fall into
another, very common in our days. Passions and Vices are described to us in
such pretty colors, even in the Pulpit, that a Man can hardly perceive what
deformity they have in them. There are those persons that know how to conceal
the impieties and extravagancies of the most pernicious manners, in order to
hide what conformity they maintain to the weakness and frailty of our Hearts.

We should be too much startled to know the impiety thereof. No body would draw
down upon himself the vengeance of Heaven. We are too much humbled in a severe
examination of our extravagancies and no one has a mind to be ridicuous. But to
be frail, to be subject to infirmities, this is no more than being born Man;
and no one thinks he ought to be ashamed of his birth, or of his destiny.

I should therefore rather choose a description which would faithfully represent
things, than those flattering Pictures which fortify Men in their false
opinions, or in their usual disorders.

However, don't follow Iuvenal's footsteps, or assume the liberty to make the
grossest representations of the greatest irregularities: In vain does an Author
so abominably licentious and impudent persuade me to hate the excesses of
Messalina, I hate him even more than I do her; and the lewdnesses of his wit
that are sufficiently discovered in the boldness of his Style, scandalize me
infinitely more than those of the most abandoned Women, who are blindly
transported by the fury of their Passions.

I love his Translator better than him: He took great care to preserve the
cleanness of his Style in such ill Company. He has omitted nothing in the
Satyrs of his Author, but what might hinder the secure reading of them. His
fine indignation at the Vices of Rome, his Fire, his Vivacity, even to the tone
of Declame, which was the true Character of Iuvenal, he has preserved entire.
And let it never be said that Satyr divested of these excesses, is less
agreeable; for it is certain, that nothing but the Salt of acute Raillery makes
up the whole entertainment in that sort of Poetry; and that on the other side,
grossness of expression and thought, cannot fail to displease those Gentlemen
that have the least delicacy. Which is easily justified by the example of
Monsieur We know him better in England under the name of Boileau.
Despreaux; For do we read any of the Ancients with greater satisfaction? And
yet can one carry further, than he has done, discretion and reservedness.

His Muse always chaste, always modest, knows how to pursue Vice, and to condemn
it, as Virtue it self uses to do, by its light, and by its vehemence: For we
should overstretch things, and push them to the utmost rigor, should we say,
he had done better if he had afforded no room for the la Neveu in his Works.
What he says in that respect is so short, that he deserves to be excused, if it
be a fault; and if not, we must acknowledge that he has taught us, that a Man
may speak sometimes of such a Person, provided he observes the temperaments of
this Author, in one or two words, and yet never infringe the Rules of Decency.

But Lucretius neglects this conduct at the end of one of his Books: A Man must
certainly have his Veins kindled with the flame of Love, a Burning Aetna in the
bottom of his Soul; or, to leave these great expressions, A Man must be a
Madman, as in effect he was, to tire his Reader with a long description, and
that in the most extravagant and nasty circumstances, of the Dreams and
Illusions of a young Man.

The more I consider of this passage, the less I discover those Reasons which
make People generally so fond of so violent, so imperious an Author: When he
would act the Serious Man, and the Reasoner, it is then he is utterly lost, and
knows not what he says: witness that verse which I have often heard so
impertinently quoted.

Primus in orb Deos fecit timor. That is to say, Fear induced Men to believe,
that there were Gods. For if one should ask him, Who is it that produced this
Fear? Would not he have been obliged to Answer, That it is the natural Idea
which Men conceive of a Divinity? For Fear, and other Passions, are no
otherwise raised in us than by the Objects which excite them by the means of
the Imagination or Thought.

But if I find in my self the Idea of a Divinity, before I find that fear which
I ought to have for it, this fear then is the effect, and not the cause of the
thought I conceive of it. A man needs but very little penetration, and extent
of mind to make so obvious a discovery?

If he has a Mind to descend from this State, which does not suit with his
Talent, Why must he go throw away fine expressions, to represent impertinent
things, to insist upon them so long, and not to leave, till he had exhausted
it, so ridiculous a Subject, as that of the Dreams of an Age, which performs
nothing, even in the day time, that deserves our attention?

If this is Beauty, or Delicacy, or Learning, I heartily congratulate the
grossness of our days, which certainly would near bear so irregular a freedom
in any Author whatsoever.

I wish with all my heart I could excuse Ausonius, that illustrious Consul of
Gaul; but the consequence of this remark carries me in spite of my self, to
speak of him, nay, and to speak ill of him, What can be finer than his
Thanksgiving to the Emperor upon the subject of his Consulship?

Pliny the 2d, would have envied him this work. What can be more ingenious,
than the Punishment of Cupid in the Elisian Fields, and those sufferings and
reproaches which the Heroines made him undergo, who had all of them some cause
to make their complaints of him?

He must, for the misfortune of his Reputation, amuse himself in that
employment, which of all things in the World is most unworthy of a Learned Man:
Judge what time he lost in busying himself to pick up sometimes a beginning of
a verse in Virgil, sometimes an end; and tack all these different parts
together, in order to compose a poor wretched Cento.

What shall I say of those expressions of Virgil, which tho they were innocent
as they lay in him, yet as Ausonius has managed and sorted them, they are
conscious of all the indecencies that imagination can possibly form to it self?

Behold now a strange description of this Man. He that was Author of a serious
Work, which he Addresses to a great Emperor, who has Wit and Learning, as we
may sufficiently see in many other places of his Books, is notwithstanding the
same that prostitutes his Muse, and composes an infamous Poem out of several
pieces of Poetry very harmless in themselves.

To condemn all these insolences, does not argue too great a sowrness of
Spirit; many persons would be pleased to see even Virgil himself condemned for
the interview of Eneas and Dido in that cave of the 4th of the Eneids.

Speluncam, Dido, Dux and Trojanus, eandew,
Deveniunt. --
Nor would they be less willing to condemn Homer for what passed between Juno
and Jupiter, upon the Mount Olympus.

These two great and illustrious Authors have avoided a thousand occasions,
wherein any other person would have lost himself. If Paris and Helena converse
together in the Iliad, it is only to reproach one another. Calypso, Circe, the
Sirens of the Odysses, contain nothing that offends Modesty. Ulysses does not
abuse the Favors of the Princess Nausicaa.

A Man who has a truly great Soul, Elevated and Noble; a vast genius, and an
imagination clear and well disposed, will never stoop and descend to that
meanness which I here condemn.

(...)

or any Method. I will tell you, with all sincerity, what the Desire to
satisfy you, rather than Study or Experience, suggested to me upon this
Subject.

The first step that a Man makes into the World, generally determines all the
rest, and is the Foundation of his Reputation, and best Presage of his Fortune;
and, from the first Marches that he makes, those that have had Experience, will
tell you how far he will advance. It Is then very necessary to make this first
step with a great deal of caution, and to signalize ones Entry by something
that is glorious and great.

There is a great deal of Art in gaining the public Esteem, and to make ones
Talents appear so to advantage, that the World shall never disgust, or be
glutted with 'em.

The means to preserve ones Reputation, is to produce something more and more
excellent, and to provide a fresh Nutriment for the general Admiration, which
seems always to grow up equal with our Merit. The great Actions we do, promise
something greater; and the good ought to be followed by better.

A Great man ought not then to suffer the depth of his Capacity to be sounded,
if he will be always esteemed by the Vulgar: He ought, on the contrary, to
behave himself after such a manner, as never to discover all that he knows, and
that no man may have it in his power to assign Limits to his Learning. For, let
a Man be never so learned the Opinion we have of him, when we know him but by
halves, goes always farther than the Idea we conceive of him, when we are
wholly acquainted with him.

Therefore let him take care not to discover his Ability all at once, but make
an absolute use of his Cunning. He should always to manage himself with
caution, that he may be able to disengage himself from the Inconveniences he
may fall into; and, to have a hidden Reserve, where he may command suitable
Succors, to repair his greatest Mistakes, and to retrieve him from his
greatest Oversights.

As the Success of the most Judicious Undertakings depends upon the meeting of
a multitude of Conjunctures, many of which Chance can only reconcile; an
excellent man ought not ever to commit his Reputation to the risque of a
Conversation, a Dispute, or an Interview; for, if it does not succeed with him,
he never recovers it: And no man can be sure not to fail in an Essay or a
Trial; since nothing is more common, than to find ones first Projects
disappointed. He ought then to expose his Reputation to the hazard of the
Enterprise, whatever Advantage he may promise himself from its Success.

On the contrary, the great Art of all consists in not discovering all one
knows at once, but to unfold it (if I may speak so) by degrees, and always to
nourish and excite Curiosity.

The Magazine should always answer the Occasions; and the Piece should not
belie the Pattern: In fine, a Man ought always to keep exactly to what he
promises.

It Is upon this consideration only, that great Masters never discover the whole
Mystery of their Art in their Lessons to their Scholars, and by that means
they remain always the Masters; the Source of their Instructions never dries
away, and as it is not communicated but by proportion and measure, they never
exhaust that Fund of Knowledge, whence they draw continually both to satisfy
the expectation of others, and to keep up their own reputation.

There is one thing more that I would recommend to an ingenious Man, and that
is, To be seen as seldom as may be; for as his presence diminishes the Esteem
one has of him, so his absence and distance augments it. Fame every day
increases Objects, and the Imagination goes much beyond the Sight.

We ought not then to be lavish of our selves; we ought to make ourselves
expected to be truly welcome. The desire any one has for us, is commonly the
measure of the Esteem they have of us: Happiness is better tasted when it has
been a long time expected; and the Pleasure that costs one something, is much
more ardently sought after, than that which is easy: so the nicest People find
in Hunger a sauce that all the ragouts could not give to their Victuals; and
it is a refining of Epicurism not to satisfy our senses and Appetites but by
halves.

A Man should never make himself familiar with the Vulgar, least he lose that
Air of Dignity, which a Retreat and serious Life bestows on those that show
themselves but seldom: for presence brings to light those Defects which absence
would conceal. The most precious things lose their worth as soon as they become
common. Those great inclinations we have for Rarities are changed into scorn,
when we find 'em to be had everywhere; and the mind is much more delicate and
difficult to satisfy than the senses, which are glutted with the most
delicious and exquisite Viands, when they are made their daily food.

Thus we may see the farther a learned Man is from us, the more we wish for his
company; the more he absconds the more we look after him: not that he ought to
render himself inaccessible; nothing but a mean Genius ought to be difficult to
come at, being conscious that his Merit would not bear too near a Scrutiny;
there is in this a Medium that consists between a Haughtiness that despises
others, and a Familiarity which makes ourselves cheap.

There are many other things might be said upon this matter, and the more I
endeavor to measure the extent of 'em, the less I discover their bounds. Let
us proceed then step by step: Let us clear, if we can, this confusion of
Idaeas, which present themselves in crowds to the Mind, and follow some sort of
Order, which may hinder us from fruitless wandering.

The first thing, in my opinion, that a Young Man ought to do, who has a mind
to settle himself with Success in the World is, to know his Planet, for there
is no body but has one, and it is want of being acquainted with it, that an
infinite number of People have not made their Fortune as they might have done
in the World.

How many men do we see in Favor, who have not thought it possible they should
be known by Great men, yet they have been so by the effect of their Destiny?
And as soon as they have made an entry, and are settled in their Posts, they
need but ordinary Capacities to maintain 'em. Therefore we ought to search with
care our predominant Destiny.

He that fails at the Court, perhaps, may succeed in the City: And, he that
finds himself the Jest of the Town, may set up for a Wit, and be admired in the
Country. In a word, No man is a Prophet in his own Country.

It Is necessary then to know how to transplant onesself. Many Great men had
never been known, if they had always tarried in the place of their Birth. Some
men must stand in a good Light, to appear in their true luster.

We see every day several persons that would have been the Scandal of their
Order, if they had continued in it, yet forsaking it, they have become the
Honor of another.

Men succeed oftentimes better in one condition than in another, although they
have not a better Genius for that which they have undertaken, than that which
they leave.

It Is to nothing but their Fate that we ought to attribute the Rise or Fall of
most Great persons: Wherefore every one ought to look into his Lot, to content
himself with it, and follow it; for, to think to make ones Fortune by any other
means, is, to have a mind to sail against Wind and Tide.

The second thing that is necessary for a Young Man to do, is to know his good
and ill Qualities; for every thing in the World is mixed with Good and Evil.
There is no man but has something good in him, which may become excellent, if
it be cultivated.

Such a one would have become a Great man, if he had known his Strength, and
perfected his best Talents. But the most part force their Genius, and lose the
Reward of their Course, because they drive beyond the Posts that should bound
their Career.

He ought also to know his predominant Defect, for every body has one, which
counterballances in a manner his excelling good Quality; and if one takes a
Resolution to destroy it, one may infallibly succeed. But one ought to take it
in good time, and to labor with a great deal of Courage and Perseverance; for
it is not a small matter to destroy a Vice that is born, and has grown up with
us.

When a Young Man is arrived so far, he ought not to think, that he must
presently enter upon upon the World, and embark in some Employ; he must reflect
upon it a long time first; he must consider his Abilities, provide himself of
Patrons, and measure the height of the Undertaking he pretends to: He ought, if
I may be allowed the expression, to feel the Pulse of his Affairs, and to wait
a long time, if it be necessary; for it belongs only to Wise men never to
precipitate, and be impatient for any thing. He that never grieves, or puts
himself in a Passion, shows that he is an absolute Master of himself; and when
once a Man is Master of himself, he is not long after of others also.

There is a certain term to bring great Designs to maturity; those that can
expect it, are commonly paid with Usury for their Patience; for, in many things
Delay does more than Force.

Precipitation ruins the best-laid Enterprises; whereas Patience ripens the
most difficult Designs, and renders the execution of them easy.

Not but that it becomes a Young Man, to tempt Fortune by some bold and
courageous Action; for, on the contrary, this way seldom fails of Success, and
the Character of Attempting is almost a certain Pledge or Security for the
Success of any Enterprise whatsoever. Nothing more resembles Sottishness than
Cowardice; whereas a little Bravery supplys oftentimes the want of Ability.

We ought not then to be afraid so much of the Merit of others, nor suffer any
Idea we may have of it to give us any disturbance before 'em; for, how much
soever one is possessed in Favor of a man of great Reputation, he shall not
have a long time conversed with him, before he finds a great deal to be abated
of the excess of his Reputation; and that every one has his Weaknesses, which
level him with the Vulgar, as much as he is removed from 'em by his Merit.

A man that is upon the Rise dazles us if we regard him at any distance; but
let us come near him, and his Personal Defects will immediately moderate the
Foreign Gloss that he but borrowed from his Rank and Dignity.

Let us then be upon the guard, against a Power that an Imagination too
favorably biased usurps over our Reason. It no more becomes a learned man to
be fearful, than an ignorant to be bold.

We ought to know how to undertake seasonably: it is not enough to begin, we
ought to know how to proceed in an Undertaking. There are a great many Men who
are only good to broach an Affair, but are absolutely unfit to finish it: It Is
from this Default that many great Battles have been gained without any great
Advantages to the Conquerors, because they tarried behind to reap the Fruit of
the Victory, when they should pursue the Advantages. And it is from the same
Principle that a Statesman, in Public Affairs, commits the same Solecisms, as
a private Man does in those of his Family.

If a Man after having taken his Measures on all sides, happens to succeed in
any thing, let him take a great deal of care not to suffer himself to be
overcome with the flattering Design, which Self-love inspires those with, who
have too much Satisfaction in any happy Success: for there is need of as much
Moderation not to be corrupted by one's good Fortune, as Patience not to be
cast down at the bad: Besides, one ought to have the power to stop one's self
in the middle of one's most favorable Enterprises: The Torrent of Prosperity
ought not to carry us away against our Wills. It Is often times necessary not to
desire one's Victory as far as one might; a wise Retreat is no less glorious
than a courageous Attack; it is by retiring from the World in good time, that we
can secure the Glory we have acquired in it; and it is the Character of a
consumated Merit, to be able to live in a Retreat with Honor, after having
lived in the Public with Luster.

See here, my Lord, in what manner it seems to me, that a young Man who would
maintain an illustrious Figure in the World, ought to begin, proceed, and
finish his Actions. I am very well assured there are many other things might be
said upon this Subject, but in the little I have writ upon this Occasion, there
is enough to make me understood to one, that has had so much Experience as your
Lordship, and whose Thoughts are so much elevated above those of other Men.

Reflections upon what a Man ought to do to live Happy.
IT IS a great Advantage toward the Tranquillity of Life, Reflect. 1.
to behold it through the most agreeable part of it: A thing must be very
adverse indeed, that one cannot draw some profit from; we grieve oftentimes,
and give ourselves abundance of trouble for something that in a little time
becomes of itself easy to us.

2. Satyr may give us a great deal of pleasure, whether we write it our selves
or hear it from another; but this pleasure should not inspire us with a kind of
Melancholy, that is to be seen in the Conversation of some People who are
seriously concerned at the Follies or Extravagancies of other Men; who are not
pleased with the Condition they find the World in, and do not consider
disagreeable Objects, but to be displeased with 'em. What good did it do
Heraclitus to sigh and grieve? Did he by those means reform the Abuses of the
Age? The wisest side is to take care of one's self, and to leave to others the
managing their own Persons: Has not every one enough to do with his own Affairs?

3. When a Man is in trouble, he ought to remember that he has had some
favorable minutes, and impute to his good Fortune all his former happiness; in
short, one is less Unhappy when one can charm one's Sorrows either by a
remembrance, or an hope of a Condition more Happy.

4. The greatest part of Mankind look upon the Honors, Riches, and Pleasures
of others, as Adulterers do upon other Men's Wives, in despising those they
enjoy: Cannot a Man make use of Life with pleasure without possessing all that
may belong to it? Why should we make a Necessity of an hundred things without
which we may live content enough, providing we be but a little reasonable.

5. Although Ambition oppose this, yet we are more at quiet when we consider
those that are below us: she would have us aspire to the first Rank, and
despise this petty sort of Tranquillity; but had she any better recompense to
put in its place?

6. The measure of our Happiness ought to be taken from that of our Passions:
he that has the fewest desires, hopes, or such like other motions of the Mind,
without doubt will be the most content.

7. There is nothing except the desire of Virtue, which ought to be limited, if
one would live happy: For in fine, how many Virtues are there incompatible? How
many Undertakings which are not proper to all sorts of People? it ought to
suffice us that acquit ourselves in the Employ wherein we are, and there to
bound all our Duty.

8. That Man's truly miserable who goes to search for Sorrows in Futurity; it is
an Abiss so profound that the prospect from above is enough to fright one. To
make use of the present good is a very rare Secret: but not that a Man ought to
be prepared for the different Accidents of Life. This may shield us from the
Insults of Fortune. No Misfortune can happen to us when one has a sufficient
Fund of Patience and Reason to overcome it.

9. It Is very much to misunderstand one's self, to be troubled and frighted
when one has done amiss. A man must have a great deal of Vanity, not to know
his Weakness. But if he knows it, at least he may gain this Advantage by it, to
remain in a calm Condition after any Frailty whatsoever.

10. There is nothing more frights the World than Death, as if it were not a
passage to a better Life. Live well, and the thoughts of Death will but create
in you an excess of Joy.

11. Let not your Soul, prevented by any austere Maxims, hinder you from taking
the innocent pleasure of Life. There are some Men that build themselves up a
Merit, by refusing the smallest, and most natural Sweets that Heaven has been
pleased to mingle with the Bitters of Life, to render them supportable.

12. Solid Content proceeds from a good Conscience; without that, there is no
Pleasure which does not become uneasy, for there is no body that receives more
Satisfaction or Uneasiness, than either to be in good or bad Circumstances with
himself. Now it is the thought that we have performed our Duty, that makes us be
content at Home; and on the other hand, nothing gives us more Pain and
Inquietude, than the mortifying Reflections we make on the ill Disposition of
our Hearts.

13. Happy is the Man who knows to make a right Judgment of what is truly Good,
and truly Evil; for there are a thousand false Scruples, that nevertheless give
us true Vexations: And therefore, if we desire to regulate them, we must by no
means reject the Natural Instincts we have of all that is really Good. The
Quiet of those Persons who have lost their Conscience, is a lamentable
Lethargy, that leads to Infallible Destruction.

Of Logic, by the same Hand.
INstead of a great number of Precepts, of which the Logic we learn at the
College is wholly composed, and which are for the most part, either
Unprofitable, or too Intricate; it seems to me, that these four only may
suffice to all those, who have a mind to conduct their Reason surely in their
Search after Truth.

1. We ought not to determine, That a thing is, or is not, without having a
Reason for it, that is explained in so clear terms that it may naturally
convince the Mind.

2. For fear of suffering one's self to be carried away by a Precipitancy of
Mind, or Prejudice, to which we are so obnoxious, we ought to examine all the
terms in which any Reason is laid down, dividing it into as many parts as we
can: For it is not possible for us, having our Minds so confined, to judge well
of a thing, unless we examine it peice-meal.

3. Moreover, we ought to establish an Order in all the Thoughts that a Subject
is filled with. That which is the most simple, most general, and most easy to
be understood, ought to precede that which is most confused; because there is
nothing which is a greater help than this Order, to know if one be not deceived
in Reasoning; that is to say, in making one thing follow another.

4. In fine, we ought to take a great deal of care, to make so exact an
Enumeration, that we may be assured, that nothing is omitted. If but one thing
be forgot, it is impossible there should not be some defect or other in what we
propose.

To comprehend in fewer Words these four Maxims, remember, 1. Not to Judge of
any thing which is obscure, or without Proof. 2. Divide the thing you are to
judge of. 3. Take care to have a Method in your Thoughts. 4. That the
Enumeration you make be entire.


Of the Multitude of Words, or the Number of Books.
I Cannot well explain my Thoughts upon this Subject, without making use of
this Question, viz. Whether it be not true, That those who Divine, or
Conjecture upon any private Affairs, do not speak much more, and say many more
things than those who know the Secret? What is not daily said about Affairs of
State, when it is the Prince only that knows the Mystery? One word from his
mouth would explain better all the different faces of things, than all that the
Politicians commonly babble.

Hence it seems to me, That a Man may well think, that the more Books he sees
upon a Subject, the more he may conclude we know nothing of the Matter. Of
every thing there is but one Truth to be known; but for want of this Knowledge,
there is a multitude of groundless Conjectures.

Of Moral Philosophy.
MOral Philosophy ought to endeavor to conduct us in the search of Good, as
Logic guides us in the search of Truth.

So then, that of the College is not truly Moral Philosophy; for it is certainly
true, that it only proposes some unprofitable Questions, concerning the Idea
that one ought to have of the Order of Things that create our Happiness, of the
number of our Passions, and other Metaphysical Points which serve for nothing
else but Matter for a Dispute.

The true Moral Philosophy ought to teach us,
1. What it is truly to act like reasonable Creatures, that is to say, with
liberty; It therefore first treats of Humane Actions, that is to say, rational,
or free. 2. After having supposed, that nothing but free Actions are Good, or
Evil, it inquires what this Goodness, or Evilness of our Actions is; or if
there can be any indifferent. 3. For this reason as the goodness of our Actions
depends upon their Rule, and their End, it inquires what is the certain Rule,
and the certain End. 4. Then it teaches us, That we have not her Rule but the
Law of God, which it considers two ways: 1. As it is written in the Books of
Moses, etc. and the Gospel, interpreted according to the Fathers of the Church.
And, 2. In every Man's Conscience. 5. As to what concerns the End, it shows
that it consists not in Virtue only, which the Pagans sought after with so
great a Passion, but that God only ought to be the Object, upon which all our
Love is employed, of which it discovers to us the absolute Necessity. 6. Next,
considering that the Passions are a certain Obstacle to it, it does not so much
teach us to know them, as how to tame them. 7. In fine, because Men are obliged
by the Necessities of Life, to live together, it speaks of the Duties of
Justice, which we owe to one another, whatever condition we are in. It seems to
me, that, if every one followed these Rules in the Study of Morality, one might
make a much greater Progress, and find more Pleasure, than in the insipid
Systems of the Philosophy of the Schools.
Maxims of Morality
REason, which obliges us to be oftentimes irresolute in our Judgments, because
the greatest part of Objects do not present themselves to our Minds with proof
enough to make them well understood, obliges us not to be so in our Actions;
for being to live with one another, it is necessary to choose at last some sort
of Conduct, which we should constantly observe, till we can find a better.

For in the same manner, as a Man who pulls down one House to build up another,
makes choice, by way of Provision, of some place where to stand while he builds
it; so when a Man would examine with care his Thoughts, and reform his Soul
from the Prejudices it may have imbid'd, he ought to provide himself, after the
same manner, of a Morality which may serve him for a Rule. This Morality may be
reduced to four Maxims:

1. To obey the Laws and Customs of the Country where one is born, and to
follow in all things, the most moderate Opinions, without disapproving, or
condemning any Person.

2. To be so constant in this Conduct, that one has chosen, as not to have any
regard to whatever may be said, to put us out of conceit with it: Like in this
to Travelers, who finding themselves in a Forest, ought not to wander this
way, or that way, but go as directly as they can in the same path, and not to
change it, for idle Reasons; for at last they must come to some end, wherein
all probability, they will be better than in the middle of the Wood.

3. To deliver themselves from all those Disquiets, which are wont to move
those feeble and staggering Spirits, which suffer themselves to be turned
inconstantly by all sorts of Examples: For these Agitations, and these
unprofitable, and confused Reflections amuse the Mind; and take away from it
all the force it should have.

4. Of all the kinds of Morality, we ought rather to make use of that which
teaches us to vanquish ourselves, than that which has no other end, but to
triumph over Fortune, and to change our Desires, without pretending to change
any thing in the Order of the World. I believe this was the Secret of thosej
Philosophers, who, inspite of the Incommodities of Life, were able to dispute
Happiness with their Gods: But it is impossible to experience this Secret,
unless one be thoroughly persuaded, that there is nothing truly in our Power,
but our Thoughts, and our Desires.

With these few Maxims one may observe a regular Conduct, till one has formed
another from long Experience, if it be possible to find a better; Life being
short, and the occasions of improving it very rare.

To the Earl of Ormond
ALL Men have a mind to be Happy. This Desire leaves us not, during the course
of our Lives; it is a Truth wherein all the World are of one Opinion.

But to render our selves Happy with less trouble, and to be so with Security,
without fearing to be disturbed in one's Happiness, we ought to act in such a
manner, My Lord, that others may be so with us; for, if one pretends to take
care only of himself, he will find continual Oppositions: And when we will not
be happy, but upon condition, that others may be so likewife, all Obstacles are
removed, and all the World agrees with us.

It Is this management of Happiness for our selves and others, which we ought to
call Honesty, and which properly speaking is nothing but Self-love well managed.

Honesty ought then to be considered, as the desire of being Happy, but after a
manner, that others may be so too. Let us look into, let us examine all
Virtuous Actions, and we shall find they are all of this Nature, and that they
all move upon the same Principle.

To possess this Honesty in the highest Degree, we ought to have a sound
Understanding, and our Hearts honest, and both to agree together.

By the power of our Understanding, we know what is most Just, and most
Reasonable to say and do; and by the Honesty of the Heart, we never fail to be
willing to do, and say the same.

When a Man has but one of these two, he cannot pretend to complete Honesty;
for the power of the former does vainly comprehend Reason and Justice: if the
integrity of the Heart ben't on its side, nothing is executed, nothing is done.
And in like manner, if the integrity of the Heart be alone, and the Assistance
of the Soul be wanting to guide it, it will blindly feell out its way, without
ever knowing exactly the road it ought to take.

These two things are Essential to make an honest Man; and since it is so rare a
matter to see them separately, how much ought it to be more rare, to see them
together? But, My Lord, when they meet in the same Person, What Greatness do
they not show, what Justice, what Charms, and what Reason? A Man of this
Character compleats equally all his Duties, however extended, or different they
may be.

He is a good Subject, a good Father, a good Friend, a good Citizen, a good
Master: He is Indulgent, Humane, Assisting, Charitable, and Sensible of the
Misfortunes of another.

He is Circumspect, he is Modest, he does not act the Man of Censure, or Pride;
he takes notice of another's Faults, but never talks of them, nor does seem to
have seen them.

He is not in the least interess'd, but, as he knows the Necessities of Life;
his Conduct is always regulated, and he never lives in Disorder.

He is not moved, but by true Merit. That which is called Grandeur, Authority,
Fortune, Riches; all these do not enchant him, and it is this which hinders him
from taking sometimes the way to Fortune.

Although he be agreeable, and of good Converse, yet he is enough retired, and
loves not a Crowd: So we may see he seldom endeavors to show himself upon the
Theater of the World: but if his Birth or Fortune are pleased to place him
there, as he has a vast Wit, as he is prodigiously Apprehensive, Penetrating,
Expert, and what not, he performs his Part esxceedingly well.

The honest Man makes a great account of Wit, but yet he makes a greater of
Reason. He loves Truth in all things; he would willingly know all things, but
is not vexed, if he knows nothing. He takes care of all, examines all, knows the
Worth, Force, and Weakness of all. He esteems nothing, but according to its
true Value. The nicest Errors and Disappointments do not impose upon him, nor
make any Impression upon his Mind.

The honest Man, in short, says nothing, and does nothing, which is not
Agreeable, Just, Reasonable, and which does not lead to the making all Men
Happy.

It Is then evident, My Lord, That to make the World Happy, it is necessary to
establish Honesty in it. But to bring this about, 'twould not suffice to know
in what Condition it is at present in; it is necessary also, to know how it
ought to be, and how it would be in effect, if all Men were Reasonable.

In the present Estate of the World, every thing is almost out of Order:
Honesty has no place in it, and honest Men live in it, as it were a strange
Country.

The Re-establishment of Honesty amongst Men, would be easy for Kings; and to
accomplish this great Work, they would have nothing else to do, but to prefer
good Men, and punish the bad.

If all Men were reasonable, there would be nothing among us, but our Natural
Infirmities, as Sickness, Old Age, and Death.

Nevertheless, we have a thousand others, as Prevention, Madness, Ambition,
Perfidiousness, Ignorance, and the Contempt of Knowledge.

There is nothing else in the World that attracts the eyes and esteem of all
Men, but great Birth, and the Glory of War; all other Deserts, if I may speak
so, are sad and languishing, and not taken notice of.

It Is very just that the Merits of War should be considered; the Fatigues,
Wounds, and Death itself, to which the Brave are so often exposed, ought yet to
be more taken notice of then they are: Nevertheless, if one compares the
Honors that are bestowed upon 'em, with those of Persons dignified in other
Arts, we shall find that they are enough rewarded. There is this unhappiness in
the Merit of the Mind, that few People understand it, and that even in this
small number there are some who have no great esteem for it.

It is not the same with Riches; all the World esteems them, the Poor as well
as the Rich: The other Gifts of Fortune have the same advantages; the Men of
the lowest birth aim at Greatness, and do what they can to raise themselves,
etc.

Maxims for the Use of Life.
MEN never commend freely, and without interest: Some advantage must come to
'em, or it must cost him something considerable that has a mind to be well
praised.

Those that are of high Birth are continually respected, their name alone is a
great Elogy; there is not a greater Privilege amongst Men.

The Conditions of the most Unfortunate are the most despised; their Miseries
alone are not enough, but there must be added to 'em Shame and Scorn; Men are
in truth very cruel.

One must never say, Citizen, Country Boor, and such like. All these names are
injurious, and words of contempt; one must endeavor to avoid 'em, for they do
but create malice amongst Men: but we must preserve the names of Knave,
Traitor, Ungrateful Fellow, and others of such nature, on purpose to cast a
shame on those that deserve it.

We ought not to despise those that are in want, but rather on the contrary
give 'em some marks of our Esteem: And as Contempt is, it may be, one of the
greatest misfortunes of Poverty, we may sweeten in some manner their troubles,
by declaring, without affectation, that we do not esteem 'em less, however
unhappy they be.

One must be affable and courteous to one's Domestics, and by this behavior
comfort 'em in their conditions. It Is the work of Fortune that they are so low,
and that we are above'em.

We must not be rigorous in what regards our own interests: Nothing becomes a
Man better than to release a little of his privilege. One must avoid great
Play, it is a Divertisement too dangerous; Anger, Heat and Quarrels accompany it
always; it procures a Man often times bad nights, and at long run it
perpetually incommodes him: Nor is this all, he must be always upon his guard;
lest he be cheated, and it is but an uneasy condition to be always as in an
Enemy's Country.

A Man ought not to have any thing remarkable or too gay in his Habit,
Discourse, or Manners: It seems to me that the modest Air becomes one better
than that which they call the Bel-air; it is good to have in one's Countenance
something great, that procures both Esteem and Respect; but the Courteous, and
Honest Air does not create less good Effects; it is from thence that we make our
selves beloved: For the fierce Air that is so much esteemed, in my Opinion, is
only proper for War.

We ought to learn not to disquiet our selves, and to study well this Lesson.

The Court, if I may say so, is an Epitome of the whole Kingdom; whatever is
most Exquisite and Pure, is there met with. The manner of speaking, the the
Modes, the Air, and the Customs are there excellent. The greatest part of these
things are not learnt, but by the Success, as Physic is not well understood,
but by Experience: However, it seems to me, that one ought to endeavor to know
them by their Causes, which would be the best and surest way. And to this end,
we ought to know the nature of those things which please, and be skilled in the
Hearts of Men.

There is no other Study, but how to please in the Courts of Princes, because
there a Man makes his Fortune by rendering himself agreeable. Hence it comes,
that Courtiers are so Polisht. On the contrary, in Towns and Republics where
Men manage their Affairs by Labor, the the last of their Cares is to Please,
and it is that which renders them so Clownish.

That which we call the Last in a Figurative Sense, is a very rare thing, and
is found but in very few People. One can scarce learn it, or teach it, but it
must be born with us. Exquisite Knowledge seems to be above it, and carries a
greater Latitude; but in truth, for the Commerce of the World, and most affairs
of Life, a true Judgment equals its Worth, and possesses its place. When we
have got this Advantage, we ought not to despise those which have it not.

To be agreeable, and good Company, a Man ought to think discreetly, and
readily upon all that is said in Conversation; and this cannot be, if one has
not an excellent Wit, a great deal of Memory, and an Imagination suitable. One
ought also to be Master of one's Language, by knowing all the Niceties,
Beauties, and Delicacies of it.

We ought to suit ourselves to the Capacities of those we converse with, and to
take in some manner, the Height, and the Degree of their Wit. We ought to take
a great deal of care not to affect the Vanity to be the head of the Company.
One makes himself more agreeable, when one hears willingly, and without
Jealousy; and susters others to have Wit as well as himself.

There is no Subject so barren, upon which there may not be something well
said; but even when the Subject affords nothing, a Man of sense has always in
Reserve, some agreeable manner of speaking, of which he is an absolute Master,
and which can never fail him: Apt Words are rare, and depend upon Time and
Chance.

Narratives and Stories do not always succeed; we ought not to make use of them
often; but when we find ourselves engaged in them, we must take care that they
be not long, and that there be always something particular and diverting, to
surprise the Company. One must avoid Repetitions. We care not to hear what we
know already, and we can reap no more benefit by,

Things that are New, Great, Universal, and those which have the Air of great
Persons, are always pleasing, because Men are Curious; because they despise
those things that are limited, and of small consequence, and are commonly very
much affected with Grandeur.

It Is for this Reason, that what comes from the Country, from little Towns, and
private Quarters, is but indifferently received. We are apt to imagine, that
Politeness, and a good Taste is not to be found there.

The same Reason occasions also, that Figures d^^wn from War, Hunting, and the
Sea, are so well received; and that we cannot endure those that are taken from
mean Professions; of which the World makes but small account.

One must not expect, that Conversations should be always equal; they depend
upon Chance, as well as other things.

A Man cannot become Learned, or Agreeable, if he does not love Reading; without
it the best natural Parts are commonly dry and barren.

He ought to behave himself so, that in his Actions, Discourse, and Manners
there may be always a certain Air of Politeness, that never forsakes him:
Nothing is more shameful than to be Ignorant.

Politeness is a mixture of Discretion, Civility, Complaisance, and
Circumspection; accompanied with an agreeable Air scattered throughout,
whatever one says, or does. And as so many things are Essentially necessary to
acquire this Politeness, it is no wonder if it is uncommon.

Whether it is, that Women are naturally more Polite, or that to please them,
the Spirit raises, and embellishes itself; it is principally from them, that
this Politeness is learnt.

A Letter to Monsieur Justel.
By Mr. Savage.
I Am overjoyed to see you in England. The Conversation of a Man so Knowing,
and so Curious as you, will give me a great deal of Satisfaction. But permit me
to disapprove of the Resolution you have taken to quit France, so long as I see
you maintain for her so tender, and so loving a Memory. When I see you doleful
and desolate on the shore of our Thames wishing for Paris; you put me in mind
of the poor Israelites bewailing their Jerusalem upon the Banks of Euphrates.
Either live happy in England, in an entire Liberty of Conscience, or
accommodate your self to the Catholic Religion in your own Country, to enjoy
the advantages you thirst after.

Is it possible, that Images, Ornaments, Ceremonies, and other such like
things, upon which you establish so many ill grounded Disputations, and which
you make so unreasonably the Subject of Separation; should trouble the Quiet of
Nations, and be the cause of so many great Misfortunes which happen to Men.

I confess, it is a good thing, to search God in Spirit and Truth. This first
Essence, this sovereign Intelligence deserves our most purified Speculations.
But when we have a mind to disengage our Soul from all commerce with our Sense,
are we assured, that an abstracted Knowledge is not lost in wandering Thoughts,
and does not create more Extravagancies than it discovers Truths? Whence, think
you, comes the Absurdity of so many Sects scattered through the World, but from
deep Meditations, where the Mind, as it were in a Dream, meets with nothing but
its own proper Fancies?

Forget Sir, this melancholy Disgust you have to our Images. Images stop in a
manner, this Spirit so difficult to be fixed. Moreover, there is nothingmore
natural to Man than Imitation; and of all Imitations, there is nothing so
lawful as that of a Picture, which represents to us only what we ought to
Worship.

The Idea of virtuous Persons creates in us a love of Virtue; and produces a
just desire to attain that Perfection which they have arrived to.

There are Emulations of Holiness, as well as Jealousies of Glory; and if the
Picture of Alexander animated the Ambition of Caesar to a Conquest of the
World, the Image of our Saints may well excite in us the ardour of their Zeal,
and inspire us with that happy Violence which ravishes Heaven.

I allow you, that the Old Testament did not permit us to form any thing that
looked like the resemblance of God. This God painted himself in the great Work
of the Universe. The Heavens, the Sun, the Stars, the Elements were the Images
of his Immensity and Power. The wonderful Order of Nature expressed his Wisdom to
us. Our Reason, which would know all, finds in her self a kind of Idea of this
Infinite Being; and this was all that could be figured of a God, who did no
otherwise discover himself to Men, but by his Works.

But it is not thus in the New Alliance. Since that a God is become Man for our
Salvation, we may well make to our selves Images of him, to stir us up to the
knowledge of his Goodness and Love: And in effect, if those are condemned as
Heretics, that denied his Humanity, is not it a strange Absurdity to call us
Idolaters for loving to see it represented? You are commanded to think always
of his Passion, to meditate always upon his Sufferferings, and it yet is made a
crime in us, to have Figures that should support the Remembrance of them.

They would have the Image of his Death always presented to our Souls, but
will not allow of any before our Eyes.

Your Aversion for the Ornaments of our Priests has no better Foundation. Do
not you know, Sir, that God took the pains himself, to ordain even the Fringe
of the Habit of the High Priest? And do you find that our Pontifical Habits are
very different from those under the Jewish Economy?

You are not less forward to deny us our Music, than to condemn our Images.
You ought to have remembered, Sir, that David recommended nothing frequenter to
the Israelites, than to sing the Praises of the Lord, with all sorts of
Instruments.

The Music of our Churches exalts the Soul, purifies the Spirit, inspires the
Heart, and rectifies, or augments the Devotion. When a Mystery, or a Miracle is
treated of, you understand nothing but Sense and Reason. In Natural things,
which lead to Purity, Sense and Reason are your Enemies. There you give all to
Nature, here to Grace; there one can allege nothing supernatural but you laugh
at it: Here one says nothing of Humane to you, but you think it Profane, and
Impious.

Contrarieties have lasted but too long. Agree with us about the lawful
established Customs, and we will write with you against the Abuses that have
been introduced.

As to the Doctrine of our Church, touching the real Presence of the Body of
Jesus Christ, in the Sacrament of our Altar, you have no more reason to dispute
it. You say, that it is difficult to agree with us about a Body without Figure
and Extension; But is it more easy for us to agree with you about your
Spiritual eating it? After this manner, who eats really the Substance of this
same Body? The difficulty of comprehending the Mystery, is it less great on
your side? And is not a Miracle as necessary to your Opinion, as ours?

So that, if in spite of all this, the love of a Separation still possesses
you, and that you cannot disengage your self from the prejudice of your
Sentiments; do not complain of that which is taken from you as an Injustice,
but rather be thankful for that which you have left as a Grace. Melancholy
Muttering, and Opposition, will rather hurt than serve you. Whereas a Conduct
more respectful, and an Interest more discreetly managed, than violently
maintained, might hinder the design of your Ruin, if it were thought on.

One of the chiefest points of Discretion, and the oftenest recommended, is to
respect in all Countries the Religion of the Prince. To condemn the Belief of
the Sovereign, is to condemn the Sovereign himself at the same time. A
Protestant, who in his Discourse, or Writings, taxes the Catholic Religion of
Idolatry, accuses the King by a necessary Consequence to be an Idolater; and
makes an assault upon him in his own Dominions; which the Emperors of Rome
would never suffer.

I know well, that I exhort you to no purpose, in the humor you are at
present. A Sentiment as it were natural, which is formed in our first
Impressions; the inclination one has for ancient Customs; the difficulty that
one suffers to quit a Belief, one has been born in, to embrace another which
one has always opposed; a delicacy of Scruple, a false opinion of Constancy,
are bonds which will not easily be broken. But then at least leave to your
Children the liberty of choosing that which your long Engagements will not
suffer you to do.

You complain of the Edict, that obliges them to choose a Religion at seven
years old; Now this is the greatest favor could have been done them; by that
they are restored to their Country which you robbed them of; It returns them
into the Bosom of the Commonwealth, whence you dragged them; It makes them
capable of Honors and Dignities, that you had excluded them from.

Do not envy them Sir, those Advantages that you will not benefit by; and
keeping your Opinions and Misfortunes to your self, remit the care of their
Religion to Divine Providence, which shows itself so visible in such a conduct.

Where is the Father who does not inspire the Zeal of his Party, as well as his
Religion, into his Children? And what does any one know what may happen from
this Zeal? whether it will proceed to Fury or Piety? if it will produce Crimes
or Virtues? In this Uncertainty, Sir, remit all things to the disposition of a
Law, which has no other end, then the Public Good, and the particular Interest
of your Family.

A Letter to Monsieur the Count de C. By the same Hand.
AS I interest my self infinitely in all that concerns you, the particulars of
your gallant Actions have created in me a sincere pleasure. Persons that have
been perfectly acquainted with 'em, have taken the pains to send me an account
of 'em; and I should be ready to complain to you, for concealing them as a
Secret, if I did not fear to disturb a Joy so great as yours, by reproaches of
Friendship.

How truly Glorions are you, Sir, after having so often given proofs of your
Valor against the Enemies of the State, to have vanquished, amidst the
Delights of the City, the most merciless Creature, in the World, and who had
defied all the Earth? I know that charming Person in whom Beauty, Wit, and
Manners seem to dispute which shall gain her the greatest Esteem: lovely,
delicious, and now, for you only becomes a Lover. In truth, Sir, I enter into
those very Transports which have made you forget all the World, to imprint in
your Soul only the Idea of a Person so accomplished: I pardon your abandoning
yourself wholly to her; and I conceive it is difficult for you to have any
Kindness left for Madam de L. who is so much below her in Charms of Body.

But at length, Sir, your forgetting and abandoning, excusable in the
beginnings of so great a Fortune, would be so no longer if they should last
always: You know that Madam de L. has a Merit very much distinguished: you know
all that you owe her. She loves you as much as ever any loved: Ought not her
Love then to take place of Beauty? And this Acknowledgment, with which you were
smitten so much heretofore, does it not oblige you to some manner of Return?

For my part, I confess to you, that the Description she makes of your
Insensibility, and of her Griefs, is so lively and touching in the Letter she
writ to me upon this Subject, that I cannot avoid entering into her Interests:
Suffer then, Sir, I beseech you, my Remonstrances; you owe this to our
Friendship, and I owe them to the Confidence that an Unhappy Lady has reposed
in me.

I do not mean here that you should forsake in favor of her, this. Beauty that
so bewitches you: you have nothing more to do than to give yourself the trouble
to deceive Madam L. You will do it easily because she will assist you herself.
And I believe you will not pretend to so squeamish a conscience as to make a
scruple of it.

You are not ignorant that your new love will be mixed with some Confusions and
Coldnesses: you may allow those Intervals to Madam L. and she will be content
with 'em; and you may make use of her to re-inflame the fires of the other, that
unlucky Accidents or a mere Cessation may extinguish.

Yet once more, Sir, do not despise a Woman that a great many others would be
glad of: permit her to think that she has yet some place in your breast.
Alcibiades did not disdain to eat course Bread and black Porridge with the
Lacedaemonians, after he had tasted the Delights of Athens; he came out of the
arms of the lovely Aspasia, the most charming Creature of all Greece, where he
enjoyed all the Spirit and Delicacy of a tender Love, and yet submitted himself
to the Embraces of the Queen of Sparta, whose Manners were fulsom, and who was
very far from having the Charms of Aspasia.

See here, Sir, an Example to follow; consider also with a little attention,
the Character of Alcibiades, and you may find it throughout to have much
resemblance with yours; which I presume will not be thought disadvantageous.

A Letter to Madam D. D. B. C. By the same Hand.
FRom what I understand, Madam, you have a mind to become a Religious; I thank
God for it with all my heart; having more need in your Conversation of the
Purity of Sentiments, you are about to have, then all those you may be inspired
with from the Conversation of Men.

I conjure you, then in the name of Heaven, to take up a sincere Devotion; and
to render it such as it ought to be, take care to avoid the Defects which that
of other People is so often accompanied with.

There are some Men who think they have the ardour of a lively Zeal. There are
some who enjoy themselves in a good and solid Piety. There are others who could
be able to die for God, through the Sentiments of a courageous Faith. But in
truth there are very few who can live according to the Laws of the Gospel and
Religion.

You may expect all from their Heat, where there is occasion to employ it: but
you must hope almost nothing from 'em where there is need of Constancy and
Discretion.

Let us see how they behave themselves in things which God requires from their
Submission: and when they show a Rule in their Manners, a Modesty in their
Conversation, a Patience in Injuries, then will I be convinced of their
Devotion by their Conduct.

Govern yourself, Madam, by the Errors of others; and having a mind to give
yourself to God, let that less enter into your Devotion which you love, than
that which pleases him. If you do not take care in this, your heart may bear
its inclinations to him without receiving the impressions of his Grace, and you
will be altogether your own, when you think you are altogether his.

Not but that there may be an holy and happy Agreement between his will and
yours: you may love what he loves; you may desire what he desires; but we do
commonly by a pleasing and secret Impression, that which we desire of
ourselves; and it is this which ought to render us more attentive and inclined
to do nothing but by a consideration of what he enjoins.

You need not nevertheless for this reason subject yourself wholly to the
Conduct of those Directers, who make use in their Maxims of a certain Spiritual
niceness which you do not understand, nor perhaps they themselves. The Will of
God is not so concealed but it may be discovered by those who have a mind to
follow it; and generally speaking you will have less need of Inspiration than
Submission. Those things which have relation to your desires, are easily
understood, and easily followed: Those which encounter your inclinations
explain themselves enough; but Nature resists, and an indocible Soul defends
its self from their Impression. I should desire then, Madam, two things of you,
in the Devotion you are about to engage your self in: the first is, That you
would take care not to raise your Heart to God, because you believe it more
proper for the Passions of Men. The second is, That you would not disguise your
Animosities under an appearance of Zeal, or prosecute those you with ill to,
under a false pretense of Piety.

A Relation of a Dispute between the Marshall of Hocquincourt, and Father
Canaye, a Jesuit. By M. D. S. E.
AS I dined the other day, with the Marshall d' Hocquincourt, Father Canaye, who
dined there also, let fall the Discourse insensibly, upon the Submission of the
Spirit that Religion requires of us; and having related to us many new
Miracles, and some modern Revolations, he concluded, that we ought to avoid
more than the Plague, those headstrong Spirits, who would examine all things
by Reason.

To whom do you talk of headstrong Spirits, says the Marshall? And who has
known them better than me? Bardouville and St. Thibal were the best of my
Friends; 'twas they that engaged me on the side of Monsieur le Comte, against
Cardinal Richelieu. If I were acquainted with many more of these headstrong
Wits, I would write a Book of all they have said. Bardouville being dead, and
St. Thibal retired into Holland, I entertained a Friendship with Lafrete, and
Sauve Beuf; these were not headstrong Wits, but brave Men. Lafrete was a
gallant Man, and my very good Friend, and I think that I have sufficiently
testified my self to have been his, in the Distemper that he died of. I saw him
die of a small Fever, which would have scarce killed a Woman; and was enraged
to see Lafrete, that Lafrete who fought Bouteville, go out, neither better nor
worse, than a Farthing Candle. We were concerned, Sauve Beuf and I, to preserve
the Honor of our Friend, which made me take a resolution to kill him with a
Pistol-bullet, that he might dye like a Man of Courage. I clapped the Pistol to
his Head, when a certain Bougre of a Jesuit pusht my Arm aside, and hindered my
Design. This put me in so great a rage, that presently I resolved to become a
Iansenist.

Take notice, my Lord, says the Father, take notice how Satan is always lying
in wait for us. Circuit Quaerens quem Devoret; You conceive a kind of
Displeasure against our Order, which he takes occasion of to surprise and
devour you; nay, worse than devour you, to make you turn Iansenist: Vigilate,
Vigilate; One cannot be too much upon his guard against the common Enemy of
Mankind.

The Father's in the right, says the Marshall; I have heard, that the Devil
never sleeps. We must have a good Guard, a good Foot, and a good Eye upon him.
But let us leave the Devil and discourse of the things I love. I have loved War
above all things, Madam de Monbazon next to War, and such as you see me,
Philosophy after Madam de Monbazon. You have reason to love War, replys the
Father, and War also loves you; she has crowned you likewise with Honor. Don't
you know that I am also a Warrior? The King has given me the Direction of the
Hospital of his Army in Flanders: Is not this enough to be a Warrier? Who would
ever have believed that Father Canaye should ever have become a Soldier? I am
such, my Lord, and do not render less Service to God in the Camp, than I did in
the College of Clermont. You may then love War innocently; to go to War, is to
love one's Prince; and to serve one's Prince, is to serve God.

But as for what concerns Madam de Monbazon; if you have lusted after her, you
must permit me to tell you, that your Desires were criminal. You should not
lust after her, my Lord, but love her with an innocent Friendship.

What, says the Marshall, would you have me love like a Sot? The Marshall of
Hocquincourt has not learnt in Ladies Chambers, to do nothing but Sigh. I
would, my Father, I would -- you understand me well. I would -- Oh how many I
would? In truth, my Lord, you rally with a good Grace. Our Fathers of St. Louis
would be astonished at these I woulds: When one has been a great while in the
Army, one learns to bear all. No more, no more, you speak this, my Lord, I
suppose to divert your self.

There is no such Divertisement in it, Father: Do you know for what design I
loved her? Vsque ad Aras, My Lord: No, Aras, my Father. Look here, says the
Marshal, taking a Knife, and grasping the Haft fast in his hand, look here, if
she had commanded me to kill you, I would have buried the Blade in your Heart.
Father Canaye surprised at this Discourse, and more frighted at the Transport,
had immediate recourse to his Mental Devotion, and prayed God secretly, that he
would deliver him from the danger wherein he found himself. But not trusting
altogether to Prayer, he leaped insensibly out of the Marshal's reach, by an
unperceivable motion of his Buttocks. The Marshal followed him in the like
manner; and one that had seen his Knife always lifted up, would have sworn,
that he was going to put his Order into Execution.

My ill Nature made me take pleasure a while in the fears of our Reverend
Spark; but fearing at length that the Marshal in his Transports, might render
that Scene melancholy which was before only pleasant, I caused him to remember,
that Madam de Monbazon was dead; and told him, That fortunately the Father
Canaye had nothing to fear from a Person that was no more.

God does all for the best, replies the Marshal: The fairest Woman in the World
began to play the fool with me when she died. There was always near her a
certain Abbot de Rauce, who talked to her of Grace before People, and
entertained her with other things in private. This made me forsake the
Iansenists; before I never missed a Sermon of Father Desmarez, and never swore,
but by the Gentlemen of Port Royal. I have always been at Confession with the
Jesuits since that time: And if my Son has ever any Children, I am resolved
they shall study at the College of Clermont, upon pain of being disinherited.
Oh, how wonderful are the Ways of God! cries out Father Canaye: How profound is
the Mystery of his Justice! A little Weathercock of a Iansenist, to follow a
Lady whom my Lord wished well to. The merciful God made use of Jealousy to put
the Conscience of my Lord into our hands; Mirabilia Iudicia tua Domine;
Wonderful are thy Judgments, O Lord!

After the good Father had finished his pious Reflections, I thought it might be
permitted me to enter into the Discourse; and I asked the Marshal, If the Love
of Philosophy had not succeeded his Passion for Madam de Monbazon?

I have loved Philosophy but too well, said the Marshal, I have loved it but
too well; but I have at length left it, and will trouble my head with it not
more. A Dog of a Philosopher had so puzzled my Brain about our first Parents,
the Apple, the Serpent, Terrestrial Paradise, and the Cherubins, that I was
about to believe nothing of the matter. The Devil take me, if I believed any
thing then; but from that time, I would have crucified myself for my Religion.
It Is not that I see more reason in it now, but on the contrary, less than ever:
But I cannot help telling you, I would nevertheless have sacrificed myself
without knowing wherefore.

So much the better, my Lord, replies the Father, with a tone of Nose very
devout, so much the better; that shows they are not Humane Motions, but that
they proceed from God. No reason! that is the true Religion which has no
reason. What an extraordinary Grace, my Lord, has Heaven bestowed upon you?
Estote sunt Infantes; be as Infants. Infants have yet their Innocence, and why?
because they have no reason, Beati pauperes Spiritu, Blessed are the Poor in
Spirit: they sin not; the reason is, that they have no Reason. No Reason, I
cannot help telling you wherefore. Oh excellent Words! they ought to be writ in
Letters of Gold: It Is not that I see more Reason in it, but on the contrary
less than ever. In truth, this is Divine for them that have any taste of
Heavenly Things: No Reason, what an extraordinary Grace, my Lord, has God
bestowed upon you?

The Father had gone on farther with his Invectives against Reason, but that
Letters were brought from Court to the Marshal, which interrupted so Pious an
Entertainment. The Marshal read them softly to himself, and afterward he was
pleased to tell the Company what they contained: If I had a mind to seem a
Politician, as others do, I should retire into my Closet, to read Dispatches
from the Court; but I always act and speak with an open Heart. The Cardinal
sends me word, That Stenay's taken, that the Court will be here in eight days;
and the Command of the Army, which made the Siege, is given me, to go and
relieve Arras with Turenne and La Ferte. I remember well that Turenne suffered
me to be beaten by Monsieur the Prince, when the Court was at Gien; perhaps I
may find an occasion to do him the like favor. If Arras were relieved, and
Turenne beaten, I should be content; I Will do what I can; but I say no more.

He related to us all the particulars of his Combat, and the subject of his
Complaint, that he thought he had against Monsieur Turenne: But we were
advertised, that the Convoy was already far enough from the Town, which made us
take leave sooner than we meant to have done.

Father Canaye finding himself without an Horse, desired one to carry him to
the Camp: And what Horse will you have, Father? says the Marshal. I will answer
you, my Lord, says the Father, as the good Father Suarez did the Duke of Medina
Sidonia, upon the like occasion, Qualem me decet esse, Mansuetum. Such an one
as I ought to be, gentle and tractable, Qualem me decet esse Mansuetum; I
understand a little Latin, says the Marshal; Mansuetum would be fitter for
Sheep than Horses. Let my Horse be given to the Father; I love the whole Order,
and am his Friend, therefore let them give him my best Horse. Here I went to
dispatch a few Affairs, but staid not long, before I rejoyned the Convoy. We
jogged on prosperously, but not without some fatigue. As for the poor Father
Canaye, I met him upon the prance, on one of the best Horses of Monsieur d'
Hocquincourt; 'twas a mettlesome fiery Horse, restless and always in action; he
chewed his Bit eternally, always went on one side, neigh'd every minute, and
that which shockt most the Modesty of the Father, he very indecently mistook
all the Horses he met for Mares. And, what do I see my Father? said I, coming
up to him. What Horse have they given you? Where is Father Suarez' s Nag that
you asked so earnestly for? Ah Sir, says he, I can sit him no longer. He was
about to continue his Complaints, when a Hare crossed the Road, and an hundred
Horse immediately hurried away in confusion after the Course, and we heard
presently more discharges of Pistols, than at a Skirmish. The Father's Horse
being accustomed to fire under the Marshal, carried a way his Man, and made him
charge instantly through their confused Ranks. 'Twas a thing very pleasant, to
see a Jesuit at the head of all this Company, against his Will. Happily the
Hare was killed, and I found the Father in the middle of thirty Horse men, who
all gave him the Honor of a Chase, which one might have better called Chance.
The Father received their Commendations with apparent Modesty; but in his Mind
he despised very much the Mansuetum of good Father Suarez, and was raised to
the best humor in the World, in reflecting on the Miracles that he fancied he
had done on the Marshal's Courser: Yet he was not long without remembering that
good saying of Solomon, Vanitas vanitatum, and omnia Vanitas. He was no sooner
grown cool, but he felt an uneasiness which the heat had concealed from him,
and false Glory giving place to true Grief; he wished for the repose of his
Society, and the content of a peaceable Life, which he had quitted. But all
these Reflections signified nothing, he must go to the Camp, and he was so
tired with his Horse, that I saw him ready to abandon his Bucephalus, and walk
a foot at the Head of the Infantry.

I comforted him for his past Fatigue, and exempted him from any future
Inconveniences, in bestowing on him the easiest Nag he could have wished for. He
gave me a thousand thanks, and was so sensible of my civility, that forgetting
all regard of his Profession, he conversed with me more like an honest sincere
Fellowtraveller than a Jesuit. I asked him what opinion he had of Monsieur d'
Hocquincourt? It Is a good Lord, says he, it is a good Soul: He has quitted the
Iansenists; our Order is obliged to him: but for my part, I think I shall never
eat at his Table again, or borrow Horse of him.

Being much pleased with this first freedom, I had a mind to try him farther.
Whence comes, continued I, the great Animosities between the Iansenists and
your Fathers? Does it proceed from the difference in Opinion about the Doctrine
of Grace? What folly, what folly, says he, is it to think that we hate one
another for not having the same Opinion about Grace! It Is neither Grace nor the
five Propositions that have raised these Animosities between us. The jealousy
of governing Consciences, is the true reason. The Iansenists found us in
posession of the Government, and they have a mind to dispossess us.

Now to effect their ends, they have made use of Methods quite contrary to
ours. We employ Gentleness and Indulgence, and they affect Austerity and
Rigor. We comfort Souls by the Examples of the Mercies of God, and they
frighten them by those of Justice. They make use of Fear, where we make use of
Hopes. They would ride those that we would have to be our Subjects. Not but
that both of us have a mind to save Men, and each has a mind to have the credit
on it. And to speak freely to you, the interest of the Director goes almost
always before the salvation of him who is under the direction. I speak to you
after another manner than I did to the Marshal; I was purely a Jesuit with
him, but with you I use the freedom of a Soldier. I commended very much the new
Liberty which his last Profession had made him take, and it seemed to me that
the commendation pleased him. I had continued it longer, but as Night began to
approach, we were obliged to separate; the Father being as much contented with
my proceeding, as I was satisfied with the confidence he reposed in me.

Motives for a general Peace in the Year 1678.
IF it be a difficult matter to discover the Origin of Winds and Subterranean
Fires, it is no less very often to dive into the hidden Causes of the greatest
part of our Wars; sometimes Ambition and Avarice keep those designs long
concealed, that the least pretense discovers.

The Declarations of the pretended Cause, for the most part, are only
calculated to amuse the People; and oftentimes so dexterously, that the true
Reasons of State and Policy are covered with some appearance of Justice. They
never scruple to ruin the Foundation, and violate the most Sacred Rights of
Nature.

Don't let us look for any fresh Instances of this in the unhappy War which at
present oppresses all Countries of Christendom; let us conceive for the Princes
who are the cause of it, a Respect which perhaps Posterity will not subscribe
to; let us suppose, that they do all out of a good meaning, and that Justice is
the rule of so many destructive Actions. It seems at least, that they have not
forgot all impressions of Equity, since they have agreed to choose Mediators to
decide their Differences; and that those who are chiefly concerned seem willing
to accept his Intervention, whom the God of Peace has made his Lieutenant upon
Earth.

But as it may happen, that these Princes are not all equally disposed to
accept of a speedy Peace, 'twill be necessary to remember them, that they are
obliged to it by the Motives of Glory, Interest and a good Conscience.

Glory is nothing else but an high Esteem which is acquired amongst Men, and
which passes down to Posterity. We may say, that there is nothing more glorious
for a Prince, than to make his People happy. Nulla Major Principis Gloria, quam
fecisse felicem and satisfecisse Inopi.
The glory of storming Towns and acquiring Victories is common even to
Barbarians. But to conquer one's self, and renounce one's own Interest; to give
Repose and Peace to the World, is the proper Character of an Hero. The People
of France will never cease to give a thousand Benedictions and a thousand
Praises to the Memory of Philip the Good Duke of Burgundy; his Hate and his
Vengeance appeared just, since he armed against the Murderer of his Father:
Glory and the Reasons of State seemed to forbid him to think of a Peace, since
he might promise himself assured Conquests by the Union which he had made with
a puissant Monarch. Yet for all this, out of a pious Consideration of the
Public Calamities, he stifled his Resentments, and by one so great a Mercy, he
rendered himself a thousand times more glorious than his Son, who was so
terrible and who fought so many Battles. Many Conquerours have thought to gain
immortal Glory by their Arms, who in the next Age have been treated as As
Alexander has been by Seneca, Lucan, and Quintus Curtius.
Robbers and Pirates. War is never truly glorious, but when it is founded upon
Justice; which also ceases when one may have a reasonable Satisfaction without
it, and when the Interest of the State demands a Peace.

It would be no difficult matter to prove that even those Princes who are at
present most concerned in this War, will find their truest Interest in a Peace,
if they have any regard to that of their own Subjects, which is the only Salus
populi superma lex esto.
true Interest of State. Misery is general, we are a alike ruined by Friends and
Enemies: To take any Place you must shed the Blood, as it were, of all the
People, who being seduced to the last Extremities, mourn secretly amidst the
Songs of Triumph that are publicly commanded.

In effect, they are so far from being the better for the Conquests of their
Prince, that they are more burdened with Taxes, and Imposts, than ever. The
Towns and conquered Provinces do not afford for the most part half the
necessary Expense to fortify, and desend them. They must pay Contributions to
their Enemy, furnish free Passage and Quarter to Soldiers, who almost
everywhere live like Licencious Robbers. The present posture of Affairs seems
to give us some indications of the approach of the day of Judgment, whose
knowledge God has reserved wholly to himself; that it will be the last War of
the World, foretold us by the Scripture, and which will for ever take away the
Power from Princes and People, of Insuring and Supporting each other. Yet this
is not all, they must either receive Soldiers, or pay Winter Quarters, which
destroys all they saved from the Pillage of the Campaign; perhaps they commit
all these Excesses, to teach the People not to fear Death, in robbing them of
all they have to keep them alive. But it is to be feared, that this Despair in
the end may produce some Maxim metuenda desperantium audacia, tanquam acerrimi
morientium belluarum Morsus.
ill effects; that it may set the People upon looking for ease from their
Burdens elsewhere; or at least that in this Conjuncture, when the Pope labors
for a Peace, they will second his good Intentions in spite of their Masters who
would oppose them. When the Popes heretofore made use of the Ecclesiastical
Thunder for their temporal Interest, the greatest part of the World never
heeded it, because their Power ought to be employed to edify, and not to
destroy: But if at this day the Holy Father would make use of the Church
Censures against the most obstinate Opposers of Peace, which is the Source of
all Impieties, it is to be presumed, that so holy an Action would draw down the
Blessing of Heaven, and procure the Applause of all Mankind.

It may be objected, perhaps, That the Interest of State, and Prudence does
make Princes defer Peace, in order to weaken a growing Enemy, whose Power,
unless prevented, may occasion a common Disadvantage: As for example, the
Allies seem to have some reason not to accord so soon with France, hoping that
time may give them some Advantages, to reduce her to such a condition, that she
may not be in a capacity to hurt them. But this reason alone is not sufficient
to continue the War, no more than it would be to begin it; it is from Divine
Providence, and not from Violence, we must expect a Remedy against the fear of
an uncertain Evil Illud vero minime ferendum est, quod quidam tradiderunt, j^re
gentium arma recte sumi ad imminuendam potentiam crescentem, quae nimium aucta
^^cere posset (...) vim pari posse ad vim inferendam jus tribu^t, ab omni
aequitatis ratione ab horret. Gror. li. 2. cap. 1. Sect. 17 Jure. Bell. and
Pacis.


Whatever Interest we may have in a War, and whatever Justice we have to take
Arms; We ought seriously to desire Peace out of a pure Principle of Conscience,
though we are employed in the justest War. It Is indeed the last Reason we have
mentioned, but it would be the the first and strongest, were it not for the
universal Depravity of the World.

Heretofore it was a Doubt, whether Christians might make Non militandum
Christiano, cui nec litigare quidem liceat. Tertul. lib. de ^^^^.
War; but not to raise any difficulty upon the Argument; it is certain, they
may not, but upon those conditions which have been seldom or never observed.
It Is a strange thing, that a private Man shall be put to Death, if he kills
another who withholds his Estate from him; and yet a Prince for the least
occasion shall be permitted to lay all in Blood and Flames: We know the
difference between them; and that a private Man has not the power to do himself
Justice, as Sovereigns have; but nevertheless, they ought to prescribe Bounds
to their Pretentions and Revenge; Bellum ita suscipiatur ut nihil aliud nisi
pax quaesita videatur. Cicero de Offic lib. 1.
they ought to make it appear, that they seek Peace and its Effects, and not a
Pretense to destroy their Neighbors. But let us go on farther, and show in
what case a War, though never so Just, may injure a Prince's Conscience; In
poenis quoque exigendis illud maxim observandum est, ne unquam eo nomine
bellum suscipi atur in eum cui pares sunt vires, nam ut judicem civilem ita qui
armis facinora velit vindicare, multo esse validiorem altero opertet, neque
vero prudentia tantum aut suorum caritas exigere solet, ut bello periculoso
abstineatur, sed saepe etiam justitia rectoria scilicet, quae ex ipso regiminis
natura, superiorem non minus ad curam pro inferioribus, quam inferiores ad
obedientiam obligat. Grot. de Jur. Bell. and Pacis. c. 24.
. it is first when his Enemy is as potent as himself, and thereby engages his
Subjects in great hazard; and when he sees that the War will cause them more
prejudice than advantage Quod si plus damni evenit reip. quam compendii ex
bello suscepto etiam justo, princeps debet resticuere detrimenta. This is the
Opinion of the Casuists, and even of the Jesuit Diana, Panormit. de regular.
part. 6. pract. 4. de Bello Reg.


If we make a Reflection on the success of Parties who are at present engaged,
'twill be hard to determine which will have the better; nevertheless, we may
see, that there is none that do not do more Mischief to themselves, than their
Enemy; and that like the Soldiers of Cadmus, in the Fable they devour
themselves.

The second Reason which ought to incline a Prince to Peace by a Motive of
Conscience, is That he that is responsible to God for all Disorders, and
Damages, that his Soldiers occasion in a Friend's Country: First, when they
commit them for want of their Pay.

This is the Opinion of all the Divines; Puto Regem, qui quae debet stipendia
militibus non solvi^, non tantum militibus teneri de damnis inde secutis, sed
sub^^^is suis, and vicinis quos inedia coacti milites male habuerunt. Great. de
Jur. Bell. and Pac. lib. 3. cap. 17. secr. 2. Number. 6.
and indeed of all those that have written about Politiks, obliges him to make a
Reparation. It Is but too often seen, that the greatest part of Soldiers pretend
a License for want of being paid; and that all parts are much embarras'd at
present, to furnish their Troops with Subsistence, and that they will be more
for the future. 2. When a Prince suffers, or permits Rapines, and the Violence
of Soldiers, he isobliged to make'em good: We may allege here, what heretofore
Tom. 4. cap. 13.
Gerson said in the presence of the King of France, Tu ea non agis mala, verum
est sed ea fieri permittis and suffers. Sic Deus judicabit ^^^strate, and
dicet, non te alii, sed infernales Diaboli te cruciabunt. How then can these
Sovereigns that make this present War dispense with these Obligations, or
Punishments? they know well enough, that wherever their Troops pass, nay,
though it be in a Friend's Country, that they leave nothing behind them, that
they can carry away; that they mow the Corn when it is green, and plunder both
Women and Children, and commit oftentimes Crimes yet more enormous. Perhaps it
may be objected, That all these Disorders do not come to the knowledge of the
Prince; but yet he is not less guilty before God because he ought to inform
himself exactly, and remedy the same by his presence. With what hopes can a
Prince offer his Prayers to God, when he knows, that in quitting a point of
Chimerical Honor, he might prevent Pillage, Violence, Burning, and Sacrilege;
that he might put all Christendom in a state of Peace, and defend her from the
Assaults wherewith the common Enemy threatens her; that he might establish the
Glory and Worship of God, so much profaned by the Violations of War; and that
he might hinder an infinite number of innocent People from being exposed to the
last Extremities and insupportable Outrages.

It is not possible but that such prevalent Reasons must move the Christian
Princes to search after Peace. But it is not enough to have bare Inclinations
toward it; Piety obliges them to establish it with Industry, and to take the
most proper and ready Measures for so great and good a Work.

The best and most assured Method that can be found on both sides, is to speak
freely their Grievances and Pretentions, without losing the time in the
discussion of Preliminaries and Formalities; and not pretend an Indisposition
on purpose, or some default of the Equipage of a Plenipotentiary, to retard the
Effect of his Commission. Every one ought to do himself Justice in the Tribunal
of his own Conscience, as well as his Enemy, and offer him a Reparation of the
Wrong he has done him; after the example of that holy Prince, Heze'iah, 2
Kings. ch 18, 19.
who having broken an Alliance which he had made with an idolatrous King, was
not ashamed to condemn and submit himself to render a just Satisfaction. Which
was the cause that God, who had punished him for this Breach, afterward heaped
upon him infinite Prosperities.

After the rate that the Ministers assist at the Assembly of Nimeguen, they
seem to be very far from entertaining so pious an Intention. They are so slow
in coming thither, that in all probability they will not be slower in moving
Questions, and yet they may be more slow in resolving them. They may make it
last, if they please till the Diet of Ratisbonne; and perhaps amidst these
Delays there may happen some Accidents that will exasperate their Spirits so
much, that they will break it as they did the Treaty of Colen.

Whenever there is sincere Inclination to treat of Peace, the Points are always
proposed before, by a secret and private Mediation, and concluded in the
Cabinets of Princes: The sending of Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries, and
Public Conferences serve for nothing else but show. This appears by the most
important Treaties of this Age, and particularly that of the Pyrenees; so that
we may easily see that Nimeguen, where they know not yet what they mean to
propose, will cause us a long time to expect a Peace; during which every Party
endeavors to make the best Advantage of the present Conjuncture, and flatter
themselves with Successes they think to find over the rest.

The Allies imagine perhaps, That France in the end will be distressed by the
vast Numbers of its Officers and Soldiers; and that the poverty or natural
inconstancy of the People will cause a speedy Reverse of its Prosperity. On the
other side, France confides in the Union of its Forces, in the good Fortune she
has always hitherto had, and in the Dissension she endeavors to spread among
her Enemies; and in fine, trusts to the Revolution of Affairs, that the Port or
Poland may produce in the North and the Empire itself.

All these Conjectures are very ill grounded, both on one side and the other, but
especially through the ill Conduct of one Party. These three Years they have
been framing them to no purpose, and accordding to the judgment of the best
Politicians, each side has more reason to fear than to hope. In the mean time,
for these uncertain Hopes, all Christendom undergoes infinite Devastations,
which can never cease, but by the end of the War. We must expect Peace from God
only, and believe; that at last he will move the Hearts of these Princes to
hearken to his Voice and the Groans of the People.

FINIS
BOOKS Printed for John Everingham, at the Star in Ludgate Street.
AN Enquiry into several remarkable Texts of the Old and New Testament, which
contain some difficulty in them; with a probable Resolution of them. In two
Parts. By John Edwards, B. D. sometimes Fellow of St. John's College in
Cambridge. Octavo.

2. A Discourse concerning the Authority, Style, and Perfections of the Old and
New Testament: With Illustrations of several difficult Texts of Scripture. By
John Edwards, B. D. sometimes Fellow of St. John's College in Cambridge. Octavo.

3. Miscellaneous Essays. By Monsieur St. Euremont; Translated out of French,
with a Character. By a Person of Honor here in England; continued by Mr.
Dryden. Octavo.

4. A New Family-Book: or the true Interest of Families; being Directions to
Parents and Children, and to those that are instead of Parents; showing them
their several Duties, and how they may be happy in one another; together, with
several Prayers for Families and Children; and Graces before and after Meat: To
which is annexed, a Discourse about the right way of Impreving of our Time. By
James Kirkwood, Rector of Astwick in Bedfordshire, with a Preface by Dr.
Horneck; the Second Edition Corrected, and much enlarged. Twelves.

5. The Divine Art of Prayer; containing the most proper Rules to pray well;
with seasonable Prayers for Soldiers, both in Their Majesty's Armies and Fleet.
In Twelves.

6. The true Royal English School for Their Majesty's Three Kingdoms: Being a
Catalogue of all the Words in the Bible; together with a Praxis in Prose and
Verse; and variety of Pictures, all beginning with one Syllable, and proceeding
by degrees to Eight, divided and not divided, whereby all Persons both Young
and Old, of the meanest Abilities, may with little help, be able to Read the
whole Bible over distinctly, easily, and more speedily than in any other
Method, with Directions to find out any Word; together with an Exposition of
the Creed. By Tobias Ellis, late Minister of the Gospel. Octavo.

7. An Answer to the Brief History of the Unitarians; called also Socinians. By
William Basset, Rector of St. Swithins, London. Octavo.

8. Monarchia Microcosmi, the Origin, Vicissitude and Period of Vital
Government in Man; for a farther Discovery of Diseases incident to Humane
Nature. By Everard Maynwaring, M. D. Twelves.

BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by Abel Roper near Temple-Barr.
1. NEW Poems, consisting of Satyrs, Elegies, and Odes: Together with a
Collection of the newest Court-Songs, set to Music by the best Masters of the
Age. All written by Mr. Durfey.

2. The Princess of Cleve; as it was Acted at the Queen's Theater. Written by
Not. Lee.

3. The Amors of Anne (Queen to Lewis the XIII.) with the Chevalier de Roan,
the true Father of the present Lewis the XIV. King of France; in which the
whole Cabal and Intriegue of raising this Heir to the French Crown, is fully
detected and exposed: Together with the Engines and Instruments of that grand
Impostor. Written by a Person of Quality.

4. A Week's Exercise, preparatory toward a worthy Reception of the Lord's
Supper. In Meditations, Prayers, and Ejaculations, before, at, and after the
Holy Communion: Also Rules and Exercises how to live well after it. By W. W.
Dedicated the Princess of Denmark.

5. The State of Innocence, and Fall of Man; an Opera, written in Heroic
Verse; Dedicated to the Duchess.

6. An Historical Dictionary of England and Wales; in Three Parts. I
Geographical. II. Historical. III. Political.

7. Sir Anthony Love: or, The Rambling Lady. A Comedy,

8. Advice to a Young Lord, written by his Father.

9. The Complete Constable.

10. The Distressed Innocence; A Tragedy. Written by Mr. Settle.

11. The Heroes of France; being a Dialogue between Monsieur Louvois, Colbert,
Motchevril, Sarsfield, and Prince Waldeck; wherein is contained the present
State of Affairs in Europe.

12. The Wary Widow: or, Sir Noisy Parrat. A Comedy, Acted at the
Theater Royal. Written by Henry Higden, Esquire

13. The Rules and Maxims of Pleading; which will be Published this Term.

FINIS.

