Miscellanea: OR Various Discourses UPON 1. Tragedy, 2. Comedy, 3. The Italian
4. The English Comedy. 5. And Operas,
and to his Grace, the D. of Buckingham.

Together With Epicurus his Morals. Written Originally By the Sieur de Saint
Euvremont, And made English By FERRAND SPENCE.

To which is Prefixed a General Dissertation, introductory to the several
Tracts, and Dedicated to T. M. Esquire.

Licensed R. L'S.

LONDON, Printed for Sam. Holford at the Crown in the Pall Mall. 1686.

TO MY Honored Friend Thomas Milton Esquire.
SIR.
IT is the happiness of this Age, to equal, if not to exceed all others in true
Philosophy, that is to say, in the knowledge of men and things. One reason of
which knowledge. I shall only insist on at present, and that lies in the
general Communication of Books by Translating them from all Ages and all
Countries into all N^oterique Mother Tongues. But, if there be a more than
ordinary Extension of this advantage, We, undoubtedly, meet with it in our own
Nation: Where not only the best discourses, penned by the most Eminent Men of
the States round about us, are taught to speak English, but the Primogenial
Wits of Athens and Rome do not miss of such hands, as are in no wise unequal to
the mighty task of Interpreting them, but seem Commissionated by Nature to
handle and revive their Ashes, and perhaps bestow upon them a greater fame and
luster, than they had, when they first appeared in the World.

This, I say, not to set a value or reputation on our own Country, by the
disparagement of Greece or Italy, the first nurseries of Art and Wit, but only
to show, that I am not as yet fully persuaded of the Divinity of those Ancient
Heroes, and that he who adores 'em, must be at the same time blinded with that
Cloud of Incense, which he offers up to them. Great Geniusses, most
indubitably, they had, and did rarely well in those days, wherein they had not
failed of Admiration) if they had done less: But, by no means, can I think it
tolerable, that because they were accounted the chiefest Men in their own Age,
they should indefinitely be looked upon as such in all succeeding times. I will
readily grant that those Authors of Antiquity in their composures of Wit, and
particularly in those that appertain to the Theater, had a richer Vein, than we
have, for the Description of Nature, and of humane Passions, and, in brief, of
whate^er bears a respect to wording and expression, But, since in things of
this nature there are other matters to be observed, and a due Decorum,
Contrivance, Economy and Methodical Distribution of the several Portions is to
be carefully minded, (which I may call the Mechanical compounding Parts, and
which will require no small number of Rules and Precepts that can never be
found out but by a long train of Experience and Reflection) it must follow,
that the last Ages will have the advantage in these concerns, for as much as
they have enjoyed all the labor and thinking and mistakes of the former.

Of all the considerations, that belong to Men of Letters, this seems to me the
most weighty and Important: For, if, on the one side, a contemptuous treatment
and irreverential behavior toward our Forefathers be an ill quality in a
Scholar, on the other, a neglect and disestimation of the Moderns is still of
as bad a consequence, by reason of the just indignation, which Men of the
clearest Heads in this Age cannot but conceive, when having the most
accomplished natural Endowments, and the greatest solidity of judgment, yet they
shall choose rather to lie idle and bury their Talents in obscurity, than
venture to come into the light, where they will have open injustice done them:
Which Horace complains he met withal, when the least works of Antiquity were
preferred before the acutest and most exact Complexures under the Reign of
Augustus

This remark, Sir, I hope, is sufficient both to excuse the labor I have
bestowed on this piece, and likewise to make some Apology for my prefixing your
name to it: For, as it is a thing of more than ordinary sagacity and delicacy
of sense, and might claim a much more accurate Pen than mine, to put it into an
English dress, and as here will be quarrelling work for the most ambitious and
forward Spirits in the Empire of Wit, wherein no Man ought to plead the merit
of Nobility and all-commanding Grandeur, but that only of good-sense to Rise,
so, I think it a felicity worthy to be commemorated both by my-self and this
Book, that I have chosen a Man of that excellence and height of Soul, to whom I
might justly assgn the protection of the highest and most incomparable present,
which, (universally speaking) ever the Muses made to Mankind, since the
Triumphant Ages of Conquests and Politeness. I was never so vain as to flatter
my self, that I could write any thing, which would bear your Eye: But, having
taken in the loftiest Ideas of these Papers in the Original, I fancied, I might
safely venture an other Man's thoughts in your presence; Especially, when they
were of so nice a stamp and so ponderous a character: Tho, perhaps, in this
Translation they do not resemble the Elements of the Aristotelian Hypothesis,
which are the more weighty, when removed out of their Native Station.

Wherefore, to your Candor, Sir, not Judgment, I m^st appeal in this my
Performance: And I do not care, with what disrepute to my self, provided I can
get your single Approbation, which is more to me than the Applause of a whole
Theater. The truth is, unless we take this way, the Critics are too hard for
us: They make Parties, and damn every thing without Wit or Conscience: Which, no
doubt, is the readiest way of thriving and building a Man's Greatness in this
World; For, if Alexander had snorted and boggled at invading other Men's
Kingdoms, he had never wept for the scarcity of Worlds. Yet, let men say what
they will, there is such a thing as Good sense, in the General Notion* whereof
every one does agree as much as in the Idea of a Triangle. I have frequently
met with it in the Pit among the Women, who have judged with that undebauch'd
uprightness and Integrity, that I could hardly find any Imperfection, left by
traduction in their Souls: Their minds enjoyed their Native Purity, were
unsophisticated and free from all the Illusions of Prejudice, Friendship, or
Interest: and to such minds as these must I recommend the Speculation of these
uncompounded Essences of Poetry, with Reference to the Stage.

For, this Enchyridion containing no superficial, but the fundamental Notions,
and (as it were) the Metaphysics of the Theater, will require a Mind
abstracted from all Prepossessions, that can retire into itself to Meditate,
and there whirle about like so many Atoms, the Etern^l Paradigms of things,
those specter and Ghosts of Entity, with which Plato was so much enamored, as
to relate them into the number of his causes. So that unless the Brain be
thoroughly defecated, these thoughts will be neither well-understood nor
relished: They are not of a cut for every ordinary Perception, nor the staring
ghesses of the incogitant Rabble. For, as I have heard our Churchmen, say,
that the Ancient Fathers supposed, that the sufferings which our Savior
underwent in his Body, were more afflictive to him, than the same would have
been to an other person, by reason of his excellency and quickness of the sense
of Feeling; so likewise these sublime Ratiocinations will be reached in
proportion to the height of the capacity, that stretches it self at them. They
are not delivered with Ornament and Polishing; they are firm and solid, like
Metals of the strongest, most enduring and noblest substance, which are filled
with the greatest difficulty: They are not set off with any pimping dress or
foreign blandishments, but the Author seems to have that of Martial in his Eye.

Quicquid amas, cupias non placuisse nimis. Though certainly truth never appears
more beauteous and killing, than when we have the good Fortune to see her as
stark-naked, as ever her Maker made her, or Men keep plain-dealing still so in
this World. Octavius took great care to express his mind with the greatest
plainness imaginable, and was used to reprehend Marc-Antony for writing such
things as Men did rather wonder at, than understand. To speak the truth, when
we write on a rational Subject, it is a hard matter to be witty, without
spoiling the Connection and order of Deductions: For Wit being nothing but the
ferment of the Soul, such Excoctions must necessarily offuscate the brightness
of Reason, we must deal with it, as we do with dangerous Physic, weighing it
by Grains and Scruples and nice Proportions. And, in the management of such
Arguments, it is as carefully and prudentially to be dispersed, as motion in the
Universe; what it gains in one part it looses it another, so that in the whole
it remains always alike and the same.

This Objection, I foresaw, would presently be raised against these Essays;
and therefore, I have taken leave of you, Sir, here to answer it at first once
for all. There are many others, that I know, will be started, which I cannot
better obviate and make a reply to, as well as to those, which the Author
himself brings against the English Stage, than by prefixing here a Preliminary
discourse concerning the distinct Tracts of this Book which I must submit all
along to your Lime and Correction: For, since Critics now adays, are grown
more assuming than Jove himself, and the sacred Laurel it self is not over-safe
from their Thunderbolts, the humbler Shrubs of the plain (as Cowley calls
them) had best take all possible care to shelter themselves the best they can.

This I shall endeavor to perform in Emulation of my present Author, with all
the natural easiness imaginable: I will go no further than my own present
thoughts which hazard rather than Study brings into my mind: I will fancy my
self in your Company, sliding from one hint to another, in a grateful variety
of Sentiments: I will only examine the plain nature of things, and not the
adventitious Appendixes of industrious Cogitation: If I must be sometimes
forced to an Ostentation of Learning, when I come to want a Quotation, I will
get up to reach down my Author: I will speak nothing in a passionate and
Dogmatical Huff, nor will I follow in Poetry the great Duellists in Religion,
who, tho Chaplains to the Prince of Peace, are evermore termagantly mad, and
with the most sanguinary zeal hacking and hewing one another.

All the World knows, how necessary to our selves is the observation of other
Men's minds and manners. The Stage has been so often called the Looking-glass of
Mankind, that I am as much ashamed to repeat it, as to obtrude a Proverb upon
Company for a new notion, or to averr with an hundred and fifty Oaths, that two
and two make four. It is almost an Eternal verity, and had not Cicero told me,
that for the preservation of health, a Man ought to study and be thoroughly
acquainted with the State of his own Body, yet I should have believed, that it
is very requisite toward a good Regulation of our Lives, to take a Prospect of
the loveliness of Virtue, the odiousness of Vice, and to see those little
extravagancies of Men's Tempers, which are styled humors, publicly ridiculed.

The two first of these are the proper business and subject matter of Tragedy
and Tragicomedy: For I shall use this latter Term, since it is not only
authorized by Plautus, but also by the Modern Practice: Tho I may possibly
elsewhere and at some other time take occasion to show, there is no such thing
in Nature. In Tragedy every thing is employed to move and stir up the Passions
of the Spectators by the dreadful Adventures which it represents, and then it is
work is to appease and settle their Souls in their former calm and
tranquillity; whilst the great Heroes of Antiquity are raised from their
Graves, taking up their Tenements of Clay again, to converse with us. This,
questionless, is a great advantage, that for half a Crown we can come into
their Company, and hear them be their own Historians, and talk such fine things
about Love and Honor, without being affrighted at their Specter. And, this is
one of the chief Preheminences of a City above a Country Life, that we can
enjoy such illustrious and edifying Dialogues. We see virtue in it is exalted
State, that (...), L. 7. C. 1. which Aristotle (who poisoned his Pupil and
Benefactour, mentions in his Ethics, whereby he denotes, that it is not so
much situated above our Seize, as above our obligations to attain it, but
that when we have acquired it into our reach, it will, most infallibly, lift us
above the ordinary Predicament of humane Nature, and we shall all become
Transcendentals. So that, these great Heroes must be truly great, and endued
with all manner of Perfections, and all the Moral Virtues: And their Vices must
be either very carefully managed or quite concealed: Alexander must have a
great deal of deference and veneration paid him, and he must not be exposed to
laughter, tho he should pretend himself to be the By-blow of a God, Inter
Epistolas Mandi Procerum.
rather than that of honest King Philip, which his nown Mother resents most
bitterly in a very pathetick Letter to the ungracious Universal Monarch.
However, so many Abatements are not to be made, as that Tragedy should swerve
from History: It may improve it, but in such a measure, that the discrimination
of the real Persons may remain. Tragedy is to glorify them in this
Resurrection, but yet they are still to continue the same Individual Men. It
would be extremely ridiculous to draw Tully and Catiline, Caesar and Cato,
Antony and Brutus with the same lines and the same features, tho they lived in
the very same Age together, and the same Commonwealth.

P. 1.
And my Author says, that the French excel in works of the Stage, and he may
say so with all my Heart, if he will give it me under his hand, that he speaks
this in general, or in complement to his own Country: For, upon no account can
I concede it, if he affirms it with an Allusion to Ours. In which sense and
acceptance, we may very well understand him, when he boldly Challenges all the
Countries in the Universe to dispute with France the advantage of Tragedy, and
immediately subjoins, that he will allow but four or five English Tragedies to
be complete, and these neither, unless they were Guelt, and had a great many
restraints and alterations made in them. What these four or five are, Sir, I am
sorry he has not nominated, so that we might have impartially examined both
their Beauties and Imperfections, and compar^d them with as many of the best
French pieces. Otherwise we cannot lay hold of him, he speaks at volley and
universally; and there is no course to be taken in defense of the English
Theater, but one, which I judge to be very odious, and that is a general
comparison betwixt that and the French.

With this Province, Sir, I am not much taken, by reason it is my Opinion,
wherein I have your concurrence, that it is a putid way of Wit to draw
Comparisons in National Concerns, and to make artful and blackening
Observations on whole Communities: It almost looks as gross as a similitude in
a dying Man's Mouth. I will, therefore, modestly, in our Honor only specify
one or two things, wherein our Tragedies do as far exceed the French both for
Profit and Diversion ( if we may allow any at all in this case) as the Monument
surpasses Pancradge- Steeple, both for strength, and height, and Beauty, and, I
will leave it to any Rational-man to conjecture at the rest.

The French Tragedy bears much resemblance to an Epique Poem, picking out,
generally, one or two principal Personages of great Renown in Story, and laying
out all its gifts on some certain notable passage and event of their Lives.
Therefore it will suffer no more men to come upon the Stage, than what are
purely necessary to the adornment and furtherance of that one main-action. And
then, the whole intrigue is carried on in Rhythme, with tedious Harangues,
Dialoguewise; wherein the Actors do as devoutly pay their respects to Honor,
as if it was a piece of Religious Worship (as indeed Tragedy, heretofore, bore
a part in the Heathen Liturgy) and have the most immortal occasions upon Earth
to speak fine things, according to Mr. Bayes's Phrase in the Rehearsal.

Contrarily, we introduce a manifold and thickening diversity of Actions into
the leading designment; whereas the French are so very superstitious in
observing the Stagyrites Rules of purging Pride and Ambition by showing, that
no State can secure Mankind from the Lapses and Reverses of Fortune, that one
would guess by their Tragedies, that they had no other vice than Ambition, nor
other Men than Heroes, as we guess at the Diseases of a Country by their
Remedies. But on the other hand we aim at curing not only our soaring Sparks,
Our Nahashes, Our Absoloms; but all such Fools as suffer themselves to be mad^
their Instruments as Our Ziphs by showing the fatality that attends all those
that are engaged in such impious undertakings. Thus we flow more free and
unconfined, mixing with the great Plot many little circumstances, by the help
of our Episodes. Whereby these considerable advantages fall on our side, that
our scenes are not so nauseous, nor have so many Ambages, as our Neighbors,
but the Audience's Mind, meets the more frequently with different Mutations and
Prospects; that our Stage has more Persons upon it, which takes off the fatigue
of still viewing the same-object, and adds a pickanter vivacity to whatever is
spoken. In the last place, we, for the most part, do not use Rhythme; but
blank-verse, whereby the Poets minds is left more to it self, and has a fairer
and more natural-field, wherein to expatiate, without the necessity of cursing
Arabique Customs or Moorish Innovations, which forced a man to spoil a good
thought by tagging it with Ting-tong.

Had our Author duly weighed these things, he would not, perhaps, have so
hardily pronounced against the English Buskin, as he has done, especially by
way of comparison, when he could not but remember, what that honest-fellow of a
Critic Rapin long ago confessed of his own Countrymen, that none of them had
writ a good Tragedy, nor were ever like to write one. I know by intimation
under hand he may oppose against what I have thought fit to say in our behalf,
that this variety of Underplots does bring an heap of confused-events: P. 9.
But this lies wholly at the Poets discretion; he is to answer this Objection,
I believe, before he can get his Play acted. They may be confused, as in a
Chaos, rudis indiges-taque moles, while they lie in the Poet's Mind, they may
be then like the first matter, without form: But it is the Poet's work; and,
perhaps, one of the greatest Arts of human Wit to unconfound them, to find
fit-digressions, and right Ligaments to tie one thing to another, least instead
of representing a true State of natural Society, he plunges himself into
Hobbs's State of War.

I might here, indeed, Sir, particularize in many of our Modern English
Tragedies, endued with all the proportions of place, time and such external
Regularities, which would prove the most forcible Argument against my Author:
But since upon this whole matter, he has chosen to deliver himself, and to
sport in Generals, I have followed him but in such a way, that all men of
judgment, who have studied the English Stage, will think him out of the way,
when he judges thus of it. I must avow, Sir, I have here miss^d an heavenly
opportunity of gaining the Amity of some of our Top-Poets: But you know, Sir,
what a fierce Nation they are, (as Boileau calls them) and it is, perchance, as
dangerous to praise as to discommend any one of them: And, therefore, I will
still put both themselves and their Fortunes upon God and their Country.

There is one thing more, which upon this Topic impinges on us, P. 9.
that we are wonderfully pleased with the sight of barbarous Murders, that our
Stage is an Acheldama, that there we read Eternal Paraphrases upon the third
Chapter of Job, and that the more Blood is spilt, the more delight does the
audience receive. I will not here allege the Roman Theater, wherein were as
many Knoxes and Cargyls, as in the cirque of the Gladiators: I will only deduce
a Replication from the nature of our Stage it self. Our scenes are much fuller
than the French, in which I have already gloried; and consequently, the
Dependents of great Men always partake of their Fates. Now, how can this be
thought a piece of Inhumanity (as my Author thinks it) which is daily seen to
be Acted in Princes Courts, and upon the true Theater of the World? Our shores
( we thank God) are not inhospitable, as they were when Horace said, Visam
Britannos hospitibus feros.

And the French, I am certain, will allow, that the English can readily borrow
a great many people, to help fill up these By-plots.

I now pass to Comedy, wherein my Author seems not to take the same measures,
as he did in Tragedy, P. 39.
that every thing ought to be referred to one principal event, However, he
declares not his own Opinion in this point, but with many allowances. He will
only have it a contest depending on the Genius of the two Nations. He very
fairly and justly allows Ben. Johnson to be an Excellent Comic Poet, P. 44.
in depicting the several humors and manners of men. P. 35
Yet he thinks, our humors are carried on too far, which proceeds from our too
much thinking on the same thing, P. 35.
and our too long plodding in the same beaten Tract of Re-action. I had rather
at any time, Sir, defend than accuse, but by no means can I omit in this place,
what every body knows, in what a Lewd condition the French Comedy is at this
day; that (as my Author confesses) it is mostly filtch'd from the Spaniards,
and that it is generally (with a few exceptions) degenerated into Farce,
Puppet-shews, Buffoonry, and Apish-tricks: Whereas the English sally into new
Invention, and keep it up to the same sublimity and splendor, as it held, when
Loelius and the Masters of Rome, who had crowned Heads for their Subjects, writ
Comedies to divert the People.

I will not affirm, that we Religiously observe all the Laws, which Kings and
Parliaments of Parnassus have Enacted, and tho a Man will hardly miss of
Horace's Art of Poetry in the Title Page, that by consequence all the Rules of
that Lycurgus are observed in the ensuing Comedy. It Is enough the Prologue does
still either Court or Huff the audience to surprise it is good-Opinion: Love
goes still on at the old rate, he is still reputed the most ancient of the
Gods, (...) (as Plutarch says) all things are made and Providentially disposed
by him.

Totamque infusa per artus Men's agitat molem -- So that tho the Sparks had a
perpetual, but a very uneasy Celibacy, till the last Act, yet then from the
objective they pass to the formal happiness. And tho (as my Author remarks) the
English may surpass the natural Ideas of things, by letting our thoughts dwell
too long upon one Object, and rarifying it into vast dimensions, yet if it were
otherwise, I am persuaded, there could be nothing heard for yawning, all would
be cold and chill and beyond the eight Degree. And this reason is to be
assigned, for the continued thickness of the Wit, which sometimes is pil'd up
so mountainously thick that it is impossible to think any man can be supposed
to speak or answer so, extemperaneously, but upon Study and Premeditation.

But, to consider this thing a little more closely and Philosophically, matters
do, perhaps, stand in a much better condition as they are, than if they were
entirely conformed to the precepts of Aristotle and Horace. Indeed, if none but
the great Masters of Poetry, who have a thorough insight into these two
Lawgivers, came into the Theater, our Adversaries would say something, but our
English Actors nothing at all, unless this, Unus est nobis pro Populo, I mean
our Lawreat. I have, oftentimes, applied my self in some difficult cases to
some particular Men, who pretend to have made this Art their Study: But I have
found, they either have not told me their minds sincerely, or else have made
ill use of their Pains, seeing, afterward, I have received more satisfaction
from Persons of ordinary good-sense than these speculative Curiosi. For it is,
indisputably, true, that as to the Art of the Stage, nothing is more easy, than
for a Man to be deceived in his conceptions, when he will needs peep into it is
delicacy and fineness, and little Whimseyes: Nothing is more easy than to give
a wrong Explanation of Aristotle's or Horace's Rules, which are wont to breed as
great a disorder and hub-bub in an unapt Brain, as they yield illumination and
benefit to a mind, framed by nature for these sorts of notices.

We are to consider that Comedy is appointed to please not only the Sir Courtly
Nice's in Wit, but all true Souls, whom Terence calls the People; and we have
his Affidavit, who was no Oats, that then it attaineth it is end, when it
pleases them. When a Man, Sir of unblundering sense, that does not lay claim to
one Iota of Greek or Latin, that never read (God bless him) either Aristotle or
Horace, and that never yet aspired to write a Billetdoux so much as in his own
dear Mother Tongue; when this Man shall tell you, that such a Comedy pleases
him, that he sat easy and attentive all the while without ogling the Boxes, and
tho gifted with the Spirit of Ruffling, he bauk'd the Masks of his Douceurs,
that he comprehended the Plot very well, that he viewed it is turmoils with some
disturbance, that afterward he saw 'em unravelled with some emotions of joy,
that he came from the Playhouse in some have, or, perhaps, stumbled in the
way, while he was preparing his memory for his Friends, I should believe the
Comedy good, and the testimony of this one man should be of more comfortable
importance and judicious weight with me, than all the petty-reasons of an
half-skill'd Play-crafts-man. And I will not go far to prove, if not to
demonstrate this as certain as any Problem in Euclid, at least in an equal, and
not in a comparative sense. For, the difference which lies betwixt a Man of
skill, and a Man of no skill, upon this postulatum that there be an equal
division of good-sense between them, can never make them to have a different
relish of the Comedy. They will be equally pleased or displeased at the same
Play, with this discrimination only, that the Man of skill can tell, why he is
pleased, or why he is displeased, and the Man of just-sense cannot, as having
never made it his business to dive into the Art of Poetry.

But, to leave it in suspense, whether all the Aristotelian and Horation
Precepts are nicely requisite in the composition of a Comedy, and not to return
back and enquire here, whether the same dispute may be warped also to Tragedy,
we can make no manner of question, but that Opera's or pieces of Machine are
not subject to their Jurisdiction, but are wholly out of the pale of those two
great Men's Territories, since they are of a later date, and owe their original
to Florence in Lorenzo de Medici's time or to the Venetians, who (as Mr. Dryden
thinks, might gather them up from the wrecks of the Grecian and Roman Theaters,
Postscript to Albi^^ and Alba^ius.
which were adorned with Scenes, Music, Dances, and Machines, especially the
Athenian: Which polite Commonwealth, tho it was very frugal in every thing
else, according to Mr. Rhymer's observation, yet did tax and assess themselves,
and did expend more out of their public Exchequer upon the representation of
these public Plays, than all their Wars cost them, tho sometimes both Sea and
Land were covered with barbarous Foes, by whom they were invaded.

Aristotle, whom all men agree, to have treated of the Stage the first and the
best of any Writer, says, that two things therein are particularly to be
observed, which are verisimility and marvellousness, with this difference, that
in Comedy nothing but what retains on verisimilitude is to be admitted, whereas
Tragedy does not refuse the mavelous, Preface Ibid.
or as Mr. Dryden calls it, the surprising conduct. However in this case, great
moderation the Philosopher will have used, so that if a Man be forced to
intermingle things supernatural and so usher in the Gods, it must only be on
some pinch of necessity: And this is the sense of that Law and Ordinance of the
old Peripatetique Gentleman, which Judge Hales himself cannot interpret more
uprightly. From whence we may deduce this Corollary, that Dramatick Poetry is
to be thus essentially divided: Comedy ought to have every thing likely and
probable, i. e. only natural and ordinary Events; Opera's which are a species,
that stand in opposition to the former, must accept only of extraordinary and
supernatural Adventures: But Tragedy, like the Aristotelian virtue, is to lie
snudging betwixt them both, being compounded of marvellousness and possibility.
So that hence we see, the vices and imperfections of a Comedy, are the virtues
and beauties of an Opera. Nothing is more wicked in a Comedy than the slipping
and alteration of the Scene: But naught is so rich and excellent in an Opera as
the breaking of all the unities of time, place and action, I mean as the leaps,
not only from one place of the Earth, to an other, but from Earth to the
Empyrean Heaven, and from Heaven to Hell: While the simple Inhabitants of the
Lunar Planet little think what work we make with them in Dorset-Garden. In a
Comedy, nothing is so unmercifully insupportable, as to ungigg or explicate the
Intrigue by a Miracle, or by the kind arrival of some (...): whereas in an
Opera nothing is so charmingly ravishing, as these sorts of Miracles and these
Apparitions of Divinities, when Men have some ground and reason to introduce
them.

From this wide distinction betwixt the nature of Comedy and Opera, it may be
determined, that either my Author did not understand the right notion of
Operas, P. 42.
when he terms them, even beyond a litteral sense, Comedies in Music, P. 45.
or else he means that abused Constitution of them, which he himself derides,
when they are compelled in Music to negotiate the inferior and common affairs
of civil Life. In this* Observation he certainly shakes hands with truth, and I
am sure, you, Sir, will take his side: For I, partly, believe, that should a
Man drillingly sing and warble out an errand to his Lacquais, the Fellow might,
perhaps, go, but I fancy, he would make more have to Court than to the place
appointed him in his message, that he might be the first to make Friends for
his Master's Estate.

I will not here examine my Author's judgment in singing, nor the Preference he
gives the French to the Italian Operas, such an attempt being extraneous to my
undertaking: But since he damns the very essential constitution of this
Theatrical Entertainment, notwithstanding the incivility, I think my self
engaged to see him contradicted. And I hope, Sir, that I shall obtain your
pardon both for the tediousness and the unpolished neglect of this discourse,
especially in this part of it, wherein I have so few helps, seeing I do at once
plead the cause of Friendship, and, perhaps, of good-sense: For, this portion
of the Stage's diversion being but a Novice in our Theater, and having just
received the Royal Approbation and encouragement, as it would be unmannerly to
let any thing slip the Press, that so much as indirectly strikes at the design,
so it would be as severe too, and to the detriment of the Actors, who have been
at immense charges in carrying it on, and some of whom of Eminent judgment and
sense I am proud to call my Friends.

All the reasons, therefore, which I can find my Author goes upon, in
subverting root and branch, the constitutive Principles and foundation of
Opera's are two. The first is more general. That it is impossible for the mind
of Man to be sincerely pleased, when it has so little to do, P. 42.
and that tho, perhaps, it may be at first surpised into some delight, yet,
afterward, it presently sinks into it self, and becomes tired and drooping.
The other is, that he never saw an Opera, p. 44.
but what to him appeared foolish and contemptible, either in the disposition
of the subject, or in the composure of the Verses.

In reply to these reasons: This principle is acknowledged as a Basis and
Groundwork in all Arts and Sciences, that those who first invented them, and
gave 'em all the perfections requisite to their Frame, Nature and Constitution,
ought to be the Supreme Dictators in whose steps, all the following Disciples
are to tread: Otherwise, they tread awry. So that, as the Italians did first
pitch upon and accomplish in all it is numbers this Entertainment of Operas,
whoever undertakes to compose an Opera, must wholly square his measures to
their design. This my Critic ought to have considered, before he had gone, and
committed High Treason against one of the most established and most famous Laws
among Men of Wit, by not having the fear of Authority before his Eyes, and by
contriving some new Atheistical Regulations, according to which he would alter
the settled Government.

But (it seems) he has reason so to do: No Man of sense can be taken with
things, which have no sense in 'em: The mind does not find matter enough in
'em, to employ it self about nothing but noise and fine shows: And the
Ludgate-audience, provided they be neither Deaf nor Blind were by
Predestination devised to be charmed with these super-aerial practices: Mighty
Scenes and Fustian adorned with extravagant Decorations never fail, but operate
as certainly as a Devil, a Fool, and a Friar: And what is the effect of all
this, but to be praised by such a Riff-raff is to be condemned.

It was said of the Emperor Trajan when he boasted of his Parthian Trophee
before the Gods, that he was (...), and that he regarded a sound of words more
than real matter it self: But whether this is liable to be applied to Operas, I
will leave it to the decision of all judicious men, from the consideration both
of what has been already urged upon this Topic, and what I shall further add
in confutation of the second argument. In the interim, I will here put the
case, that there is nothing to be heard, felt, or understood but a non-sensical
sound: Yet, if this sound be truly Harmonical, whether vocal or Instrumental,
or both, men will certainly prefer it sometimes before the greatest.
Embellishments of Wit. Music, therefore, as well as all other polite Arts has
been embraced and cherished by all the most glorious Nations in the Universe,
and has received it is augmentation proportionable to the augmentations of
Empire. I have already particularized in two immortal and commanding Nations,
especially the Romans, who not only used it in their Theaters, but in Religious
matters on the greatest of all days, when their Carmina soecularia were sung
with so much pomp and ostentation, that they were styled (...), The Hebrews
themselves (not to speak of the glittering and incessant use of it in their
Temple) did in Solomon's time, when that Dominion was elevated to it is highest
Akme, and even a note above Ela, had' public times of joy adorned with the
magnificence of musical performances. And, as Mr. Dryden has remarqu'd that the
first Operas P^ef. to Alb. and Alba^.
seemed to be designed by the Italians for the Celebration of Princes
Marriages, or days of Universal rejoicing, whereof he gives us an instance in
Guarini's Pastor fido; So the Song of Songs, ( as our Learned Churchmen long
ago expressed it) is a kind of Divine Pastoral, or Marriage Play, consisting of
diverse Acts and Scenes: Or a sacred Dialogue (by way of Opera) with many
interlocutory passages. First the Bride comes in, and says, Let him kiss me
with the kisses of his Mouth: Then the Bridegroom, I have compared thee, O my
Love, to a Troop of Horses, etc. After which he withdraws himself, and sits at
his repast, leaving the Bride with her Companions, as it were alone upon the
Stage, who thus speak to her, We will make thee Borders of Gold and Studds of
Silver, etc.

But to come nearer home, and to give a taste of our own times, Balets have ever
been in vogue in France, Spain has it is Bull-feasts, the Moors their Zambra's,
the Germans their Wirschafts, being pieces composed of Mascarad^s, Balets, and
Songs, the Court of Savoy it is Sapates, and none of these Entertainments but
has Music for an essential Ingredient.

Can we, then, think that Actions, tho long, of Dramatique Music to be
ungrateful, and sure to put the audience to the most hideous Agonies of
yawning? Can we suppose the most delicate People, that ever yet lived upon
Earth to be Sots and heavy Idiots? Can we imagine them to be weary of an
happiness of their own contrivance, and to be as great Fools as the Apostate
Ang^ls, who were cloyed with their f^li^ity, and left their own Habitations?
Toward a ple^ary satisfaction and complete a^quiescence of mind, it is
necessary, that all the powers of our Souls, be adequately filled with
Pleasure, and be rapt up into an Eternal Enjoyment. There must be no
interfering Accident, to break it off. The trance must be ineffable, and what
signifies it, so it be a Trance, whether it be agreeable to the Catholic*
measures of sense or reason? I confess, Mr. Cowley says, that Wit should not be
laid too thick, but discreetly managed and scattered up and down: But for my
share, I do not think this notion is extensive to the divertisements of the Eye
or Ear: And I fancy a Lady much more richly dressed in a Gown all laid over
with Jewels, than with here and there one, nicely situated.

The Thomists will have the fruition of the Divinity to consist solely in an
Act of the Understanding, which they call Vision: But the Scotests in an Act of
the Will, which is Love: And the Thomists seem to have the better of the
argument, because seeing the operation in which our perfectest happiness is
founded, must he the perfectest operation, and seeing that of the intellectual
is more perfect than that of the sensitive part, it is apparent, that the
operation of this fruition must lie in the Intellectual Part only. But tho I
question not but that both in the upshot may be brought to an accommodation,
according to the Maxims of the new Philosophy, which holds all sensations not
to be realities either in the senses or the objects of them, but to subsist
solely in the perception. I say, I do not care, whether the Pleasure springs
from either part, provided I have the Pleasure: Tho, perhaps, all that results
from Harmony, arises from the Concord, it bears to our Souls, which some have
opin'd to be Harmony.

I know, sometimes, our sense of seeing is affected to that degree with the
Harmony or Beauty of Colors, and our hearing with that of sounds, that some
have proved too frail for the enjoyment, and have become maddish with the
superlative Pleasure. And to this cause may be ascribed the extravagant joys of
the Italian Theater, where the Composers of the Music of the Opera, endeavo^r
to end the Scenes of the principal Actors, with such Airs as not only draw the
applauses of the whole Theater, when Benissimo is heard from a thousand Mouths
at once, but have sometimes transported some Gentlemen besides themselves and
their Wits by the charming voices of their Young Women, so that they have cried
out, while they lean over from their Galleries, Ah Cara! mi Butto, mi Butto, as
if they were about to precipitate themselves down in the ecstasies, into which
they were rapt by these divine voices.

This, I think Sir, enough to offer in contradiction to the first reason of my
Critic: The second does without any exception or dispensation condemn every
particular Opera, he ever yet saw, both as to the disposal of the main subject,
and the composition of the verses; I will not here object to him Lovigis
Operas, wherein he franckly avows, P. 5^.
himself has found inimitable things, nor any of the Illustrious Achievements
in this kind of the Italian Masters: I will only bring our Alb. and Albanius
into his consideration, which not only for the amussitated management of the
subject matter, and the ingenious contrivance of the versification, but for the
great and God-like Argument, for the Heroique design of it is Instruction, for
the admirable and sumptuous performance in the sweetness of the Music, in the
Harmonique Movements and Postures, in the richness of the Habits, and the
Beauty of the Machines and Decorations, we may oppose in competition with any
thing, that ever Paris or Venice it self did yet see. Notwithstanding the
general design is but as yet in a State of Probation.

The Argument is both according to and beyond the Poets own Heart, both
literally true and super-naturally Historical. The miraculous Restoration and
Deliverances of the two Royal Brothers, with the Apotheosis of our late
Immortal and cherished Monarch. The Instruction easy and fresh in our
Memories, Treason defeated by the Almighty, and his Vicegerents preserved. We
are not constrained like our Neighbor Nations, to feign Poetical Tales: We
have daily new-subjects for Operas set before our Eyes, and we see ours acted
first on the true Theater of the World.

The conduct sublime, yet no great chasms in it, but such as rather seem to
heighten than stint the minds of the audience. The Verses pure, fluent and
filled with a Celestial and Blissful Cadence, nothing in our Language, yet
extant, comparable to it. And we can find but one and twenty Apostrophe's (I
mean of distinct Woods) through the whole Series of the verse.

This was a way of writing, first observed and introduced by Mr. Waller: And
without this, the contrivance of Operas could never stand. And as there is a
sweetness in the middle, so is there at the end of the verse, which is chiefly
caused by the Dissyllable and Trissyllable Rhymes, lately much used in our
Songs, and borrowed originally from the Italians. ^or, it is generally of the
Constitutive nature of all Italian verses, of what num^er of Syllables soever
they be, to have the Acc^nt upon the P^nultima. There a^e some, indeed, which
they call Sdruccioli or slippery verses, that lay it upon the Ante-penultima,
their final Cadence running swift: Whereof we have many examples in this
English Opera, as being naturally Competible to it is Constitution, as may be
proved by this instance.

The Italians, as they have preserved many things of the Latin through their
whole Tongue, so have they retained a sort of verses, named Sciolti, without
Rhyme: Wherein that excellent Traduction of Virgil's Aeneis is written by
Hannibal Caro, from whom, I am of opinion, Sir, that that great man of your
name, whose enlarged Genius, you inherit, separated from the unhappy and fatal
malignities, which belonged to that Age, took his design. The body of the work
consists of Heroique verses of eleven Syllables, but he sometimes mixes the
Sdruccioli of twelve, and then principally, when he makes the Gods to speak as
in the Sybill's Answer in the Sixth Book.

Verrano i Teucri al regno di Lavinio,
Di cio to affido. Ma benstoito desser vi
Si penteranno. Guerre, guerre horri bili
Sor gere ne veggio, and pien di sangue il Tevere.
As to the performance, I will not inquire whether our English voices are so
fine and fit for things of this nature: I will rather suspend my judgment with
my Author, remembering, that things cannot at first receive their ultimate
perfection, qui non est hodie, cras magis aptus erit; and that there is a
strife among Musicians as well as Men of all other Professions:

(...). I will not strain in commending the vision of the Honors of the
Garter, in which we see the Glories of our August Prince with all the lesser
Deities about him.

Divisum Imperium cum Jove Caesar habet. Neither will I mention the Peacock
which had the Samii seen (who stamped it is Pourtraiture upon their Coins,
because Juno, to whom it was dedicated, was by them adored) they would not only
have Worshipped her but the Bird too, and, perhaps, more the Birds very
Pourtraict. She, indeed, is appointed by the Poets to convert the Eyes of Argus
in the Peacock's Train: But here the Spectator does wish for his Eyes to look
upon the Bird it self, as being as rare a sight, as when it was first
transported from the Barbarians into Greece, at which time Aelian tells us,
that among the Athenians it was not to be seen without Money.

I will not enlarge, Sir, upon these Occurrences, because they have already
betrayed me into a great deal of Pedantry, tho I have made it my scope all
along to keep at as great a distance as I could from the Anonimous Translator,
who some days ago put forth these Stage Essays. I will say nothing in
derogation of his Traduction, nor build my own Reputation upon the ruins of
another Man's; But I do not doubt, that if he had pondered more, he would have
more thoroughly understood his Author, and a little more pains would have better
spoke his Acquaintance with honest Will. Lilly.

And now, Sir, I think I have been sufficiently guilty of the Vice the Greeks
called (...), as to have tried to what a degree you stand possessed of the
great virtues of perseverance and long-suffering, so as that it is high time to
make an end, least I be goar'd with questo non sa la storia intiera, perch non
gli fu insignata la fine. Wherefore I shall leave all I had to say about
Epicurus, to my Annotations: It being an infinite work to dispute concerning
summum bonum, of which Socrates affirms in his Ecclesiastical History, there
were three hundred several Opinions. This is all I have to add, that Epicurus
had a Garden, and in that Garden stood a Tree of Knowledge: But in the Bark of
it was writ, by some Lycurgus or other, a Noli me tangere.

I am, Sir, Your Most Humble, Most Affectionate, Most Obliged Servant. F.
SPENCE.

ERRATA.
PAge 43. line 9. deleatur a, P. 48. l. 2. read made, p. 63. l. 1. del. no
doubt, p. 69. l. 18. r. calumniate, p. 77. l. 6. r. with which, p. 79. l. 10.
for than is there, r. there can, p. 83. l. 23. r. si^ce, p. 89. l. 8. r.
innocent, p. 90. l. 18. r. cotton, p. 39. l. 10. r. twinges and pinches, p. 97.
l. 2. for then, r. thee, ibid. l. 12. r. Ruins, p. 98 l. 11. for ten, r. a,
ib. l. 22. r. laudable, p. 99. l. 3. r. contrarible, p. 104. l. 18. r. he
became, p. 135. l. 16. r. Tergilylinus, p. 113. l. 20. r. Thyestes, p. 115. l.
1. r. h^rrid, ib. l. 11. r. Alemeon, p. 118. l. 19. r. that the it, etc. p.
123. l. 2. r. an, p. 129. l. 12. r. est? p. 130. l. 6. r. ruinate, p. 131. l.
24. for theirs, r. other's, p. 133. l. 8. r. her, ib. l. 9. r. Jilt, p. 136, l.
1. r. Camillus, ib. l. 12. r. are, ib. l. 14. for being, r. is, p. 141. l. 1.
r. starry, p. 144 l. 11. for bate, r. ca^l, p 145. l. 7. r. sublimi, p. 146. l.
10. r. sparkling, p. 155. l. 4. r. thee. These are the material Errors, which
have escaped the Press, except some few Literal ones, the Principal whereof I
leave to be corrected by the Reader, in page 102, 106, 114, 115, 117, and 140.

MISCELANY DISCOURSES.
Of TRAGEDY.
IT is my Opinion, that the French excel in Works of the Theater; and I
believe, I should not flatter Corneille, if to many of his Tragedies I gave the
Pre-eminence over those of Antiquity. I know, the Ancient Tragic Poets have had
Admirers in all Ages; but I question whether this Loftiness, both of Place and
Wit, ascribed 'em by these Admirers, has any solid foundation.

To make us believe that Sophocles and Euripides are as admirable, as they tell
us, we must fancy many more things in their own Works, than what we can learn
from their Translators, and in my mind, the words and Language must claim a
considerable portion in their Beauty.

Through the Praises of their most Renowned, and most Partial Adorers,
(methinks) I see, and perceive, that Grandeur, Magnificence, and chiefly
Dignity, were things very little known by 'em: They were a parcel of Good Wits
cooped up in a narrow Family of a small Commonwealth, to whom a Necessitous
Liberty served instead of all manner of Things.

Put'em upon representing the Majesty of a great Monarch, they knew not
scarcely how to enter on such an unknown Grandeur: Their Senses were so used
and assubjected to base and mean Objects, that they could hardly avoid them.

It Is true, these Wits, distasting such Objects, sometimes heaved 'emselves up
to something wonderful and sublime: but then, they would be ever bringing so
many Gods and Goddesses into their Tragedies, that a man could meet with
nothing Mortal or Humane in 'em: What was Great, was Fabulous; what was
Natural, was Poor and crawling.

In Corneille, Height and Grandeur is known by it self: The Figures, he uses,
are handsome, when he has a mind to trim it with some Ornament; but generally,
he neglects those extravagant Sallies, and goes not of hunting in the Heavens
for something to set off that which is already considerable enough on Earth: He
thinks it sufficient to make a right entrance into things; and the full and
just Image, he gives us, of them, makes that true Impression, which Men of good
sense love to receive.

In effect, most admirable every where is Nature: And when Men have recourse to
that strange and borrowed Splendour, wherewith they think to embellish Objects,
it is frequently a tacit Confession, that they do not know their Propriety and
true Nature. Hence proceed the greatest part of Our Figures and Comparisons,
which I cannot approve of, unless they come very seldom, unless they be
altogether noble, and altogether just: Otherwise, by this subtle dexterity,
they seek a diversion, to turn a Man's thoughts away from the things, which
themselves do not understand. Yet whatever Beauty simile's may have, they
agree much better with an Epic Poem than a Tragedy. In an Epic Poem the mind
seeks its Divertisement out of the main Subject; but, in a Tragedy, the Soul
being full of thought, and crowded with Passion, does not easily move at the
mere glittering of a Similitude.

To return to those Ancients, from whom our Discourse has insensibly strayed,
and that we may do 'em Justice, we must confess, that they have succeeded much
better in expressing the Qualities of their Heroes, than in describing the
Magnificence of great Kings. A confused Idea, of the Glories of Babylon, did
rather spoil than exalt their Imagination: But their Wit could not commit any
mistake as to Strength, Constancy, Justice and Wisdom, whereof they had
evermore Examples before their Eyes. Their sense being disengaged from Pride,
in a mean sort of Com^on-wealth, left their Reason more free to consider Men by
themselves.

Thus nothing diverted them from studying Humane Nature, from applying their
minds to the Knowledge of Vices and Virtues, of Genius's and inclinations. By
this means, they learnt to frame their Charact^rs so well, that a man cannot
wish 'em to be more just according to the age, wherein they lived. Tho we may
be satisfied with knowing persons by their Actions, yet Corneille did believe,
it was not enough to make them Act, he went to the very bottom of their Souls,
to find out the Principle of their actions, he descended into their hearts, to
see the passions formed, and to discover what was most hidden in their Motions.

As for the ancient Tragique Poets, either they neglect the passions, to keep
closer to the exact representation of Passages, or else they bring in grave
Talkers, even in the midst of pinches and perturbations, and will tell you
starched Sentences, when you are to expect Despair and Trouble.

Corn^ille robs us of nothing of what passes, but brings every Action into view
as far as decency permits: Yet still, to his Thought, he gives all the extent
it requires, conducting Nature without perplexing or abandoning it too much to
it self.

What ever was barbarous, he has pruned off from the Ancient Th^atre: He has
mollifi'd the horror of its scene, by certain tendernesses of Love judiciously
distributed: But he has taken no less care, to keep up our fei^ and our ^ioy in
his Tragical Subjects, not diverting the Soul from those true Passions, which
it should feel, to those little troublesome Sighs which, though varied a hundred
times, never cease being always the same.

What Praises soever I give this Excellent Author, I do not say, that his
pieces are the only, that deserve applause upon the French Theater. The French
have been taken with Alc^one, Sophonisba, Mariamne, Stilicon, Andromache,
Britannicu^, and many others, whose goodness I do not pretend to disparage, by
not naming them.

I avoid, as much as possible, being distastful; and I shall think it
sufficient to say, that never any Nation could dispute with [ours] the
advantage of excelling in Tragedies.

As to those of the Italians, they are hardly worth mentioning; to name 'em
only is enough to clog a Man: Their Feast of Peter would kill the patientest
Soul upon Earth, it is so tiresom; and never did I see it, but I wished the
Author of that Piece Thunder-stricken with his Atheist.

There are four or five English Tragedies where, in good truth, many things
ought to be retrenched; and with this Curtailing they would be rendered
altogether exact and complete.

In all the rest you can see nothing but matter without form and disgestion, an
heap of confused events: And without consideration of places or times, without
any regard to decency; their cruel Eyes delight to see Blood and Wounds and
most direful Murders.

Of these things to take away the horror, by Recitals and by telling Stories,
as is used in France, this is to rob the People of the sight of what affects
'em most.

Men of sense do disallow of this Custom, established perchance on no very civil
and humane sense in the Minds of Men: but it is an Ancient Habit and way,
wherein the Nations Taste in general takes place over the delicacy of particular
Persons.

To die is so trivial a thing among the English, that to move them there is
need of Ideas and Images more dreadful than death it self: Upon which account
the French do reproach 'em for allowing too much to their se^ses in the
Theater. On the other hand the French must take that twitting very kindly from
them, in that they pass into the other extremity, when they admire such
Tragedies, as have little fine softnesses, which make no very strong Impression
upon the mind. Sometimes their Hearts, being very ill satisfied with a
tenderness, which has been ill-formed, they seek for a further emotion in the
acting of the Players. Sometimes they will have the Actor be more transported
than the Poet, and lend some fury and despair to a mean agitation and too
common a grief.

In a word, that which ought to be tender, is only sweet; what is to Create
pity, only causes tend^rness: A mere emotion serves instead of a seizure, and
Astonishment of Horror.

Something, that is profound and searching, is wanting to our Sentiments: And
the Passion, being touched b^t by halves, excites only imperfect motions in our
Souls, which do neither leave them in their proper seat, nor yet raise 'em up
^^ove themselves*

Of COMEDY.
AS to Comedy, which ought to represent Life in ordinary and common
Conversation, the French have altogether wheeled it upon Galantry in imitation
of the Spaniards, not considering, that the Ancients made it their whole
bu^ness to represent Humane Life according to the diversity of Humors; and that
the Spaniards, to follow their own proper bent and Genius, have only described
and painted out the Life, that is lead at Madrid in their Intrigues and
Adventures.

I confess this sort of work, among the Ancients, might have had a much more
Noble Air, and more Gallant: But this was rather the fault of those Ages than
the fault of those Authors. Nowadays the greater part of our Poets are as
little acquainted with the manners, as they in those times knew what Galantry
was. You would swear, there are no more Covetous Rogues now living, no more
spend-thrifts, no more good natured Men, of an humor fit for Society, no more
People naturally peevish, gloomy; and austere; as if Madam Nature was changed,
and Men had worn out these several Impressions. Now under the very same
Character they are all represented, whereof I know no reason, unless it be
this, that the Women in our days have found it very seasonable, that there
ought to be no Creatures but Galants in the World.

I must acknowledge, that the Madrid-Wits are much more fruitful in Invention
than the French Sparks: For which reason, the Latter have fetched thence the
greatest part of their Subjects, which they have crowded with amorous or tender
Discourses, and wherein they have put more Regularity and likelihood. The
cause is, for that in Spain, where the women are seldom or never seen, the
Poet's imagination is spent in ingenious ways to bring the Lovers together
into the same place; whereas in France, where a free liberty of Commerce is
settled, the Author's greatest delicacy is employed in the tender and lovely
expressions of Thoughts.

It Is not long since [let me see] a Lady of Quality, in Spain, read the Romance
of Cleopatra: And happening, after a long narration of Adventures, to fall upon
a very curious and nice conversation, betwixt a Lover and his Mistress, that
had an equal passion one for the other: God bless me, says she! What a World
of wit is here ill impl^y'd? What signify all these fine discourses, when they
are got both together? The pleasantest R^flexion was this, that ever I heard in
all my Life: And Calprenet, tho a Frenchman, ought to have remembered, that,
to Lovers born under a Sun much hotter then that of Spain, Words were very
useless on such occasions: But this Ladies good sense would never be received
in the Ordinary Galantries among the French, where a man may speak a thousand
times of a passion, before he can be once believed, and be whole years making
complaints, before he can meet with the happy minute of putting a period to his
torment.

Moliere's Coy Lady is made a ridiculous Character in the thing it self, as
well as in the Terms, to be loath to take the Roman by the tail, when he is
about treating the serious affair of Marriage with her Parents: But it had not
been a false delicacy with a Galant, to expect his Declaration, and whatever
comes by degrees, in a procedure of Galantry.

As for Regularity and Verisimilitude, it is no wonder, we meet with 'em less
among the Spaniards, than among the French: As all the Spanish Galantry came
from the Moors, there still remains in it some relish of Africa, unknown to
other nations, and too extraordinary to be accommodated to the exactness of
Rules.

To this add, that an old impression of Knight-erran^ry, which has the
ascendant over all Spain, does bias the minds of the Cavaliers to mighty silly
adventures. The Young Ladies, on their parts, in their very childhood, draw in
this Air from the books of Chivalry, and the fabulous prittle-prattle of the
old women about them. So that with the same Ideas do both the Sexes fill their
minds: And generally, the Men and Women look upon the scruple of an amorous
extravagance as a pitiful coldness, unworthy of their passion.

Though Love, in no Country whatever, takes very good and ac^urate measures,
yet still this I will say, that it has nothing very extravagant in France,
either in the manner of it is making, or in the ordinary events, which it
produces. That, which is called a true passion, has much ado to preserve it
self from being Laughed at: For the People of Quality, being engaged in several
cares and employs, never devote their thoughts to it, as the Spaniards do
amidst the In the French Inutilite, which I render in Virgil's Language,
Ignobile Otium. Georg. lib. 4.
inglorious ease of Madrid, where no motion is but what proceeds from Love.

At Paris, the continual hurry of the Court ties men up to the Function of a
charge, or else the design of an employment keeps them awake, fortune
prevailing over the Mistress in a place, where the Custom is for a man to
prefer what is his interest before what he Loves: And the Ladies, who are to
regulate 'emselves accordingly, have more Galantry than passion, and besides do
make use of their Galantry to dive into Intrigues.

Very few are there but are swayed by vanity and interest and so the concerns
jogg on the better of both sides, they interchangeably make use of one of the
other, they of their Galants, and their Galants of them, to get their own ends.

Love never fails of intruding into the Company of this Interest, but he seldom
becomes it is Head or Master. For the conduct, which Men are obliged to keep in
their Affairs, does adapt and fashion 'em to some regularity in their
Pleasures, or at least distances them from any Extravagant Actions.

In Spain to Live, is to Love: What they call Love in France, is only ^o talk
of Love [in propriety of speaking] and to mix vain Galantries with the
sentiments of Ambition.

These differences being considered, no Man can think it strange, that the
Spanish Comedy, which is nothing else but the representation of their
Adventures, should have as little regularity as the Adventures themselves; nor
any more can he admire, that the Comedy among the French, which does not stray
from their Usages, should keep up those Respects in the representation of their
Amors, as they commonly keep in the Amors themselves. I confess, good sense,
which ought to be a Native of all Countries in the World, does establish
certain things, which in no part can be withal dispensed. Yet it is an hard
matter, of my word, not to allow much to Custom; since Aristotle himself, in
his Art of Poetry, sometimes places Perfection in what was believed and thought
better at Athens, and not in what was really the most perfect.

Comedy has no more Privilege then the Laws, which ought all to be founded
upon Justice, yet nevertheless have particular discriminations according to the
different Genius of the People, that make them. And if a Man be obliged to
preserve the Air of Antiquity, if he is to keep up the Character of Hero's,
that are dead two thousand years since, when he represents 'em upon the Stage,
how can he not follow the humors, and fit himself to the manners of those now
alive, when he represents to their Eyes that which they do every day themselves?

Yet what Authority soever Custom is pleased to assume, yet undoubtedly reason
holds the Primary Rights; but its exactness ought not to be harsh and rigid.
For, in things designed purely for Pleasure, as Comedy is, it is unkind and
troublesome to enslav^ a Man to an aus^ere order, and to begin with the Rack in
Subjects, where we only seek for diversion.

Of the Italian COMEDY.
YOu have heard what I had to say of the French and the Spanish Comedy: I shall
now tell you my Thoughts of the Italian. I shall not speak of Amyntas, Pastor
Fido, Phillis, Cyrus, and other Comedies of the like Nature. A Man must
understand the graces of the Italian Tongue a great deal better than I do: for,
tho I am charmed with Amyntas perhaps more than any Italian, it is because I
make a thorough passage into the Poets mind, and apprehend the things more
sharply than the Verses. On the other hand, in this discourse I design to speak
of Comedy, as it is ordinarily seen upon the Stage. That which is shown up and
down in France, of the Italian Theater, is not properly Comedy, since it has no
true Platform; the subject has no ligament to tie the parts together; nothing
of Character is well kept, nor of Composition, whereby an happy wit is well
guided, at least according to some rules of art: But it is only a kind of
ill-manag'd consort among many Actors, where every body supplies and provides
of himself, what he judges fit for his proper Person: It Is (in short and to
speak my mind) a medly and heap of impertinent Tuneable Words in the mouths of
Inamorato's, and cursedly foolish Buffooneries in those of Zanis.

You can see nothing of true Judgment any where, but false wit, which reigns
either in very heavenly-minded thoughts, as Suns, Stars and Elements, or in an
affectation of Nativeness and plain-dealing, that has nothing of true nature.

I confess the Buffoons are inimitable: and among the hundreds of Imitators or
Posturers [if I may use such a word] that I have seen, there has not one come
near resembling them in their Grimaces, their motions, their agility, their
Fea^s of Activity, their disposition to change their Faces as they please. I
know not whether the Mimi and Pantomimi among the Ancients had any great
Advantage over them, tho we read very wondrous things of 'em. It Is certain a
Man must love such waggish jesting and unhappy Meriment to be really affected
with what he hears. He must also be of a very grave and composed humor, not to
laugh at what he sees: And 'twould be atoo-too-much affected moroseness, not to
be pleased at their Acting, tho a Man of a delicate Ear would not take any
pleasure in their discourse.

All representations, wherein Wit bears no share, are troublesome at the
long-run, but yet they fail not to surprise and be agreeable sometime before
they grow troublesome, as Buffoons divert a Man of sense only by whiles and
interims. The Art is to put a stop to it in due time, and not allow the mind
space to return to the justness of thinking and discourse, and to the Idea of
un-hypocritical Nature. This Oeconomony, as it is desiderated, so is to be
desired and wished for in the Italian Comedy: For the first distaste is followed
by a new trouble much more wearisom; and the Variety instead of refreshing you,
brings only a new sort of Drooping.

In few words, when you have been most unmercifully tired with the Buffoons,
that have staid too long on the Stage, to complete your ruin the Amorous
hot-spurs appear: This, in my opinion, is the last and ut^ost Punishment that
can be inflicted on a judging Person; and a Man would have greater reason to
prefer ready and immediate death to the patience of hearing them out, than
Bocaliny's Lacedemonian had, when he preferred the Gibbet before that long and
tedious Reading the War of Pisa, in Guicciardin's History. If some one, that is
overfond of Life can weather-out so mortal a Lassitude, instead of recovering
himself by some pleasurable diversion, he finds no change, but presently meets
with another dreadful business, which makes him despair, and think of nothing
but a State of Separation, and that is the Doctor. To describe well the folly
of a Doctor, I know, it must be done in such sort, that he turn all his
discourse and Conversation upon the science, wherewith he is possessed [even in
the worst sense of the word;] and that he never answer to what is said to him,
but quote a Thousand Authors, and allege a Thousand Passages with such a
nimbleness of Tongue, as shall put him out of breath: This is to introduce a
fool on the Stage, that ought to be chained up in Bethlehem, and not rightly to
manage the Impertinence of a Doctor.

Petronius has taken quite another way in his ridiculing Eumolphus. The
Pedantry of Sidias is otherwise handled by Theophil, to whom the Praise is due
of knowing how to form the most Accomplished character, that is bestowed upon
this sort of Pedants. That of Charitides in Moliere's Facbeux is altogether
just: Nothing, can be taken from it without disfiguring the Picture. And these
are the Learnedly-ridiculous Creatures, whose representation would please the
Pic.

But it is a bad divertisement to a Man of sense, this, to bring him a Wretched
Doctor, whom Books have made a fool, and who ought very carefully to be locked
up (as I said) lest the World should see the weak and mean estate of Man's
Condition, and the Misery of humane nature.

Now, that I may not stretch too far my Observations on the Italian Comedy, and
to sum up all, I have displayed, in a few words; I say that, instead of
agreeable Lovers, you have only affected discoursers about Love; instead of
natural Comedians, incomparable Buffoons, but always Buffoons; and instead of
ridiculous Doctors, poor little Insensate Schoolmasters. Not one Person is
there, but is clearly over-do^^; that of Pantalon only excepted, who is the
least taken notice of in the Play, and yet the only thing, that does not out go
the veri-simile.

Tragedy was the first pleasure of the Ancient Republic; and the old Romans,
being Masters only of a severe and stern Virtue, went to the Theater with no
other design than to fortify their natural courage, and to acquire and
entertain rugged and austere Habitudes of Mind. When they began to add a
sweetness of Wit in Conversation to a force and Vigor of Soul in great things;
they also took a delight in Comedy, and sometimes would have strong Ideas set
before their Eyes, and sometimes divert 'emselves in pleasing Impressions.

As soon as Rome came to be corrupted, the Romans quitted Tragedy, and could
not endure to behold any Image of the Ancient Virtue, [or Valor, for Virtue
signifies nothing else,] on the Stage.

From those days to the last of the Commonwealth, Comedy was the Recreation of
Great Men, the divertisement of Polite Persons, and the amusement of a People
either Remiss or Soft'ned.

A little before the Civil War, the Spirit of Tragedy began to animate the
Romans, by a secret disposition of a Genius, that prepared 'em for the dreadful
Revolutions happening afterward. Caesar wrote one, and many Persons of Quality
wrote some likewise: But the disorders being calmed under Augustus, and Peace
and tranquillity Re-established, Pleasure was the only thing, they hunted after.

Then came Comedies into Play again, the Pantomimes were Men in vogue and
credit; and Tragedy made a shift to keep up her Reputation. Under Nero's Reign,
Seneca imbibed fatal Ideas, which made him compose the Tragedies that he has
left us: And when corruption was in full Sway, and Vice general and A-la-mode,
the Pantomimes did utterly destroy both Tragedy and Comedy. No longer now had
Wit any part in the Stage-representations, and only the sight did seek, in
Postures and motions, that which might imprint Voluptuous Phantasms on the Soul
of the Spectators.

At this day the Italians bless 'emselves for being shone upon by the same Sun,
for breathing the same Air, and inhabiting the same good Land, that the old
Romans dwelt in heretofore: But they have even very wisely left that wicked
rigid Virtue of those Romans to their Histories, and have believed, that they (
good Men) have no need of Tragedy, to encourage them to those difficult things,
which they have no mind to do. As they love the indulgent comforts of an
ordinary and un-fighting life, and the pleasures of a Voluptuous one, they
desire to form such representations, as agree both with the one and the other:
And this was the Origin of the mixture of Comedy and the Pantomimick Art
together, which we see in the Italian Theater.

All the Actors, that play now, are generally very excellent, even those that
play an amorous part: And not to do them an injury, any more than show them any
favor, I will say, they are very good Astors, but have very bad Comedies; and
perhaps they could make good ones, and perhaps they have reason not to make
such. And one day telling Cintsio, in a slurring way, that there was not
Veri-similitude enough in their Pieces, he answered me, that, if there were
more, I should soon see my good Comedians dye of Famine with their good
Comedies.

Of the English COMEDY.
THere is no Comedy more conormable to that of the Ancients, than the English,
in what respects the manners. It is not pure and sincere Galantry full of
Adventures and amorous discourses, as in Spain and France; but the
representation of humane life in common, according to the diversity of Humors,
and several Characters of Men. It Is an Alchimist who, by the illusions of his
Art, entertains the deceitful hopes of a vain curioso: It Is a simple and
Credulous Person, whose foolish easiness is eternally abused: It Is sometimes a
ridiculous Politician, Grave, starcht, and composed; who plucks up his
Shoulders, and pinks with his Eyes at every thing, being most mysteriously
suspicious; and who fancies he can find designs hidden in the most common
Intentions, and thinks to discover Artifice in the most innocent actions of
Life: It Is a foolish Lover, a false Bravo, an unthinking great Clerk, the one
with his natural Extravagancies, and the other with his ridiculous
Affectations. Indeed these Cheats, these simpletons, this Politician, with the
other Characters, being ingeniously formed, are carried on too far according to
Frenchmen's Opinions, as those of the French Theater lie somewhat heavy on the
Stomach of an Englishman. And the reason hereof is, perhaps, that the English
think too much, and most commonly the French think not enough.

In effect, the French content 'emselves with the first Images received from
Objects: And to stop them at the mere Outsides of things, an appearance almost
always serves instead of truth; and what is easy, for that which is natural.
And here I shall say, upon the by, that these two last Qualities are sometimes
confounded together very ill to the purpose. What is easy, and what is natural,
agree sufficiently in their opposition to what is hard or forced: But when the
French go about to dive into the nature of things, or the natural disposition
of Persons, every Man will confess, that they do not always easily attain their
end: There is some Internal thing, something hidden, which they would discover,
if they would plumb matters a little deeper. In as much difficult as it is for
the French to enter things, so much h^rd a business do the English find it to
get out: They never leave off thinking, till they become Masters of the thing
on which they think; and when they comprehend their subject, they dig still,
where nothing is to be found, and surpass the just and natural Idea, which they
ought to have, by an over-profound inquiry.

To speak the truth, I never met with people of better understanding than the
French, who give attention to consider, and the English, that can break off,
from their too great Meditations, to return to an easiness of discourse and a
certain Liberty of Mind, which we ought always, if it be possible, to enjoy.
Men of the best sense in the World are the French that think, and the English
that speak. I am insensibly casting my self into too general considerations,
and therefore shall resume my subject concerning Comedy again, and pass to a
considerable distinction and difference betwixt the English and French sock:
And that is, that the French, being tied up to the regularity of the Ancients,
refer all to one principal action, without any other diversity, than that of
the means, whereby they think to bring it about.

We are all to agree in this point, that one principal event ought to be the
only scope and end of the Representation in a Tragedy, wherein the mind would
suffer some violence in such divertings, as would turn its thoughts aside.

The misfortunes of a miserable King, the fatal and tragical death of a great
Hero, hold the Soul strongly chained up to these important Objects; and
instead of all the variety in the World it is satisfied with knowing the
different means that lead to this principal action. But Comedy, being made to
divert us, and not wholly to seize us, provided that likelihood be kept and
Extravagance avoided, in the opinion of the English, the diversities are
pleasing surprises and agreeable Alterations; whereas the continual expectation
of the same thing, wherein nothing of importance can be conceived, must
necessarily create a faintness in our attention.

So that, instead of representing an eminent and signal Imposture carried on by
means that refer all to the same end, they represent a Famous Cheat with his
hundred several tricks, every one of which produces its particular effect
according to its proper Constitution. As they almost always renounce Unity of
Action to represent a principal Person, who diverts 'em with different Actions;
so they likewise forsake this Principal Person, to let you take a prospect
diverse ways of what happens in public places to many Persons: Ben. Johnson
has taken this course in his Bartholomew Fair: The same thing we see in Epsoam
Wells: And in both Comedies are comically represented the ridiculous passages
in both those places.

There are other Pieces, where (as it were) a couple of Subjects do so
ingeniously commix one with the other, as that the mind of the audience (which
might be wounded by an over-sensible change) finds nothing but pleasure in that
diverting Variety, which they produce. We must confess, that this is not
according to Law and Rule: But the English are persuaded, that the Liberties,
which are allowed for the greater Pleasure, ought to be preferred before such
exact Rules, as every barren and sleepy Author can make an Art of plaguing
others withal.

To avoid confusion, we ought to observe Rules and directions, and to follow
true judgment and good sense, which may allay the heat of an inflamed
imagination: Yet we are to undress those Rules of all tormenting constraint,
and to banish a scrupulous reason, which thorough too close embracing of
justness, leaves nothing free and natural behind it.

Those whom Nature has sent into the World without a Genius, being never able
to give it to 'emselves, allow all to Art which they can acquire: and, that
their servile observation of regularity may not go without its due merit, they
never forget to decry a work, which is not perfect cap^^pe. As for those that
love ridiculing; that take a pleasure in spying the blind sides of the black
Eyes of the Town; that are delighted with true Characters; they will find the
English Comedies excellent and right for their taste and purpose, as far, and
(it may be) more than any they have ever seen.

The French Moliere, into whom the Ancients inspired the true Spirit of Comedy,
equals their Ben. Johnson in admirably representing the several humors and
different manners of Men, both of them in their respective paintings, keeping a
just regard to the genius of their Nation. I should believe that, in this
point, they were as much out, as the Ancients: But we cannot deny, but that
they had more regard to the Characters than the main subjects, whose successive
Inferences also might have been better tied together, and the laying 'em out
naked much more natural.

Of OPERA'S, Written to his Grace The Duke of Buckingham.
It Is a long time, MY LORD, since I have had a desire to tell you my Opinion
concerning Opera's, and to write to you about the difference, which I find
betwixt the manner of singing among the Italians, and that among the French.

The cccasion, that I had to speak of it, in company with Madam the Duchess of
Mazarine, has rather increased than satisfied that desire: Which I now do at
length satisfy, in this Discourse, which I here send you, My Lord.

I will begin with great Freedom, and tell you, that I do not much admire
Comedies in Music, such as we see 'em at present. I confess, their
Magnificence abundantly pleases me, and the Machines carry a great deal of
surprise; the Music at certain times is very moving, and the whole thing taken
together appears almost Miraculous: But we must likewise confess, that these
Miracles and wonders are very troublesome; because where the mind has so little
to do, there is an unavoidable necessity, that the senses will fall a
languishing. After the first pleasure of the surprise, the Eyes are busily
employ^d, and afterward are continually fixed upon some objects. At the
beginning of the consorts, the Justness of Accords is observed, and there
escapes nothing of all the diversities, which concurs not to make up the
sweetness of Harmony: But sometime after, the Instruments deafen us, and the
Music is nothing to our ears but a confused Noise, where naught can be
distinguished: Now, who can resist the tediousness of a Recitative in a
modulation, which has neither the charm of a Singing, nor the pleasant force of
Speech? The Soul, being wearied out with long Attention, where it can find
nothing to think on, looks after some secret motion in it self, that may affect
it: The mind, that is vainly urged upon by impressions from without; lets it
self fly at Rovers, or else is dissatisfied with its own Impertinence: In
brief, the Tiresomeness is so great, that a man dreams of nothing but going
out, and the only pleasure, remaining to the drooping Spectators, is the hopes
to see the show done very soon. The ordinary drousiness, whereinto I fall at an
Opera, proceeds hence, That I never saw one, but it appeared very contemptible
to me, or in the disposal of the subject, or in the verses. Now it is in vain,
that flattered is the Ear, or the Eyes are charmed, unless the mind be
satisfied. My Soul being of Intelligence with my mind, rather than with my
senses, shapes in it self an opposition to the Impressions, which it may
receive; Or at least, it fails to lend a willing and agreeable Consent, without
which even the most voluptuous object cannot afford any great pleasure. A
Foppery beset with Music, Dances, Machines and Scenes, is a magnificent
Foppery, yet still its a Foppery: Its a pitiful mean thing under glorious
outsides, which I look into with much unwillingness. There is another thing in
Operas so much against nature, that my Imagination is offended with it, and
that is to make the whole Stage do nothing but sing from the beginning to the
end; as if the Persons represented, were bound most ridiculously, in Music to
treat of both the most common and most important affairs of their Lives. Can
any Man fancy, that a Master should call his Servant, or give him orders for
such or such things, while he is singing? that one Friend should declare a
secret to another in a Song? that Men should deliberate in a Privy Council
Singing? or, that they should melodiously kill one another in a Duel? This
destroys the Wit of the Representation which, questionless, is Preferable to
that of the Harmony; since Harmony ought only to be a mere attendant, and the
great Masters of the Theater have added it as a pleasant, but not as a
necessary thing, after all has been rightly ordered, which regards the subject
and discourse. However in Opera's the Idea of the Musician goes far beyond that
of the Hero: It Is Lovigi, Cavallo, and Cesti, that present themselves to our
imagination. The mind, being unable to conceive an Hero in a Songster, is
wholly affixt on him that sings; and no body can deny, but that at the
representation of the Palais Royal, [we] dream an hundred times on Baptist to
once on Theseus or Cadmus. Yet nevertheless, I do not pretend to exclude all
sort of Singing on the Stage. There are such things as ought to be sung, and
may be, without any offense to decency or reason: Vows, Prayers, and Praises,
and generally every thing, relating to the service of the Gods, have been sung
in all Nations and at all times. Tender and dolorous Passions are naturally
expressed in a sort of singing: The utterance of an amor just in its birth,
the irresolution of a Soul, tossed and tumbled with several motions, are fit
matter for Stanza's, and Stanza's will do well enough for a Song. Every one
knows, that Choirs were brought upon the Athenian Stage; and we must confess,
that they may, with as much reason, be introduced upon ours. So that this is
the distinction, which I make, whatever belongs to conversation and conference,
whatever concerns Intrig^es and affairs, whatever appertains to Counsel or
Action, is proper to be recited by Comedians, and ridiculous in the mouth of a
Musician. The Greeks made excellent Tragedies, wherein some part was sung: But
the Italians and French make wretched ones, where they sing all. If you would
know what an Opera is, it is nothing else but a fantastical piece of Drudgery
mrde up of Poetry and Music; where the Poet and Musician being equally rackt
one by the other, do take a great deal of pains to make a dull piece of Work.
Not but that you may find very pleasant words, and very good Airs: But most
assuredly you will at last be disgusted at the Verses, in which the Poets
Genius has been mightily strained and confined, and the Musicians and Singers
quite exhausted and spent by so tedious a labor. If I were fit to give advice
to our Men of sense, that take much delight in the Stage, I should direct them,
to resume our best Comedies into their hands, where Dances and Music might be
introduced, that would not spoil the Play. The Prologue might be sung with very
pleasant Attendances: In the Chorus's a Song would animate such words as might
seem to be the very Soul of what is Acted. And then, the Epilogue might be
sung, or some Reflection on the greatest Beauties in the Play: The Idea and
shadow might be enhanced and strengthened, and the Impression more cleverly
and lastingly made on the Spectators minds. It Is thus we may find satisfaction
for the mind and senses, while we cannot any more desire the charm of Singing
in a pure Representation, nor the Vigor of a Representative in the drowsiness
of continual Music. It remains still behind, that I should give some
directions for all those Comedies, wherein Singing is put: which is to leave
the main Authority to the Poet for the management of the Piece: The Music
should be made rather for the Verse, than the Verse for the Music; it belongs
to the Musician to follow the Poets Order; from which course only Baptist, in
my Opinion, ought to be exempt, for his understanding the Passions better and
sinking farther into Men's Hearts than the Authors themselves. Lambert,
undoubtedly, has an excellent Genius, fit for an hundred several sorts of
Music, and all are well managed with a Righteous Economy of Voices, and
Instruments; there is no Recitati^e better extended nor better varied than his:
But as to the nature of the Passions, and the quality of Sentiments to be
expressed, he ought to receive that light from the Authors, which Baptist is able
to give them himself, and not to refuse direction, tho Baptist through the vast
comprehensiveness of his knowledge may very fitly be the director. To my
discourse I will not put an end without entertaining you with that small
esteem, the Italians have for our Operas, and the great dislike we bear to
those of Italy. The Italians being altogether employed about the
representation, and particular care of expressing things, cannot endure the
French should call an Opera a concatenation of Dances and Music, which have
no just Affinity, nor natural correspondence with the subject. The French being
accustomed to the Beauty of their Scene-openings, the pleasantness of their
Airs, and the charm of their symphonies, do with much passive valor bear with
the ignorant brutishness or wicked use of Instruments in the Venetian Operas,
and refuse Attention to a long Recitative, that becomes troublesome by the
little Variety, we meet with in it. I can not tell you properly what is their
Recitative: It is something unknown to the Ancients, which we may define a bad
use of Song and Speech. I confess, I have found inimitable things in Lovigi's
Opera's both in the expression of thoughts and the charm of Music: But the
ordinary Recitative was extreme tiresom, insomuch as the Italians did even
impatiently expect those quaint Passages, that came very rarely in their
Opinion. The greatest defects in the French Operas, I will comprise in few
words: They think to come to a representation, where they will find nothing
represented; they go to see a Comedy, where no Spirit or shade of a Comedy is
to be seen. This is what I had to say concerning the different constitution of
Opera's. As to the manner of Singing, called in France, Execution, I believe
without partiality, that no Nation can reasonably dispute with it. The Spaniard
is admirably well disposed in his Windpipe, bu^ with his quaverings and
rowlings, he seems to aim at nothing else than to triumph over the easy Throat
of the Nightingale. The Italian he has a false expression (or at least it is
overdone) not knowing exactly the nature or degree of the Passions: He breaks
out into laughter rather than Sings, when he wou^d express some sentiment of
Joy: If he would sigh, you hear such sobs as are violently formed in the
Throat, and not such sighs as secretly escape from the Passion of an amorous
Heart: At a dolorous Reflection, you hear the Lowdest Exclamations; Tears of
absence become Funeral-wailings; and the Melancholy Man becomes so sorrowful
in their Mouths, that they send forth cries instead of complaints in grief; and
sometimes they express a languishment of Passion by a swoon of nature. Perhaps
the Italians have now made some alteration in their way of Singing, and
bettered 'emselves by a commerce with the French as to the neatness of a Polite
Execution, as the latter have drawn advantage from them in the Beauties of a
greater and more bold composition. I have seen Comedies in England, where there
has been rouch Music: But to speak of 'em with dscretion, is impossible for
me, since I could not fashion my self to the English Singing. Too late I came
to take a Relish so different from any other. There is no Nation, where appears
more courage in the Men, or more Beauty in the Women, or more wit in either
Sex. We cannot have every thing, where so many goood qualities are so common:
it is not so great an evil, that the true taste should be so rare; and certain it
is, we meet with it very seldom there. But those Persons, in whom we find it,
have it as nice and delicate as any people in the World, escaping the common
Misfortune of their own Nation by an exquisite Air and most happy natural
parts. Solus Gallus cant at, only the Mounsieur Sings: I would not be injurious
to all other Nations by maintaining what an Author has been pleased to promote:
Hispanus f^et, dolet Italus, Germanus boat, Flander ululat, and Solus Gallus
cantat: To him I leave all these cunning distinctions, and think it enough to
found my Opinion on the authority of Louigi, who could never endure the
Italians should sing Airs, after he had heard 'em sing at M. Nyert, Hilaire,
and la petite Var^nne. At his return into Italy, he made all the Musicians, of
that Nation, his Enemies, by saying openly at Rome, as he had done at Paris,
tha^, to make the Music pleasant, the Italian Airs should be put into
French-mens Mouths: He made very little account of French Songs, excepting
Beausset's, which he loved particularly. He admired the concert of [our]
Violins; he admired our Lutes, our Claricords, and Organs: He was ravished to
hear, the first time, the great Bells of St. Germain des Prez: And what charm
might not he have found in our Flutes, if they had been in use at that time?
This is certain, he was mightily disheartened and dissatisfied with the rudeness
and harshness of the greatest Masters of Italy, when he had tasted the tender
way of moveing, and the neatness and manner of the French. I should be too
partial, if I spoke only of [our] Excellencies: There is no People, that have a
more slow apprehension both as to the sound of the words and the mind of the
Compositor as the French: Very few there are, that understand the quantity
less, and with more trouble find out the Pronunciation: but after long studying
has made 'em overco^e all those difficulties, and they come once to comprehend
what they sing, nothing comes near them. The same thing befalls 'em in
Instruments and particularly in consorts, where nothing is very sure or just
but after infinite Repetitions; yet nothing so neat and handsome, when the
Repetitions are done. The Italians go deep into Music, and bring their
Science to our Ears without any sweetness. The French are not satisfied with
taking away from the Science the first roughness, which smells of labor in
Composition: But also in the secret of Execution they find a charm for our
Souls, and something in it self so moving, that makes it is way to our Hearts. I
had forgot to talk with you concerning Machines; so easy is it, to forget such
things, as we would have retrenched. Machines may satisfy the curiosity of
Ingenious Men in Mathematical Inventions, but upon the Stage they can never
please Persons of true judgment. The more surprising they are, the more do they
divert the mind from its attention to discourse: And the more admirable they
appear, the i^pression of this admiration does leave the Soul the less
exquisite sense and tenderness, which it has need of to be affected or charmed
by the Music. The Ancients used Machines only upon necessit^ to fetch in some
deity or other, tho the Poets were almost always laughed at for letting
themselves be reduced to such a straight. If a Man has a mind to be at any
expense and charge, let him open his Purse-strings upon handsome Scenes, the use
of which is more natural and pleasant than that of Machines. Antiquity, that
exposed its Godheads to Poets, and even on hearths; this same Antiquity (I say)
as vain and credulous as it was, yet did very seldom expose them on the Stage.
After the destruction of their Creed, and Mortals trusting in 'em, the
Italians, in their Opera's, revived and settled, the Heathen Gods again in the
World, and feared not to possess Men with those ridiculous Vanities, provided
they gave a great Splendour to their pieces by the introducing that false and
dazzling kind of wonderment. These Theatre-divinities abused Italy a long time:
but at length being happily undeceived it renounced these Gods, whom it had
restored; and it returned to such things, as tho really they were not exactly
true, yet were less troublesome, and such as good sense with a little Indulgence
would not reject. In the case of Gods and Machines it has happened to the
French, what almost ever happens to the Almains in Gallican modes; the French
take up what the Italians leave: And as if [we] would repair the fault of
having been prevented in the Invention, we carry on the humor of a custom or
mode even to excess, which they had brought in for no good in the World, but
managed it with reserve and moderation. In effect, we cover the Earth all o'r
with God-ships; and make 'em dance, and descend in troops, whereas they made
'em come down with some sort of managment to the most important occasions. As
Ariosto outflew the most wonderful ^^blimities of Poetry by his incredible
Fables, we outdo all Fable by a confused Assembly of Gods, Shepherds, Heroes,
Enchanters, Phantomes, Furies, and Devils. I admire Baptist as well for his
ordering Dances, as for that which concerns Voices and Instruments: But the
constitution of our Opera's ought to appear very Extravagant to those that have
a true taste of Verisimilitude and things mavelous, yet a Man runs the hazard
of being cried down for his true taste, if he dares make it public: And I
advise others, when they hear any discourse about Opera's, to keep their own
thoughts secret to themselves. As for my self, who have now past the Age and
time of signalizing my self in the World, by the humor of modes and merit of
fancies, I am resolved to take the side of good sense [as much abandoned and
forlorn as it is] and to follow reason in all her disgraces with as much
Loyalty, as if she had now her first consideration. That which vexes me the
most for the giddiness of Pate, wherewith Men run after Operas, is, that they
will ruin the best thing we have, the most proper to elevate the Soul, and most
capable to form a true wit. So that we will conclude, after so long a
discourse, that the constitution of Operas can hardly be more defective than
they are.

The End.
EPICURUS HIS MORALS^
MOst Men, no doubt, find fault with Epicurus and reject his Doctrine, not only
as unworthy of a Philosopher, but as dangerous to a Citizen, imagining a Man
Vicious as soon as he is of the number of his Disciples. On all occasions, they
brand his Opinions, as opposite to good manners, and his name is blasted with
shame and Infamy Yet some Stoics, who were his greatest Enemies, have not used
him so roughly; their Eulogys accord not with the public Aspersions* they have
combated him, without outraging him; and the Books they have left us, still
speak, in several Passages, the great value, they had for him. From whence then
does this extreme difference proceed, And why are we no longer of the same
Opinion with the Sages? It Is very easy to give the reason; we do not act like
them, we make no enquiry, we do not sift matters, we adhere only to what is
told us, without instructing our selves in the nature of things; we account
those the best, which have most examples and approvers: And we do not follow
reason, but only its resemblance, we retain our errors, because they are
authorized by those of others: We love rather to believe than judge; and we are
so unjust, that we defend against reason, the spurious opinions that have come
down to us. Thus this infirmity is one of those, which has made Epicurus fall
under the public Aversion, and which has almost egged on all Men to strike him
out of the List of Philosophers: They have condemned him without knowing him,
and have banished him, without hearing him; they would not pry into the merits
of his cause, and seem to have been afraid of his making his own justification.
But in my opinion, the first and most reasonable pretense, that Men had to
slight his Doctrine, was the life of some Vicious Wretches, who having abused
the name of that Philosopher, corrupted the reputation of his Sect. These
People have given their Vices the inscription of his Wisdom: They have popt
their defects into the Bosom of his Philosophy; and flocked in vast multitudes
to places, where they understood Pleasure was commended. The mischief was, they
did not thoroughly apprehend that pleasure and those praises: They rested
satisfied with its name in general, and veiled and defended their Debaucheries,
and courted the Authority of a great Man to support the Lewdness of their own
lives, so as instead of profiting by the good Instructions of that Philosopher,
and in his School, correcting their own evil Inclinations, they have even lost
that, which could only be left'em, namly the shame of tripping. They are come
to that pass as to fall extolling Actions, whereat they blushed before; they
have gloried in the Vices, they concealed, and [in short] have followed without
any shame the pleasure they brought along with them, and not that which was
endeavored to be inculcated into them. In the mean while, the World had judged
upon appearances; and seeing that those persons, who st^l^d themselves
Philosophers, were extremely dissolute; that they made a public profession of
their failings, that they cited Epicurus to authorize their impurity, laziness,
and gluttony: This same World made no difficulty of pronouncing, that this
Philosophers Doctrine was most pernicious, and of comparing his Disciples to
the vilest Animals in nature:

Epicuri de grege Porcum.
PEople would deal very unreasonably with Epicurus, and his affairs would be in
a very ill pos^ure, if some had not been careful to put them to the Test, and
separated 'emselves from that multitude, which has ever been an Enemy to all
Wise Men and Sur [opinion d'autruy.
upon an alien opinion condemned Socrates, tho approved of by the Gods. Thus
they have met with some, who have taken Information of that Wise-mans Life, and
without dwelling upon the belief of the vulgar, or the face of things, have
penetrated farther and in the result of their research, given Testimonies of
his Probity, and the Sanctity of his Doctrine.

After due knowledge, they Proclaimed his pleasure, as severe as the Stoics
virtue; that tho its title was delicate, its precepts were difficult, and to be
debauched like Epicurus, a Man must be as sober as Zeno. And certainly its
incredible, that a Person whose Country erected him several Statues; whose
Friends swayed the Citys of Greece; who loved the Worship of the Gods and his
Countries good; who had piety toward his Parents, Liberality toward his
^rethren, and gentleness for his Slaves; whose modesty kept him from tampering
in the State, and Temperance made him commonly only live on Bread and Water;
its incredible (I say) that this Man should write the Precepts of Lewdness, or
teach his Disciples the practice of the vices he naturally abhorred. On the
contrary, as if this excellent Personage had apprehended, that the title he
bestowed upon his Discipline, might foster the naughty inclinations of several,
and that Men might fall to caluminate his pleasure: As if he had foreseen the
unjust Hatred of following Ages, and the Lewd Life of those who should abuse
his Doctrine, he took care himself to make its Apology; he explained its Comme
elle et^it sobre et Si^ne.
great Thirst and sobriety, and banished from the Garden, where he
Philosophized with his Friends, those, who abusing the name of pleasure were
its corrupters, and who considered their own vices as the sovereign good of Man
and tranquillity of Life. By no means will I that in this you pin your Faith
upon my Sleeve; I will make him speak in his own person, and I Will show you one
of his Letters. Thus he Writes to Menecans.

Notwithstanding we say (these are his words) that pleasure is the end of Man,
we do not mean vile and infamous pleasure, such as proceeds from the Taste and
Gluttony: this unlucky opinion is of persons that are ignorant of or oppose our
precepts and separate themselves from their Communion, or turn 'em into an ill
sense.

So that you see, how careful he was of having a defense ready against
ignorance and ill opinion; that he believed there were only those two things
capable of decrying him, and which indeed were, [as we have already said,] the
only things, which ruined his repute among the greatest part of the World. His
very Life tho discreet and sober, has not (however) wanted to be attacqued by
Invectives and detractions, but those who have written it, having recited the
calumnies of his Enemies, have incontinently refuted them, and have not
composed the History of that Philosopher, but at the same time they have made
his Apology. As my design is not to entertain you with his Actions, but only to
defend his pleasure, I Will And the En^lisher [possibly wi^h more reason] t^ the
Learned Gassendus his Notes upon it, together with a la^ge account of Epicurus
his Life, writ by the same Famous French Philosopher.
refer you to Diogenes Laertius for the relation of his Life and content my
self with Philosophizing with you upon the Nature of that Pleasure, that has so
many Enemies; and we will examine whether it be such as to exclude, out of the
rank of good, and wise Men, those who defend and follow it. Living according to
Nature, and not having any sensation of Pain, is what Epicurus calls living
pleasantly. Methinks herein there is nothing to be taxed; and such a Life has
no need of censors; and there is no Government so severe in the World, as can
disapprove any thing in this position. Following Nature is following Reason;
the bounds nature has prescribed are those of Inno^ence; there is nothing in
nature but what is just and equitable. From nature it is not, that Avarice
came: she has concealed Gold in the Bowels of the vilest Element, and we have
torn it thence: Nature was not the cause of Ambition which torments us: It
brought us into the World, and with equality sends us out thence packing. We
only differ from one another, in as much as we corrupt it. We eye at the same
time, both Liberty and the Sun: servitude was introduced by violence; and the
first Kings were Tyrants. Is it nature [think you] which prompts to delights?
The Poets themselves, who have foisted defects into the very Heavens, to screen
their own blunders with examples, and made Jupiter wicked, that they might be
so themselves, durst not own such a thought. They have preserved it is purity
entire, and have not couched in the description of its own, that is to say, the
Golden Age, the Luxury of others, that succeeded it. Do but hear 'em talk;
They Will tell you, that Acorns were then Men's Food, that Rivers squench'd their
thirst, that they dwelt in Caverns, that they had no Clothes, which defended
them against the cold, and that they followed Nature in all their Actions. I Will
willingly own, that there was never such a constitution of things, and that Men
were never reduced to the Villainy of Brutes; the Poets have pushed on their
fiction much farther, but at least they were willing to let us understand, that
our excess proceeded not from nature: that she does not advise us to them, and
that it is not nature, which says, Ales Phasiacis petita Colchis,
Atque Afr^ Volucres placent Palato;
Quod non sunt faciles;


And that in fine, it is we, who abuse the Gifts of Heaven and the advantages,
it confers upon us. How then to live according to nature, must a Man abstain
from the things, that are submitted to him, and of which she has appointed him
Lord? This I do not say, I rather say, we ought to use 'em, provided we use 'em
according to nature. We must use things in such sort, as that we may be without
them, we must be their Masters, and not their Slaves; we must not grow
impatient for 'em, nor be cast down for their loss; lets enjoy 'em peaceably,
when occasion is offered, and not pursue 'em with disquiet and turmoil. There Is
no condition, but what is becoming the Wise Man: So as I shall never blame a
Philosopher for inhabiting a Palace, but in not having the power to be
contented with a Cottage. I shall not be scandalized at seeing him in the
Robes, if he has not the Ambition of a King; Let Aristippus possess the Riches
of Craesus, what matter? He Will throw 'em away, when they incommode him; let
Plato be at Denis's the Tyrants Table, yet in the midst of that abundance of
delicacies, he will eat sometimes only Olives: We do not damn the Possession of
goods, we damn their servitude; it is not Poverty will make us wise, it may
purge away, indeed, the desire of committing certain faults, but there are
others, which it cannot remedy. The Cynicks rags contribute not the least to
tranquillity or moderation; Ambition follows Diogenes into his very Tub, and
there it was he had the confidence to command Alexander the haughtiest of all
Mankind. All that comes from us, will be indifferent, if we have moderation of
mind, that is to say, if we are wise, and follow nature. Very true it is, that
there is more difficulty, in following nature in abundance, than in necessity,
and that the Spurs, which our delights use to try our moderation, are much more
keen than those adversity employs for that purpose: But still there is much
more glory in surmounting them, and the loss of false joys secures much better
the Possession of real ones. We are not sensible of the felicity which costs us
nothing, and for which we are endebted to chance; it must be given us by
Wisdom; and trouble sometimes must usher us to pleasure* A Man, who at the
Olympic Games, should be in the Lists with a design to try his skill, if no
body stood forth, might possibly be Crowned, but nevertheless, that would not
render him Victorious. Storms and Tempests are what procure reputation to
Pilots, and if Penelopes Chastity had not been tried, some might have said of
her, it only wanted corrupters: Wherefore, let us not fly the World, let us not
fly the Court, let us not sculk in the Deserts, from whence Philosophy fetched
the Primitive Mankind; let us possess Riches, let us not refuse to enter upon
Public Offices; if we are Wise, we may enjoy these things without any danger,
we shall Sail happily amid those Rocks, we shall eye all this with an
unconcerned look: And if we be stripped of it, we shall testify by not looking
back upon it, that we despise and were not wedded to it. It is a shame in the
Wise Man to fly, and to be more feeble than such desires, which being
unnatural, have no other credit but what is acquired them by opinion. This is
[in part] the pleasure of the Epicureans, this is what they call, to live
according to nature: This is their Doctrine, and these their Sentiments.
Consider now whether this Opinion merits our odium, and see whether we have
reason to despise it; Whether their Pleasure Pimps to Debaucheries and
Excesses, and whether than is there be any thing more sober or more Chaste? Ask
you me Epicurus, what is it to live voluptuously? He will answer you, that is
is not the having a fondness for Worldly concerns; that it is resisting evil
desires, contemning Honor, getting the Mastery of Fortune, and that it is (in
a word) possessing absolutely Peace and Repose of Mind. Hereat are levelled all
his Precepts; here you meet with pleasure, and here it is indeed, we ought to
seek it, not in the satisfaction of the senses, nor in the emotion of the
Appetites. It is too pure to depend on the body, it depends on the Intellectual
part: ^eason is its Mistress, reason is its rule, the senses are only its
Ministers: And besides, what delights soever we may hope for in indulging a
revelling Palate, in the Pleasures of the sight, in Perfumes and Music, if we
do not approach those things with a calm mind, we shall be d^ceived, we shall
fall under the delusion of a false joy, and take the shadow of Pleasure for its
real body. We will burn [if you please] all the Wood of Arabia the happy; we
will closet up our selves with Venus, we will live on Nectar and Ambrosia; we
will enjoy the Pleasure the Poets have imagined; all this will prove bitter, if
we are under disquiet; and our Pecvishness will force us to complain in the
midst of these delights. I Will give you an instance of this Assertion, and show
you, how much a Man is incapable of Pleasure, when his mind is in trouble. You
have read of the Feast, which Tigellinu^ made Nero; and you may remember that
great Debauch the Renown of whose Luxury has lasted to our Age. It seems to
have been the last effort of sumptuousness and delicacy, and that sensuality
has not been able to make any farther Progress. Agrippa's Pond was pitched on
for this extraordinary repast, it was made upon a stately Barque, which being
drawn by a great many others seemed of it self insensibly to move: All these
Barges appeared enriched with Gold and Ivory. Many lovely Youths were the
Rower^ or rather so many Cupids. The taste knew no Foul, but what it was
furnished with at that entertainment: The Ocean provided it with Fish, and the
Provinces of the Empire with diversity of Meats. In short, all appeared with
huge daintiness and abundance. I omit speaking of the infamous Houses erected
upon the Banks, which were stocked with Women of great Quality; and I will
forget the Courtizans there seen stark naked. The Night it self contributed to
the Pleasure of this Debauch; its shades were combated by an infinity of
Lights, and its silence agreeably disturbed by the Harmony of several consorts.
Would you know, what delight Nero took in all these things, and if he departed
satisfied from this Banquet? You need only imagine, that he carried with him
thither the memory of his c^imes and the remorses of his conscience, and you
will make no difficulty of concluding, that despair accompanied him to that
Entertainment, that he there felt the Penitential Whip, and that tho his
outside had the face of a triumph, he acted in his mind a Bloody Tragedy. If he
had any joy, it was that of the Menades: He was obliged for his Pleasure to his
fury or Drunkenness, and his happiness augmented with the diminution of his
reason. I suppose the same thing of all those of his retinue, for I imagine
there neither Seneca, nor Thraseas, Poetus, nor Bareas Soranus, who lived
according to nature amidst the corruption of their Age, to be of the number of
the Guests. Doubtless, such only were present as endeared themselves to his
conversation by a con^ruity of manners: Who egged him on in his crimes: Who
were his Minist^rs, in 'em, and before whom he ought not to blush at least, sin
the resemblance of the wicked, hinders their shame. Cert^inly, such ^ Riff-Raff
were far from being happy; there was no finding a sound Man in all that
Assembly: Pleasure could not get admittance into those Bosoms, which excesses
had entirely possessed.

Quemvis media erue Turba,
Aut ob avaritiam aut misera, ambitionelaborat;
Hic Nuptarum insa^it amori bus, hic Puerorum.
In short, they were assaulted with all the ill passions, which destroy the
repose of mind, and by consequence, were not in a State of relishing the
Pleasure, we approve. I could wish that this Philosoper had been present at
this Debauch, and that in the Eyes of the universe he had told his opinion; I
am sure he would have declared the truth before Nero's Face: He would not have
dreaded death, which he held indifferent, and I imagine in this manner he would have
spoken:

Oh Wretched Prince! How art thou mistaken in believing, that pleasure is found
in thy excesses! It is as far remote from 'em as thou art from Life's true
happiness. Thou dragg'st thy unhappiness along in all places, where thou go,
and do what thou will, thou can not sculk one moment from thy conscience.
Thou may cover thy Table with Meats still more precious than those it
abounds with; taste the most delicious Wines of Greece and Italy, Sully thy self
afterward in all abominations, that Debauchery can invent; yet nothing will thou find in all this to afford thee satisfaction; and tho thy body were
filled, thy mind would still be in quest of Pleasure. These are not the things,
which render Life happy; it is only Prudence, which composes the sovereign good;
it is she alone which will teach thee to regulate thy desires according to
NATURE, and in this Rule it i^ thou will find what thou can not meet with in
thy disorders; If any thing be wanting, turn thy Eyes toward that common
Mother; she will give thee wherewith easily to content thee. Art thou thirsty?
She has every where placed Rivers and Springs, where thou may squench thy
Thirst. Hungry? Places, where thou will find Fruits to live on. If thou art not
satisfied with these things, thou will never be satisfied with all thy
Excesses; consult thy Hunger and thy Thirst, they will make thee find delights
in the simplicity of nature; and Bread and Water will serve thee instead of the
best Dish upon Earth thou can call to mind when thou art in necessity. Now
that thou art not so, thou do not give thy Stomach time to digest Meats, thy
intemperance daily engenders crudities; it advances the hour of that death,
which Hobgoblings thee with so many apprehensions. Thus thou make Feasts
without their affording thee any Pleasure, because thou constrain'st thy
Nature, forcing it to obey thy Desires: But know, thy Desires interfere with
thy Nature, and the overflowings of thy Mind darken the light of thy Reason;
wherefore, do not flatter thy self with tasting the Pleasures thou imagin'st:
There Is nothing bounded but in nature; all that is repugnant to nature is
infinite, and consequently, above us. Ambitious Subjects aspire to Crowns: If
they became Kings, they would be the sole Monarchs of the World: Being
Monarchs, they would wish for Incense and Sacrifices, and the Fable of the Giants
informs us, that the Earth has dared to pretend to Heavens Dominion. It is so
with other bad desires, no body can be happy but he who knows how to regulate
his desires. And as it only belongs to the Wise Man to undertake that Province,
so it only belongs to him to command the universe. Only he can extract Pleasure
out of all these things, and he alone uses Delights soberly, and despises them
in their Possession. For thy part, who dishonourest the race of Augustus, and
art the Infamy of human kind, over whom the anger of the Gods has given thee
the command, do what thou list, thou will ever be unhappy? thy grief will
backney thee at all moments, and in all places: Thou will never steal one
minute from thy conscience: And in the midst of thy good cheer, thou will drink
no Wine, but what will represent to thee the Innocents Blood, which thy cruelty
has shed on such or such an occasion. This is [if I be not mistaken] what
Epicurus would have said; this is what he would have alleged in Justification
of his Philosophy, and thus would he have reproved the Emperors Enormities.
But forasmuch as that it is impossible, that the mind [the Arbiter of Pleasure]
should enjoy perfect pleasure, if the body its Minister endures any torment;
Epicurus or rather truth teaches, that the privation of corporal pain, is
necessary to the composition of that summum bonum, which the pleasure of the
Sages does produce. And in truth, the alliance betwixt the mind and the flesh
is so close, that it is very difficult to separate their pleasures and their
su^ferings. The mind can scarce be soveraignly happy, while Maladies afflict
the Body: The mind can scarce think of joy, while the violence of pain tears
from it complaints, or can the mind be sensible of pleasure, as long as it is
in all parts, that undergo the assaults of pain? Let the Stoics boast as high
as they please, the insensibility of their Sect, and that rigorous virtue,
which makes a mock of pain, they will find their body does not colten with their
opinion, and that tho their discourses be magnificent and sublime, yet they are
neither according to truth or humane nature. I will not prop this Proposition
with the example of the Mobile of those Philosophers. I will not make use of a
Name, they may scruple to receive, nor pitch on a Man, whose virtues may seem
suspected by them. Hercules alone shall bear testimony of what I urge; that
Hercules, who is placed among the Gods, whom so many labors have rendered
Famous, and the Poets made choice of, for a perfect model of the force of their
Wisdom. What if we take a view a while of that Hero dying, and consider the
last Actions of his Life? That Invincible Man's Congee will be doubtless like
his entrance, Illustrious in performing something Heroic. Certainly he will
say nothing as may dishonor his Noble Actions, or seem unworthy of his former
virtue. The strength of his pain gets the mastery over his courage: His
Constancy yields to the ardour of the Venom,. which devours him; he does not
only complain, he we^ps, he cries, he howls: At circum gem^nt petrae,
Locrorum and alta Eubaeae
Promont^ria.


And it is with the last effects of rage and despair, that he departs out of
this Life to take his place among the Gods. Therefore, let the Stoics rank
themselves in our party, let 'em tattle no longer of their insensibility, nor
foist on us, that the Wise man may be happy amid Tortures, and let 'em not
despise pain, to which Hercules himself was constrained to submit so many
victories. But if it be answered, that the Poets were to blame for representing
Hercules in this manner, and that in favor of that Hero, they are willing to
rescue him from the Authority of Books, and the consent of Theaters:
Possidonius, formerly one of Cicero's Masters, and the greatest of all the
Stoics (for so he is styled by that disciple) will serve us for an illustrious
example, we shall see a Pillar of the Porch staggered by a Disease. The Gout
being the Malady of that Philosopher, was likewise the wrack of his constancy;
he endured its violence as patiently as an ordinary Man would have done; and
tho he upbraided pain, that all it is twinges pinches could not constrain him to
own, that it was an evil; yet for all this it afflicted him, and made him
complain. It seems too that Cicero was choqu'd, or at least astonished at this
wisemans weakness. I have seen, says he, Possidonius the greatest of the
Stoics have as little power to undergo the pains of the Gout, as my Host
Nicomachus, whom Tully accounted a common sort of Fellow. And assuredly I am so
far from believing that true felicity can concur with pain, that I should
esteem it the action of a Wise Man to part with his Life, if he could not
separate it from pain. And because the Memory of Mecoenas is in great
veneration with me, and in my Opinion he ought never to be mentioned but with
Honor; I wi^h, if it were possible, that those Verses, which remain to us of
him, had been stiss^d, and he had not informed us, that he was more wedded to
Life, than became (I do not say a Philosopher, but only) a Man of Courage. You
could not have offered him any condition, so he might but live, but what he
would have accepted; were he deformed? that is no matter; were he maimed? he would
find some consolation in living; let him endure all the Torments of the most
violent Distempers, he would still be happy, if they were not mortal; and tho you
should have sentenced him to the most cruel of Deaths, he would not consent to
quit Life, provided he could keep it amidst the Tortures of Executions.

Debilem faci^o mann,
Debil^m pede, coxa;
Tuber adstrue Gibberum;
Lubricos quate dentes;
Vita dum superest, been est:
Hanc mihi vel acuta,
Si sedam Cruce, sustine.
Without doubt, Effeminacy dictated these Verses to him, while he tasted all
the Pleasures of Life. He never had had any experience of pain, and had he
fallen into the ill condition he proposes, Death would have been as welcome to
him, as a Reprieve to a Criminal upon the Rack. It Is easy by this to understand
that M^caenas was voluptuous; but no Epicurean, since those Philosophers have
too gen^rous a Soul to shrink to such feeble sentiments; they dread Death much
less than pains, and sometimes renounce Pleasure for very pain. And the reason
is, that Epicurus well judging that most Men being allured and corrupted by the
fruition of pleasures, and suffering themselves without Rule, and blindly to be
hurried away by the current of their Appetites, would not be in a capacity to
foresee the pains and afflictions, which would fall upon 'em in conseq^ence of
those disorders: And besides, fearing that the love of case and Effeminacy of
s^irit, joined to the fear of pain and labor, might oblige them to be wanting
in their Duties, and to render themselves useless in L^fe; he was of opinion,
that in the time wherein a Wise man should have full liberty of Election, and
wherein nothing should hinder him from procuring his own satisfaction, he might
abandon himself to pleasure, and give a temporary Farewell to Pain: But That
then are certain seasons, in which they must be Friends again, and during which
the Obligation of Duties, and the Necessity of Things ought to constrain him
not to refuse Dolor, and to reject Voluptuousness.

'Twas this generous Maxim, that made Cato of Vtica his own Executioner: For,
though he might have born himself up on the Mines of his Party, and Caesar would
have been mighty glad to grant him his Life; yet, the shame of surviving the
Loss of the Public Liberty, and the Infamy of Servitude, would not let that
large Heart even deliberate, whether he should choose. the Pain of dying
gloriously, to avoid the Pleasure of living after a manner, that seemed to him
unworthy of a Roman. This Maxim it was, that made Regulus to reput himself into
the hands of his Enemies, where the Cruelties of his Tormentors were less
s^nsible to him, than his Remorse would have been for having broken his word.
'Twas this Maxim, which making Fabricius to despise the Treasures of the King
of Epeirus, made him also despise the evil desires, which fol^ow the possession
of Riches, and preserve to himself the Repose of Mind, the sovereign and
chiefest of Pleasures. Lastly, it was this Maxim, that set Cicero of declaiming
against Anthony, to devote himself for the safety of the Commonwealth at a
time, when he might have stayed at home very fairly in Peace and quietly
enjoyed an easy Life, and the Delights of his own Studies.

To this Maxim there are no laudible Actions but what may be referred: And what
Heroic Pea^s soever those great men have achieved, you will find, that if
they have run toward Pain, it has been to avoid a much greater, and
contrariety, if they have not glanced upon some pleasures, it was by such an
Abstinence, to acquire Others more satisfactory and solid. For, what other
cause would you have us ascribe to their Illustrious Actions? Do you think,
they would have so boldly left this Life? That they would have turned their
backs upon the possession of Gold? That they would painfully hunt after very
dangerous. Enmities? And, not consider at the same time, if what they did, was
useful or agreeable to them? with this Censure, let us not bespatter them: The
Effects of their Wisdom let us not impute to the unruliness of their Mind, but
believe, that they consulted generally themselves and their own Intellectuals
upon their Actions: And let us not state them in a worse condition than the
most salvage of Animals, which are never transported nor troubled in such a
manner, but that it is easy to discover, what is the Aim of the Impetrosity of
their Movements. Cato forsook that Life, which was become his Burden; he found
it less grievous to quit the World, than to obey Caesar, whom he believes to be
no good man, and he thought it more pleasant not to live at all, than to live
in an ignominious slavery. Regulus returned to Carthage: If he had not done so,
he had been accused of Perfidiousness. Fabricius could not be corrupted by
Pyrrhus, in which he exerted his Integrity: He served his Country, and in the
single pleasure of refusing Riches, he satisfied himself more than if he had
accepted all the Treasures of the Universe. In short, Tully gave hard words to
Antonius, and declared himself his capital Enemy: If without any reason he did
so, he is much to blame: But, if at his own peril he had a design to establish
the Commonwealth, and if he undertook Marc Anthony's Ruin, to prevent that of
Rome; as hereby he took care of the common safety of his Citizens, wherein his
own was contained; so he, moreover, deserved the praise of all Mankind, and the
love of the whole People of Rome. Those Great Men, indeed, were not of the
Family of Epicurus, and One of 'em has even endeavored by his Writings to
destroy his Opinions: But it is sufficient, that the Authority of their Examples
is found in the Doctrine of that Philosopher, and that the World know, That it
was not Virtue alone, which was their Motive, or at least what they called
Virtue, ought to be styled Pleasure.

However, out of this School there have issued Spirits completely Heroique, who
in a corrupted Age have performed as vigorous Actions, as those Ancient Romans
in the flower of their Republique under Neroe's Reign, the World admired the
death of Petronius, as much as that of Seneca. The Emperor's Tutour acquired
no Glory by dying, but what was afterward bestowed upon the Arbiter of his
Pleasures; and the common Sentiment was, that the Stoician who had always held
forth and preached up a contempt of Life, did not leave it more generously than
Petronius, who had courted all it is Pleasures.

In this place, I am bound, for the honor and sake of Epicurus, to retrace
something of the Life and Death of this great Disciple: As indeed, it would be
impossible for me to pass by this point without some discourse to you
concerning it, and as you with a very willing Ear listen to the performances of
Illustrious Men, you will not be loath to rank Petronius in their number, and
take a transitory view of the marks of his Wisdom and Generosity. This famous
Epicurean, far from resembling those Sots and Debauchees, who commonly
gormandize all their Estate away, made Profession of a Polite Luxury, making
Pleasures his only study. And as Toil and Industry confer Reputation on the
^est of Mankind, he alone obtained it by a gentile kind of Idleness. Very free
and very much neglected were his Words and Actions: And, for as much as they
demonstrated the goodness and the candor of his Soul, appearing under the garb
and covert of simplicity, with so much the more pleasure and satisfaction they
were received. Notwithstanding which, this excellent Man knowing well, that
there are times, wherein the Wise Man is obliged to lay aside the repose and
tranquillity of Life, to serve the State in Public Affairs, did wholly throw
away that happy way of Living, when he was Elected Proconsul of Bithynia, and
afterward was chosen Consul: And acquitting himself worthily of those glorious
Employments, he showed by his Application and Conduct, that no affair, how
bulky soever was too unweildy for his management. At the Expiration of these
Charges, he fell again to his wonted way of Living, and then being became one
of Nero's most intima^e Friends, when though this Prince had very bad
Inclinations, yet he was so much enchanted with Petronius his merit, that he
made him the Arbiter of all his Pleasures, and fancied, that amidst the
affluence of these Delights, none were to be accounted sweet and pleasant, but
such as were approved by Petronius. [I would be understood here to speak of
honest Pleasures: since he was so far from participating in the filthy
Debauches of Nero, as that that Emperor was used to wonder, how they could
come to the knowledge of Petronius, who reproached him with them by his
Codicils; so that he caused Silia to be punished, as suspecting, she had
revealed them.]

From that time, Tegaltinus eyed Petronius as his Competitor; and fearing, that
by the means of honest Pleasure, he might do what Seneca was unable to effect
with the austerity of his Sect, i. e. that he might reduce Nero from the
disorders of his Life, and restore a true Emperor to Rome; he resolved to
under-mine him, saying, there was no establishing his own Fortune but by the
ruin of Petronius. Wherefore, he straightwaies attacks the cruelty of that
Prince, to which all his other Pleasures yielded, and gave way: he accuses
Petronius of having been of the number of Scevinus his Friends, who had shared
in Pisoe's conspiracy: He corrupt^ a Slave of his, to depose against him: He
deprives him of all ways to make his Defense, and causes the greater part of
his Domestiques to be laid in Shackl^s, under such Circumstances, a Man, less
generous, would either have flattered himself with the hopes of Pardon, or
prolonged his Life to the utmost Extremity. But he, for his part, was of a
quite contrary Opinion; he thought it both a vile and a weak thing to support
any longer the fatigues of Fear or Hope, and resolving to die, he contrives to
do it, with the same Tranquillity, in which he had lived.

Thus, unwilling to part with his Life in a precipitate way, he has his Veins
opened, and then bound up again, and still now and then taking off the Bands,
according as his fancy moved him, he discoursed his Friends upon agreeable
matters; not affecting to entertain them with serious Debates and searched
sentences, by which he might pretend to the glory of Constancy. The last hours
of his Life, by no means would he employ, in speaking of the Souls Immortality,
or of Philosophical Opinions, but having pitched upon a sort of most voluptuous
and most Natural Death, he chose rather to imitate the sweet fate of Swans, and
had smooth and easy verses rehearsed to him, with miscellanies of Poetry. Yet
he reserved to himself some moments for the disposing of his Affairs: He
rewarded many of his Slaves, punished some, and seeing the time draw near of
shaking off Mortality, after having used a little exercise, he fell into a calm
and gentle Slumber: So that his Death, which was constrained, might seem casual
and Natural. Now, let men talk of Socrates! let them boast of the constancy and
firmness of mind, wherewith he drank the Poison! Petronius does not yield, to
him in the least ^unctilio. Nay, Petronius may pretend to the advantage of
having abandoned a Life infinitely more Delicious than that of the Gr^ek Sophy,
with the same serenity of mind, and the same equallity of Countenance.

But that you may the better know, how rich and precious is the Pleasure, I
defend; I design to give you the Pourtraict of a man who possesses it in
perfection, and by depicting his contrary afterward, to take away all reasons
of jealousy and doubt, that Epicurus his volupty is of high esteem. Imagine then
a Man in perfect health, possessing a good Estate; enjoying delights handsomely;
having a mind peaceable and contented; tasting always and with abundance the
most diverting pleasures of Body and Mind; not troubled with the presence, nor
menaced with the fear of any Pain: What condition can you suppose more
excellent, or more desirable than this? For, it is necessary, that, such a
Person, to be in this State, s^ou'd possess a force of Mind proof against ^ain
and Death it self; should be absolutely undeceived of the false Opinions of the
Vulgar; should be insens^ble of impertinent Terrors and Scholastique
Scare-Crows; not suffer the Pleasures to escape, which he enjoys; always
entertaining himself in the sweetness of their Remembrance: And, this is to be
at the high^st period of Felicity, and to have nothing more to pretend to for
the accomplishment of ones happiness.

On the other side, let us figure to our selves a Man oppressed with all the
evils, that can afflict humane Nature; deprived of all hopes of ever seeing
them lessn'd or abated; sensible of no present Pleasure, having never tried any
past delights; not daring to aspire to the possession of future ones: And when
we have acknowledged, that nothing can be imagined more miserable than this
Estate, let us confess withal, that there is nothing more happy than the
voluptuous Follower of Epicurus.

Now if you think this happy Man, whose Picture I now draw, is no where else to
be found than in my imagination, and that so perfect a Felicity cannot be among
Men; I must confess, you have but sorry Sentiments of our humane condition, and
of the goodness of Heaven, and I fancy my self engaged to retrieve you out of
this error, if I would pass with you for a real Man, and to keep you from
maundering any more against our misery, and the Injustice of Destiny. Thus
then, I find, that original done by the hand of one of the greatest Masters,
placed in the Cabinet of the curiousest of Authors, that ever Writ: It is
Felicity it self painted under the visage of Orata, for so Tully calls him; and
here follows a faithful Trad^ction of what he relates of his happiness. To
Orata, a Man of Wealth, Pleasantry, and Niceness, nothing was wanting of all
that can serve to live voluptuously, to procure Love, and enjoy an entire and a
perfect Health. For he gathered very ample Revenues from his Noble Lordships:
He had always many Friends very useful, agreeable, and diverting: He
dexterously made use of all these things, to maintain a sweet solacing Life:
And to say all in few words, his Wills and Designs had ever a success as
propitious, and an accomplishment as favorable as he could wish. In this
condition, I do not think, any thing could befound fault with, in provision no
change fell out, but that Orata must be perfectly happy, if he can remain in
the State, wherein we show him. And this, if I am not mistaken, is a
Pourtrai^t, that bears assimilation enough to the first design, which I showed
you, and which you might peradventure take for Crotesque and a fancy of the
Painter.

Let us now seek for some miserable men in opposition to this Orata: We will
compare him (if you please) to those unfortunate Wretches. whom we see upon the
ancient Theater, the one of whom Judges himself too criminal to manage the
Grecian Scepter, who fears to dishonor the Race of Pelops by owning himself a
Branch of that Family, and who dares not show his Face to Mortals. Or let us
compare him with that other, who beck'ning to his Friends, that they should not
approach him, esteems himself so unhappy, that he fears, his very shade may be
contagious. Or rather, let us not call to mind Atreus or Thyastes: Let us forget
their Crimes, whose Memory creates an Abhorrence; and let our Eyes no longer
dwell upon a Family, that has forced the Sun to return back to the East, and
has furnished Hell with one of its most famous Punishments.

Occule.
Noxitudo obliteretur Pelopidum. Let us rather choose Heroes and People as
wretched as the Progeny of Tantalus. Let Amphiareus's Son come and acq^aint us
with his being Habgoblin'd by Vision^, and his demanding succors against the
Furies that haunt him.

Oh Wretch! What is it, I see?
Whence come those Lamps,
Which seem to rise from you
Tomb's gloomy Damps?
Help me, defend me from the burning Rage
Of this hot Fire: Oh! It Is damned heat assuage!
Night's ghastly Daughters, round each awful Shrine,
With bluish Snakes their horned*
Miens entwine:
The direful hissings! Now, they me assail,
Now, now I feel their Flames:
No plaints avail.
The sound of crashing stripes invades my Ears,
And stubs my drooping Soul with thunder-pointed Fears.
After Al^meon has thus let us see the tortures of his Conscience, and the
racks of his Mind, let Philoct^tes entertain us with the miseries, which he is
reduced unto! Let him speak, and complain of his ill Fortunes; for truly, he
makes no distinction of Persons, when he says: Poor Mortal thou, whom Winds and
Seas that roar,
Drive on the Isle of Lemnos sacred Shore.
Contemn me not, though thus; though me you find
Most solemnly forlorn of all Mankind.
View those vast Rocks, exposed to the Firmament,
Where midst of sorrows, I nine years have spent.
Hard Stones my Bed, of Glory quite bereft,
Here far from Battles, far from Laurels left,
Debarred the Freedom of the Aer,
I snap the flying Fowl of fleetest Wing,
And with their Plumes, I weave my covering.


Let him then show us his Bodily Pains, when his Ulcer becomes inflamed: He
despairs in these Verses: Has no Man, of you, pity in his Soul,
That his soft Heart may my hard Fate control?
Will none from this high Pyke, this salvage Rock,
Give me one gentle and good-natured Shock;
That headlong into raging Billows thrown,
My much more raging Tortures I may drown?
There let me Bulge upon the boyst'rous Floods,
Until the Sea has lav'd me into Suds.
Nothing is equal to my Pangs: The Fir^
Burns in my aged Wound with Vlcerous Ire,
The great Vulcano to this Mound, while I
In Flames, a Salamander, never Dye.


Or, if these Misfortunes be not yet sufficient, let us with Ovid amass
together all the miseries of Fables, to wish them to a Man, and then judge,
whether his condition be more happy than that of Orata, or of that famous
Vatia, who formerly merited this Exclamation; O Vatia, you alone know, how to
live: And, consequently, let us conclude with a like Exclamation: O Epicurus,
thou alone know how to Philosophize.

By all these vanities we may know, that Volupty is not only worthy of the
Eloges of all Men, but that it is their Sovereign good and sole end. Yet in
regard this first Proposition makes the principal point of Epicurus his
Doctrine, and that is the most true, it is also the most contested. Having
begun to undeceive these Enemies of his, I must consummate my Documents and
their Instruction, and leave the truth of this Opinion so well established in
their minds, that no more occasion they may have to dispute it, but with
extreme Injustice. Therefore, that they may be of this Opinion, I will only
desire them to cast their Eyes upon Nature, whose effects are rational and
certain experiences. They will not only find, that she authorizes what I say,
but she gives them such clear Demonstration^, that, unless they purposely
hood-wink themselves, they will be constrained to acquiesce therein. Let 'em,
consider, what this common Mother does in the production and Birrh of Animals,
that is to say, in her entire Purity and before her Corruption: They may
observe, that she inspires them with the love of Volupty, and the flight of
Dolor; that she conveys 'em to what is pleasant, and distanceth 'em from what
is hurtful; that she teaches them (if a Man may say so) good and evil, and when
they attain the former, they rejoice and rest satisfied in it. For which
reason, when our Philosopher, following the Institutions of Nature, pronounces,
that the voluptuous Life is the end of Man, he does not trouble his Head about
proving this Proposition. As he thinks, there is no need of the dint of
Ratiocination to persuade Men, that Fire is hot, Snow cold, and Honey sweet,
because these are sensible things; he, likewise, believes, that to apprehend
the love of Pleasure, which may easily be known by natural effects, a Man need
only make use of a mean Animadversion, and a simple Advertisement upon those
effects.

However, though we have nature on our side, that is, an infallible Decision;
though we fully perceive in our minds a certain notion, which enclines us to hate
evil and pursue Pleasure; tho the beginnings of our wishes, of our disgusts,
and of all our actions draw their origin from Pleasure and Pain; nevertheless,
because some Philosophers maintain, that dolor ought not to be reckoned among
evils, nor Pleasure among Goods, and because to establish this Opinion, they
allege many curious things, we must not so strongly confide in our own, as not
to stick to the naked truth. We must argue in favor of the Epicurean pleasure:
We are to show, that Reason as well as Nature authorizes that sect. And
certainly, if the ^hilosophers, who found fault with this pleasure, had
considered it well, if they had viewed it, before they attacked it, they would
have easily discovered, that they were mistaken in their Enemy, and that their
Forces ought not to have been bent against this pleasure. That they were
mistaken in their Invectives, and rejected it only on the score of the Pains,
which follow it sometimes; they might have perceived; for that those pains did
not proceed from it, that it is the fault of those who use it ill, and by
consequence, they would not have decryed a pure and clean source, for having
found it mudded and defiled by dirty Beasts. For, they must confess to me, that
there is no Man in the World, that despises Pleasure, quatenus Pleasure, that
hates or eschews it; that loves Pain as Pain; that follows or endeavors to
attain it. But because those who use the most moderate Pleasures ill,
afterward undergo many disquiets and torments; and, on the contrary, there are
certain Seasons, in which pain and labor do occasion exceeding great
pleasures: This has made those Philosophers (who had only considered the
Sequels of a Ill-husbanded Pleasure, and of a profitable and necessary Pain) to
strike the former out of the class of Goods, and then set pain among
praiseworthy things. But in my Opinion, they had acted much more discreetly,
if they had emulated us; and if after having accused the profaneness of
pleasure, as the Epicureans do in their School, they had not only discharged
pleasure from the crimes, by them imputed to it, but also had bestowed upon it
Encomiums and Crowns, and openly pronounced in favor of its Innocence. For,
under what color, could they reprove a Man, who is desirous to enjoy such
pleasures, as from which he receives no annoyance, and who will endeavor to
avoid the pain, that brings him no profit? Let 'em, then, quest about, as long
as they please, they will never find the least shadow to condemn it: On the
other hand, right reason will still force them to adorn it with the sublimest
praises.

Now, it is time, to employ all our forces in an enterprise, that needs them:
Now are we to combat generously, that so we may acquire an immortal victory.
The case is no longer the defending pleasure, or considering it as the chief
good of Life. We must raise it upon the Throne of Virtue, which disputes with
it that Title: And tho we do not chase that virtue away from it, whereof we
make profession, we must constrain it to yield the first place to pleasure. And
certainly, as all Philosophers agree, that the ultimate end, which Man ought to
propose to himself in this World, is a calm and a pleasant Life, many of them
are choused in situating this Life in Virtue and not in pleasure, and in making
their applications to the Splendor of a name, that tops upon 'em, without
considering an opinion, whereto nature her self compels their assent. And in
truth* if they would consult and believe her, they must own, that those
virtues, which they style great, precious and magnificent, only seem estimable
to them, in as much as they contribute toward pleasure, and that, consequently
not considered by themselves, they ought not to prefer 'em before a thing, from
which they receive their whole Value and Reputation. For, in the same m^nner we
approve of Physi^k not upon the account of the A^t, but upon the score of
Health; and the Science of Pilots deserves com^e^dation only for the usefulness
of Navigation; we, likewise, should not wish for wisdom, which may be called
the Art of Life, if it were of no use to us, and did not c^ntribute toward our
obtaining the possession of v^lupty.

There is no necessity of repeating here, what that Pleasure is, or of
designing you afresh, not to despise that Name, which Men have corrupted. You
know very well, how severe Epicurus renders it, and you must needs avow that it
is no shame for wisdom to veil to it, and thence to borrow its whole
consideration. Also, on our side, we will confess, that without being a
Philosopher, a Man cannot be happy, and that wisdom is the only means to attain
Pleasure. In effect, the weakness and frailty of humane nature, being afflicted
with the ignorance of good and evil, floating commonly betwixt those two
things, without being able to discriminate them, and often electing with joy,
what is to be avoided with care, does fall into so monstrous a blindness, that
Men instead of meeting with the felicity, they gape after, shear often aloof from
it; so that they become miserable instead of finding satisfaction, and in
exchange for the Pleasures proposed to themselves, they plunge themselves into
Pains, which vex and torment them. Wherefore, the use of wisdom ought to draw
'em out of this miserable condition: Its Candle is to light them in such an
irksom and lonely darkness: Its power is to redeem 'em from slavery and
bondage; from inordinate desires; from inconsiderate terrors, and from rash
Opinions: In imitation of Hercules, it must make them a passage through so many
Monsters, and conduct them with safety to Pleasure. Wisdom alone performs these
great things, like a faithful and a generous Guide: She removes the
difficulties of the way she points out to us. But it is not sufficient, that we
do not ramble out of it, we must also in safety walk therein: And while the
Winds and Seas disperse and drown the Ships, which Sail without her Steerage,
others whose Rudder she has taken in hand, pull into Harbor without running
any Risque or dreading any Tempest. In this Port, it is, where the Wise Man
meets with pleasure: In this Port, he reposedly contemplates the turmoil of the
rest of Mankind: He discovers all the impertinent errors, which persecute
their weakness: He observes, with how much busy eagerness they endeavor to
satisfy their Passions: He sees em crow'd in multitudes, striving who shall
advance farthest in Power, in Ric^es, and in Fortune.

Certare Ing^nio, contendere Nobilitate;
Noctes atque dies niti praestante labor,
Ad summas emergere opes, rerumque Poti^i.
And then, having considered all these things, he breaks out into this
Exclamation.

O miseras ho^inum mentes! O pectora caeca!
Qualibus in ten^bris vitae, quantisque periclis
Degitur hoc A^vi, quodcunque ast?
For his particular, nothing disquiets him; nothing frets him; nothing troubles
him: But, he is happy, he follows nature; he enjoys an accompli^ht felicity;
and in this state he offers up his Thanksgivings to wisdom, the donatrix of his
Pleasure. Like him, we must act, if we mean to be happy, like him: We must
throw our selves into the arms of that wisdom, and endeavor to attain that
Plea^ure. We must stifte those unlucky desires, which rob us of it: They are
insatiable and dangerous: They not only minate private Persons, but destroy
whole Families: They pull down States; they create Odiums, Divisions, Discords,
Seditions, and Civil Wars: They are the Tyrants and Enemies of those Breasts,
that foster them. And if we put the Poets to a scrutiny and examination, we
shall find, that by the torments of the Damned, they design to figure out those
whom these internal plagues do afflict.

Cui Vultur jecur ultimum pererrat,
Et pec^us trahit, infimasque Fibras,
Non est quem Tytium vocant Poetae,
Sed cordis mala, livor atque luxus.
Since, therefore, by the sole aid of wisdom, we can surmount them, as she
alone makes us capable of resisting Fortune, and by her we learn all the means
of acquiring tranquillity and a sedate Life; why should we fear to conclude,
that it is only desirable on the account of producing Pleasure and opposing
Pain? The same thing we are to say of temperance, and only not desire it for it
self, but because it preserves to our Souls that Peace, without which we could
not be happy. and by the Concord it inspires, it appeaseth our troubles, and
finds even Pleasure in them. It Is this Virtue, which always comes to the
assistance of wisdom: It Is that which executes what the other does only
deliberate: And as that shows us, what we are to shun, and what to follow, this
stops us, when we run contrary to the their advice, and when we give more
credit to our senses that our reason. This is a Bridle, which holds us in* when
we are hurried on toward evil Pleasures; a Hand, that conducts us in the road
of true joy; and, in brief, a virtue, without which we can neither be happy nor
wise. And truly, what avails our knowing good, when we are too weak to practice
it? What signifies our seeing a precipice, if we suffer our selves to tumble
down it, and our giving the glory of all words to ^isdom, when we rob it of all
its actions? To this pass most Men are reduced: they conclude all for ^isdom,
but they cannot keep to what they have concluded. They know, there are
pleasures, whose results are dangerous, and most aus^erely forbidden by
Epicurus: But they make a mock of this Philosophers prohibition, and ^bandon
'emselves to the empire of their bad desires. They are like to Phaedria in
Terence, and they speak through his Mouth on the Theater of that excellent
Comique Poet. This outrag'd Lover acknowledges, indeed, he should do an
unworthy action, if he came once more to a reconciliation with his Mistr^ss. He
declares here ipso facto a guilt, and himself a wretched Man: He frets
terribly, and grows very uneasy. What then? he does not reform; he burns still
with Love, and when he most apparently sees, that he stands upon the very brink
of ruin, yet even then he perishes with deliberation. So that Phaedria does
want no wisdom, but he wants temperance. He knows, what ought to be done in
order to his repose and pleasure, but he does not practice it. He knows, what
is b^st, and approves it, and yet he follows the worser side. These are men's
ma^ners, admirably well described and expressed. This is the image of their
sentiments and frailties. Thus, without temperance, they cannot find pleasure.
In vain do you upbraid them, that what they follow, is irrational; that it is
unnecessary; that its priv^tion produces no pain. In vain do you index the
Diseases, Damages, or Infamy, that follow their enjoyments. In vain, do you
menace them with the punishment of Laws, and the severity of Magistrates: You
can tell 'em nothing, but what they knew hefore, and what they will say
themselves. What of all this? Why, still they are the Slaves of what they as
well as you detest and abhor, resembling those Grecian Philosophers, that were
allowed in an high and mighty strain to talk of such virtues, as they never
practiced.

A sort of Men there are still behind, who indeed are no Philosophers, but yet
dispute with much acumen and vivacity. These Men (whom we may call the
Prophaners of the Epicurean Pleasure,) will upon no account allow temperance to
be a virtue, and loudly declare, that happiness depends upon the fancy and
imagination. There is no staying to contest with unreasonable people: And the
greatest mischief, we can wish them is, that they may live according to their
own desire. Our selves we may barely content with knowing, that their opinion
is false and horribly ill grounded, and that felicity is never but in the
desires, which temperance brings along with it. For, it is not only a miserable
thing to desire what is not honest: But also it is more advantageous, not to
obtain what we desire, than to obtain what we cannot without shame desire.
Insomuch that we ought to be of the Opinion of that Ancient Gentleman, who
judging of Comitty banished from Rome, while Manlius was Master of that City,
esteemed the condition of that virtuous Exal to be better than that of that bad
Citizen. But in truth, those who study temperance, and manage the possession of
pleasure so well, that they feel not any pain; these Men, certainly, may be
termed happy, and merit the Title of Sages. Most durable as their pleasures, as
being well regulated, and their whole Life being calm and eas^e, because it is
innocent. They are far from pursuing inordinate pleasures: Their felicity
consisting in a total abstinence from them. Nay, they go to meet some pa^ns,
that they may avoid greater: And from their only using temperance in the
enjoyment of pleasure, they leave us to conclude, that temperance as well as
wisdom, tend only to a more quiet possession of that pleasure, which temperance
is in quest of: Not that it makes the pleasure, but it preserves it in us, by
making us to use it rightly and with Judgment. You would peradventure be
startled (if not troubled) at it, if prosecuting the examination of Virtues,
and referring them to Pleasure, I aver, that fortitude depends on it as well as
wisdom and temperance; and that that Virtue, which terrasseth Lions under foot,
which despises dangers, and could without any dread view the ruin of the whole
World, produces nothing illustrious, but what bears a respect to pleasure, and
proceeds from it as from a source. For, first of all, it must be conceded, that
neither the labors we undertake, nor the pains we support, have any thing to
provoke our Stomach^, if we consider them simply, and separate them from other
things: And that the care and diligence, so frequently commended in Life and in
Affairs, and the force (whereof we are now speaking) are never pracrtis'd,
unless it be with some design, some cui bono, and for some certain cause. But
we must say, that these things were introduced for the tranquillity of Life,
and we follow them only, that we may live without care and fear; with an intent
to deliver (as much as possible) our Body and Mind from the Maladies and
Troubles which might afflict them, and safely to enjoy that indolence, which is
one of the compositum's of Epicurus his pleasure. And indeed, how would you
have a Man live happy, when he fears death? How would you have that Sicilian
find pleasure in the midst of Feasts and Music, when all the while he dreads
the fall of that Sword, which threatens his Head and Diadem? Is it not an
extreme misery to fall under pains, and yet support 'em basely and with
weakness? Did not this debility of mind formerly make several to loose
'emselves, after having lost their relatives and their Country? What was it, I
wonder, that occasioned poetry to Metamorphose Hecuba into a mad Bitch, unless
it be, that the grief which overcame her, compelled her to imitate the fury of
that Creature? Perhaps, if she had withstood her grief, or, at least, had
endeavored to forget the occasions of it, they would not have made her to
proceed from tears to despair, and from desperation to rage. Now, these are the
complaints, they put into her mouth, and, by the representation of the wretched
estate she was reduced to, and of that which she had lost, she fosters her
mourning Soul upon their Stage, and enkindles the flames of that rage, which
was ready to seize her.

Under the pressure sunk of heavy Fate,
Alas, what can I do in this Estate?
To what retreat can Hecuba now fly?
What kind As^lum, or what Fort is ^igh?
Out of bely's jurisdiction here I lie.
^ion's high Tower and Cit^, where the Gods,
Like Heaven it self, did settle their A^^ads,
Where they themselves with Vows and Offerings came,
Is now the insulted prey of the l^wd Grecian flame,
I Have lost these Treasures. Whither can I go,
What hope expe^t or what s^^^l comfort know?
When to Me^ Altars Sacrifices (...),
And Deities their bo^y losses (...),
When ^i^ty is Chaos, etc.
Afterward, she calls to mind the beauty of her edifices, and the Riches of
Asia, to augment both her own grief, and that of the Spectators: For who can
remain unmoved with her discourses.

Oh, d^^^st Country, or, my Countre^'s Shade!
Priam's high House in lowly Ruins laid!
Oh, Templ^s worthy of the Godhead's Eye^,
Whose (...) with Godlike Art Men did devise
Ive seen your Fan^s and we^lt^y Shrines shine bright
With Sta^ry Gemms, that cast Catestial Light.
The Gold, the I^ory, etc.
And, what Person can avoid being seized with both horror and pity, when she
proceeds in this manner?

By merciless Flames all this I Have seen devoured:
I saw the Aged Pr^am, when he poured
His Royal Soul upon Jove's Heart i^ Blood:
Never so great a Victim it embru'd.
Dragged through the dirt I Have seen my Hector's course,
Without the Grecian's pity or remorse,
And to complete the sum of Funerals
I Have seen his Son thrown ^eadlong from our Walls.
So that I do not at all wonder, that the People of Rome should sigh
heretofore, when they heard these Verses publicly rehearsed, and that I my
self in reading them gushed out into tears. Thus their strength and beauty
forced me to translate them: And, though perchance I have injured both: Yet as in
translating them, I have imitated the Ancients with some latitude, I have
likewise satisfied such persons, as do not understand them, and have in no sort
robbed others, who understand 'em in their original. But in what language
soever we consider them, it is easy, to perceive, they come from a mind very
sorely afflicted, and though they were stripped of their finest Ornaments, they
contain sufficient seeds of sorrow to create pity. Hecuba, indeed, has great
occasions to bemoan her condition. She had lost her Husband, her Son, her
Empire, and her Freedom. If she beheld these misfortunes without bewailing
them, she had been insensible, and we very inhumane, if after so many very
litteral losses we should go about to debar her tears. But for all that, when
she has wept and bedewed four or five Handkerchiefs for some time, we should
not be unjust to prescribe bounds to her affliction, by regulating her tears
and sorrow, and by advising her at length to oppose the force of reason against
that of despair. Now some delicate and Womanish Man, that is affected with her
complaints, might perhaps start in her defense, that those who would limit her
sorrow to the first motions of her mind, would allow her her laments to the
last minutes of their Lives, if they shared the afflictions, whereof they only
judge. And, by consequence, they would prove, that our Philosophy, which only
talks of Victories, would take wing at the sight of so many calamities, when it
should see them coming pell-mell to overthrow it. To such a tenderhearted Man
I wish a mighty deal of happiness, for, without dispute, if any mischance
befall him, he would not forbear weeping most bitterly: Yet not unless upon
this condition, that for this kind wish, he will give me a dispensation from
believing, what he says, and not exact of me, that I judge of the strength of
his Philosophy by the feebleness of reason. For, not staying much to refute all
those Men he may have corrupted [in case there be any such, and it be lawful,
to hate such effeminate People Men] I shall content my self with putting him to
the blush with two common examples. They are Persons, whose Age and Sex might
probably render extremely feeble, and yet in their infirmity have that force
and strength, which our effeminate Blade does not desiderate in Hecuba, and
does even despair to find among the Philosophers. Let him consider the deaths
of Astianax and Philoxena, a Child, and a Virgin: These the Greeks condemned
both to execution. See here Ulysses advancing himself, holding the first by the
hand, and walking fiercely to tumble him down But, See! the Boy follows him
with no less assurance.

-- Sublin i gradu
Incedit Ithacus parvulum dextra trahens
Priami Nepotem; nec gradu sequi Puer
Ad alta pergit mania.
Consider, that among all those who accompany and lament him, he alone it is,
whose Eyes are dry, and who refuses Tears to his own Death. Observe, that
whilst his Executioners are invoking the Gods to that bloody Sacrifice, he
Throws himself down from the Pinnacle of the Tower, from whence he was doomed to
be precipitated, and voluntarily himself puts a Period to a Life, which had
hardly begun its Part.

But let us turn our eyes to the other side: For, Polixena is already placed
upon Achilles Sepulcher, and only expects the Blow, which is to appease that
Grecians shade, and rejoyn his Soul to those of his Forefathers. Admire her
Beauty, which appears so sparling and Serene; Her Mien, not at all discomposed
at the approach of Death: On the contrary, this Sun, which is going to set for
ever, seems to add a new Luster to the last Beams of its Light. There is also
in her Aer something more strong than her Sex and present Condition ought to
bear. And indeed, she thinks it not enough to expect the Blow, without Shunning
it: But, she sees it coming with much fierceness.

C^^versa ad ^ct^n stat Tr^ci vultu Fer^x. And, when Pyrrhus had given her the
Mortal stroke, her last action seems still an action of courage, and she does
not let her self fall upon the Sepulcher of Achilles, but with design to make
its Earth more heavy, and even in dying to revenge her self.

Tell me now, if it be not a shame in Hecuba, to see her Children more
courageous than her self. Tell me, if it becomes her to pour forth such an
Ocean of tears, while Astianax and Polixena dye without shedding one single
Melancholy drop. Tell me, if you do not think those persons happy, in
comparison with that miserable Woman. Or, if you are so non-plust with the
prospect of all these things, that you have nothing more to urge in her behalf,
acquiesce at the long run with us, that she had too little courage in her
calamities, and wanted fortitude to resent them less cruelly. Now if it be
true, that a ^eakness of mind is the only thing, which renders misfortunes
insupportable to us; and which making us to leave the Helm in the sharpest
Tempests and Hurricanes of Fortune, does occasion the wrecks we suffer in
places, where with safety we might plow the billows: Ought we not to seek
fortitude, that so we may use it as an Anchor, opposing it against the rage of
Wind and Water, and sheltering our selves from the barbarity of the Stor^? Upon
this Pillar we ought certainly to lean* which serves for a foundation to
pleasure, jo^ning this Virtue to temperance and wisdom: And for the living in
repose and in the privation of misery, we must believe, that this firm and
courageous Spirit is ever above anxieties and cares, seeing it despises death
it self: And it must be so well prepared for pain, as to bear always in mind,
that death is the remedy of the most violent, that the l^ast have many good
Intervals, and that it is Master of the middle and moderate ones. Which things
standing thus, we are to infer, that we do not blame timidity and weakness, nor
praise fortitude and temperance for their peculiar regard; but that we reject
those and desire these, because of the former pain is the effect, and the
latter skreen us from it.

So that, now, Justice remains only behind to be examined, and then we shall
have done with the principal, which our Ethics call the Cardinal Virtues. But
the things, that might be said upon this point, are almost the same with the
foregoing: And it is no less conjoined with pleasure than Prudence, Temperance
and Fortitude, which can no ways be withdrawn nor separated from it. And truly,
this pleasure is so far from bringing any damage to our minds, that it does
ever nourish therein by its influence and its nature, such thoughts and
sentiments as are sedate, and never leaves us without these hopes, that we
shall never want any thing of all that nature desires, when it is uncorrupted.
And just as Intemperance and Folly afflict, torment and trouble us incessantly:
So Injustice no sooner seizes on a Man's Breast, but it instills disorder and
confusion into it, rendering him unhappy, tho it should not render him
criminal. But if an unjust Man does any sinister action, tho he commit it in
such sort, that neither Men nor the Sun are privy or can bear witness of it;
yet notwithstanding that he is sure of its being concealed, and what obscurity
soever the shades might have, which covered it, he is still under apprehensions
of its being discussed by truth. Suspicion, commonly, follows the actions of
the wicked, and then discourse, and then rumor, and then the accuser, and then
the judge: And tho all these fail, their own Consciences will not fail to lay
themselves open. Now if some Men believe, that their Riches and ^ower fortify
'em sufficiently against humane justice, and set them above Laws and
Punishments, yet they cannot secure their dear Persons against Divine Justice:
They never lift up their Eyes toward Heaven, but their Consciences fly in
their Faces, and give 'em horrible apprehensions; and they are still phancying,
that those piercing disquiets, which devour them without abatement, are the
secret Executioners of the punishment, which the Divinity inflicts upon them.
For, what Power, or what Riches, when they are justly acquired, can so much
diminish the irksomnesses of this Life, but that at the same time the remorses
of Conscience, the fear of punishment, and the Aversion of Men do the more
augment them? Are there not many Persons, who cannot set bounds to the desire
of being more Rich, of getting more Honors, of Lording it more absolutely, of
showing themselves more voluptuous, of making more stately and delicious
Feasts, of still propagating more and more their sinister Sentiments? And do we
not see, that how great a prey soever they may have scraped together by their
lewd ways, all this instead of pacifying their evil desires, helps only to
inflame them still the more, and these people have more need of being chastis'd
by the Laws, than corrupted by reprimands? Thus, reason invites Men of a sound
judgment to maintain the justice established by the Laws and Equity, which
derives its origin from Nature and Faith, which may be termed the Band of
Civil Society. And this very reason shows, that unjust actions ought never to
be undertaken; not by the weak, who would undertake to attempt them without
success, nor by the Potent, who having compassed them, would not meet with due
repose, nor the accomplishment of their desires in them: And, in short, it
forces us to own, that justice is not desirable for it self; but because it
procures us much contentment, because it makes us to be beloved and cherished,
which are two delicious things: And in a word, by these two means, it renders
our Life the more secure and our Pleasure the more complete. Now, if the praise
of those very Virtues, wherein other Philosophers did principally employ their
most magnifick Harangues, cannot find any issue but that which leads to
Pleasure, and, if that Pleasure, which is the end of all the Virtues, be the
only thing, which calls us to it self, and attracts us by its own proper
Nature, we may boldly deduce this Corollary, that it is the summum bonum, and
the most perfect of all the blessings of humane Life: And we can no longer
question, but that that is the truly happy Life, which Epicurus has taught us.
O holy and severe Pleasure! O admirable Philosophy! By what mischance did Men
come to decry thee! How have thou been abhorred by many virtuous Persons, that
did not understand thee! What has hindered their Eyes from seeing through the
Veil, that their Virtues are under thy Dominion! And how did they happen to
treat then with opprobrious terms, when they are obliged to thee for their
Felicity! But happy the Men, that have been of the Wise Man's Sect, that has
followed thee! Happy those, who have imitated him! Happy even those, who being
born in an Age, wherein several believe, that the Vice and Pleasure of Epicurus
are but one and the same thing, have had sufficient light to discover the
contrary, or at least sufficient, address to stand up in its defense, tho they
have not had courage sufficient to put it into Practice.

FINIS.
Annotations ON EPICURUS HIS MORALITY.
PAge 63. some Stoics, who were Epicurus greatest Enemies, have not used him
so roughly.] I suppose he means Seneca for One, (tho he was no Enemy to
Epicurus in his Life, whatever he might be in his Doctrine) who in many places
of his Works gives him high Commendations. More particularly, there is one
Sentence, which speaks mighty kindly in his Favor, and which Gassendus has
placed in the Title Page of his Life of this Philosopher: But I cannot at
present set it down here, the Place not recurring to me in Seneca (only I
remember in general, that it is in his Epistles) and not having by me the Book
written by that immortal Gallican Philosopher, whom this latter Age may boast
of no less for his Learning than Experience, and who seems to have made an
equal Combination of Speculation and Practice together. But I am heartily of
Opinion, that all these good words, which Seneca gave Epicurus, were in
complement to the rest of the Great and Lordly Men of his Age, who thorough the
Extremities of the whole Roman Empire, were generally Epicureans, if they did
at all hold any solid and fundamental Opinions.

Page 67. People would deal, etc.] In this place my Author infers the innocence
of the Philosophy from the Life of the Philosopher, which is no conclusive way
of arguing. Mr. Hobbs, no doubt, does hold many Dogmes, which are repugnant if
not destructive, to our holy Religion. Now, I cannot conclude, because his Life
(I mean as to the greater part of it) for innocence and strictness might be
paralleled with that of the Primitive Christians, that, therefore, those
Tenants of his were as harmless and meek as any those Catechumens did
entertain. But, whatever our Author says upon this Head, is not so true of
Athens as Malmsbury: There is a different Fame goes aboat of every Man, and it
belongs to our judgment to weigh all sides: Epicurus his Friends aver this and
more of him, than is here related; But they are, unquestionably, over-
balanced on the other side. However, as to Mr. Hobbs, I do believe him to have
been a truly honest and sincere Man, who spoke what he thought, and moreover to
be upright in his Life and Conversation, notwithstanding the stories I have
heard at Bishop's Tables concerning his dealings with the forementioned
Gassendus.

Page 68. Some who have taken Information of that Wisemans Life.] But if they
happen to take Information from his Adversaries, that dissented from him, or
perhaps those that writ the plain truth of things, they will not present the
World with such a fair History of his Life, as they find Epitomized in this and
the ensuing Page. They will find, that he stole every Mother's Son of his
Opinions from Democritus and the Eleatick School, though afterward he
endeavored to hide and conceal the Theft by changing the Opinions in some
little things: That he was so vain and proud, as to exclude from the number of
Learned Men all that did not adhere to his Philosophy, and did not declare
themselves his Sectators, as Plutarch acquaints us: That he was of a fierce and
vexatious Spirit, would let no body alone but railed at every thing, that stood
in his way, most contumeliously contending with Aristotle, most shamefully
Billings-gating Phaedo the Socratick, and in several Volumes opposing
Timocrates, the Brother of Metrodorus, his Companion, because he in some small
concerns differed from him in Philosophy. Laertius, indeed, on whose Sleeve
Gassendus seems to pin his Faith, has spoken much in his behalf; and to
vindicate his Reputation from this among other Aspersions, that he asserted the
lowest sorts of bodily Pleasure to be the supreme Felicity of Mankind, he says,
that his Scholars did either ignorantly or wilfully mistake him. Yet, his
professed Disciple and great Admirer Lucian, who preferred him before all other
Philosophers, and exalted him at such a rate as never Man was exalted, unless
Lucretius had the management of him) comparing him with Aristippus and
Democritus his Masters, says, that he exceeded them both in Impiety and
Luxury. His impiousness appears, that he had the most monstrous conceptions of
God and his Providence, that ever Atheist pretended to own, and that he denied
the Immortality of the Soul: All which Metaphysics may be seen in Laertius
himself. But as for his voluptuousness, we know that Tully an Author of much
greater Authority than Laertius, having objected to one of Epicurus his Friends
his unworthy definition of happiness, quoting it in his own words, and
reproaching the sense of it, asserts that Epicurus did acknowledge no happiness
distinct from corporal and soft and obscene Pleasures, of which he used to
discourse by name without blushing. He reports also concerning Metrodorus, who
(as we have said) was Epicurus intimado, that he did scornfully disdain his
Brother Timocrates, because he hesitated whether all things that belong to an
happy Life, are to be measured by the Belly, and offered to show Velleius his
Books, if he questioned the Allegation. His Garden was not shut to Whores and
Strumpets: It was a perfect Moor-fields, only I believe, it might be a
cleanlier place, and better situated: Leontium was the Creswel, Famous for her
audacious Writing against Theophrastus, and the right knack of a
virtuosa^Impudence, which had risen to that height, as to cast very foul blots
on the impotent Lust of Epicurus, when the poor Gentleman was now grown deadly
old, in a Letter, which she wrote to Lamia, yet extant. It is recorded in the
second Book of Alciphron, where the Learned part of the World, if they have any
occasion for it, may find it whole and entire: I only think fit, in this place,
both for the honest satisfaction of the Reader, and for an Idea of Style to our
Modern Jilts, to translate the beginning of it.

Nothing, in my Conscience, is more hard to please, than that old Fellow, when
he grows young again; this Epicurus, (O Laud!) does so mortify me. He must be
picking faults with every thing, suspecting the very Leaves of the Trees, that
make a noise, writing Eternal Love Letters to me, which keep me from his
Garden. By Venus, if Adonis were now Fourscore years Old, Lowsy, always Sick,
and wrapped his Head in a Fleece of Wool instead of a Cap, I could not endure
him.

These brief Memoirs may satisfy any Man, that has no mind to take up any
thing upon trust, before he comes to read this dissertation, wherein the
Foundation-Principle of the Epicurean Philosophy, i. e. That our happiness does
consist in voluptuousness, is with great Industry canvass'd, and to the great
honor (greater perhaps than he deserved) of Epicurus.

Page 87. There is nothing bounded but in Nature.] That is to say, every thing
in nature has its particular Limits and Circumscriptions, according to the
threefold dimensions of places: Tho all things taken together, i. e. the
Universe or natura rerum, may have a vast and indefinite Extension, and banish
the supposition of imaginary spaces. Yet, in things immaterial, and independent
of matter and body it is not so: Ex. Gr. The Will enjoys an Attribute, next to
infinity: There are no bounds to be set to it, but what reason prescribes; and
this prescription is to be guided according to the necessities of Nature.
Ambition is the greatest Extravagance and Monstrosity, and gave a Monmothian
Birth to the Fable of Typhon, who was a Giant, feigned to be the Son of Erebus
and Terra: Ambition ascending as all other vices from Hell, of which he was a
Type. He was said to have reached Heaven with his Heads, because of his
aspiring Thoughts, and to have forced Old Jove from thence, in regard by
Ambitious Spirits Princes are often chased from their Thrones.

Page 90. Let the Stoiques boast as high as they please, the insensibility of
their Sect.] They held (...), that Passions were Irrational; whence they
defined (...), an inordinate Impulse, straying beyond Nature. This was a
pleasant conceit, but such a one, as, I am glad, they held with all my heart;
since, otherwise, we had never met with all that Wit, which Seneca bestows upon
the Illustration of this Point, while with a great deal of Passion he labors
to prove that the Wise man ought to have none. It Is certain, the whole Intrigue
of Virtue and Vice consists in the Passions: And by the same Argum^nt a Papist
may persuade us Pro^^^^^nts to throw away our Bibles ^tterly, because we,
sometimes, make bad use of them.

Page 94. And because the memory of Maecenas] These verses of Maecenas, Seneca
comments upon excellently well and like himself, in his hundred and first
Epistle. He calls it Turpissimum Votum, that ever Man should refuse neither
weakness, nor deformity, nor the Cross it self, provided but a little Life
would stay in him, during his sufferings. Herein, he prays for the Greatest
Curse that could befall him, and he begs for a continuance of his Punishment,
as if it were for Life it self. But of all things this was the most
contemptible, that he should desire to live, tho it were to be Crucifi^d. You
may debilitate, cripple me (says he) if you please, so that the Soul does but
stay in my broken and useless body: Squash me double in pieces upon the Rack,
so that the distorted Monster does get some Time: You may hoist, and nail me to
the sharpened Cross, yet it is worth my while, to compress my Wounds, and to
hang down straightned from the Tree, so that I but defer what is best in Evils,
an end of the Punishment. It is worth my while to have a Ghost, that I may give
it up. What can we wish to this man, but that his Prayers may be answered? Was
ever heard a Bargain of so much foolish Fear? Did ever man beg his Life with so
much Turpitude? Do ye think, Virgil had ever repeated that to him, Vsque adeone
mori miserum est? Or he had ever seen [let me add] those Verses of his beloved
Horace, wherein Regulus is described leaving Rome at his return for Carthage,
and which in my weak Judgment, I think, to go beyond any thing, that ever
Horace writ of Imagery? Fertur pudicae Conjugis Osculum,
Parvosque natos, ut capitis Minor
A se removisse, and virilem
Torvus humi posuisse Vultum:
Donec labantes consilio Patres
Firmaret Author nunquam alias dato,
Interque maerentes Amicos
Egregius properaret Exul, etc.


Page 101. One of 'em has endeavored by his Writings to destroy his
Opinions.] i. e. Cicero, who in most of his Philosophic or Moral Writings does
oppose the Opinions of Epicurus, especially this of Volupty being the Summum
Bonum. And he deals not only with his Ethics, but his Physics and Theology
too, by introducing several of the Greatest Wits and Gentlemen of Rome, in
company and conversation, some of whom being leven'd with these Principles he
makes to dispute with huge vivacity and acumen with him and his Friends.

Page 107. Petronius did not employ the last hours of his Life in set Speeches
concerning the Souls Immortality.] As Seneca did, who made better use of his
time, and did not dye with the Crowderos about him. This may be easily
interpreted in a very bad sense, principally when my Author elsewhere (page 60.
of the second Volume of his Works Printed at Paris) speaks so slightingly of
the Eternal duration of the Soul: And therefore, I think my self obliged not to
pass it over without some Asterisk fixed upon it. For my part, I would go no
farther than this place to find an argument for the Soul's Immortality: For, I
think it an undeniable proof, that if the Soul be Immaterial, it is certainly
Immortal, unless God will withdraw his ordinary Providence and annihilate it.
Now, that its essence is immaterial and not corporeal, may be gathered hence,
that if it were co-substantial with the body, it could never act as it does in
a dying man. When one Vein was Lanc'd, then would so much Soul fly out with the
Animal Spirits, and the mind would contract an equal Imbecility with the Body;
Judgment, Invention, Memory, would all fail Gradually: And the very Harmony,
which Petronius thought to find in his Music, would prove Discord to him. Not
to engage here in any disputes, I will only mention a Story that a Roman
Catholic, my Friend and a Person of excellent sense told me the other Night:
When he was last in France, he paid a Visit to an Hermit: And after much
discourse, finding him to be of a free temper, and (as we say) a Good-humored
Man, he became so confident, as to ask him, why he being so accomplished a Man,
and so fit for the Pleasures as well as Affairs of humane Life, should go and
macerate himself at this rate for a thing that is doubtful and Cross and Pile:
Why, (says he) If I am in the right at last, I am most happy; if wrong, I am
where you are still.

Ibid. He chose to imitate the sweet Fate of Swans.] Pausanias notes, that
Cygnus King of Liguria, a Prince much addicted to Music, was transformed into
a Swan by Apollo, which Bird ever since was Musical, entertaining its own death
with Songs and Rejoicings. Ovid in his Epistles: Sic, ubi Fata vocant, udis
abjectus in undis,
Ad vada Maeandri concinit albus Olor.
The dying Swan, adorned with Silver Wings,
So in the Sedges of Maeander sings.


It Is true, the Authors of natural History, give little credit to this Relation
of their Harmonical Notes before death, as Aristotle, Pliny, Dr. Brown, etc.
and Alexander Myndius says, That he has attended the death of several of them,
yet could never for his Life hear one Musical Note. However, since it was, the
vulgar notion, it served the Poets to beautify their Poesy withal; and when my
Author was speaking of a Poetique death, it was pity but the Mantuan Swan
should come into his Head. The Roguy Martial himself used it as one of his
Flowers in his Epigrams: Dulcia defecta modulatur carmina Lingua,
Cantator, Cygnus, Funeris ipse sui.
The Swan her sweetest Notes sings as she dies,
Chief Mourner at her own sad Obsequies.


Page 110. Impertinent Terrors and Scholastic Scare-Crows.] This is such a
description of happiness as we meet with in the Poet: Felix, qui potuit rerum
cognoscere causas,
Atque metus omnes, and inexorabile Fatum
Subjecit pedibus, strepitumque Acherontis Avan'!
-- Virg. Georg. 2.

The Lord Verulam somewhere observes very well, that perhaps a little
Philosophy may make men Atheists, but a greater search into the Clue of Causes,
does certainly extricate them from that pestilent Principle; it being (as
Pindar calls it) (...), a wicked Craft, and seems to entitle Atheists to the
Denomination of Wits, when indeed it is (...), the very height of Folly, or
rather of Ignorance, as Clemens Alexandrinus says. And we have an Instance of
it in Hobbs himself, even where in effect he expresses himself One; who in the
very same Book, in which he pretends, that it is highly necessary to the Empire
of our High and Mighty Sovereign Lord and Master Leviathan, that the unthinking
Mobile be abused with the Belief, and scared with the Terror of Invisible
Powers, yet lest the World should be tempted to think him so weak as to be
betrayed into the same Opinion, he declares openly totidem verbis, That neither
himself, nor any wiseman ought to regard the Tales of Religion, and that they
are only designed to chouse poor Ignorant and Foolish Creatures. Just as if
this great Politician should go about to fright Birds from his Corn (which is
one of his own similitudes and colors of Speech) with an empty Doublet, an Hat
and a crooked Stick, but yet lest the Jack-Daws should take him, for one of
their own silly Flock, he shall take most especial care to inform them, that
himself knows it only to be a man of Clouts.

These are men's manners, admirably well described and expressed.] It Is the
nature of Flesh and Blood, sometimes, to run counter to that Old Ethical Axiom,
Omnia appetunt bonum, but then it appears under the notion and semblance of
Good: As you see this antique Saw, a line above translated, -- Video meliora
proboque
Deteriora sequor.


Saluft the Historians Excellence lay in characterizing men, and his chief
strokes in those Characters lie in the representations of the same Persons
frequent Differing: from themselves, in their Passions and Habitudes of Virtue
and Vice.

Page 146. This Sun, which is going to Set for ever.] He alludes to that of
Catullus: Soles occidere and redire possunt:
Nobis, cum brevis occidit semel Lux,
Nox est perpetua una dormienda.


Page 151. They never lift up their Eyes toward Heaven, but their Consciences
fly in their Faces.] Conscience is a Principle inh^rent in the Soul, and
derived from God and Nature, and not to be eradicated by the Art of Man. Great
Philosophers have Christened it by the most venerable Names, as (...) and
(...), i. e. a Domestique God, a Divine Bishop or Overseer, a Sacred Deity, a
Power, that has framed to himself a natural Temple in the Conscience. Tho
Atheists pretend to slight it, yet Cotta who disputed zealously against it,
confessed that as to Matters of Virtue and Vice, sine ulla divina ratione grave
ipsius Conscientiae pondus est. [Tull. de Not. Deorum lib. 3.]

But it begins to grow dark, and I think, here are notes enough of Conscience
already for a Book of this small magnitude. I will, therefore trouble neither
my Reader nor my self any further with such stuff, as any Fellow who has but
one Eye to look into an Index and another into a Book, can with as great ease
as haughtiness present him withal, upon some hours retirement into his Study.
This, in plain truth, is my case: For, I am not indebted to my Stars so much,
as Seneca (the Declamator) was, who could repeat two Thousand Names in the same
Order, that they were rehearsed, and could remember all the lovely things in
the Juvenile Harangues of Rome, Forty years before. Beyond all contradiction,
this is the best way: I love, when Men do a thing, that they should do it
thoroughly!

FINIS.

