IMMANVEL. Or, A discovery of TRUE RELIGION, As it imports a living Principle
in the minds of men; grounded upon Christ's Discourse with the Samaritaness. 1 John 4. 14. Being the latter clause of The Voice Crying in a Wilderness; Or a
Continuation of the Angelical Life:

Mostly Composed at the same time, By S. S.

This is the Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those
days, says the Lord; I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in
their hearts,

Jer. 31. 33. (...) that believes in me, as the Scripture has said, out of
his belly shall flow rivers of living Water,

Joh. 7. 38. (...) itatem Philosophi quaerunt, Theologi inveniunt, Religiosi
Possident.

Comes Mirandul. LONDON, Printed, Anno Dom. 1667.

A Treating Preface TO THE READER.
AMongst the many stupendous spectacles that are wont to surprise and amuze
inquisitive and considerative minds, there seems to be nothing in the world of
a sadder and more astonishing observation, than the small progress and
propagation of Christian Religion. This I call a sad observation, because
Religion is a matter of the most weighty and necessary importance, without
which it is not possible for an immortal soul to be perfected and made happy: I
call it astonishing, because Christian* Religion has in itself such advantages
of recommending itself to the minds of men, and contains in it such mighty
engines to work them into an hearty compliance with it, and to captivate their
reason unto itself, as no other Religion in the World can with any face pretend
to. I do earnestly (and I suppose rationally and Scripturally) hope that this
veritas magna those sacred Oracles will yet much more prevail, and that the
founder of this most excellent Religion, who was lift up upon the cross, and is
more exalted to his Throne, will yet draw more men unto himself: and this
perhaps is all the millennium that we can warrantably look for. But in the mean
time, it is too too evident that the Kingdom of Satan does more obtain in the
World, than the Gospel of Christ, either in the Letter, or power of it. As to
the former, if we will receive the probable conjecture of learned enquirers, we
shall not find above one sixth part of the known World yet Christianized, or
giving so much as an external adoration to the Crucified Jesus. As to the
latter, I will not be so bold as to make any Arithmetical conjectures, but
judge it more necessary and more becoming a charitable and Christian spirit, to
set down in secret and weep over that sad but true account given in the Gospel,
Few are chosen, and again Mat. 20. 26 Mat. 7. 14.
Few there be that find it; being grieved (after the example of my
compassionate Redeemer) for the hardness of their hearts, and praying with Joah
in another case, The Lord make his people an hundred times so many more as they
be! It is besides my present purpose to enquire into the immed^ate causes of
the non-propagation of the Gospel in the former sense; only it is easy and
obvious to guess, that few will enter in by the way of the tree of life, when
the same is guarded with a flaming sword; And it were reasonable to hope, that
if the minds of Christians were more purged from a selfish bitterness, fierce
animosity, and arbitrary sowrness, and possessed with a more free, generous,
benign, compassionate, condescending, candid, charitable, and Christ-like
spirit, which would be indulgent toward such as are for the present under a
less perfect dispensation* (as our Luke 9. 49, 50, 54 55.
Saviors was) would not impose any thing harsh or unnecessary upon the sacred
and inviolable Consciences of men, but would allow and maintain that liberty to
men, which is just and natural to them in matters of Religion, and no way
forfeited by them; then I say it might be reasonable to hope, that the innate
power and virtue of the Gospel would prove most victorious; Judaisme,
Mahumetisme, and Paganism would melt away under its powerful influences, and
Satan himself fall down as lightning before it, as naturally as the eyelids
of the morning do chase away the blackness of the night, when once they are
lift up upon the earth. But my design is chiefly to examine the true and proper
cause of the non-progress of the Gospel as to the power of it, and its
inefficaciousness upon the hearts and Consciences of those that do profess it.
And now in finding out the cause hereof, I shall content my self to be wise on
this side Heaven, leaving that daring course of searching the decrees of God,
and riffing into the hidden rolls of eternity, to them who can digest the
uncomfortable notion of a self-willed, arbitrarious, and imperious Deity; which
I doubt is the most vulgar apprehension of God, men measuring him most grossly
and unhappily by a self-standard. And as I dare not soar so high, so neither
will I adventure to stoop so low, as to rake into particulars; which are
differently assigned, according to the different humors and interests of them
that do assign them; each party in the world being ^o excellently favorable to
itself, as to be ready to say with David, The earth and all the Psalm. 75. 3.
inhabitants of it are dissolved, I bear up the pillars of it; ready to think
that the very interest of Religion in the world is involved in them and their
persuasions and dogmas, and that the whole Church is undone, if but an hair
fall from their heads, if they be in the least injured or abridged. Which is a
piece of very great fondness, and indeed the more unpardonable, in as much as
it destroys the design of the Gospel, in confining and limiting the holy one of
Israel, and making God as topical, as he was when he dwelt no where upon earth
but at the Temple in Jerusalem.

Waving these extremes therefore, I conceive the true cause in general of the
so little prevailing of true Religion in the hearts and lives of men is the
false notion that men have of it, placing it there where indeed it is not, nor
does consist. That this must needs be a cause of the not prevailing of the
Gospel wherever it is found, I suppose every body will grant; and that it is
almost everywhere to be found, will I doubt too evidently appear by that
description of true Christian Religion, which the most sacred Author of it the
Lord Jesus Christ made to the poor Samaritaness; which I have endeavored
briefly to explain, according to the t^nour of the Gospel, in this small
Treatise; which I first framed for private use, in a season when it was most
behovefull for me to understand the utmost secrets of my own soul, and do the
utmost service I was able toward the salvation of those that were under my
roof; expecting every day to render up my own or their souls into the arms of
our most merciful Redeemer, and to be fully swallowed up into that eternal
life, into which true Religion daily springs up, and will at length infallibly
conduct the Christian soul unto. This work thus undertaken and in a great
measure then carried on, I have since perfected, and do here present to the
perusal of my dear Country, having made it public for no private end; but if
it might be to serve the interest of Gods glory in the world: which I do verily
reckon that I shall do, if by his blessing I may be instrumental to undeceive
any soul mistaken in so high and concerning a matter as Religion is, or any way
to awaken and quicken any Religious soul not sufficiently ravished with the
unspeakable glory, nor cheerfully enough springing up into the full fruition of
Eternal life.

What a certain and undefeatable tendency true Religion has toward the
eternal happiness and salvation of men's souls, will I hope evidently appear out
of the body of this small Treatise: But that is not all (though indeed that were
enough to commend it to any rational soul, that is any whit free and ingenuous,
and is not so perfectly debauched as to utterly from right reason;) For it is
also the sincerest policy imaginable, and the most unerring expedient in the
world for the uniting and establishing of a divided and tottering Kingdom or
Commonwealth: To demonstrate which, was the very design of this Preface. It is
well known (Oh that it were but as well and effectually believed!) that
godliness is profitable to all things, and that it 1 Tom. 4. 8.
has the promises and blessings of the life that now is, and of that which is
to come; that the right seeking of the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness
has no less than all things Mat. 6. 33.
annexed to it. How unmeasurable is the body and bulk of that blessedness, to
which all the comforts of this life are to be as an Appendix to a volume! But
men are apt to shuffle off generals; therefore I will descend to instances, and
show in a few Particulars what a mighty influence Religion in the power of it
would certainly have, for the political happiness and flourishing state of a
Nation. Wherein I doubt not but to make it appear, that not Religion (as some
slanderously report) but indeed the w^nt of it is the immediate trouhler of
every Nation, and individual society, yea and soul too; according to that
golden saying of the holy Apostle, From whence come Jam. 4. 1.
wars and fightings? Come they not hence, even of your lusts that war in your
members? Here let me desire one thing of the Reader, and that is, to bear in
his mind all along where he finds the word [ Religion,] that I have principally
a respect to the description given of it in the Text, and that I mean thereby a
divine principle implanted in the soul springing up into everlasting life.

And now I should briefly touch those faults both in governors toward their
subjects, subjects toward their governors, and toward each other, which do
destroy the peaceful state and the sound and happy constitution of a body
politic: And indeed I fear it will run upon some inconvenience, if not
confusion, to wave this method. But out of a pure desire to avoid whatever may
be interpretable to ill will, curiosity, presumption, or any other bad
disposition, and that it may appear to any ingenuous eye that I am more
desirous to bind up, than to rake into sores, I will expressly show how Religion
would heal the distempers of any Nation, without taking any more than an
implicit notice of the distempers themselves.

First Then, it is undoubtedly true, that Religion deeply radicated in the
nature of Princes and governors would most effectually qualify them for the
most happy way of reigning. Every body knows well enough what an excellent
Eucrasie and lovely constitution the Jewish polity was in, under the influences
of holy David, wise Solomon, devout Hezekiah, zealous Josiah, and others of the
same spirit; so that I need not spend my self in that enquiry, and so
consequently not upon that argument. Now there are many ways, by which it is
easy to conceive that Religion would rectify and well temper the spirits of
Princes.

This principle will verily constitute the most noble, heroical, and royal
soul, in as much as it will not suffer men to find any unhallowed satisfaction
in a divine authority, but will be springing up into a Godlike nature, as their
greatest and most perfective glory. It will certainly correct and limit the
over-eager affectation of unweildy greatness and unbounded Dominion, by
teaching them that the most honorable victory in the world is self-conquest,
and that the propagation of the image and Kingdom of God in their own souls is
infinitely preferrible to the advancement or enlargement of any temporal
jurisdiction.

The same holy principle (being the most genuine offspring of divine Love and
Benignity) will also polish their rough and over-severe natures, instruct them
in the most sweet and obliging methods of government; by assimulating them to
the nature of God, 1 Cor. 7. 22. 2 Cor. 3. 17.
who is infinitely abhorrent from all appearance of oppression, and has most
admirably provided that his servants should not be slaves, by making his
service perfect freedom.

The pure and impartial nature of God cannot endure superstitious flatterers,
or hypocritical professors; and the Princes of the Earth that are regenerate
into his Image, will also estimate men according to God; I mean according to
his example, who loves nothing but the communications of himself, and according
L^v. 2. 11.
to their participation of his Image, which is only amiable and advanceable in
the world. What God rejected in his fire-offerings, Religion will teach Princes
to disgust in the devotions (as they call them) of their Courtiers; I mean not
only the leaven of superstitious pride and dogged morosity, but also the honey
of mercenary prostrations and fawning adulations.

In a word, this Religious principle which makes God its pattern and end,
springs from him and is always springing up into him, would sovereignty heal
the distempers of ruling by humor, self-interest, and arbitrariness, and teach
men to seek the good of the public before self-gratifications. For so God
rules the world, who (however some men slander him) I dare say has made
nothing the duty of his creature, but what is really the good of it: neither
does he give his people Laws on purpose that he might show his Sovereignty in
making them, or his justice in punishing the breach of them; much less does he
give them any such statutes, as which himself would as willingly they broke as
kept, so he might but the penalty.

What I have briefly said concerning political governors, the judicious Reader
may view over again and apply to the Ecclesiastical. For I do verily reckon
that if the hearts of these men were in that right Religious temper and holy
order which I have been speaking of, it would plentifully contribute toward
the happy and blessfull state of any Kingdom. I will speak freely (let it light
where it will,) that principle that springs up into popular applause, secular
greatness, worldly pomp and bravery, flesh-pleasing, or any kind of
selfexa^tation (which is manifold;) is really contradistinct from that Divine
principle, that Religious nature that springs up into everlasting life. And
certainly notwithstanding all the recr^minations and self-justifications which
are on all hands used to shuffle of the guilt, these governors must lay aside
their fullen pride, as well as the people their proud fullenness, before the
Church of God be healed in its breaches, purged of Antichristianism, or can
probably arrive at any sound constitution or perfect stature.

But I suppose Religion will not have its full and desirable effect upon a
Nation by healing the sickly heads of it; except it be like the holy oil
powered upon the sacrificer's head, which ran down also upon the skirts of his
Psalm. 133. 2.
garment. Therefore

Secondly, It is indispensably requisite for the through healing and right
constituting of any political body, that the subjects therein be thus Divinely
principled. This will not fail to dispose them rightly toward their govern^urs
and toward one another.

1. Toward their Governors. There are many evil and perverse dispositions in
subjects toward their Rulers; all which Religion is the most excellent
expedient to rectify.

The first and fundamental distemper here seems to be a want of due Reverence
toward these vicegerents of God upon earth; which easily grows up into
something positive, and becomes a secret wishing of evil to them. This fault,
as light as some esteem it, was 2 Samuel 6. 16. Prove. 30. 16. 1 John 3. 15.
severely punished in Queen Michal, who despised her Lord King David in her
heart, and her barren womb went down to its Sister the grave under great
reproach. And if an ordinary hatred be so foully interpreted by the holy
Apostle, Whosoever hates his brother is a murderer; surely disloyal and
malignant dispositions toward governors must needs have a fouler face; and we
may say by a parity of reason whosoever hates his Prince is a Rebel and a
Regicide. Now this distemper, as fundamental and epidemical as it is, the
spirit of true Religion will heal, and I think I may say that only: For I know
nothing in the world that has, nay I know that nothing in the world has that
Sovereignty and dominion over the dispositions and affections of the soul, as
this principle thoroughly ingrafted in the soul does challenge to itself. This
alone can frame the heart of man into that beautiful temper and complexion of
love and loyalty, that he will not curse the King, no not in his conscience; no
Eccles. 10. 20.
not though he were well assured that there were no winged ^e^^enger to tell
the matter.

An other distemper in Subjects respective to their Governors is Impatience of
bearing a yoke. Which is an evil so natural to the proud and imperious spirit
of man, that I believe it were safe to affirm, that every irreligious subject
could be well content to be a Prince; however there may be many who utterly
despairing of such event, may with the Fox in the Fable, profess they care not
for it, From this principle of pride and impatience of subjection I suspect it
is, that the rigid Chiliasts do so scornfully declaim against, and so loudly
decry the carnal ordinances of Magistracy and Ministry: not that they do verily
seek the advancement of Christ's Kingdom, (which indeed every disorderly,
tumultuous, proud, impatient soul does ipso facto deny and destroy) but of
themselves. To whom one might justly apply the censure which Pharaoh
injuriously pa^^es upon the children of Israel, with a little alteration, Ye
are proud, therefore ye say let Exodus 5. 17.
us go and do Sacrifice to the Lord. This distemper the power of Religion would
excellently heal, by mortifying ambitious inclinations and quieting the
impatient turbulencies of the fretfull and envious soul, by fashioning the
heart to a right humble frame and cheerful submission to every ordination of
God. You will see in this Treatise, that a right Religious soul, powerfully
springing up into everlasting life, has no list nor leisure to attend to such
poor seize and sorry acquests, as the Lording it over other men; being
feelingly acquainted with a life far more excellent than the most Princely, and
being overpowred with a supreme and Sovereign good, which charms all its
inordinate ragings, and laying hold upon all its faculties, draws them forth by
a pleasing violence unto a most zealous pursuit of itself. A principle of
humility makes men good subjects; and they that are indeed probationers for
another world, may very well behave themselves with a noble disdain toward all
the glories and preferments of this.

The last distemper that I shall name in Subjects toward their Governors is
Diseontents about conceited misgovernment and maladministration; which commonly
spring from an evil and finister interpretation of the Rulers actions, and are
attended with an evil and tumultuous zeal for relaxation. Now this distemper,
as great as it is, and destructive to the well-being of a body politic, true
Religion would heal both root and branch. Were that noble part and branch of
Christian Religion universal Charity rightly seated in the soul, it would not
suffer the Son of the bondwoman to inherit with it; it would cast out those
irefull jealousies, sour suspicions, harsh surmises, and imbittered thoughts
which lodge in unhallowed minds, and display itself in a most amicable
sweetness and gentleness of disposition, in fair glosses upon doubtful
actions, friendly censures or none at all, kind extenuations of greater faults
and covering of lesser. For this is the proper genius of this divine principle
to be (...) or very unbelieving of evil, and (...), or easily entertaining of
good reports, gladly interpreting all things to a good meaning that will
possibly admit of such construction; or if you will in the Apostles phrase,
Charity is not easily provoked, thinks no 1 Cor. 13. 5.
evil.

And as Charity does put up this root of discontents, so will faith allay and
destroy those discontents themselves, which are about misgovernment and ill
administration. This noble principle administers ease and satisfaction to the
soul, if she happen to be provoked: For it will not suffer her long to stand
gazing upon second causes; but carries her up in a seasonable contemplation to
the supreme cause, without whom no disorder could ever befall the world; and
there commands her to repose her self, to wit in the bosom of infinite wisdom
and grace, waiting for a comfortable issue. He may well be vexed indeed, that
has so much reason as to observe the many monstrous disorders which are in the
world, and not so much faith as to eye the inscrutable providence of a benign
and all-wise God, who permits the same with respect to the most beautiful
end and blessed order imaginable. Though faith abhors the blasph^my of laying
blame upon God, yet it so fixes the soul upon him, and causes her so to eye his
hand and end in all mal-administrations of men, that she has no leisure to
fall out with men, or quarrel with instruments.

These Discontents I said were frequently attended with an evil and seditious
zeal for relaxation, discovering itself in secret treacherous conspiracies, and
many times in boisterous and daring attempts. These are at the first sight so
directly contrary to the character given of Religious men, viz. the Psalm. 35.
20. Gal. 5. 22, 23. Col. 3. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
quiet of the Land, and the genius of Religion which is wholly made up of love,
peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faithfulness, meekness,
temperance, mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind, forbearance, forgiveness,
charity, thankfulness, wisdom, that it is easy to conceive that Religion in
the power of it would certainly heal this evil disease also. There are many
pretenders to Religion, whose complaint is still concerning oppression and
persecution, their cry is all for liberty and deliverance; but to make it the
more passable and plausible, they style it the advancement of the Kingdom of
Christ. This pretense is so fair, but withal so deceitful, that I count it
worth my time to speak a little more liberally to it. And here I do from the
very bottom of my soul protest, that I account the advancement of the glory of
God and the Kingdom of Christ to be the most desirable thing in the World; and
that it is highly becoming the greatest spirits upon earth to employ the very
utmost zeal and diligence to assist the accomplishment thereof: yea so utterly
do I abhor irreligion and Atheism, that (as the Apostle speaks in somewhat a
like case) I do verily Phil. 1. 18.
rejoice that Christ is professed though it be but pretended, and that truth is
owned though it be not owned in truth. I will further add that the oppressing
and obstructing of the external progress and propagation of the Gospel is hated
of Christ, and to be lamented of all true Christians. Yea I will further allow
men a due sensibleness of their personal oppressions and injuries, and a
natural warrantable desire to be redeemed from them. And now having thus purged
my self, I entreat the Christian Reader patiently, and without prejudice to
suffer me to speak somewhat closely to this matter: Yea I do verily assure my
self that I shall be accepted, or at least indulged by all free and ingenuous
spirits, who are rightly acquainted with the genius of Christian Religion, and
do prefer truth before interest.

And first, For the complaint, that is mostly concerning oppression and
persecution: certainly Religion, if it did rightly prevail in our hearts, would
very much heal this distemper, if not by a perfect silencing of these
complaints, yet surely by putting them into another tune. I reckon that
Religion quite silences these complaints when it engages the soul so entirely
in serving the end of God in afflictions, and in a right improvement of them
for religious purposes, that she list not to spend her self in fruitless
murmurings and unchristian indignations. As fire seizes upon every thing that
is combustible, and makes it fuel for itself, and a predominant humor in the
body converts into its own substance whatever is convertible, and makes it
nourishment to itself; so doubtless this spirit of burning, this divine
principle, if it were rightly predominant in the soul, would nourish itself by
all things that lie in its way, though they seem never so heterogeneous, and
hard to be digested; and rather than want meat, it would with Sampson fetch it
out of the very eater himself. But if Religion should not utterly silence these
complainings by rendering the soul thus forgetful of the body, and regardless of
its smart, in comparison of the happy advantage that may be made of it; yet
methinks it should draw the main stream of these tears into an other channel,
and put these complaints into an other tune. It is very natural to the
Religious soul to make God all things unto itself, to lay to heart the interest
of truth and holiness more than any particular interest of its own; and to
bewail the disservice done to God, more than any self-incommodation. Must not
he needs be a good subject to his Prince, who can more heartily mourn that Gods
Laws, are not kept, than that he himself is kept under; that can be more
grieved that men are cruel, than that they kill him; that can be more troubled
because there are oppressions in the world, than because he himself is
oppressed? such subjects Religion alone can make.

As for the Cry that is made for liberty and deliverance; I confess I do not
easily apprehend what is more, or more naturally desirable than true liberty:
yea I believe there are many devout and Religious souls, that from a right
noble and generous principle, and out of a sincere respect to the Author and
End of their creation, are almost intemperately studiou^ of it, do prefer it
above all preferme^^ (...) hing that may be properly (...) ^^sual, and would
purchase it with any thing that they can possibly part with. But yet that I may
a little moderate, if not quite stifle this cry, I must freely profess that I
do apprehend too much of sensuality generally in it; because this liberty is
commonly abstracted from the proper end of it, and desired merely as a
naturally convenient good, and not under a right religious consideration.
Self-love is the very heart and center of the animal life; and doubtless this
natural principle is as truly covetous of self-preservation, and freedom from
all inconveniences, grievances, and confinements, as any Religious principle
can be And therefore I may well allude to our Saviors words, and say, If you
love and desire Mat. 5. 47.
deliverance only under the notion of a natural good; what do you more than
others? Do not even Publicans the same? But were this divine principle rightly
exercising its Sovereignty in the soul, it would value all things, and all
estates and conditions, only as they have a tendency to the advancement and
nourishment of itself. With what an ordinary, not to say disdainful eye, would
the Religious soul look upon the fairest self-accommodations in the world; and
be ready to say within itself, What is a mere abstract deliverance from
afflictions worth? Wherein is a naked freedom from afflictions to be accounted
of? Will this make me a blessed man? Was not profane and impudent Ham delivered
from the deluge of Water, as well as his brethren? Were not the filthy
shameless daughters of Lot delivered from the deluge of Fire as well as their
Father? And yet we are so far from rising up and calling these people blessed,
that the heart of every chaste and modest Christian is ready to rise against the
very mention of their names, when he remembers how both the one and the other,
though in a different sense, discovered their Fathers nakedness. If we did
really value our selves by our souls, and our souls themselves by what they
possess of the Image of God, if we did rightly prefer the advancement of the
Divine life before the gratification of the animal, it is easy to conceive how
we should prefer patience before prosperity, faith in God before the favor of
men, spiritual purity before temporal pleasures or preferments, humility before
honor, the denial of our selves before the approbation of others, the
advancement of Gods image, before the advancement of our own names, an
opportunity of exercising gracious dispositions, before the exercising of any
temporal power or secular authority, and in a word, the displaying of the
beauty, glory and perfections of God before health, wealth, liberty,
livelihood, and life itself. We should certainly be more indifferently affected
toward any condition, whether prosperity, or adversity, and not be so fond of
the one, nor weary of the other, if we did verily value them only by the
tendency that they had to further Religion, and advance the life of Christ in
our souls. This would certainly make men more sincerely studious to reap Gods
end in afflicting them, and less longing to see the end of their afflictions.

And as for treacheries, plottings, invasions, usurpations, rebellions, and
that tumultuous zeal for Relaxation, which this impatience of oppression and
fondness of deliverance do so often grow up into, I dare say there is nothing
like Religion in the power of it, for the effectual healing of them. The true
spirit of Religion is not so weary of oppression, though it be by sinful men,
as it is abhorrent from deliverance, if it be by sinful means. May 1 Cor. 3. 1.
I not be allowed to allude to the Apostle, and say, whereas there is amongst
you this zeal, contention, and faction, are ye not carnal and walk as men? Is
not this the same which a mere natural man would do, strive and struggle by
right and by wrong to redeem himself from whatsoever is grievous and galling to
the interest of the flesh? Might it not be reasonably supposed, that if
Religion did but display itself aright in the powerful actings of faith, hope
and humility, it would quench this scalding zeal, and calm these tempestuous
motions of the soul, and make men rather content to be delivered up to the
adversary, though the flesh should by him be destroyed, so by the spirit might
be saved, and the divine life advanced in the way of the Lord. Oh how dear and
precious are the possession and practice of faith, patitnce, humility, and
self-denial to a godly soul, in comparison of all the joys and toys,
treasures, pleasures, ease and honor of the world, the safety and liberty of
the flesh! How much more then, when these must be accomplished by wicked means,
and purchased at the rate of Gods displeasure?

And because the Kingdom of Christ is so often alleged to defend and
patronize these strange fervours and frenzies, let me here briefly record to
all that shall read these lines, the way and method of Christ himself in
propagating his own Kingdom. It will not be denied but that Christ was
infinitely studious to promote his own Kingdom in the best and most proper
sense: But I no where read that he ever attempted it by force or fraud, by
violent opposition or crafty insinuation. Nay he reckoned that his Kingdom was
then truly promoted, when these tumultuous, impatient, imperious, proud lusts
of men were mortified. Nothing had been more easy with him, considering his
miraculous power, infalsible Mat. 11. 29.
wisdom, and the mighty interest and party which he could by these have made
for himself in the world, than to have raised his own Kingdom upon the ruins
of the Roman, and to have quite shuffled Caesar out of the World: but indeed
nothing more impossible, considering the perfect innocence and infinite
Sacredness of his temper, nor any thing more contradictious, considering the
proper notion of his Kingdom; which he professes not be secular, and so not be
maintained by fighting: But if you would John 18. 16. ver. 37.
know in what sense he was a King, he himself seems to intimate it in his
answer to Pilate, Thou say that I am a King; to this end was I born that I
should bear witness unto the truth: So then it seems, where ever there is truth
and holiness predominant, there is Christ really enthroned and actually
triumphant. Where Religion does vitally inform, animate, and actuate men's
souls, it does make them rightly to understand, that the Kingdom of Christ is
not the thriving of parties, the strengthening of factions, the advancement of
any particular interest, though it seem to be of never so Evangelical a
complexion; nor yet the proselyting of the World to the profession of
Christianity, or of the Christian World to the purer and more reformed
profession of it (though these latter would be a great external honor to the
person of Christ:) but that it is most properly and happily propagated in the
spirits of men, and that where ever there is faith, patience, humility, self
denial, contempt of this world, and pregnant hopes of a better, pure obedience
to God and sincere benignity to men, here and there is the Kingdom of God,
Christ Regnant, and the Gospel in the power and triumph of it. And may not
these things be, and be most conspicuously, in a persecuted condition of the
Church? That certainly was an high instance of the mighty power of the Divine
life in our blessed Savior, which the Apostle Peter records of him, who when
he was reviled, reviled not again, 1 Pet. 2. 23.
when he suffered he threatened not, but committed himself to him that judges
righteously. The same divine principle dwelling plentifully in our souls, would
instruct us to the same behavior, according to the precept given by the same
Apostle, Not rendering evil 1. Pet. 3. 9.
sor evil, or railing for railing, but contrariwise blessing, etc. How vainly
do men dream that they serve the interest, and advance the Kingdom of Christ,
by fierce and raging endeavors to cast off every yoke that galls them, and
kicking against every thorn that pricks them; when indeed they serve the
interest of the flesh, and do under a fine cloak gratify the mere animal life,
and Sacrifice to self-love; which is as covetous of freedom from all
retrenchments, and confinements, as Religion it self can be. It is said indeed,
that when the Churches had rest they were edified and multiplied; but when they
suffer according to the will of God, they Acts 9. 31. 1 Pet. 4. 14. 2 Cor. 12.
19.
are then glorified: for the spirit of glory and of God rests upon them: As
the Apostle Paul professes of himself in that most noble and heroical passage
of his to the Corinthians, Most gladly therefore will I rather glory in my
infirmities that the power of Christ may rest upon me. Secondly, Religion will
not fail rightly to dispose the hearts of subjects toward one another; and
that whether they be of the same way and judgment with themselves, or
different. I dare not assert that it would make them all of the same way and
mind; neither do I believe it would: yet I am confident it would do more
toward this Catholic union, than all the Laws and severities in the world
can. Mutual forbearance and forgiveness, Christian kindness, and discreet
condescensions, are the most warrantable, and most effectual method for
introducing uniformity and unanimity too (which is much better) into the Church
of Christ. But however, Religion would certainly give a right disposition, and
teach men aright behavior respective to each other, whether friends or
dissenters.

This principle would teach men to love their friends and accomplices only in
the Lord, as his members, not as their own partisans. Are not they strangely
devoted to interest, that will vindicate any thing in a partizan, which they
will declaim against in a dissenter? And yet how is the sacred name of
Christian friendship reproached everywhere by reason of this partiality! How
much better did true Religion instruct the great Apostle, to know no man after
the flesh, no 2. Cor. 5. 16.
not Christ himself!

The same principle would not fail to cure the distempers of men respective to
those that are of a different way and judgment from themselves; whether of
Pretestants toward Protestants, or Protestants and Papists one toward
another. It would heal the distempered affections and behaviors of Protestants
toward Protestants. Were men thoroughly Baptized into the Spirit of Love and
Wisdom (which are so lively pourtrayed by the Apostles St. Paul and St. James,
that one might well be enamoured of the very description,) how certainly would
all oppressions, lawsuits, disputations about unprofitable and indeterminable
points either be suppressed or sanctified, either not be or not be vexatious! Not
to speak of the oppression done by overreaching, stealing, lying,
falsewitness-bearing, slanderous detrectations, envious suggestions, and
malignant dissemination of doubtful suspicions, (by which commonly poor men
oppress the rich;) all which true Religion abhorrs: There is a great oppression
that goes uncontrolled in the World, which is, by the cruel engrossings and
covetrous insatiable tradings of richer men. What these are intentionally I
will not say, but that they are really and eventually as great oppressions, as
those inhumane depopulations, and squeezing exactions, which are so much
inveighed against, I doubt not. But be they what they will, or be they excused
how they will, I am confident that this Divine principle that powerfully
springs up into everlasting life, would mightily relieve the world in this
respect; in that it would moderate men's desires of corruptible riches, forbid
them to seek the things of this world any more or any otherwise than in
consistency with, and subserviency to their primary and most diligent seeking
of the Kingdom of God: it would make men seek the wealth of others even as
their own, and make private advantages stoop to the public good. I do verily
believe that if there were none but good men in England, there would be no poor
men there. Civil Laws may provide for the maintenance of the poor; but the Law
of Divine love, a principle of Religion, if it were universally obeyed, would
make men so nobly regardless of earthly accommodations, that there would soon
be room enough for all men to thrive into a sufficient stature; and then being
so grown, they would covet no more.

In Lawsuits (if there were any) men would seek the advancement of truth, and
not of their own cause and interest distinct from it.

And oh how excellently would it still the noise of axes and hammers about the
Temple of God! It would take men off from vain speculations and much eagerness
about unnecessary opinions; by employing them in more substantial and important
studies. The very being of Religion in the soul would indeed decide a world of
controversies, which the Schools have long labored in vain to determine. For I
reckon that these Scholastical wars, (fitly called Polemicks,) like those civil
dissensions spoken of by the Apostle Jam. 4. 1.
James, do for the most part spring from men's lusts that war in their members;
such as pride, curiosity, lasciviency of wit, disobedience and unsubduedness of
understanding, and the like. I have observed with great grief, how the spirits
of many men, I had almost said sects of men, run out wholly into disputes about
Ceremonies pro and con, about Church Government, about what is orthodox and
what is heterodox, about the true and the false Church (which commonly they
judge by something external, and indeed separable from the essence of a true
Church;) and hereabout is their zeal, their conference, and their very prayers
themselves mostly bestowed. Who can doubt but that Religion in the power of it
would find men something else to do; yea and if it could not perfectly
determine these niceties, yet it would much heal our dissentions about them,
and bring tears to quench the strange and unnatural heats that are amongst us,
and cause such dreadful inflammations in our bowels.

But it may seem that there is such a fatal enmity and irreconcilable feud
betwixt Papists and Protestants, that nothing, no not Religion it self can heal
it. And truly if we suppose that it is Religion that engages both parties in
this enmity, I think it will prove incurable; But God forbid that this pure
offspring of Heaven should be so blaspheamed! It is not Religion, but indeed
the want of it that begets this implacable animosity, whatever is pretended.
Cruel Religion, Bloody Religion, Selfish Religion, Envious and Revengeful
Religion! Who can choose but cry out of the blasphemy of this contradiction at
the very first hearing? Nay I dare affirm it without haesitation, that the more
Religious any Protestant or Papist is, the more abhorrent he is from brutish
savageness, wicked Revenge, and devilish Hatred. The Church of Rome judges the
Reformed Heretics are not fit to live; and why? Not because they live not
well, but because they cannot think and believe as they do. And is this the
genuine product of true Religion? Nothing less. For a desire of ruling over
men's Consciences, and of subjecting the faith of others to themselves, is
certainly competible to a mere natural man, nay to the Devil himself, who is as
lordly, cruel, and imperious as any other. The Reformed Churches on the other
hand, are (I doubt) generally more offended at the Papists for their
persecutions of them, than for their real persecuting and Crucifying Christ
afresh by their sins; and so consequently, do rather write and fight against
them, than either pity or pray for them. I hope there are as many
well-spirited Christians in England, at least proportionably, as in any Church
upon earth; and yet I fear there are far more that could wish the Papists out
of this world, than that earnestly desire that they might be fitted for, and so
counted worthy of a better. And does this spring from a Religious principle
think ye, or a selfish? Does it not agree well to the animal life, and natural
self to be tender of its own interest and concernments, to wish well to its own
safety to defend it self from violence? May I not allude to our Saviors words,
and say If ye hate them that hate you, Mat. 5. 46.
how can that be accounted Religious? Do not even the Publicans the same? I
doubt we know not sufficiently what spirit we should be of. The power of
Religion rightly prevailing in the soul would mold us into another kind of
temper; it would teach us as well to love and pity and pray for Papists, Mat.
5. 44. Rev. 19. 20, 21.
as to hate Popery. I know the Prophecy indeed, that the Beast and the false
Prophet shall be cast alive into the lake burning with brimstone, and the
remnant shall be slain with the sword of him that sat upon the horse: But in
as much as that sword is said to proceed out of his mouth, I would Ephesians. 6. 17.
Hos. 6. 5.
gladly interpret it of the word of God, which kills men unto Salvation.
However, let the interpretation of that Text and others of the like importance
be what it will, I reckon it very unsafe to turn all the Prophesies and
threatenings of God into Prayers; lest happily we should be found to contribute to
the damning of men's souls. Yea when all is 2 These. 2. 12.
said, concerning the reprobating decrees of God, and his essential inflexible
punitive justice; and all those Texts that seem to speak of Gods revenging
himself with delight, are interpreted to the utmost harshness of meaning that
the cruel wit of man can invent; yet it remains a sealed, and to me a sweet
truth, I have no pleasure in the Ezekiel. 18. 32. chap. 33. 11.
death of him that dies, says the Lord God: and again, As I live says the
Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked. Wherefore to wave all
those dreadful glosses (that do rather describe the bitter and revengefull
ingeny of man that makes them, than interpret the pure and perfect nature of
God upon whom they are made,) let us attend to that beautiful character that is
every where given of Religion (which is Exodus 32. 32. Numb. 11. 29. Romans 92, 3.
Luke 19. 10. Acts 10. 38. Romans 5. 6.
our highest concernment) in the person of Moses, of Paul, and of Christ Jesus
himself the Author and exemplar of it; who by his incarnation, life and death,
abundantly demonstrated the infinite Benignity and compassionate ardours of his
soul toward us, when we were worse than Papists, as being out of a possibility
of salvation without him: and let that mind be in us, which was in him also.
Though it be not directly our Saviors meaning in my Text, yet I believe it is
reduct^vely, that this pure and divine principle Religion springs up into
everlasting life, not only our own, but other men's also. But however Religion
is described, sure I am it is most unnatural to the Religious soul that is
regenerated into the pure spirit of piety, pity, and universal charity, to be
of a cruel, fierce, revengeful, damning disposition. And therefore, whatever
are the Ranting and Wrathful strains of some men's Devotions, I beseech the
Reader to endeavor with me, that Charity toward men's souls may go along in
conjunction with zeal and piety toward God, when we present our selves before
the throne of his grace: And so I am confident it will, if we pray sincerely to
this purpose, viz. That God would cause the wickedness of the wicked to come to
an end, that he would consume the Antichrist but Convert the Papist, and make
the wonderers after the beast to become followers of the Lamb! I doubt there
are many, that think they can never be too liberal in wishing ill to the
Papists; nay they count it a notable argument of a good Protestant, I had
almost said an evidence of grace, to be very raging and invective against them.
Alas, how miserably do we bewray our selves in so doing, to be nothing less,
than what we pretend to by doing it! For are not we our selves herein
Antichristian; whilst we complain of their cruelties, our own souls in the
very act boiling over with Revengefull and scalding affections? If we do indeed
abhor their cruelty because it is contrary to the holy precepts of the Gospel,
and the true Kingdom of Christ, we ought to be as jealous at the same time lest
any thing like unto it should be found in our selves: otherwise are we not
carnal? For mere nature, as I have often said, will abhor any thing that is
contrary to it self, and will not willingly suffer its delicate interest to be
touched. The Apostle tells us that no man speaking by the Spirit of Christ,
calls Christ accursed; 1 Cor: 12. 3.
But I doubt it is common to curse Antichrist, and yet by a spirit that is
Antichristian, I mean, carnal, selfish, cruel, and uncharitable. For there is a
spiritual Antichrist, or if you will in the Apostles phrase, a Spirit of
Antichrist, as well as a political 1 John 4. 3.
Antichrist; and I doubt the former prevails most in the world, though it be
least discerned and bann'd. Men do by Antichrist, as they do by the Devil,
defy him in words, but entertain him in their hearts, run away from the
appearance of him, and in the mean time can be well enough content to be all
that in very deed which the Devil and Antichrist is. All this evidently appears
to be for want of the true power and spirit of Religion, which I commend for so
great a healer, even the (...) of our distempers.

Perhaps no Papist will find in his heart to read this Epistle written by a
Heretic; yet possibly too, some one or other may therefore I will adventure
briefly to prescribe this same medicinal Divinity to them also; though perhaps
I might be excused upon another account, all that which I have hitherto said to
distempered Protestants being rightly enough ( mutatis mutandis) applicable to
them. But moreover, whereas they value their Church, and the truth and
rightness of it by its universality and prosperity; the power of Religion would
make men to value themselves, and their adherents, only by the divine
impressions of piety and purity, and to account such only worthy of the
glorious title of Apostolical and children of God, who are sincere followers of
the Apostles, wherein they were followers of Christ, viz. in true holiness and
righteousness. Are they industrious and zealous for the Proselyting of the
world, and spreading of their interest far and near? And are not all wicked
men, yea and the Devil himself so too? The fairest and most flourishing state
of a Church is nothing to God, and so consequently not to a godly soul, in
comparison of those excellent divine beauties, wherewith Religion adorneth the
world. But whereas the greatest complaint, and the most dreadful charge which
the Protestants bring against the Papists, is their immanity and most
unchristian cruelty, exercised against all whom they can but make a shift to
esteem Heretics; and they on the other hand allege, that the interest of
Religion and the Catholic faith does require it, and that they do not so
properly murder men, as sacr^fice John 16. 2.
them to the honor of God: It will be proper to spend a little time, at least
to clear Religion of this blame; that as wisdom is at all times justified of
and in her children, so she may be sometimes justified by them, especially when
the aspertions are so monstrous foul. And indeed she has sufficiently
instructed us how to justify her from all such imputations; having so fairly
pourtrayed Jam. 3. 14, 15, 16, 17.
her self by the pen of the Apostle James, both negatively and affirmatively.
She is void of strise, envyings, bitterness, and every evil work; but she is
pure, peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits,
without partiality, and without hypocrisy. This is the proper description of
heavenly wisdom or pure Religion: And oh that all Christians would estimate
themselves to be wise according to their consonancy and conformity thereunto!
Then I would easily believe that none would be Papists in practice, whatever
they might be in opinion. What ( Sirs,) is the God of Christians become like
unto a Devil; that he should delight in cruelty, and drink the blood of men? Is
the butchering of reasonable creatures that reasonable service which he
requires? Is the Romans 12. 1. 2 Cor. 6. 15.
living sacrifice of your own bodies turned into the dead sacrifice of other
men's? It was wont to be said, What communion has Christ with Belial; And is
the Prince of Peace now become very Satan; the author of enmity, malignity,
confusion, and every evil work? Did he shed his blood for his enemies; to teach
us that goodly lesson of shedding the blood of ours? Did he come to seek and to
Luke 9. 56.
save that which was lost; to set us an example, that we might seek to destroy,
and that only to repair our own losses? Be it so, that the Protestant Churches
have apostatized from you: this I hope is not a greater crime than the
apostasy of mankind from God; which yet he expiated, not with the blood of the
Apostates, but with his own. Religion was formerly a principle springing u^
into eternal life; How is the world changed, that it should now be a principle
springing up into Massacres, and temporal death? or is Religion now become a
principle springing up into secular power, worldly dominion, temporal
greatness, and all manner of fl^shly accommodations? This was of old the
description of sensuality, and a heathenish genius, Mat. ^ 6. 32.
For after all these things do the Gentiles seek. Are there so many mighty
engines in the Gospel to engage the hearts of men to believe, profess, and obey
it; And must they all now give place to Fire and Sword? Are these the only
Gospel-methods of winning men to the Catholic faith? What, are we wiser for
Christ, or more zealous than he himself was? Did he forbid fire from heaven;
Luke 9. 55.
and* will you fetch it even from hell, to consume dissenters. Did he sheath
the sword that was drawn in his own defense, and set a dreadful seal upon it
too, (...) Mat. 26. 52.
all they that take the sword, shall perish with the sword: And will you
adventure to draw it in a way of revenge and persecution; and count it
meritorious too, as if you should therefore never perish because you take it?
Is it not written in your Bibles as well as ours, that no murderer shall enter
into the Gal. 5 21 1 Jo^. 3. 15
Kingdom of God; And do you think by murders to propagate this Kingdom upon
earth, and have a more abundant entrance into it your selves hereafter? Can
hell dwell with Heaven? shall bloody cruelty ever come to lodge in the bosom,
or lie down in the sacred arms of eternal love? Be not deceived, Sirs, with a
false Heaven; but take this for an indubitable and self-evidencing Aphorism of
truth, No soul of man has any more of Heaven, no nor ever shall have, than he
^e has of God, and of his pure, placable, patient, benign, and gracious
nature. And this is that everlasting life which a Religious principle is
always springing up into; so that hereby it appears plainly, that Religion in
the power of it would heal these feverish distempers also, and so restore a
most excellent constitution, both personal and political.

It may seem possibly that I have toiled too much in these discoveries: and
happily my pains may prove ungrateful to many: but may it please Almighty God
that they may prove vindicative of Religion, re^^aurative of the sickly and
lapsed Ecclesiastical or political state, yea or medicinal and profitable to
any single soul of man, I shall venture to estimate it against an age of pains.
And if it should prove, that by all this toil I have caught nothing (as the
Luke 5. 5.
weary Disciples complained of old) nevertheless being well assured that I have
a word of God for my encouragement, I will let down the Net once again, and so
finish these Epistolary pains with an earnest hortatory address to all that
shall peruse them.

Let nothing satisfy your souls ( Christians,) let nothing administer rest or
settlement to your hearts, that is common to the natural man, or competible to
the mere animal life. There are a great many high strains of zeal and seeming
devotion, by which many men judge themselves to be some great ones, and
concerning which they are ready to say, These things are the great power of
God; which if they be well rifled into, will be found to grow upon no better
root than natural self, and to spring from no higher principle than this animal
life. It is impossible for me to give an exact Catalogue of all these: many of
them I have occasionally recorded in the latter end of this ensuing Treatise;
to which yet many more might be added, if I had a fair opportunity. But at
present, let me in general commend to you this description made by our Savior
of true Religion, as the Rule whereby I do earnestly entreat you faithfully to
examine your selves, your actions, affections, zeal, confidence, professions,
performances. Let me speak freely, All pomp of worship, all speculative
knowledge (though never so Orthodox) is as dear to the animal life as the
divine: and all external modells of devotion, submiss confessions, devout
hymns, pathetical prayers, raptures of joy, much zeal to reform indecencies in
worship or superstitions, a fierce raging against the political Antichrist do
as well agree to a natural man as a spiritual, and may be as fairly acted over
to see to, by a mere selfish carnal principle, as by that which is truly
divine. When Diogenes trampled upon Plato's stately bed, saying calco Platonis
fastum; it was answered him very sharply, sed majore fastu, he was prouder in
treading upon it than Plato was in lying upon it. I doubt it may be applied too
truly to a great deal of that cynical and scornful zeal, that is in the world
at this day; men declaim against the pride and pomp and grandieur of
Antichristian Prelates, with a pride no whit inferior to theirs whom they thus
decry. However it is plain, that those things which are imitable by a sensual
heart, and indeed performable by the mere magic of an exalted fancy, are not
to be rested in by a sincere Christian. Read over therefore I beseech you the
fruits of the spirit, Gal. 5. 22. etc. 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7.
recorded by the Apostle Paul and the Apostle Peter, and estimate your selves
by them: These things are utterly incompetible to the mere animal man: All the
natural men and Devils in the world cannot be humble, meek, self-denying,
patient, charitable, lovers of God more than of themselves, or, of their
enemies as themselves. Would you judge rightly of the goodness of any opinion?
then value it by the tendency that is in it to advance the life of God:
particularly judge of the millenarian opinion, which begins to be so much
hugged in the world. Concerning which I will only say thus much at present:
that in the common notion of it, as it promises a state of much ease, liberty,
power, prosperity, and freedom from all persecutions and oppressions, it is as
grateful to the fleshly palate, and will be as gladly embraced by the mere
animal man, as by the greatest Saint upon earth. And therefore supposing it to
be true, yet I cannot but wonder how it comes to administer so much
satisfaction, and afford such a mavelous relish to minds divinely
princ^pled, as many seem to taste in it. By this same tendency to advance the
divine life in your souls, judge also of all your enjoyments, riches, honors,
liberties, friends, health, children, etc. and value them, if it be possible,
only under this consideration. But to hasten to an end, I will endeavor to set
on this general exhortation by two or three weighty considerations. First, It
is utterly impossible that any speculation, opinion, profession, enjoyment,
ornament, performance, or any other thing but the transformation of the mind
into the very image and nature of God, should ever be able to perfect our
souls, or commend us unto God. They cannot perfect our souls, as being most of
them exterior, and all of them inferior to it. They cannot commend a man to
God, who loves us, and whom we so far know and love, as we partake of his
nature, and resemble him: This is the love of God, this is the worship of God,
and this is really the souls acquaintance with him, and nothing* but this.
Secondly, The advancement of the divine life is that which God mainly designs
in the world. I need instance but in two things: first, the sending of his own
son into the 1 John 3. 5. 8.
world for this very end and purpose, that he might take away our sins, says
the Apostle John; and again that he might destroy the works of the devil; and
again says the Apostle Paul, That he might redeem us from all iniquity, Tit.
2. 14.
and purify to himself a peculiar people zealous of good works. Secondly, It
appears that this is the grand design of God in the world, in as much as he
does not deliver his faithful servants out of their afflictions and
tribulations: which he would not fail to do, did he not intend them a greater
good thereby, and design to lead them on, and raise them up to a higher life.
Now what can more ennoble these souls of ours, than to live upon the same
design with God himself?

And now ( Reader) I commend thee to the blessing of God, in the perusal of
this small tract: which I have composed, and now exposed, under a sense of that
common obligation, that lies upon every person, to be active in his sphere for
the interest of the name and honor of God, and to render his life as useful
as he may: more particularly, under a sense of my own deficiency in several
accomplishments, whereby others are better fitted to serve their generation:
and especially, under a sense of the peculiar engagement that lies upon me, to
dedicate my life entirely to his service, from whom I have so lately, and that
so signally received the same afresh: In imitation of whom, I hope thou will be
indulgent toward my infirmities. To whom I heartily commend thee, and to the
precious influences of his Eternal Spirit, and Rest,

Thy Servant in his Work, and for his Sake, S. S.

Courteous Reader be pleased to correct these gross mistakes which (with many
other lesser) happened in the Printing.
IN the Title Page, for 1 John 4. 14. r. John 4. 14. in the inscription of the
preface, for treating, r. healing. In the preface p. 2. l. 12. for more r. now;
p. 4. l. 16. for excellently r. exceedingly. p. 6. l. 11. for apostate r.
apostatise, p. 7. l. 9. after run put in me, p. 9. l. antepenult, for exalt r.
exact, p. 14. l. 8. for put read out.

In the body of the Book, page 17. line 2. for part r. peart, l. 17. after same
put in sense, p. 20. l. ult. for translated r. transacted, p. 23. l. 19. for
either r. rather, and l. 23. for more, r. mere, p. 25. l. 24. before Solomon
put in what, p. 48. after the last line insert these words [from thinking that
he has an (...) or, self -- ] p. 56. l. 21. for foul r. business, p. 70. l.
16. for proselite r. property, p. 104. l. 3. for performance r. perseverance,
p. 120. for actively r. activity, p. 179. l. penult. for indisputable r.
indissoluble, p. 196. l. 19. for fully r. fitly, p. 199. l. 18. for external.
r. eternal, p. 204. l. 7. for soul r. Saul, p. 220. l. 19. for piety r. Deity,
p. 227. l. 3. for more r. mere, and l. 7. r. declame, p. 273. l. 12. blot out
with, p. 315. l. 10. for notion r. motion, p. 356. l. 16. for but still r. but
is still.

CHAP. I.
The occasion of the words of the Text; the principal contents of it. The
original of true Religion. All Souls the Offspring of God, and a more especial
Portraicture of Him, but godly Souls yet more especially. God the Author of
Religion from without, in several respects, God the Author of it from within
enlightening the faculty; Religion something of God in the Soul. A discovery of
religious Men by the affinity that they have to God. God alone to be
acknowledged in all holy Accomplishments. The original of Sin from hence
discovered.

John 4. 14. (...) But whosoever drinks of the Water that I shall give him,
shall never thirst; but the water that I shall give him shall be in him a Well
of Water, springing up into everlasting Life.
THis Chapter contains an excellent, profitable, familiar discourse of the
blessed Savior of the World, into whose Lips grace was poured, Psalm. 45. 2.
and he ceased not to pour it out again: That which is said of the Wise, Prove.
15. 7. is fully verified of Wisdom it self, His Lips dispersed Knowledge. A
poor Woman of Samaria comes to draw Water, and our Savior takes occasion from
the Water, to instruct her in the great and excellent Doctrines of the Kingdom
of Heaven. Oh the admirable zeal for God, and compassion for Sonls, which dwelt
in that Divine Breast! And Oh the wonderful unsearchable Councels of an
all-wise God! He ordains Readiness seeking of Asses to be the means of his finding
a Kingdom upon Earth; and this poor Woman's seeking of Water, to be an occasion
of her finding the way to the Kingdom of Heaven: She comes to the Well of
Jaceb, and behold she meets with the God of Jacob there. The Occasion,
Passages, and Issue of this Discourse, would each afford many good and
profitable Observations: But I think none more than this verse that I have
pitched upon; in which the mystery of Gospel Grace is rarely unfolded, and true
Christian Religion is excellently described. For so I understand our Savior,
not as speaking of Faith or Knowledge, or any other particular Grace, but of
Grace in general, of the holy Spirit of God, that is, the Gifts and Graces of
it, of true Godliness, or if you will, of Christian Religion; for that word I
shall choose to retain throughout my Discourse, as being most intelligible and
comprehensive.

In which words we find true Christian Religion unfolded in the original,
nature, properties, consequent, and end of it. The original of it is found in
those words, [ I shall give him:] The nature of it is described by a [ Well of
Water;] The properties of it will be found in the phrase of [ springing up;]
The consequent of it, that the man that is endued with it shall [ never
thirst;] The end or perfection of it is, [ everlasting Life.] Of all these, by
Gods assistance, in this order:

First I begin with the Original of it, as it seems meet I should: for indeed
it is first found in the words, -- The Water that I shall give him. And here
the Proposition that I shall go upon must be, That

True Christion Religion is of a Divine Original. All Souls are indeed the
Offspring of God. Those Noble Faculties o^ Understanding, and a Will free from
constraint, do more resemble the nature of God, than all the World besides.
There is more of the glory, beauty, and brightness of God in a Soul, than there
is in the Sun it self. The Apostle allows it as a proper speech spoken in
common of all men, (...), Act 17. 28. God has derived more lively prints of
himself and his Divine Essence upon a rational Soul, than he has upon the
whole Creation: so that the Soul of man even as to its constitution, does
declare and discover more of the rature of God, than all the other things that
he has made, whereof the Apostle speaks, Romans 1. 20. He that rightly
converseth with his own Soul, w^ll get more acquaintarce with God, than they
that gaze con^^ually upon the material Heavens, or traverse the dark and u^most
corners of the Earth, or go down unto the Sea in Ships; the s^rious
consideration of the little World, will teach more of him than the great one
could do: So that I doubt not to take the Apostles words concerning the Word of
God, and apply them to the Nature of God, Romans 10. Say not in thy heart, Who
shall ascend into Heaven, to bring a discovery of God from thence? or who shall
descend into the Deep, to fetch it up from thence? The Nature and Essence of
God is nigh thee, even in thine own Soul, excellently displayed in the
Constitution and Frame, Powers and Faculties thereof: God has not made any
Crea^u^e so capable of receiving and ^^flecting his Image and Glory, as Angels
and Men: Which has made me often to say, That the vilest Soul of Man is much
more beautiful and honorable than the most excellent Body, than the very Body
of the Sun at noon day. And (by the way) this may render S^n odious and loa^h
some; because It has defiled the fairest piece of Gods Workmansh^p in the
World, and blur^ed the clearest Copy which he had drawn of himself in the whole
Creation.

But though all rational Souls be the Children of God, yet all of them do not
imi^ate their Father; though their Constitution do express much of the Essence
of God, yet their Disposition does express the Image of the Devil. But godly
Souls, who are followers of God, are indeed his dear Children, Ephesians. 5. 1.
Holy Souls, who are endued with a divine and god like disposition, and do work
the work^ of God, these are most truly and properly his Off spring, Mat. 5. 44,
45. And in this respect, God's Children are his workmanship created unto good
Works, Ephesians. 2. 10. Religion is of a Divine Original: God is the Author and
Father of it, both from without, and from within.

1. God is the Author of it from without. When Man had sallen from God by sin,
and so had lost his way, and was become both unwilling and unable to return,
God was pleased to set up that glorious Light his own Son, the Sun of
Righteousness, in the World, that he might guide their feet into the way of
peace, who is therefore called, A Light to lighten the Gentiles, Luke 2. 32.
and compared to a Candle set upon a Candlestick, Mark 4. 21. God of his
infinite free grace, and overflowing goodness, provided a Mediator, in and by
whom these Apostate Souls might be reconciled and reunited to himself; and to
as many as receive him, to them he gives power to become the Sons of God, John
1. 12.

Yet further, It pleased God in his infinite Wisdom and Mercy, to chalk out the
way of Life and Peace in the holy Scriptures, and therein to unlock the secrets
of Salvation to succeeding generations. Herein he has plainly laid down the
terms of the Covenant of Peace, which was made in the Mediator, and given
Precepts and Promises for the direction and encouragement of as many as will
enquire into the same. These are the sacred Oracles which give clear and
certain answers to all that do consult them about their future state, Romans 3.
2. Christ Jesus opened the way into the holiest of all, and the Scriptures they
come after, and point it out unto us: He purchased life and immortality, and
these bring it to light, 2 Timothy 1. 10.

And yet further, That these might not be mistaken, or perverted to men's
destruction, which were ordained for their salvation (which sometimes does come
to pass, 2 Pet. 3. 16.) God has been pleased to commit these Records into the
hands of his Church, and therein to his Ministers, whom he has appointed,
called, qualified, instructed for the opening, explaining, interpreting and
applying of them: so that they are called Scribes instructed unto the Kingdom
of God, and stewards of the Mysteries, Stewards over the household of God* to
give unto every one his portion. These Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists,
Pastors, Teachers, God has given for the perfecting of the Saints, for the
edifying of the Body of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12.

These things has God done for us, from without us; he has set up a light,
chalked out our way, and appointed us Guides. To which I might add the many
inticements and motives, which we call Mercies or Comforts of this Life; and
the many aff^ightments of Judgments and Afflictions, which God has added to
the Promises and Threatenings of his Word, to bring us into the way of Life. But
all these are too little, too weak of themselves to bring back a straggling
Soul, or to produce a living Principle of true Religion in it. Therefore,

2. God is the Author of Religion from within. He does not only reveal himself
and his Son to the Soul, but in it; he does not only make discoveries ^o it,
but l^vely impressions upon it; he does not only appoint, and point out the way
of Life, but breathes in the breath of Life. He has not only provided a
Savior, a Redeemer, but he also draws the Soul unto him, John 6. 44. He has
not only appointed Pastors and Teachers, but he himself impregnates their Word,
and clothes their Doctrine with his own Power, using their Ministry as an
Instrument whereby to teach; so that the Children of God are said to be all
taught of God, John 6. 45. Ministers can only discover and as it were enlighten
the Object, but God enlightens the faculty, he gives the seeing Eye, and does
actually enable it to discern. Therefore the work of converting a Soul is still
ascribed to God in Scripture; he begets us again, 1 Pet. 1. 3. he draws the
Soul, before it can run after him, Cant. 1. 4. Christ apprehends the Soul, lays
powerful bold of it, Phil. 3. 12. God gives a heart of flesh, a new heart, he
causes men to walk in his statutes, Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27. He puts his Law into
their inward parts, and writes it in their hearts, Jer. 31. 33. To which I
might add many more Quotations of the same value.

But yet methinks we are not come to a perfect discovery of Religions being the
Offspring of God in the minds of men. For it is God who enlightneth the
faculty as to the learning of all other things also; he teaches the Grammar
and the Rhetoric, as well as the Divinity; he instructs even the Husbandman
to discretion in his affairs of Husbandry, and teaches him to plow, and sow,
and thresh, etc. Isa. 28. 26. Not only the gift of Divine Knowledge, but indeed
every good gift comes from the Father of Lights, Jam. 1. 17. God does from
within give that capacity, illumination of the faculty, ingenuity, whereby we
comprehend the mysteries of Nature, as well as of Grace, John 1. 9.

Therefore we may conceive of the Original of Religion in a more inward and
spiritual manner still. It is not so much given of God, as it self is something
of God in the Soul; as the Soul is not so properly said to give, as to be the
Life of Man. As the conjunction of the Soul with the Body, is the Life of the
Body; so verily the Life of the Soul stands in its conjunction with God by a
spiritual union of Will and Affections. God does not enlighten men's minds as
the Sun enlightens the World, by shining unto them, and round about them, but
by shining into them, by enlightening the faculty, as I said before; yea, which
seems to be somewhat more, by shining in their hearts, as the Apostle phraseth
it, 2 Cor. 4. 6. He sets up a Candle, which is his own Light within the Soul;
so that the Soul sees God in his own Light, and loves him with the Love that he
has shed abroad in it; and Religion is no other than a reflection of that
Divine Image, Life, and Light, and Love, which from God are stamped and
imprinted upon the Souls of true Christians. God is said to enlighten the Soul,
but it is not as the Sun enlightens, you see; so he draws the Soul too, but not
ab extra only, as one man draws another with a Cord, (as Jupiter in Homer
draws men up to Heaven by a Chain, and Mahomet his Disciples by a Lock of Hair)
but he draws the Soul, as the Sun draws up Earthly Vapors, by infusing its
virtue and power into them; or as the Loadstone draws the Iron, by the powerful
insinuations of his grace. God does not so much communicate himself to the Soul
by way of Dis^overy, as by way of Impression, as I said before; and indeed not
so much by impression neither, as by a mystical and wonderful way of
implantation. Religion is not so much something from God, as something of God
in the Minds of good Men; for so the Scripture allows us to speak: It is
therefore called his Image, Col. 3. 10. and good men are said to live according
to God in the Spirit, 1 Pet. 4. 6. But as if that were not high enough, it is
not only called his Image, but even a participation of his Divine Nature, 2
Pet. 1. 4. something of Christ in the Soul, an infant-Christ, as one calls it,
alluding to the Apostle, Gal. 4. 19. where the saving knowledge of Christ, is
called Christ himself, -- Until Christ be formed in you. True Religion is as it
were God dwelling in the Soul, and Christ dwelling in the Soul, as the Apostles
St. John and St. Paul do express it: yea, God himself is pleased thus to
express his relation to the godly Soul, ^sa. 57. 15. I dwell in the high and
holy place, with him also that is of a humble spirit; And again, 2 Cor. 6. 16.
-- As God has said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them. Pure Religion is a
beam of the Father of Lights, Lumen de Lumine; it is a drop of that eternal
Fountain of Goodness and Holiness, the Breath of the Power of God, a pure
Influence flowing from the Glory of the Almigh^y, the Brightness of the
everlasting Light, the unspotted Mirror of the power of God, and the Image of
his Goodness, more beautiful than the Sun, and above all the Orders of Stars,
being compared with the Light, she is found before it, as the Author of the
Book of Wisdom speaks, Chap. 7. What is spoken of the e^ernal Son of God, Heb.
1. 3. may in a sense be truly affirmed of Religion in the abstract, That (...),
that it is (...), the effulgency, or beaming forth of Divine Glory. For there
is more of the Divine Glory and Beauty shining forth in one godly Soul, than in
all things in the World beside: The glorious Light of the Sun is but a dark
shadow of the Divine Light, not to be compared with the Beauty of Holiness. An
immortal Soul does more resemble the Divine Nature, than any other created
Being; but Religion in the Soul is a thousand times more divine than the Soul
it self. The material World is indeed a darker Representation of Divine Wisdom,
Power, and Goodness; it is as it were the footsteps of God: the immaterial
World of Angels and Splrits does represent him more clearly, and are the Face
of God: but Holiness in the Soul does most nearly resemble him of all created
Things, one may call it the Beauty and Glory of his Face. Every Creature
partakes of God indeed; he had no Copy but himself and his own Essence to frame
the World by; so that all these must needs carry some resemblance of their
Maker. But no Creature is capable of such communications of God, as a rational
immortal Spirit is; and the highest that Angel or Spirit, or any created Nature
can be made capable of, is to be holy as God is holy. So then if the Poet may
call the Soul, and St. Paul allows him in it, -- Divinoe particula a^ra; sure
one may rather speak at that rate of Religion, which is the highest perfection
that the Soul can attain to, either in the World that now is, or that which is
to come. One Soul, any one Soul of man, is worth all the World beside for glory
and dignity; but the lowest degree of true Holiness, pure Religion, Conformity
to the Divine Nature and Will, is more worth than a World of Souls, and to be
preferred before the Essence of Angels. I have often admired three great
Mysteries and Mercies, God revealed in the Flesh, God revealed in the Word, and
God revealed in the Soul: This last is the Mystery of Godliness which I am
speaking of, but cannot fathom: It is this that the Apostle says transcends the
sight of our Eyes, the capacity of our Ears, and all the faculties of our Souls
too, 1 Cor. 2. 9. Eye has not seen, etc. Christ Jesus formed in the Soul of
man, incarnate in a heart of Flesh is as great a Miracle, and a greater Mercy,
than Christ formed in the Womb of a Virgin, and incarnate in a humane Body.
There was once much glorying concerning Christ in the World, the Hope of
Israel, but let us call out to the powers of Eternity, and the Ages of the
World to come, to help us to celebrate and magnify Christ in us the hope of
Glory; or if you will, Christ in us the first fruits of Glory.

1. This will then help us in our discoveries of that precious part Religion.
There is nothing in the world that men do generally more seek, or less find: no
nation in the world but has courted it in one way or other; but alas how few
that have obtained it! At this day there are many claims laid to it, all
pretending a just title: the men of Judab cry, she is of Kin to us; the men of
Israel say, we have ten parts in this Queen, and we have more right in Religion
than ye; according as they contended of old about King David, 2 Samuel 19, They
say of Christ as it was foretold, (though perhaps not in the same as was
foretold) lo here he is, and lo there he is; which ha^h made many say, he is
not at all, or if I may go on in the same allusion, they live by the rule that
there follows, they will not go forth to seek him any where. Mighty strivings,
yea and wars there have been about the Prince of peace, whose he should be: And
at this day no question more debated, nor less decided, than which is the
Religious party in the Land. Oh would to God, men would dispute this
controversy with works and not with words, much less with blows? Religion is
of an eminent pedigree, of a noble descent, you may find her name in the
Register of Heaven, and look where God is, there is she. She carries her name
in her forehead; the Divine disposition that she is of, the Divine works which
she works, which no one else can work, the same do bear witness which is she.
I am ready to say with the man that had been blind, Joh. 9. 3. here in is a
marvelous thing, that ye know not Religion, who she is, and yet she is the
mighty power of God opening the eyes, changing the hearts, and as it were
deifying the souls of men. Why do we not also go about enquiring which of those
many stars is the Moon in the Firmament? If ye ask of the Religions party, I
will point you to the blessed and eternal God, and say, As he is, so are they,
in their capacity, each one resembling the Children of a King; or I will point
out the Religions Christian by the same token, as Christ himself was marked out
to John the Baptist, Joh. 1. 33. -- upon whom thou shall see the spirit
descending and remaining, the same is he. If ye enquire about the Children of
God, the Apostle shall describe them for you, Ephesians. 5. 1. The followers of God
are his dear Children. That which is most nearly allied to the nature and life
of God, that call Religion, under whatsoever disguises or reproaches it may go
in the world. Examine the world by no lower a mark, than that Character that is
given of David, 1 Samuel 13. 14. and the man that does appear to be after Gods
heart, viz. comformable to his image, complyant with his will, and studious of
his glory, pitch upon him, for that is that man, under what name soever he
goes, of what party or faction soever he is. And let no soul examine it self by
any lower marks than this (...), participation of the Divine nature, conformity
to the Divine Image. Examine what alliance your soul has to God; whose is the
image and superscription. Religion is a divine accomplishment, an efflux from
God, and may by its affini^y to Heaven be discerned from a brat of Hell and
darkness. Therefore Christians if you will make a judgment of your state, lay
your hearts and lives to the rule, the eternal goodness, the uncreated purity
and holiness, and see whether you resemble that Copy: For conform^ty to the
image and will of God, that is Religion, and that God will own for his, when
all the counterfeits and shadows of it shall fly away, and disappear for ever.
I fear it may be imputed as a great piece of vanity and idle curic^ty to many
(...) speculative Christians, that they are very inquisitive, prying into the
hidden ro^^s of Gods decree, the secrets of predestination, to find out the
causes and method of their vocation and salvation; in the mean time they are
not sollicitous for, nor studious of the relation and resemblance that every
religious soul bears unto God himself, the heaven that is opened within the
godly soul it self, and the whole plot and mystery of salvationsalvation
translated upon the heart of a true Christian. There is a vanity which I have
observed in many pretenders to nobility and learning, when men seek to
demonstrate the one by their Coat of Arms, and the Records of their family, and
the other by a gown, or a title, or their names standing in the Register of the
university, rather than by the accomplishments and behaviors of Gentlemen or
Scholars. A like vanity I doubt may be observed in many pretenders to
religion: some are searching Gods decretals, to find their names written in the
book of life; when they should be studying to find Gods name written upon their
hearts, holiness to the Lord engraven upon their souls: some are busy
examining themselves by notes and marks without them; when they should labor
to find the marks and prints of God and his nature upon them: some have their
Religion in their books and Authors, which should be the Law of God unwritten
in the Tables of the heart: some glory in the bulk of their duties, and in the
multitude of their pompous performances, and religious atchievments, crying
with Jehu, come see here my zeal for the Lord; whereas it were much more
excellent, if one could see their likeness to the Lord, and the Characters of
Divine beauty and holiness drawn upon their hearts and lives. But we, if we
would judge rightly of our religious state, must view our selves in God, who is
the Fountain of all goodness and holiness, and the Rule of all perfection.
Value your selves by your souls, and not by your bodies, estates, friends, or
any outward accomplishments, as most men do: But that is not enough; (if men
rest there, they may make an idol of the fairest of Gods creatures, even their
own souls,) therefore value your souls themselves by what they have of God in
them. To study the blessed and glorious God in his word, and to converse with
him in his works, is indeed an excellent and honorable employment, but oh what
a blessed study is it to view him in the communications of himself, and the
impressions of his grace upon our own souls! All the thin and subtle
speculations which the most raised Philosophers have of the essence and nature
of God, are a poor and low and beggarly employment and attainment, in
comparison of those blessed visions of God which a godly soul has in it self,
when it finds it self partaker of a Divine Nature, and liveing a Divine Life.
Oh labor to view God and his Divine perfections in your own souls, in those
copies and transcripts of them which his holy spirit draws upon the hearts of
all godly men. This is the most excellent discovery of God that any soul is
capable of; it is better and more desirable than that famous discovery that was
made to Moses in the clift of the rock, Exodus 34. Nay I should much either
desire to see the real impression of a God-like nature upon my own soul, to
see the Crucifying of my own pride and selfwill, the mortifying of the more
sensual life, and a Divine life springing up in my soul instead of it, I would
much rather desire to see my soul glorified in the image and beauty of God put
upon it, which is indeed a pledge, yea and a part of Eternal glory, than to
have a vision from the Almighty, or hear a voice witnessing from Heaven, and
saying, Thou art my beloved Son, in whom my soul is well pleased. This that I
am speaking of is a true foundation of Heaven it self in the soul, a real
beginning of Happiness: For Happiness, Heaven it self is nothing else but a
perfect conformity, a cheerful and eternal compliance of all the powers of the
soul with the will of God: so that as far as a godly soul is thus conformed to
God, and filled with his fullness, so far is he glorified upon earth -- Sed heu
quantum distamus ab illo!

2. Let wisdom then be justified of her Children; let the children of God,
those that are his genuine offspring, rise up and call him blessed, in
imi^ation of their Lord and Savior that eldest son of God, that first born
amongst many brethren, who rejoiced in spirit, and said, I thank thee Father,
Lord of Heaven and Earth that thou have revealed these things, Luke 10. 21. or
according to the style of the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 1. 3. Blessed be the God
and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who according to his abundant mercy has
begotten us again! There is no greater contradiction in the world; than a man
pretending Religion, and yet ascribing it to himself; whereas pure Religion is
purely of a Divine Original: Besides, Religion does principally consist in the
subduing of selfwill, in conformity to, and compliance with the divine will, in
serving the interest of Gods glory in the world. Then, and not till then, may a
soul be truly called Religious, when God becomes greatest of all to it and in
it, and the interest of God is so powerfully planted in it, that no other
interest, no self-interest, no creature-love, no particular private end, can
grow by it, no more than the Magicians could stand before Moses, when he came
in the power of God to work wonders. So that Solomon says of self-seeking,
Prove. 25. 27. For men to seek their own glory is not glory; the like I may
safely say, upon that double ground that I have laid down, self-Religion is not
Religion. How vainly and madly do men dream of their self religion, carrying
them to Heaven; when Heaven it self is nothing else but the perfection of
^elf-denyal, and Gods becoming all things to the Saints, 1 Cor. 15. 28. Instead
of advancing men toward Heaven, there is nothing in the world that does more
directly make war against Heaven, than that (...) (as Siracides calls it) that
proud and petulant spirit of self-will that rules in the children of
disobedience. So that when the Holy Ghost would describe David one of the best
men, to the best advantage, he describes him with opposition to self, and
selfwill, 1 Samuel 13. 14. -- a man after Gods own heart; and again, Acts 13. 36.
-- he served the will of God in his generation.

There have been of old a great number of Philosophical men, who being raised
up above the speculation of their own souls, (which is the logical life,) unto
a contemplation of a Deity; and being purged by a lower kind of virtue and
moral goodness, from the pollutions that are in this world through lust, did
yet ultimately settle into themselves, and their own self-love. They were full
indeed, but it was not with the fullness of God as the Apostle speaks, but with
a selfsufficiency; the leaven of self-love lying at the bottom, did make them
swell with pride and self-conceit. Now these men, though they were free from
gross external enormities, yet did not attain to a true knowledge of God, nor
any true Religion, because they did set up themselves to be their own Idols,
and carry such an image of themselves continually before their eyes, that they
had no clear and spiritual discerning of God. They did, as it is storied of one
of the Persian Kings, enshrine themselves in a Temple of their own. But what
speak I of Heathen Philosophers? Is there not the same unclean spirit of
self-adoration to be found amongst many Christians, yea and Teachers of
Christianity too! witness that whole brood those men, who whilst they hang the
grace of God upon man's free will, do rob him of his glory. Some of these have
impudently given a short but unsavory answer to the Apostles quest^on in 1
Cor. 4. 7. Who makes you to differ from an other! Ego me ipsum discerno, I
make my self to differ. These men whilst they pretend to high seize, do
discover a low and most ignoble spirit: To fasten and feed upon any thing in
the Creature, is the part of a low and degenerate spirit; on the other hand it
is the greatest perfection of the Creature, not to be its own, not to be any
thing in it self, or any way distinct from the blessed God, the father and
fountain of light and grace. Holy Paul is all along in a different strain, as
in 1 Cor. 15. 10. I, yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me. I told
you before what a fair and honorable character the Holy Ghost has given of
holy David, a man after Gods own heart: now you may also find a description of
these men too in Scripture, not much differing from the other in phrase, but
very much in sense; it is the same that is given of the proud Prince of Tyrus,
Ezekiel. 28. 2. They set their heart as the heart of God. But we, if we do indeed
partake of the Divine Nature, shall not dare to take any part of the Divine
Glory; if we conform to Gods Image, we shall not set up our own. This
selfglorying in the predominancy of it is utterly inconsistent with true
Religion, as Fire is with Water: For Religion is nothing else but the shinings
forth of God into the Soul, the reflection of a beauty and glory which God has
put upon it. Give all therefore unto God; for whatsoever is kept back, is
sacrilegiously purloined from him: Glory we in the fullness of God alone, and in
selfpenury and nothingness. The whole of Religion is of God: Do we see and
discern the great things of God? It is by that light that God has set up in
us; according to that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2. 11. The things of God knows
no man but the Spirit of God: That love whereby we love him, he first shed
abroad in our hearts: If our Souls be beautiful, it is with his brightness, the
beauty and glory of essential Holiness, according to that of the Apostle, Heb.
12. -- Partakers of his holiness: If we be really and truly full, we receive it
of his fullness, according to that of the Apostle, Ephesians. 3. 19. -- filled with
all the fullness of God. In a word, if we be in any God-like dispositions like
unto him, it is by his spreading of his image in us and over us. By all which
it appears to be a thing not only wicked and unwarrantable, but utterly
impossible for a godly Soul to exalt himself against God, for grace to advance
it self against divine glory; for grace is nothing else but a communication of
divine glory; and God is then glorified, when the Soul in holy and gracious
dispositions becomes like unto him. How is it possible that grace should be a
shadow to obscure divine glory, when it self is nothing else, as it comes from
God, but a Beam of glory, and as it is found in the Creature, may properly be
called a reflection of it. To conclude then, Be ye persuaded that a man has so
much of God, as he has of Humility, and Self denial, and Selfnothingness, and
no more; He is so far of God, as he loves Him, honors Him, imitates Him, and
lives to Him, and no further.

3. By this discovery of the Original of Religion, we come to understand the
Original of Sin and Wickedness. And here, according to the method wherein I
spoke of the Original of Religion, I might show you how the original of Sin
from without, is of the Devil, that first ushered it into the World, and
cease not to tempt men to it continually; as also of men, who are his
instruments; and that it does in a sense spring from many occasions without.
But these things are more improperly said to be the causes of Sin. The inward
cause is the corrupt heart of man, that unclean spirit, that devilish nature,
which is indeed the worst and most pernicious Devil in the world to Man. It is
an old saying, Homo homini Demon; One Man is a Devil to another: which though
it be in some sense true; yet it is more proper to say, Homo sibi Demon; Man
is a Devil to himself; taking the spirit and principle of Apostasy, that
rebellious nature for the Devil, which indeed does best deserve that name. But
yet if we enquire more strictly into the original and nature of this Monster,
we shall best know what to say of it, and how to describe it, by what we have
heard of Religion. Sin then, to speak properly, is nothing else but a
degeneration from a holy state, an apostasy from a holy God. Religion is a
participation of God, and sin is a straggling off from him. Therefore it is wont
to be defined by Negatives, a departure from God, a forsaking of him, a living
in the World without him, etc. The Souls falling off from God, does describe
the general nature of S^n; but then as it sinks into it self, or settles upon
the World, and fastens upon the Creature, or any thing therein; so it becomes
specified, and is called Pride, Covetousness, Ambition, and by many other
names. All Souls are the Offspring of God, were originally formed into his
image and likeness, and when they express the purity and holiness of the Divine
Nature, in being perfect as God is perfect, then are they called the Children
of God: But those impure Spirits that do lapse and slide from God, may be said
(...), to implant themselves into a other stock by their own low and earthly
lives, and are no more owned for the Children of God, but are of their father
the Devil, John 10. 44. By which you may understand the low and base original
of Sin: Nothing can be so vile as that which, to speak properly, is nothing
else but a perfect falling off from glory it self. By this you may also (by the
way) take notice of the miserable condition of unholy Souls. We need not call
for Fire and Brimstone to paint out the wretched state of sinful Souls. Sin it
self is Hell and Death, and Misery to the Soul, as being a departure from
Goodness and Holiness it self; I mean from God, in conjunction with whom the
Happiness, and Blessedness, and Heaven of a Soul does consist. Avoid it
therefore as you would avoid being miserable.

CHAP. II.
True Religion described, as to the nature of it, by Water; a Metaphor usual in
the Scriptures: First by reason of the cleansing virtue of it. The defiling
nature of Sin, and the beauty of Holiness manifested. Secondly, by reason of
the quenching virtue of it. This briefly touched upon, and the more full
handling of it referred to its proper place. The nature of Religion described
by a Well of Water: That it is a Principle in the Souls of Men, proved by much
Scripture. An Examination of Religion by this test; by which Examination are
excluded all things that are merely external; external Reformations and
Performances instanced in. A godly man has neither the whole of his business,
nor his motives lying without him. In the same Examination many things internal
found not to be Religion: It is no sudden passion of the Mind; no, not though
the same amount to an ecstasy; (...)

I Come now to speak of the Nature of True Religion, which is here described by
our blessed Lord, by a well of Water: First, by Water, secondly, by a Well of
both these, but more briefly of the former.

1. Pure Religion, or Gospel Grace, is described by Water. This is a comparison
very familiar in holy Scriptures, both of the Old Testament, and the New, By
this similitude Gospel Grace was typi^ied in the Ceremonial Law, wherein both
Persons and Things ceremonially unclean were commanded to be washed in Water,
as is abundantly to be seen in that administration. Under this notion the same
Grace is prayed for by the Psalmist, when he had defiled himself in the Bed of
a Stranger, Psalm. 51. 7. Wash me, and I shall be whiter than Snow: He had drunk
Water out of a strange Cistern, (as his Son Solomon describ^^ that unclean act,
Pro. 5. 15.) and now he calls out for Water from the Fountain of Grace to
undefile him: He now cries out for Water from the Fountain of Grace, the blessed
Messiah, that sprung up into the world at Bethlehem, and that with more
earnestness than formerly, we read that he wished for the Water of the Well of
Bethlehem, which is by the gate, 2 Samuel 23. In the same phrase the same grace
is promised by the Ministry of the Prophets, who prophesied of the grace that
should come unto us. Thus we read of the fair and flourishing state of the
Church, Isa. 58. 11. Thou shall be like a watered Garden, and like a spring of
Water, whose Waters fail not; and of the fruitful state of the
Gospel-Proselytes, Joel 3. 18. All the Rivers of Judah shall flow with Waters,
and a fountain shall come forth of the House of the Lord, and shall water the
Valley of Shittim. Which promises that they are understood of the grace of
Sanctification, the Prophet Ezekiel shows plainly* Ezekiel. 36 25. I will
sprinkle clean Water upon you, and ye shall be clean; from all your filthiness,
and from all your Idols will I cleanse you: for ordinary elementary Water
cannot cleanse men from Idols. The Prophet Isaiah also puts it out of doubt,
whose Prophecy, together with the interpretation of it, we find both in one
verse, Isa. 44. 3. I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon
the dry ground; I will pour my Spirit upon thy Seed, and my Blessing upon thine
Offspring. By the same Ceremony the Gospel Dispensation shadows out the same
Mystery, in the Sacrament of Baptism; and by the same phrase, our Savior
offers and promises the same Grace, Joh. 7. 37. If any man thirst, let him come
unto me and drink: and his Apostles after him, who in allusion to Water, call
this Grace the washing of Regeneration, Tit. 3. 5. To which I might add 1 Pet.
3. 21. and many other Texts, if it needed.

Now as the grace of God is compared to Fire, because of its refining nature,
and consuming the dross and refuse of Lust in the Soul; and to other things for
other reasons; so is it compared to Water, especially for those two properties,
viz. Cleansing and quenching. For observe this by the way, that it is a very
injurious thing to the holy Ghost, to press the Metaphors which he uses in
Scripture, further than they do naturally and freely serve. Neither are we to
stick in the letter of the Metaphor, but to attend unto the scope of it. If we
tenaciously adhere to the phrase, wanton wits will be ready to quarrel with
absurdities, and so unawares run into strange blasphemies: They will cry out
presently, How can Fire wash, when they read that of the Prophet. Isa. 4. 4.
The Lord will wash away the filth of the Daughter of Sion, by the Spirit of
Burning? But who art thou, O man, that wilt teach him to speak, who formed the
Tongue? The Spirit of God intends the virtue and property of things when he
names them, and that we must mainly attend to.

First therefore, by the phrase Water, is the Cleansing nature of Religion
commended to us: It is the undefiling of the Soul, which Sin and Wickedness
has polluted: Sin is often described in Scripture by filthiness, loathsomness,
abomination, uncleanness, a spot, a blemish, a stain, a pollution; which indeed
is a most proper description of it. The spots of Leprosy, and the scurff of
the fowlest scurvy are beauty spots in comparison of it: Job upon the Dunghill,
furnished cap-a-pe with scabs and boils, was not half so loathsome as goodly
Absalom, in whose Body there was no blemish from the sole of his foot to the
crown of his head; but his Soul was stained with the sanguine spots of malice
and revenge, and festred with the loathsome Carbuncle and Tumor of Ambition.
Lazarus lying at the gates full of raw and running sores, was a far more lovely
object in the pure Eyes of God, than dame Jezabel looking out at the window,
adorned with spots and paints. If the best of a godly man that he has of his
own, even his Righteousness, be as a filthy rag, Isa. 64. 6. Whence shall we
borrow a phrase soul enough to describe the worst of a wicked man, even his
wickedness; I need say no more of it, I can say no worse of it, than to tell
you it is something contrary to God, who is the eternal Father of Light, who is
Beauty, and Brightness, and Glory it self; or to give it you in the Apostle's
phrase, Romans 3. 23. a falling short of the glory of God. Which has made me
many times to wonder, and almost ready to cry out with the Prophet, Be
astonished, O ye Heavens at this, when I have seen poor, ignorant, wicked, and
profane Wretches, passing by a person or a family visited with some loathsome
Disease, in a mixture of fear and disdain, stopping their Noses, and hastening
away; when their own Souls have been more vile than the dung upon the Earth,
spotted with Ignorance and Atheism, swollen with the risings of Pride and
Self-will, and contempt of God and his holy Image. This might well be a matter
of wonder to any man, till he consider with himself, that one part of these
men's uncleanness, is that very blindness which keeps them from discerning it: I
speak principally of the defilement of the Soul; though indeed the same do
pollute the whole Conversation: Every action springing from such an unclean
Heart, thereby becomes filthy; even as Moses his hand, put into his bosom
became leprous, Exodus 4. or rather as one that is unclean by a dead body,
defiles all that he touches, Hag. 2. 13.

Now Religion is the cleansing of this unclean spirit and conversation; so that
though the Soul were formerly as filthy and odious as Augeus his Stable, when
once those living Waters flow into it, and through it from the pure Fountain of
Grace and Holiness, the Spirit of our God, one may say of it as the Apostle of
his Corinthians, 1 Cor. 6. 11. Such were some of you; but ye are washed, but ye
are sanctified, etc. The Soul that before was white as leprosy, is now white
as Wool* Isa. 1. 18. the Soul that before was like Moses his hand, leprous as
snow, is now like David's Heart, white as snow, yea, and whiter too, Psalm. 51.
7. Oh what a beauty and glory is upon that godly Soul that shines with the
image and brightness of God upon it! Solomon in all his glory was not beautiful
like such a Soul; nay, I dare say, the splendour of the Sun in its greatest
strength and altitude, is a miserable glimmering, if it be compared with the
Day Star of Religion; that even in this Life arises in the heart, or if you
will in the Prophets style, the Sun of Righteousness, which arises with
healing in his wings, upon them that fear the Name of God. To speak without a
Metaphor, the godly Soul having entertained into its self the pure effluxes of
Divine Light and Love, breathes after nothing more than to see more familiarly,
and love more ardently, its inclinations are pure and holy, its motions
spiritual and powerful, its delights high and heavenly; it may be said to rest
in its love, and yet it may be said that love will not suffer it to rest, but
is still carrying it out into a more intimate union with its beloved object.
What is said of the Ointment of Christ's Name, Cant. 1. 3. is true of the Water
of his Spirit, it is poured forth, therefore do the Virgins love him: Religion
begets a chaste and virgin-love in the Soul toward that blessed God that begot
it, it bathes it self in the Fountain that produced it, and suns it self
perpetually in the warm beams that first hatched it. Religion issues from God
himself, and is ever issuing out toward God alone, passionately breathing with
the holy Psalmist, Whom have I in Heaven but thee? In Earth there is none that
I desire beside thee! The Soul that formerly may be said to have lain among the
Pots, by reason of its filthiness, is now as the wings of a Dove covered with
silver, and her Feathers with yellow gold: the Soul that formerly may be said
to have sitten down by the flesh pots of Egypt, in regard of its sensual and
earthly Loves, being redeemed by the almighty grace of God, is upon its way to
the holy Land, hastening to a Country, not earthly but heavenly, Heb. 11. This
pure Principle being put into the Soul, puts it upon holy Studies, indites holy
Meditations, directs it to high and noble ends, and makes all its embraces to
be pure and chaste, laboring to compass God himself, which before were
adulterous and idolatrous, free for sin, and self, and the world, to lodge and
lie down in. In a word, this Offspring of Heaven, this Kings Daughter, the
godly Soul, is all glorious within; yea, and outwardly too, she is clothed
with wrought gold, Psalm. 45. 13. Her faith within, is more precious than gold,
1 Pet. 1. 7. and her Conversation curiously made up of an Embroidery of good
Works, some of P^ety, some of Charity, some of Sobriety, but all of Purity,
shines with more noble and excellent splendour, than the high Priests Garments
and Breast Plate spangled with such variety of precious Stones. This precious
Ointment, this holy Unction, as the Apostle calls it, 1 John 2. 20. is as
diffusive of it self and ten thousand times more fragrant than that of Aaron so
much commended in Psalm. 133. that ran down from his head upon his beard, and
from thence upon the skirts of his garment. Not my feet only, but my hands and
my head, Lord; said Peter, John 13. Not well knowing what he said; but the Soul
that is truly sensible of the excellent purity which is caused by Divine
Washings, longs to have the whole man, the whole Life also made partaker of it,
and cries, Lord not my head only, not my heart only, but my hands and my feet
also, make me wholly pure as God is pure. In a word then, true Religion is the
cleansing of the Soul, and all the powers of it, so that whereas Murderers
sometimes lodged in it, now Righteousness; the Den of Thieves, thievish Lusts
and Loves, and Interests, and Ends, which formerly stole away the Soul from God
its right Owner, is now become a Temple fit for the great King to dwell, and
live, and reign in: And the whole Conversation is turned from its wonted
vanity, worldliness, and iniquity, and is continually employed about things
that are true, honest, just, pure, lovely, and of good report, Phil. 4. 8.

2. By the phrase Water, the Quenching nature of Religion is commended to us.
God has endued the immortal Soul with a restless appetite and raging thirst
after some chief Good, which the heart of every man is continually groping
after, and catching at, though indeed few find it, because they seek it where
it is not to be found. If we speak properly, it is not gold, or silver, or
popular applause, which the covetous or ambitious mind does ultimately aim at,
but some chief good, happiness, sufficiency, and satisfaction in these things:
wherein they are more guilty of Blasphemy than Atheism: for it is clear that
they do not deny a supreme Good, (for that which men do chiefly and ultimately
aim at, is their God, be it what it will) but they do verily blaspheme the true
God, when they place their happiness there where it is not to be found, and
attribute that fullness and sufficiency to something else besides the living
God. Sin has not destroyed the nature and capacity of the rational Soul, but
has diverted the mind from its adequate object, and has sunk it into the
Creature, where it wanders hither and thither, like a banished man, from one
Den and Cave to another, but is secure no where. A wicked man, who is loosed
from his center by sin, and departed from the Fountain of his Life, flies low
in his affections, and flutters perpetually about the Earth, and earthly
Objects, but can find no more rest for the foot of his Soul, than Noah's Dove
could find for the sole of her foot. Now Religion is the hand that pulls this
wandering Bird into her own Ark from whence she was departed; it settles the
Soul upon its proper center, and quenches its burning thirst after happiness.
And for this reason it is called Water in Scripture, as appears from Isa. 58.
11. The Lord shall satisfy thy Soul in drought; and of Isa. 45. 3. I will pour
Water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground; compared with
John 7. 37. Jesus stood and cried, saying, If any man thirst, let him come unto
me, and drink. Religion is a taste of infinite Goodness which quenches the
Souls thirst after all other created and finite Good; even as that taste which
honest Nathaniel had of Christ's Divinity, took him off from the expectation of
any Messiah to come, and made him cry out presently, Rabbi, thou art the Son of
God, thou art the King of Israel, Joh. 1. 49. And every religious Soul has
such a taste of God even in this life, which though it do not perfectly fill
him, yet does perfectly assure him where all fullness dwells. But of this I
shall have occasion to discourse more largely, when I come to treat of the
consequent of true Religion.

I proceed therefore to the second phrase whereby our Savior describes the
nature of true Religion, It is a Well, a Fountain in the Soul, -- Shall be in
him a Well of Water. From which phrase, to wave niceties, I shall only observe,

That Religion is a Principle in the Souls of men.

The Water that Christ pours into the Soul, is not like the Water that he pours
upon our Streets, that washes them, and runs away; but it becomes a cleansing
Principle within the Soul it self; every drop from God becomes a Fountain in
man. Not as if man had a kind of (...) in himself, or were the first spring of
his own motions toward God: I find not any Will in the natural man so divinely
free. God has indeed given this to his natural Son, his only begotten Son, to
have life in himself, Joh. 5. 26. but not to any of his adopted ones. If you
ask me concerning man in his natural capacity, I am so far quickening power, a
principle of life in himself, that I must needs assert the contrary with the
Apostle, That he i^ dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2. 1. so far from
thinking that he has in himself a Well of Water, that I must call him, with
the Prophet, Isa. 44. thirsty and dry ground. As for the Regenerate man, I will
not enter into that deep controversy concerning the cooperation of man's Will
with the Spirit of God, and its subordination to that in all gracious acts, or
what a kind of cause of them this renewed will of man may be safely called,
only I will affirm, That Repenting and Believing, are properly man's acts, and
yet they are performed by Gods power; first Christ must give this Water, ere it
can be a Well of Water in the Soul: Which is enough, I suppose to clear me from
siding with either of those parties, whether those that ascribe to God that
which he cannot do, or those that ascribe to Free Will that which God alone can
do. But I fear nothing from these Controversies, for that way wherein I shall
discourse of this matter, will nothing at all border upon them. This then, I
affirm, That Religion is a living Principle in the Souls of good men: I cannot
better describe the nature of Religion, than to say it is a Nature; for so does
the Apostle speak, or at least allows us to speak, when he calls it a
participation of a divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. nothing but a Nature can partake
of a Nature; a man's Friend may partake of his Goodness and Kindness, but his
Child only partakes of his Nature: He that begets, begets a Nature, and so does
he that begets again. The Sun enlightens the World outwardly, but it does not
give a Sun like nature to the things so enlightened; and the Rain does moysten
the Earth, and refresh it inwardly, but it does not beget the nature of Water
in the Earth: But this Water that I give (says our Savior) becomes a Well of
Water in the Soul. Religion is not any thing without a Man, hanging upon him,
or annexed to him; neither is it every something that is in a man, (as we shall
see anon) but it is a Divine Principle informing and actuating the Souls of
good Men, a living and lively Principle, a free and flowing Principle, a strong
and lasting Principle, an inward and spiritual Principle. I must not speak of
all these distinctly in this place, for fear of interfering in my discourse.
When I say Religion is a Principle, a vital Form acting the Soul and all the
powers of it, an inward nature, etc. Says not the Scripture the same here, a
Well or Fountain of Water? And elsewhere, a new man, the hidden man of the
heart, the inward man, Ephesians. 4. 24, 1 Pet. 3. 4. As the Soul is called an
inward man, respective to the Body, 2 Cor. 4. 16. so Religion is called an
inward man, respective to the Soul it self, Romans 7. 22. It is a man within man.
The man that is truly alive to God, has in him not only inward parts, for so a
dead man has, but an inward man, an inward Nature and Principle. Again, It is
called a Root, Job 19. 28. or if not there, yet plainly in Mark 4. 17. Where
temporary Professors are said to have no root in themselves. And this is by the
same propriety of speech, whereby a wicked principle is called, A Root of
bitterness, Heb. 12. 15. Again, it is called a Seed, the Seed of God, 1 John 3.
9. where this Seed of God is called an a biding or remaining principle. In the
first Creation God made the Trees of the earth, having their seed in
themselves, Genesis 1. 11. and in the New Creation, these trees of Righteousness,
of Gods planting, are also made with seed in themselves, though not of
themselves: it is said to be the Seed of God indeed, but remaining in the godly
Soul. Again, it is called a Treasure, in opposition to an Alms or Annuity, that
lasts but for a day or an year, as a Well of Water, in opposition to a Dish
of Water; and a Treasure of the heart, in opposition to all outward and earthly
treasures, Matthew. 12. 35. It is a treasure affording continual expenses, not
exhausted, yea increased by expenses; wherein it exceeds all treasures in the
World. By the same propriety of Speech, Sin is called a treasure too, but it is
an evil treasure, as our Savior speaks in that same place. Do you not see what
^ stock of wickedness sinful men have within themselves, which although they
have spent upon ever since they were born, yet it is not impaired, nay, it is
much augmented thereby: And shall not the second Adam bestow something as
certain and permanent upon his Offspring, as the first Adam conveyed to his
Posterity? Though men have something without them to guide them in the way of
life, yet it is some living principle within them, that does denominate them
living Men. The Scripture will abundantly inform you which is the true
Circumcision, Col. 2. 11. the true Sacrifice to God, Psalm. 51. 17. And ind^^^
^he Law it self is not so much to ^ ^^^sidered as it was engraven in Tables of
Stone, as being written in the heart, Jer. 31. 33. The Jews need not have taken
up their rest in the Law, considered as an outward Rule or Precept; for they
knew, or might have known, that God requires truth in the inward parts as one
of themselves, a Prophet and King of their own acknowledges, Psalm. 51. 6. But
I doubt many Christians are also sick of the same Disease, whilst they view the
Gospel as an History, and an external dispensation; whereas the Apostle, when
he opposes it to the Law, seems altogether to make it an internal thing, a
vital form and principle seated in the minds and spirits of men, 2 Cor. 3. The
Law was an external Rule or Dispensation, that could not give Life, though it
showed the way to it, Gal. 3. 21. but the Gospel in the most proper notion of
it, seems to be an internal impression from God, a living principle whereby the
Soul is enabled to express a real conformity to God himself. If we consider the
Gospel in the History of it, and as a piece of Book-Learning, it is as weak and
impotent a thing as the Law was, and men may be as overly and formal in the
profession of this, as they were of that, which we see by daily sad experience.
But if we consider the Gospel, as an efflux of Life and Power from God himself
upon the Soul, producing Life wherever it comes, then we have a clear
distinction between the Law and the Gospel; to which the Apostle seems to
refer, when he calls the Corinthians the Epistle of Christ, not written with
ink, nor in Tables of Stone, but with the Spirit of the living God, in fleshly
Tables of the Heart, 2 Cor. 3 3. According to which notion of the Law and
Gospel, I think we may (with a learned man of our own) come to a good
understanding of that tormented Text, Jer. 30. 31. quoted by the Apostle, Heb.
10. 8. This is the Covenant that I will make I will put my Law into their
minds, etc. The Gospel does not so much consist in verbis, as in virtute; a
Divine Principle of Religion in the Soul, is the best Gospel: And so Abraham
and Moses under the Law, were truly Gospellers; and on the other hand, All
carnal Christians that converse with the Gospel only as a thing without them,
are as truly legal, and as far short of the Righteousness of God, as ever any
of the Jews were.

Thus we see that Religion is a Principle in the Souls of good Men. -- Shall be
in him a Well of Water.

We shall here now take notice of the difference between the true, and all
counterfeit Religions. Religion is that pearl of great price, which few men are
possessed of, though all men pretend to it, Laodicean-like, saying, they are
rich, and need nothing, when indeed they are poor and have nothing. This then
shall be the test by which at present we will a little try the counterfeit
pearls. True Religion is an inward nature, an inward and abiding principle in
the minds of good men, a well of water.

1. Then we must exclude all things that are merely external; these are not it.
Religion is not something annexed to the soul ab extra, but a new nature put
into it. And here we shall glance at two things.

1. A godly soul does not find the whole of his soul lying without him.
Religion does not consist in external reformations, though never so many and
specious. A false and overly Religion may serve to tie men's hands, and reduce
their outward actions to a fair seemliness in the eyes of men: but true
Religion's main dominion and power is over the soul, and its business lies
mostly in reforming and purging the heart, with all the affections and motions
thereof. It is not a battering Ram coming from without, and serving to beat
down the outworks of open and visible enormities of life; but enters with a
secret and sweet power into the soul it self, and reduces it from its
rebellious temper, and persuades it willingly to surrender it self, and all
that is in it. Sin may be beaten out of the outward conversation, and yet
retire and hide it self in the secret places of the soul, and there bear rule
as perfectly by wicked loves and lusts, as ever it did by profane and
notorious practices. A man's hands may be tied by some external cords cast upon
them, from visible revenge, and yet murders may lodge in the temple of his
heart, as murderers lodged in the Temple of old: men's tongues may be tied up
from the foul sin of giving fair words concerning themselves, very shame may
chastize them out of proud boastings, and self-exaltings; when in the mean time
they swell in self-conceit, and are not afraid to bear an unchaste and sinful
love toward their own perfections, and adore an image of self set up in their
hearts. What a fair outside the Pharisee had, himself will best describe, (for
indeed it is one of his properties to describe himself) Luke 18. 11. God, I
thank thee that I am not, etc. but if you will have a draught of his inside,
you may best take it from our Savior, Matthew. 23. Neither does Religion consist
in external performances, though never so many, and seemingly spiritual. Many
professors of Christianity, I doubt, sink all their Religion into a constant
course of duties, and a model of performances, being more strangers to the
life, and strength, and sweetness of true Religion. Those things are needful
and useful, and helpful, yea, and honorable, because they have a relation and
some tendency to God; but they are apt to become snares and idols to
superstitious minds, who conceit, that God is some way gratified by these, and
so they take up their rest in them. That Religion, that only varnishes and
beautifies the outside, tunes the Tongue to Prayer and Conference, instructs
and extends the Hands to Diligence and Almesdeeds, that awes the Conversation
into some external Righteousness o^ Devotion, is here excluded, as also by the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 13. Much less can that pass for Religion, that spends it self
about Forms, and Opinions, and Parties, and many disputable points, which we
have seen so much of in our own Generation. The Religion that runs upon modes,
and turns upon interests, as a door turns upon its hinges, is a poor narrow
scant thing, and may easily view it self at once, all together from first to
last. Men may be as far from the Kingdom of Heaven in their more spiritual
Forms, and Orthodox Opinions, as they were in their more carnal and erroneous,
if they take up their rest in them: Neither is it the pursuing of any interest
that will denominate them religious, but the grand interest of their Souls.

2. A godly Soul in his more inward and spiritual acts, has not his motive
without him: For a man may be somewhat more inward in his motions, and yet as
outward in his motives as the former. Religions acts and gracious motions are
not originally and primarily caused by some weights hung upon the Soul either
by God or men, neither by the worldly Blessings which God gives, nor the heavy
afflictions which he sends. The Wings by which the godly Soul flies out toward
God, are not waxt to him, as the Poets feign Icarus's to have been; but they
grow out of himself, as the wings of an Eagle that flies swiftly toward
Heaven: On the other side, a Soul may be press down unto humiliation under the
heavy weight of Gods Judgments, that has no mind to stoop, no self-denying or
self-debasing disposition in it. Thus you may see Jehu flying upon the Wings of
Ambition and Revenge, born up by successes in his Government; and his
Predecessor Ahab bowing down mournfully under an heavy Sentence. The Laws, and
Penalties, and Encouragements, and Observations of men, do sometimes put a
weight upon the Soul too, but they beget a more sluggish, uneven, and unkindly
motion in it. You may expect that under this head I should speak something of
Heaven and Hell; and truly so I may very pertinently, for I think they do
belong to this place. If you take Heaven properly, for a sull and glorious
union to God, and fruition of him, and Hell for an eternal separation and
straggling from the Divinity, and suppose that the love of God, and the fear of
living without him, be well drunk into the Soul, then verily these are pure and
religious Principles: But if we view them as things merely without us, and
reserved for us, and under those common carnal notions of delectableness and
dreadfulness, they are no higher nor better motives to us, than the carnal Jews
had in the Wilderness, when they turned their Backs upon Egypt, where they had
been in bondage, and set their Faces toward Canaan, where they hoped to find
Milk and Honey, Peace, Plenty and Liberty. A Soul is not carried to Heaven, as
a Body is carried to the Grave, upon men's Shoulders; it is not born up by
Props, whether humane or divine; nor carried to God in a Charior, as a man is
carried to see his Friend: The holy fire of arden^ Love wherein the Soul of
Elijah had been long carried up toward God, was something more excellent, and
indeed more desirable, than the Fiery Chariot by which his Body and Soul were
translated together. Religion is a spring of motion which God has put into the
Soul it self.

And a^ all things that are external, whether actions or motives, are excluded
in this Examination which we make of Religion: So neither,

2. Must we allow of every thing that is internal, to be Religion. And
therefore,

1. It is not a fit, a start, a sudden passion of the mind, caused by the power
and strength of some present Conviction in the Soul, which in a hot mood will
needs make out after God in all haste. This may fitly be compared to the rash
and rude motion of the Host of Israel, who being chidden for their slothfulness
over night, rose up early in the morning, and gat them up into the top of the
Mountain, saying, Lo* we be here, and will go up unto the place which the Lord
has promised, for we have sinned, Numb. 14. 40. And indeed it ^ares with these
men oftentimes as it did with those, both as to the undertaking, and as to the
success; their motion is as sinful as their station; and their success is
answerable, they are driven back and discomfited in their enterprise. Nay,
though this passion might arise so high as to be called an ecstasy or a
rapture, yet it deserves not the name of Religion: For Religion is (as one
speaks elegantly) like the natural hea^ that is radicated in the hearts of
living Creatures, which has the dominion of the whole body, and sends forth
warm Blood and Spirits, and vital nourishment into every part and Member, it
regulate^ and orders the motions of it in a due and even manner. But these
extatical Soul^, though they may blaze like a Comet, and swell like a torrent
or land-flood for a time, and shoot forth fresh and high for a little season,
are soon extinguished, emptied, and dried up, because they have not a
Principle, a stock to spend upon, or as our Savior speaks, no root in
themselves. These men's motions and actions bear no more proportion to Religion,
than a Land-flood that swells high, and runs swiftly, but it is only during the
rain, or in the Scripture Phrase, no more than a morningdew that soon passes
away, ( Hos. 6. 4.) is like a Well or Fountain of Water.

2. If Religion be a Principle, a new Nature in the Soul, then it is not a mee^
Mechanism^, ^ piece of Art. Art imitates Nature; nothing more ordinary (I
doubt) than for Religion it self, that new Nature, to go into an Art. I need
not tell you, how all the external acts and shootings forth of Religion, may be
dissembled and imitated by Art, and be acted over by a mimical apish Pharis^^,
who finds nothing at all of the gentle and mighty hea^, not the divine and
noble life of it in his own Soul, whereby he may fairly deceive the credu^ous
World, as I have partly hinted already. But it is possible (I wish it be not
common) for men that are somewhat more convinced, enlightened, and affected, to
imitate the very power and spirit of Religion, and to deceive themselves too,
as if they possessed some true living Principle; and herein they exceed the most
exquisite Painters. Now this may be done by the power of a quick and raised
Fancy; men hearing such glorious things spoken of Heaven, the City of the great
King, the New Jerusalem, may be carried out by the power of self-Love, to wish
themselves there, being mightily taken with a conceit of the place. But how
shall they come at it? Why they have seen in Books, and heard in discourses, of
certain signs of Grace, and evidences of Salvation; and now they set their
fancies on work, to find or make some such things in themselves. Fancy is well
acquainted with the several Affections of Love, Fear, Joy, Grief, which are in
the Soul, and having a great command over the animal Spirits, it can send them
forth to raise up these Affections, even almost when it lists; and when it
has raised them, it is but putting to some thoughts of God and Heaven, and
then these look like a handsome platform of true Religion drawn in the Soul;
which they presently view, and fall in love with, and think they do even taste
of the powers of the world to come, when indeed it is nothing but a
self-fulness and sufficiency that they feed upon. Now you may know this
artificial Religion by this; These men can vary it, alter it, enlarge it,
straiten it, and new mold it at pleasure, according to what they see in others,
or according to what themselves like best; one while acting over the Joy and
Confidence of some Christians, anon the Humiliation and Brokenness of others.
But this fanciful Religion, proceeding indeed from nothing but low and carnal
conceits of God and Heaven, is of a flitting and vanishing nature. But true
Christians are gen^^y, yet powerfully moved by the natural force of true
Goodness, and the beauty of God, and do move on stedily and constantly in their
way to him, and pursuit of him. The Spirit of Regeneration in good men, spreads
it self upon the understanding, and sweetly derives it self through the will
and affections, which makes true Religion to be a consistent and thriving
principle in the Soul, as not being acted upon the stage of imagination, but
upon the highest powers of the Soul it self: and may be discerned by the
evenness of its motions, and the immortality of its nature: for a good man
though indeed he cannot go on always with like speed and cheerfulness in his
way, yet is not willing at any time to be quite out of it.

By this same nature of true Religion, you may examine all those spurious and
counterfeit Religions, that spring from a natural belief of a Deity, from
convictions, observations, fleshly and low apprehensions of Heaven,
booklearning, and the precepts of men, as the Prophet calls them, and the rest,
which are seated in the fancy, and swim in the brain; whose effect is but to
gild the outward man, or at best, but to move the soul by an external force, in
an unn^tural, inconstant and transient manner. In a word, All these pretenders
to Religion may seem to have water, but they have no well; as there are others,
deep men, principled indeed with learning, policy, ingenuity, etc. but not with
true goodness, whom the Apostle calls Wells, but without Water, 2 Pet. 2. 7.
But the truly godly, and Godlike soul has in it self a principle of pure
Religion -- The water that I shall give him, shall be a well of water,
springing up into Eternal Life.

CHAP. III.
Containing the first property mentioned of true Religion, viz. The Freeness
and unconstrainedness of it: This discovered in several outward Acts of
morality and worship; as also in the more inward Acts of the Soul. This Freedom
considered as to its Author; in which is considered how far the command of God
may be said to act a godly soul: Secondly considered as to its object. Two
cautionary concessions; First, that some things without the soul may be said to
be motives; how far afflictions and temporal prosperity may be said to be so.
Secondly, That there is a constraint lying upon the godly soul; which yet takes
not away its freedom. An enquiry into forced devotion, and first into the
causes of it, viz. Men themselves, and that upon a threefold account, other
men, or the providence of God: Secondly, into the properties of it, proving
that it is for the most part dry and spiritless, needy and penurious, uneven,
and not permanent.

I proceed now from the nature of Religion, to speak of the pro^erties of it,
as many of them as (...)ed under this phrase (...), springing up into
everlasting life. Not to squeeze the phrase any further than it will naturally
afford discourse, I shall only take notice of these three properties of true
religion, contained in the word [springing up] viz. the Freeness, Activity, and
permanency or perseverance of it.

The first proselyte of it coucht under this phrase is, that is is Free and
unconstrained. Religion is a principle, and it flows and acts freely in the
soul, after the manner of a fountain, and in the day of its mighty power makes
the people a willing people, Psalm. 110. 3. and the soul in whom it is truly
seated, to become a freewill offering unto God. Alexander the great subdued the
World with force of arms, and made men rather his tributaries and servants,
than his lovers and friends: But the great God the King of souls obtains an
amicable conquest over the hearts of his elect, and overpowers them in such a
manner, that they love to be his servants, and do willingly and readily obey
him* without dissimulation or constraint, without mercinariness or morosity: In
which they are unlike to the subjects of the Kingdoms of this world, who are
kept in their duties by fear and force, not from a pure kindness and
benevolence of mind, to whom (...), the present yoke is always grievous. Hence
it is that the propagation of this people is called their flowing unto the
Lord, Isa. 2. 2. the mountain of the Lords house shall be established, and all
nations shall flow unto it; and again, Jer. 31. 12. they shall flow together to
the goodness of the Lord. And the disposition of this people is described to be
a hearty and willing frame, Ephesians. 6. 6, 7. and elsewhere often. Now this
willingness or freeness of godly souls might be explained and confirmed by the
consideration both of their outward and inward acts.

1. As to the outward acts of service which the true Christian does perform, he
is freely carried out toward them without any constraint or force. If he keep
himself from the evils of the place and age and company wherein he lives and
converses, it is not by a restraint which is upon him merely from without him,
but by a principle of holy temperance planted in his soul: it is the seed of
God abiding in him that preserves him from the commission of sin, 1 John 3. 9.
He is not kept back from sin as a horse by a bridle; but by an inward and
spiritual change made in his nature. On the other hand, if he employ himself in
any external acts of moral or instituted duty, he does it freely, not as of
necessity or by constraint. If you speak of acts of charity, the godly man
gives from a principle of love to God, and kindness to his brother; and so
cheerfully, not grudgingly, or of necessity, 2 Cor. 9. 7. An alms may be wrung
out of a Miser, but it proceeds from the liberal soul, as a stream from its
fountain: therefore he is called a deviser of liberal things, and one that
stands upon liberalities, as those last words of Isa. 32. 8. are rendered by
the Dutch translators. If you speak of righteousness o^ temperance, he is not
overruled by power, or compelled by Laws, but indeed acted by the power of that
law which is written and engraven upon his mind. If you speak of acts of
worship whether moral or instituted, in all these he is also free, as to any
constraint. Prayer is not his task, or a piece of penance, but it is the
natural cry of the new born soul; neither does he take it up as a piece of
policy, to bribe Gods justice, or engage men's charity, to purchase favor with
God or man or his own clamarous conscience: but he prays, because he wants, and
loves and believes; he wants the fuller presence of that God whom he loves, he
loves the presence which he wants, he believes that he that loves him, will not
suffer him to want any good thing that he prays for. And therefore he does not
bind up himself severely, and limit himself penuriously to a morning and
evening Sacrifice and solemnity, as unto certain rent-seasons wherein to pay a
homage of dry devotion; but his loving and longing Soul disdaining to be
confined within Can^nical hours, is frequently soaring in some heavenly
raptures or other, and sallying forth in holy ejaculations: He is not content
with some weak assays toward Heaven in set and formal Prayer, once or twice a
day, but labors also to be all the day long sucking in those Divine
influences, and streams of grace by the mouth of faith, which he begged in the
morning by the tongue of prayer; which has made me sometimes to think it a
proper speech to say, the faith of Prayer, as well as the prayer of faith; for
believing, and hanging upon Divine grace, does really drink in what Prayer
opens its mouth for, and is in effect a powerful kind of praying in silence: By
believing we pray, as well as in praying we do believe. A truly godly man has
not his hands tied up merely by the force of a National Law, no nor yet by the
authority of the fourth commandment, to keep one in seven a day of rest; As he
is not content with mere resting upon the Sabbath, (knowing that neither
working nor ceasing from work does of itself commend a Soul to God) but does
press after intimacy with God in the duties of his worship; so neither can he
be content with one Sabbath in a week, nor think himself absolved from holy and
heavenly meditations any day in the week; but labors to make every day a
Sabbath, as to the keeping of his heart up unto God in a holy frame, and to
find every day to be a Sabbath, as to the communications of God unto his Soul:
Though the necessities of his body will not allow him it may be (though indeed
God has granted this to some men) to keep every day as a Sabbath of Rest; yet
the necessities of his Soul do call upon him, to make every day as far as may
be, a Sabbath of communion with the blessed God. If you speak of Fasting, he
keeps not Fasts merely by virtue of a civil, no nor a divine institution, but
from a principle of godly sorrow afflicts his ^oul for sio, and daily
endeavors more and more to be emptied of himself, which is the most excellent
Fasting in the world. If you speak of Thansgiving, he does not give thanks by
laws and ordinances, but having in himself a law of thanksulness, and an
ordinance of love engraven upon, and deeply radicated in his Soul, delights to
live unto God and to make his heart and life a living descant upon the goodness
and love of God; which is the most divine way of thank offering in the world,
it is the hall^lujah which the Angels sing continually. In a word, wherever God
has a tongue to command, true godliness will find an hand to perform; whatever
yoke Christ Jesus shall put upon the Soul, religion will enable to bear it, yea
and to count it easy too; the mouth of Christ has pronoun^'d it easy, Mat.
11. 30. and the spirit of Christ makes it easy. Let the commandment be what it
will, it will not le grievous, 1 John 5. 3. The same spirit does in some
measure dwell in every Christian which without measure dwelt in Christ, who
counted it his meat and drink to do the will of his Father, Joh. 4. 34.

2. And more especially, the true Christian is free from any const^aint as to
the inward acts which he performs. Holy love to God is one principal Act of
the gracio^s soul, whereby it is carried out freely, and with an ardent lust
toward the object that is truly and infinitely lovely and satisf^ctory, and to
the enjoyment of i^. I know indeed that this springs from self indigency, and
is commanded by the sovereignty of the supreme good, the object that the Soul
eyes: but it is properly free from any constraint. Love is an affection, that
cannot be excorted as sear is; nor sor^^d by any external power, nor indeed
internal neither: the revenues of the King of Persia, or the treasu^es o^
Egypt cannot commit a rape upon ^^, Heb. 11. 26. neither indeed can the soul
it self raise and lay this spirit at pleasure; which made the Poet complain of
himself, as if he were not sole Emperor at home,

Non amo te Sabidi; nec possum dicere quare, etc. Though the outward bodily
Acts of Religion are ordinarily forced, yet this pure, chaste, virgin-affection
cannot be ravished; it seems to be a kind of a peculiar in the soul, though
under the jurisdiction of the understanding. By this property of it, it is
elegantly described by the spirit of God, Cant. 8. 7. -- if a man would give
all the substance of his house for love, it would utterly be contemned. It
cannot be bought with money or money-worth, cannot be purchased with gifts or
arts; and if any should offer to bribe it, it would give him a sharp and
scornful check in the language of Peter to Simon, Thy money perish with thee;
love is no hireling, no base born mercenary affection, but noble, free, and
generous. Neither is it lowspirited and slavish as Fear is: therefore when it
comes to full age, it will not suffer this Son of the Bond woman to divide the
inheritance, the dominions of the Soul with it; when it comes to be perfect, it
casts out fear, says the Apostle, 1 John 4. 18. Neither indeed is it
directly under the authority of any law, whether humane or Divine: it is not
begotten by the influence of a divine law, as a law, but as holy, just and
good, as we shall see more anon: -- quis legem dat amantibus? ipse Est sibi lex
amor; the Law of Love, or if you will, in the Apostles phrase, the spirit of
love, and of power, in opposition to the spirit of fear (2 Timothy 1. 7.) does
more influence the godly man in his pursuit of God, than any law without him:
this is as a wing to the Soul, whereas outward commandments are but as guides
in his way, or at most, but as spurs in his sides.

The same I may say of holy delight in God, which is indeed the flower of love,
or love grown up to its full age and stature, which has no torment in it, and
consequently no force upon it. Like unto which are holy confidence. Faith and
Hope, ingenuous and natural Acts of the Religious Soul, whereby it hastens into
the Divine embraces, as the Eagle hastneth to the prey, swiftly and speedily,
and not by force and constraint, as a fool to the correction of the stocks, or
a bear to the stake. These are all genuine offsprings of holy religion in the
Soul, and they are utterly incapable of force; Violence is contrary to the
nature of them; for to use the Apostles words, with the change of one word,
Hope that is forced, is not hope.

Now a little further to explain this excellent property of true Religion, we
may a little consider, the Author and the object of it.

The author of this noble and Free principle is God himself who has made it a
partaker of his own nature, who is the Free agent, himself is the fountain of
his own Acts. The uncreated life and liberty, has given this privilege to the
religious Soul, in some sense to have life and liberty in it self, and a
dominion over its own Acts. I do not know that any created Being in the world
has more of divinity in it than the Soul of man, qua nihil homini dedit Deus
ipse divinius, as Tully speaks; nor that any thing in the Soul does more
resemble the Divine essence, than the noble Freedom that the soul has in
itself; which freedom is never so divine and generous, as when it is objected
upon God himself. This excellent freedom is something of God in the Soul of
man, and therefore may justly claim the Free spirit for its author, Psalm. 51.
12. 2. Cor. 3. 17. or the Son of God for its original, according to that in
Joh. 8. 36. If the Son shall make you free, then shall ye be free indeed.

But here it may be demanded, whether the command of God do not act the godly
soul, and set it upon its holy motions? I confess indeed that the command of
God is much eyed by a godly man, and is of great weight with him, and does in
some sense lay a constraint upon him: but yet I think not so much the authority
of the Law, as the reasonableness and goodness of it, does prevail principally
with him. The Religious Soul does not so much eye the Law under the notion of a
command, as under the notion of holy, just, and good as the Apostle speaks, and
so embraces it, chooses it, and longs to be perfectly conformable to it. I do
nor think it so proper to say that a good man loves God, and all righteousness
and holiness, and religious duties by virtue of a command to do so, as by
virtue of a new nature that God has put into him, which does instruct and
prompt him so to do. A religious Soul being reconciled to the nature of God,
does embrace all his Laws by virtue of the equitableness and perfection that he
sees in them; not because they are commanded, but because they are in
themselves to be desired, as David speaks, Psalm. 19. 10. In which Psalm the
holy man gives us a full account why he did so love and esteem the laws and
commandments of God, viz. because they are perfect, right, pure, clean, true,
sweet, and lovely, as you will find, v. 7, 8, 9, 10. To love the Lord our God
with all our heart, and strength, and mind, is not only a duty, by virtue of
that first and great commandment that does require it; but indeed the highest
privilege, honor and happiness of the Soul. To this purpose may that
profession of the Psalmists be applied, Psalm. 119. 173. I have chosen thy
precepts, and, ver. 30. I have chosen the way of truth. Choosing is an act of
judgment and understanding, and respects the quality of the thing, more than
the authority of the command. David did not stumble into the way of truth
accidentally by virtue of his education, or acquaintance, or the like
circumstance, nor was he whipped or driven into it by the mere severity of a law
without him; but he chose the way of truth, as that which was indeed most
eligible, pleasant and desirable. What our blessed Savior says concerning
himself, is also true of every true Christian in his measure, he makes it his
meat and drink to do the will of God: Now we know that men do not eat and
drink, because Physicians prescribe it as a means to preserve life; but the
sensual appetite is carried out toward food, because it is good, sweet,
suitable: so is the spiritual appetite carried out toward spiritual food, not
so much by the force of an external precept, as by the attractive power of that
higher good which it finds suitable and sufficient for it. As for the object of
this Free and generous spirit of Religion, it is no other than God himself
principally and ultimately, and other things only as they are subservient to
the enjoyment of him. God as the supreme good, able to fill and perfectly
satisfy all the wants and indigencies of the soul, and so to make it wholly
and eternally happy, is the proper object of the Souls most free and cheerful
motions. The Soul eyes God as the perfect and absolute good, and God in Christ
as a feasible and attainable good, and so finds every way enough in this object
to encourage it to pursue after him, and throw it self upon him. Religion fixes
upon God, as upon its own center, as upon its proper and adequate object; it
views God as the Infinite and absolute good, and so is drawn to him without any
external force. The Godly Soul is overpowred indeed, but it is only with the
infinite goodness of God, which exercises its Sovereignty over all the
faculties of the Soul; which overpowring is so far from straitning or pinching
it, that it makes it truly free and generous in its motions. Religion wings the
Soul, and makes it take a flight freely and swiftly toward God and eternal
life: it is of God, and by a sympathy that it has with him, it carries the
Soul out after him, and into conjunction with him. In a word, the godly Soul
being loosned from self-love, emptyed of self-fulness, beaten out of all
self-satisfaction, and delivered from all selfconfining lusts, wills, interests
and ends, and being mightily overcome with a sense of a higher and more
excellent good, goes after that freely, centres upon it firmly, grasps after it
continually, and had rather be that than what itself is, as seeing that the
nature of that supreme good is infi^itely more excellent and desirable than its
own.

Thus have I briefly explained and confirmed the Freeness of this principle in
the truly godly Soul: I would now make some little improvement of it, but that
it seems needful I should here interweave a cautionary concession or two.

First, It must be granted, that somethings without the Soul may be motives, in
our common sense, and encouragements to the Soul to quicken, and ^asten, and
strengthen it in its religious acts. Though grace be an internal principle, and
most free from any constraint, yet it may be excited, or stirred up as the
Apostle speaks, 2 T^m. 1. 6. by such means as God has appointed hereunto, as
prayer, meditation, reading, administration of our callings, as the Apostle
intimates in the body of that forequoted Epistle. But perhaps there will a
question arise concerning some other things, which may seem to lay a constraint
upon the spirits of men. I deny not but that the seemingly religious motions of
many men are merely violent, and their devotion is purely forced as we shall
see by and by: but I affirm, and I think have confirmed it, that true and
sincere Religion is perfectly free and unconstrained. This being premised, now
if you ask me what I think of afflictions, I confess God does ordinarily use
them as means to make good men better, and it may be sometimes to make bad men
good: these may be as weights to hasten and speed the Souls motions toward
God, but they do not principally beget such motions. If you ask me of temporal
prosperity, commonly called mercies and blessings, of promises and Rewards
propounded; I confess they may be as oil to the wheels, and ought to quicken
and encourage to the study of true and powerful godliness; but they are not the
spring of the souls motions: they ought to be unto us, as dew upon the grass to
refresh and fructify the Soul; but it is the root which properly gives life
and growth.

Secondly, It may be granted that there is a kind of constraint and necessity
lying upon the godly Soul, in its holy and most excellent motions: according to
that of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5. 14. The love of Christ constrains us; and
again, 1 Cor. 9. 16. Necessity is laid upon me to preach the Gospel. But yet it
holds good, that grace is a most free principle in the Soul, and that where the
spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. For the constraint that the Apostle
speaks of is not opposed to freedom of Soul, but to not acting; Now although
the Soul so principled and spirited cannot but act, yet it acts freely. Those
things that are according to nature though they be done necessarily, yet are
they done with the greatest freedom imaginable. The water flows, and the fire
burns necessarily, yet freely: Religion is a new nature in the soul, and the
religious Soul being touched effectually wi^h the sense, and impressed with the
influences of divine goodness, fullness and perfection, is carried indeed
necessarily toward God as its proper center, and yet its motions are pure,
free, generous and with the greatest delight and pleasure conceivable. The
necessity that lay upon Paul to preach the Gospel is not to be understood of
any external violence that was done to him, much less of ^odily necessity, by
reason of which many men serve their own bellyes in that great function, more
than the Lord Jesus; for though he preached the Gospel necessarily, yet did he
preach freely and willingly, as he often professes. The godly Soul cannot but
love God as his chiefest good, yet he delights in this necessity, under which
he lies, and is exceeding glad that he finds his heart framed and enlarged to
love him. I say enlarged, because God is such an object, as does not contract
and pinch and straiten the soul, as all created object* do, but ennoble,
ampliate, and enlarge it. The sinful soul, the more it lets out, and lays out,
and spends itself upon the creature, the more it is straightened and contracted,
and the native freedom of it is enslaved, debased, and destroyed: but grace
does establish and ennoble the freedom of the Soul, and restore it to i^s
primitive perfection: so that a godly soul is never more large, more at rest,
more at I berty, th^^ when it finds itself delivered from all self. confining
creature-loves and lusts, and under the most powerful influences and constraint
of infinite love and goodness.

By this that has been said of the free and generous spirit of true Religion,
we may learn what to think of the forced devotion of many pressed Soldiers of
Christ in his Church militant; that there is a vast difference and distance
between the pressed, and the impressed Christian. Though indeed the freedom of the
will cannot be destroyed, yet in opposition to a principle, many men's devotion
may be said to be wrung out of them, and their obedience may be said to be
constrai^ed. I shall explain it briefly in two or three particulars.

1. Men force themselves many times to some things in Religion, that are
besides, yea and against their nature and genius. I need not instance in an
overly conformity to the letter of the law, and some external duties which they
force themselves to perform, as to hear, pray, give alms, or the like: in all
which the violent and unnatural obedience of a pharisee may be more popular and
specious, than the true and genuine obedience of a freeborn disciple of Jesus
Christ, If going on hunting, and catching of Venison might denominate a good
and dutiful Son, Esau may indeed be as acceptable to his father, as Jacob; but
God is not such a father as Isaac, (whose affections were bribed with fat
morsels,) he feeds not upon the pains of his children, nor drink, the sweat of
their brow^. I doubt not but that an unprincipled Christian, that has the
heart of a slave; may also force himself to imitate the more spiritual part of
Religion, and as it were to act over the very temper and disposition of a son
of God. Therefore we read of a semblance of joy and zeal, which was found in
some, whom yet our Savior reckons no better than stony ground, Mark. 4. 16.
and of great ex^asies in some, whom yet the Apostle supposes may come to
nothing, Heb. 6. 5. and what appearance of the most excellent and divine graces
of patience, and contempt of the world many of the sowrer sort of Monastical
Papists, and our m^ngrel breed of Papists, the Quakers do make at this day, all
men know: nay some of these last sort do seem to themselves I believe, to act
over the temper and experiences of the chiefest Apostles, rejoicing with Peter
and the rest that they are counted worthy to suffer shame, Act. 5. 41. and
keeping a catalogue of their stripes with Paul, 2 Cor. 11. 24. and in these
things, I am confident (to use the Apostles words) that they think themselves
not a whit behind the very chiefest Apostles: nay they are not ashamed to lay
claim to that grace of graces, self-denial, which they have forced themselves
to act over so artificially, that even a wise man might almost be deceived into
a favorable opinion of them, but that we know that whilst they profess it
they destroy it; for it is contrary to the nature of self-denial to magnify
and boast itself: And indeed it is very evident to a wise observer, that these
men by a pretense of voluntary humility, and counterfeit self-denial, do in
truth endeavor most of all to establish their own righteousness, and erect an
idol of self-supremacy in themselves, and do really fall in love with an (...)
or self-sufficiency, instead of the infinite fullness of God.

Now there seem to be three things in a formal hypocrite, that do especially
force a kind of devotion and show of religion from him, viz. Conscience of
guilt, self-love, and False apprehensions of God. First, There is in all men a
natural conscience of guilt, arising from that imperfect and glimmering light
that they have of God, and of their duty toward him; which though it be in
some men more quick and stinging, in others more remiss and languid, yet I
think is not utterly choked and extinguished, no not in the worst and most
dis^ol^^e men, but that it does sometimes beget a bitter sadness in the midst
of their sweetest merriments, and does disturb their most supine and secure
rest, by fastening its stings in their very souls at some time or other, and
filling them with agonies and anguish, and haunting them with dreadful
apparitions, which they cannot be perfectly rid of, no more than they can run
away from themselves. This foundation of hell is laid in the bowels of sin
itself, as a preface to eternal horror. Now although some more profligate and
desperate wretches, do ^uriously bluster through these briars, yet others are
so cought in them, that they cannot escape these pangs and throws, except they
make a composition, and enter into terms to live more honestly, or at least,
less scandalously. In which undertaking they are carried on in the next place,
by the power of self-love, or a natural desire of self-preservation: For the
worst of men has so much Reason left him, that he could wish that himself were
happy, though he have not so much light as to discover, nor so much true
freedom of will as to choose the right way of happiness. Conscience having
discovered the certain reward and wages of sin, self-love will easily prompt
men to do something or other to escape it. But now what shall they do? why
Religion is the only expedient that can be found out; and therefore they begin
to think how they may become friends with God, they will up and be doing. But
how come they to run into so great mistake about religion? why their false and
gross apprehensions of God do drive them from him, in the way of superstition
and ^ypocrisie, instead of leading them in the way of sincere love, and
self-resignation to him. Self being the great Diana of every natural man, and
the only standard by which he measures all things, he knows not how to judge of
God himself, but by this; and so he comes to fancy God in a dreadful manner, as
an austere, passionate, surly, revengeful Majesty, and so something must be
done to appease him: but yet he fancies this angry Deity to be of an impotent,
mercena^y temper like himself, and not hard to be appea^ed neither; and so
imagines that some cheap services, specious oblations, external courtesies will
engage him, and make him a friend, a sheep or a goat, or a bullock under the
old Testament, a prayer or a Sacrament, or an Alms under the new. For it is
reconciliation to an angry God that he aims at, not union with a good God; he
seeks to be reconciled to God not united to him, though indeed these two can
never be divided. Thus we see how a man void of the life and spirit of
Religion, yet forces himself to do God a kind of worship, and pay him a kind of
homage.

2. Sometimes men may be said in a sense to be forced by other men to put on a
vizard of holiness, a dress of Religion. And this constraint men may lay upon
men by their tongues, hands, and eyes. By their tongues, in the business of
education, often and ardent exhortation and inculcation of things divine and
heavenly: and thus an unjust like the unjust Judge in the Gospel, though he
fear not God sincerely, yet may be overcome by the importunity of his father,
friend, minister, tutor, to do some righteous acts. This seems to have been the
case of Joash King of Judah, the spring head of whose religion was no higher
than the instructions of his tutor and guardian Jehojada the highpriest, 2
King. 12. 2. By their hands, that is either by the enacting and executing of
penal laws upon them, or by the holy example which they continually ^et before
them; exempla trahunt. By their eyes, that is, by continual observing and
watching their behavior; when many eyes are upon men, they must do something
to satisfy expectations of others, and purchase a reputation to themselves. It
may be said that sometimes God does lay an external force upon men; as
particularly by his severe judgments or threatenings of judgments, awakening
them, humbling them, and constr^ining them to some kind of worship and
religion. Such a forced devotion as this, was the humillation of Aha^, 1 King.
21. and the supplication of Saul, 1 Samuel 13. 11, 12. For God himself acting
upon men, only from without them, is far from producing a living principle of
free and noble Religion in the Soul.

Now the better to discern this forced and violent Religion, I will briefly
describe it by three or four of its properties, with which I will shut up this
point.

1. This forced Religion is for the most part dry and spiritless. I know indeed
tha^ Fancy may be screwed up to a high pitch of joy and frolickness, so as to
raise the mind into a kind of a rapture, as I have formerly hinted in my
disc^orse upon these words. A mere artificial and counter^^it Christian, may be
so strongly acted by imagination, and the power of self*love* that he may seem
to himself to be fuller of God, than the sober and constant soul. You may see
how the hypocritical phatis^^^ sw^ll^^ with ^^^conceit, gloryed over the poor
man that had been blind* but now saw more than all they, Joh. 9. 34. Thou wast
altogether born in sin, and do thou teach us? and indeed over the whole
people, Joh. 7. 49. This people that knows not the law is cursed. A
counterfeit Christian may rise high as a Meteor, and blaze much as a Comet,
which is yet drawn up by mere force from the surface of the earth or water. And
as to the external and visible acts and duties of Religion which depend much
upon the temper and constitution of the body, it may easily be conceived and
accounted, how the mimical and mechanical Christian may rise higher in these,
and be more zealous, watchful, and cheerful, than many truly religious and
godly men: as having greater power and quickness of fancy, and a greater number
of animal spirits; upon which the motions and actions of the body do mainly
depend. The animal spirits may so nimbly serve the soul in these corporal acts,
that the whole transaction may be a fair imitation of the motions of the divine
spirit, and one would verily think there were a gracious principle in the soul
itself. This seems to be notably exemplified in cap^ain Jehu whose religious
actions (as he would fain have them to be esteemed, 2 Kin. ^0. 16.) were indeed
rather Fury than Zeal, and proceeded more from his own fiery spirits, than from
that spirit of Fire, or spirit of burning, which is of God, Isa. 4. 4. But
commonly this forced devotion is jejune and dry; void of zeal and warmth,
drives on heavily in pursuit of the God of Israel, as Pharaoh did in pursuit of
the Israel of God, when his Chariot wheels were taken off* Exodus 14. Gods
drawing the Soul from within, as a principle, does indeed cause that soul to
run after him, Cant. 1. 4. but you know the motion of those things that are
drawn by ex^ernal force is commonly heavy, slow and languid.

2. This forced Religion is penurious and needy. Something the slavish spirited
Christian must do, to appease an angry God, or to allay a storming conscience,
as I h^n^ed before; but it shall be as little as may be. He is ready to g^ndge
God so much of his time and strength, and to find fault that Sabbaths come so
thick, and last so long, and that duties are to be performed s^ often: so he is
described by the Prophet, Amo^ 8. 5. When will the Sabbath be past, and the new
Moon gone? But yet I will not deny, but that this kind of Religion may be very
liberal and expensive too, and run out much into the branches of external
duties, as is the manner of many trees that bear no f^uit: for so did the base
spirit of the Pharisees, whose often fasting, and long praying is recorded by
our Savior in the Gospel, but not with approbation. Therefore these are not
the things by which you must take measure, and make estimate of your Religion.
But in the great things of the Law, in the grand duties of mortification, self
denial and resignation; here this forced Religion is always very stingy and
penurious. In the duties that do nearly touch upon their beloved l^sts, they
will be as strict with God as may be, they will break with him for a small
matter: God must have no more than his due, as they blasphemously phrase it in
their hearts; with the slothful servant in the Gospel, Lo there thou have that
is thine, self and the world sure may be allowed the rest. They will not part
with all for Christ, Matthew. 19. 22. is it not a little one? let me escape
thither, and take up my abode there, said Lot, Genesis 19. They will not give up
themselves e^tirely unto God; the Lord pardon me in this one thing, cries
Naaman; so they, in this or that let God hold me excused. The slavish spirited
Christian is never more shrunk up within himself, than when he is to converse
with God indeed: But the Godly soul is never freer, larger, gladder, than when
he does most intimately and familiarly converse with God. The Soul that is Free
as to liberty, is free also as to liberality, and expenses; and thatnot only in
external, but internal and spiritual obedience, and compliance with the will of
God: he gives himself wholly up to God, knows no interest of his own, keeps no
reserve for himself, or for the Creature.

3. This forced Religion is uneven, as depending upon inconstant causes. As
land-floods that have no spring within themselves vary their motions, are swift
and slow, high and low, according as they are supplied with rain; even so these
men's motions in Religion, depending upon Fancy for the most part; (than which
nothing is more fickle and flitting;) have no constancy nor consistency, in
them. I know indeed, that the spirits of the best men cannot always keep one
pace, nor their lives be always of one piece; but yet they are never willingly
quite out of the call or compass of Religion. But this I also touched upon
formerly. Therefore,

4. The forced Religion is not permanent. The Meteors I will down again, and be
choakt in the earth whence they arose. Take away the weight, and the motion
ceases; take away (...), and Joash ^lands (...), ye^^ runs backwards. But this
I shall speak more unto, when I come to speak of the last property of Religion,
viz. its performance.

CHAP. IV.
The active and vigorous nature of true Religion proved by many Scriptural
phrases of the most powerful importance: more particularly explained in three
things; First, In the Soul^ continual care and study to be good; Secondly, In
its care to do good; Thirdly, In its powerful and incessant longings after the
most full enjoyment of God. In all which the causes and reasons of the same are
either more obs^urely intimated, or openly assigned.

I Come now to the Second property of true Religion, which is to be found in
this phrase, (...) springing up or leaping up; wherein the Activity and
vigorousuass of it is described. Religion though it be compared to water, yet
is no standing pool of water, but a well of water springing up. And here the
proposition that I shall go upon is, that True Religion is active and vigorous:
It is no lazy and languid thing, but full of life and power: so I find it every
where described in Scripture, by things that are most active, lively vigorous*
operative, spreading, powerful; and sometimes even by motion it self. As sin is
in Scripture described by death and darkness, which are a cessation and
privation of life and light and motion; so Religion is described by life, which
is active and vigorous, by an Angelical life, which is spiritual and powerful,
yea a divine life, Ephesians. 4. 18. which is, as I may say, most lively and
vivacious, Christ lives in me, Gal. 2. 20. and the production of this new
nature in the Soul is called a quickening, Ephesians. 2. 1. and the reception of it
a passing from death unto life, Jo^. 5. 24. Again, as sin and wickedness is
described by flesh, which is sluggish and unactive, so this holy principle in
the soul is called spirit. Gal. 5. 17. the spirit lus^eth against the flesh;
yea the spirit of power, 2 Timothy 1. 6. and the spirit of life, Romans 8. 2. the
law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus has made me free from the law of sin
and death. How can the power and activity of any principle be more commended,
than by saying it is life, and the spirit of life, and the law of the spirit of
life in the soul? which has made me sometimes to apply those words of the
Prophet, as a description of every godly soul, Mic. 3. 8. I am full of power
and might by the spirit of the Lord.

Yea further, the holy Apostle seems to describe a godly principle in the soul
by activity and motion itself, Phil. 3. 12, 13, 14. where he gives this
excellent character of himself, and this lively description of his religious
disposition, as if it were nothing else but activity and fervor, I follow
after that I may apprehend, I forget those things that are behind, and reach
forth unto those things that are before. I press toward the mark, etc. It were
too much to comment upon those p^^a^^s of like importance, laboring, seeking,
striving, fighting, running, ^^^st^ing, panting, longing, h^ngring, thirsting,
watching, and many others which the Holy Ghost makes us^ of up and down the
Scriptures, to express the active, industriou^, vigorous, d^^ge^t and powerful
nature of this divine principle, which God has put into the souls of his
elect. The streams of divine grace which flow forth from the throne of God and
of the Lamb into the souls of men, do not cleanse them and so pass away, like
some violent Land-Flood that washes the fields and meadows, and so leaves them
to contract as much filth as ever; but the same become a well of water,
continually springing up* bo^ling and b^bling and working in the soul, and
sending out fresh rivers, (...), as our Savior calls them, Joh. 7. 38. Out of
his billy shall flow rivers of living water.

But more particularly to unfold the Active nature of this divine principle in
the soul, we shall consider it in these three particulars, viz. as it is st^ll
conforming to God, Doing for him, and longing after him.

1. The Active and sprightly nature of true godliness or Religion planted by
God in the soul appears and shows itself in a continued car^ and study to be
good* to conform* more and more to the nature of the bl^ssed God, the glorious
patter^^ of all perfection. The nature of God being infinitely and absolutely
perfect, is the only rule of perfection to the creature. If we speak of
Goodness, our Savior tells us that God alone is good, Luke 18. 19. of wisdom,
the Apostle tells us, that God is only wise, 1 Timothy 1. 17. of power, he is
omnipotent, Rev. 19. 6. of mercy and kindness, he is love itself, 1 John 4 8.
men are only good by way of participation from God, and* in a way of
assimilation to him: so that though good men may be imitated, and followed, yet
it must be with a quatinus with this limitation, as far forth as they are
followers of God: the great Apostle durst not press his example any further, 1
Cor. 11. 1. Be ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ. But the nature
of God being infinitely and absolutely perfect, is to be ^yed and imitated
singly, entirely, universally, in all things wherein the creature is capable of
following him, and becoming like unto him. So Christians are required to look
up unto the Father of lights, the fountain of all perfections, and to take from
him the pattern of their dispositions and conversations, to eye him continually
and eying him, (...), to derive an image of him (not into their eye, as we do
by sensible objects but) into their souls, to polish and frame them into the
most clear and lively resemblances of him; that is in the language of the
Scripture, to be perfect, as their heavenly father is perfect, Man. 5 44. 45,
48. to be holy as God is holy, 1 Per. 1. 16. And thus the genuine children of
God are described by the Holy Ghost, Ephesians. 5. 1. they are followers of God.
This is the shortest, but the surest and clearest mark that can be given of a
good man, a follower of God: They are not owned for the children of God, who
are created by him, nor they who have a notional knowledge of him, who profess
him, or exhibit some external worship and service to him in the world; but
they that imitate him: the true children of Abraham were* not those that were
descended from him, or boasted of him, but they that did the works of Abraham,
Joh. 8. 39. eve^ so are they only the offspring of Heaven, the true and dear
children of ^he living God, who are followers of him; be ye followers of God ^^
dear Children. A godly soul having its eyes opened to behold the infinite
beauty, purity and perfect on of that good God whose nature is the very
Fountain, and must needs then be the Rule of all goodness, presently comes to
undervalue all created excellencies both in it self and all the world besides,
as to any satisfaction that is to be had in them, or any perfection (...) can
be acquired by them* and (...) endure to take up with any (...) ^od, or live by
any lower r^l^ than God himself. A godly man having the unclean and rebellious
spirit cast out, and being once reconciled to the nature of God, is daily
laboring to be more intimately united thereunto, and to be all that which God
is (as far as he is capable,) the nature of God being infinitely* more pure and
perfect, and more desirable than his own. Religion is a partic^pation of life
from him who is life itself, and so must needs be an active principle spreading
it self in the soul, and causing the soul to spread it self in God: And
therefore the Kingdom of Heaven, which in many places of the Gospel. I take to
be nothing else but this divine principle in the soul, which is both the ^^^est
Heaven, and most properly a Kingdom, (for thereby God does most powerfully
reign and exercise his Sovereignty, and most excellently display and manifest
his glory in the world) is compared to seed sown in good ground, which both
sp^ingeth up into a blade, and brings forth fruit; to Mustard Seed, which
sp^^^deth i^s self, and grows great, so that the birds of the air may lodge
in the branches thereof; to Leaven, spreading it self through the whole quantity
of meal, and leavening the whole and all the parts of it. M^tth. 13. By a like
similitude, the path of the just is compared to a shining light, whose glory
and ^ustre increases continually, shining more and more unto the perfect day,
Prove. 4. 18. which continual growing up of the holy soul into God, is
excellently described by the Apostle in an elegant metaphor, 2 Cor. 3. 18. We
all with open face, beholding as in a glass, the glory of the Lord, are changed
into the same image from glory to glory; that is, from one resemblance of
divine glory to another. The gracious soul no^ being contented with its*
present a^tainments, and having in its eye a perfect and absolute good, forgets
that which is behind, and labors, prays* strives, and studies to get the
perfections of God more clearly cop^ed out upon it self, and it self as much as
may be, swal^owed up in the divin^^y: I cove^s earnestly these best th^^gs, ^o
be p^r^^ct^d ^^ grace and holiness, to have divine characters more fair and
legible, divine impression^* more deep and lively* divine life more strong and
powerful, and the communicable Image of the blessed God spread quite over it,
and through it: A godly soul is not content to receive of Christ's fullness, but
labors to be filled with the fullness, with all the fullness of God; he rejoices
indeed, that he has received of Christ grace for grace, as a child has limb
for limb with his Father; but this his joy is not fulfilled, except he find
himself adding daily some cubits to his Infantstature; nor indeed then neither,
nor can it be, until he come to the measure of the stature of his Lord, and be
grown up into him in all things, who is the head, even Christ, Ephesians. 4. 15. He
delights and glories in God, beholding his spices growing in his soul; but that
does not satisfy him, except he may see them flowing out also, Cant. 4. 16. He
is neither barren nor unfruitful, as the Apostle Peter speaks; but that is not
enough, he desires to be fat and fruitful also, as a watered Garden, as the
Prophet phraseth it, even as the Garden of God. The spirit lusts against the
flesh, and struggles with it in the same womb of the soul, as Jacob with Esau,
until he had cast him out: The seed of God warreth continually against the seed
of the Serpent, raging and restless, like Jehu shooting, and stabbing, and
strangling all he meets with, till none at all remain of the family of that
Ahab, who had formerly been his Master: Oh how does the godly and devout soul
long to have Christ's victory carried on in it self, to have Christ going on in
him conquering and to conquer, till at length the very last enemy be subdued,
that the Prince of Peace may ride triumphantly through all the Coasts and
Regions of his heart and life, and not so much as a Dog move his tongue against
him ^ This holy principle which is of God in the soul, is actually industrious
too; it does not fold the arms together, hide its hand in its bosom, faintly
wishing to obtain a final conquest over its enemies, but advances it self with
a noble stoutness ness against lusts and passions, even as the Sun glories
against the darkness of the night, until it have chased it all away. The godly
soul puts it self under the banner of Christ, fights under the conduct of the
Angel of God's presence, and so marches up undauntedly against the children of
Anak, those earthly loves, lusts, sensual affections, which are indeed taller
and stronger than all other enemies that do encounter it in this wilderness
state: and the gracious God is not wanting to such endeavors, he remembering
his promise, helps his servants, even that promise, Isa. 49. 31. That they
that wait upon the Lord, shall renew their strength. A true Israelitish soul
impregnated with this noble and heroic principle, is not like those slothful
Israelites, that were content with what they had got of the holy Land, and
either could not, or cared not to enlarge their border, Judge. 1. But he makes
war upon the remainder of the Canaanites, and is never at rest till be have
with Sarah, cast out the bond woman and her Son too. You may see an emblem of
such a soul in Moses holding up his hands all the day long, till Amalek was
quite discomfited, Exo. 17. As often as the floods of temptation, springing from
the Devil, the world, or the flesh, do offer to come in upon him, he opposes
them in the strength of Christ, or if you will, in the Prophets phrase, ( Isa.
59. 19.) The Spirit of the Lord lifts up a standard against them, so that he
is not carried down by them, or at least, not overwhelmed with them. In the
beginning of my discourse upon this head, I hinted to you the reason why the
godly soul continually studies conformity of God, even because he is the
perfect and absolute good, and the soul reckons that its happiness consists
only in being like unto him, in partaking of a divine nature. But I might also
here take occasion speak of three things, which I will but briefly name, and so
past on.

First, A godly man reckons with himself, that conformity to the image and
nature of God, is the most proper conversing with God in the world. The great,
and indeed only employment of an immortal soul, is to converse with its
Creator; for this end it was made, and made so capacious as we see it: Now to
partake of a divine nature, to be indutd with a God-like disposition, is most
properly to converse with God; this is a real, powerful, practical and feeling
converse with him, infinitely to be preferred before all notions, professions,
performances, or speculations.

Secondly, A godly man reckons that the image of God is the glory and ornament
of the soul; it is the luster, and, brightness, and beauty of the soul, as the
soul is of the body. Holiness is not only the duty, but the highest honor and
dignity that any created nature is capable of: And therefore the godly soul,
(who has his senses exercised to discern good and evil) pursues after it, as
after his sull and proper perfection.

Thirdly, A godly man reckons that conformity to the divine image,
participation of the divine nature, is the sureft and most comfortable evidence
of divine love, which is a matter of so great enquity in the world. By growing
up daily in Christ Jesus, we are infallibly assured of our implantation into
him. The Spirit of God descending upon the soul in the impressions of meekness,
kindness, uprightness, which is a Dove-like disposition, is a better, and more
desirable evidence of our Sonship, and God's favor toward us, than if we had
the Spirit descending upon our heads in a Dove-like shape, as it did upon our
blessed Savior. These things may pass for a kind of reasons, why the religious
Christian, above all things, labors to become God-like, to be formed more and
more into a resemblance of the supreme good, and to drink in divine perfections
into the very inmost of his soul.

2. The active and industrious nature of true Godliness, or Religion manifests
its self in a good man's continual care, and study to do good, to serve the
interest of the holy and blessed God in the world. A good man being mastered
with the sense of the infinite goodness of God, and the great: end of his life,
cannot think it worth while to spend himself for any inferior good, or bestow
his time and strength for any lower end than that it; and therefore as it is
the main happiness of his life to enjoy God, so he makes it the main business
of his life to serve him, to be doing for him, to lay out himself for him, and
to display and propagate his glory in the world. And as he is ravished with the
apprehensions of the supreme goodness, which does infinitely deserve, and may
justly challenge all that he can do or expend for him, so he does indeed really
partake of the active and communicative nature of that blessed Being, and
himself becomes active and communicative too: A godly soul sluggish and
unactive, is as if one should say, a godly soul altogether unlike to God; a
pure contradiction. I cannot dwell upon any of those particular desigus of
serving the interest of God's glory, which a good man is still driving on in
the world: Only this in general, whether be pray, or preach, or read, or
celebrate Sabbaths, or administer private reproof or instruction, or indeed
plow or sow, eat or drink, all this while he lives not to himself, but serves
an higher interest than that of the flesh, and a higher good than himself, or
any created Being. A true Christian actively does not only appear in those
things which call duties of Worship, or religious performances; but in the
whole frame of the heart contriving, and the conversation expressing and
unfolding the glory of God. A holy, serious, heavenly, humble, sober,
righteous, and selfdenying course of life, does most excellently express the
divine glory, by imitating the nature of God, and most effectually call all men
to the imitation of it; according as our Savior has nakedly stated the case,
Joh. 15. 8. Hereby is my Father glorified, that ye bring forth much fruit: By
which fruits are not to be understood only preaching, praying, conference,
which are indeed high and excellent duties; but also righteousness, temperance,
selfdenial, which things are pure reflections of the divine image, and a real
glorifying of God's Name and perfections. A good Christian cannot be content to
be happy alone, to be still drawing down Heaven into his own soul; but he
endeavors also both by prayer, counsel, and holy example, to draw up the souls
of other men Heavenward. This God witnesses of Abraham, Genesis 18. 19. I know
him, that he will command his children, and his household after him, and they
shall keep the way of the Lord: And this Moses does excelently witness of
himself in that holy ^apture of his, Numb. 11. 29. Would God that all the
Lord's people were Prophets, and that the Lord would put his Spirit upon them!
By such examples as these a good man desires to live, yea by higher presidents
than either Abraham or Moses, even by the example of the Father and of the Son:
He admires and strives to imitate that character which is given of God himself.
Psalm. 119. 68. Thou art good, and do good; and that which is given of Christ
Jesus, the Lord of life, Act. 10. 38. Who went about doing good; who also
witnessed elsewhere concerning himself, that he came not into the world to do
his own will, nor seek his own glory, but the will and glory of him that sent
him: And again, Luke 2. 49. Wist ye not that I must be about my Father's
business? Oh how happy would the godly soul count it self, if it could but live
and converse in the world at the same rate, and with the same devout, fervent,
exalted spirit, as Christ Jesus did, whose meat and drink it was still to be
doing the will, and advancing the glory of his Father! But (alas) the poor soul
finds it self ensnared by passions, and selfish affections from within, clogged
with an unweildy body, and distracted with secular affairs from without, that
it cannot rise so nimbly, run so swiftly, nor serve the infinite and glorious
God so cheerfully, nor liberally, as it would, and therefore the poor prisoner
sigbs within it self, and wishes that it might escape: But finding a certain
time determined upon it in the body, which it must be content to live out, it
looks up, and is ready to envy the Angels of God, because it cannot live as
they do, who are always upon God's errand, and almost thinks much that it self
is not a Ministering Spirit, serving the pure and perfect will of the supreme
good, without grudging or ceasing. The godly soul under these powerful
apprehensions of the nature of God, the example of Christ, and the honorable
office of the holy Angels, is ready to grudge the body that attendance that it
calls for, and those offices which it is forced to perform to it; as judging
them impertinent to its main happiness, and most excellent employment; it is
ready to envy that more cheerful and willing service, which it finds from the
heavy and drossy body with which it is united, and to cry out, Oh that I were
that to my God, which my body, my eyes, hands and feet are to me! For I say to
one of these, go, and he goes: and to another, do this, and he does it. In a
word, a good man being acquainted feelingly with the highest good, eying
diligently the great end of his coming into the world, and his short time of
being in i^, serves the Eternal and Blessed God, lives upon eternal designs;
and by consecrating all his actions unto God, gives a kind of an immortality to
them, which are in themselves s^tting and transient: He counts it a repro^ch to
any man, much more to a godly man, to do any thing insignificantly, much more
to live i^percinently; and he reckons all things that have not a tendency to
the highest good, and a subserviency to the great and last end, to be
impertinencies, yea and absurdities in an immortal soul, which should
continually be springing up into everlasting life.

3. The active and vigorous nature of true Religion, manifests it self in those
powerful and incessant longings after God, with which it fills that soul in
which it is planted. This I superadd to the two former, because the godly man,
though he be formed into some likeness to God, yet desires to be more like him;
and though he be somewhat serviceable to him, yet desires to be more
instrumental to his will: though he be good, yet desires to be better; and
though he do good, yet he desires to do better, or at least more. And indeed, I
reckon that these sincere and holy hungrings after God, which I am going to
speak of, are one of the best signs that I know in the world, of spiritual
health, and the best (...) of a true Christian: For in this low and animal
state, we are better acquainted with lovings and languishings, than with
fruition or satisfaction; and the best enjoyment that we have of God in this
world, is but scant and short, indeed but a kind of a longing to enjoy him.
Love is certainly a high and noble affection; but (alas) our love, whilst we
are here in the body, is in its nonage, in its weak and sickly state, rather a
longing, than a loving, much unlike to what it will be, when it shall be grown
up unto its perfect stature in glory. But this sickly kind of languishing
affection, is a certain symptom of a healthful constitution, or (as the Apostle
calls it) of the spirit of a sound mind. Godly souls are thirsty souls, always
gasping after the living springs of divine grace, even as the parched Desert
gapeth for the dew of Heaven, the early and the later rain. One would wonder
what kind of Magic there was in Elijahs mantle, that the very casting of it
upon Elisha should make him leave Oxen and Plough, yea Father and Mother and
all, to run after a stranger: Elijah himself seems to wonder at it, 1 King. 19.
20. What have I done to thee? oh but what a mighty char^ is there in divine
love! which when it is once show abroad in the soul, makes the soul to spread
itself in it, and to it, as the heliotrope attending the motions of the Sun,
and turning itself every way toward it, wellcoming its warm and refreshing
beams. Elijah passing by Elisha as he was at plough, and catching him with his
mantle, is but a scant resembl^nce of the blessed God passing by a carnal mind,
and wrapping it in the mantle of his love, and thereby causing it to run, yea
to fly swiftly after him. If divine grace do but once touch the soul, the soul
presently sticks to it, as the needle to the Loadstone. They that heard Christ
Jesus chiding the winds and the waves, cried out what manner of man is this,
that even the winds and the sea obey him: But if one had been present when he
called James and John from their nets, Matthew from the Custom House; and
Za^heus from the tree, and by calling made them willing to come, would have
cried o^t sure, what manner of God is this, that by his bare word, makes poor
men leave their trades and livelihood, and rich men their gainful exactions,
usuries, oppressions to follow him, and shows them no reason why. What a mighty
virtue is there in the ointment of Christ's name, that as soon as it is poured
out, the Virgins fall in love with him, Cant. 1. 3? Micah cried out when he was
in pursuit of his Gods, and should they ask him what ailed him? And will ye
wonder that a holy Soul in pursuit of the holy God should be ^arnest; that he
should run, and cry as he runs, as I have seen a fond child whom the father or
mother have endeavored to leave behind them. God breathing into the Soul,
makes the Soul breath after him, and in a mixture of holy disd^in and anger, to
thrust away from itself all distracting companions, occasions and concernments,
saying with Ephraim to her Idols, Get ye hence: The Soul thus inspired is so
far from prostituting it self to any ^arthly sensual, selfish lusts and loves,
that it cannot brook any thing that would weaken it in the prosecution of the
highest good; it is impatient of every thing that would either stop or slacken
its motions after God. The godly man desires still to be doing something for
God indeed; but if the case so fall out that he cannot spend his life for God
as he desires, yet he will be spending his soul upon him: though he cannot
perpetually abide upon the knee of prayer, yet he would be continually upon the
wing of faith and love: when his tongue cleaves to the roof of his mouth that
he cannot speak for God, yet his Soul shall cleave unto him, and complain
because it can speak no longer. For faith and love are kni^^ing graces, and do
long to make the soul as much one with their object, as is possible for the
creature to be with its Creator. Religion puts a restless appeti^e into the
soul after a higher good, and makes it to throw itself into his arms, and wind
itself into his embraces, longing to be in a more intimate conjunction with
him, or rather entirely wrapped up in him: Itself is an unsatiable and covetous
principle in the soul, much like to the daughter of the horseleech, crying
continually Give, Give: what the Prophet speaks rhetorically of Hell, Isa. 50.
is also true concerning this offspring of Heaven, in the Soul, it enlarges it
self, and opens its mouth without measure. The spirit of true godliness seems
to be altogether such, that it cannot rest in any measures of grace, or be
fully contented with any of its seize in this life; but ardently longs to
receive the more plentiful communications of love, the more deep and legible
impressions of grace, the more clear and ample experiences of divine
assistance, the more sensible evidences of divine favor, the more powerful
and ravishing illapses and incoms of divine consolation into itself; let him
kiss me with the kisses of his mouth, Cant. 1. 2. such is the spirit of true
godliness, that the weakest that is endued with it, longs to be as David, and
the David's to be as God, as the Angel of the Lord, according to that promise,
Zach. 12. 8. The godly soul that is in his right senses, under the powerful
apprehensions of the loveliness of God, and the beauty of holiness cannot be
content to live by any lower instance than that of David, whose soul even broke
for the longing that it had unto the Lord, Psalm. 119. 20, or that of the
spouse, who was even sick of love, Cant. 2. 5. You have read of the Mother of
Sisera, looking out at the window waiting for his coming, and crying through
the lattess, why is his Chariot so long in coming; why tarry the wheels of his
Chariots? But this is not to be compared to the (...) the earnest expectation
of the creature, the new creature, waiting sort he manifestation of God; which
the Apostle elegantly expresses, and yet seems ^o labor for words, as if he
could not sufficiently express it neither, Romans 8. 23. you have read of the
Israelites marching up toward the promised land, and murmuring that they were
held so long in the wilderness: But the true Israelitish Soul makes more have
with less discontent, marches as under the conduct of the Angel of Gods
presence, and longs to arrive at its rest: But alas it is held in the
wilderness too, and therefore cannot be fully quiet in itself, but sends forth
spies to view the land, the scouts of Faith and Hope like Caleb and Joshua
those men of another spirit, and these go and walk through the holy land, and
return home to the soul, and come back, not as Noah's dove with an Olive leaf in
her mouth, but with some clusters in their hands, they bring the soul a taste
of the good things of the Kingdom, of the glories of her eternal state: yea the
soul* self marches up to possess the land, goes out, with the spouse in the
Canticles, to meet the Lord, to seek him whom her soul loves. Religion is a
sacred fire kept burning in the temple of the soul continually, which being
once kindled from Heaven, never goes out, but burns up Heaven-wards, as the
nature of fire is: this fire is kept alive in the soul to all eternity, though
sometimes through the ashes of earthly cares and concernments cast into it, or
the Sun of earthly prosperity shining upon it, it may sometimes burn more
dimly, and seem almost as if it were quite smothered: this fire is for
sacrifice too, though sacrifice be not always offered upon it; the same fire
of faith and love which offered up the morning Sacrifice is kept alive all the
day long, and is ready to kindle the evening Sacrifice too, when the appointed
time of it shall come. In this chariot of fire it is that the soul is
continually carried out toward God, and accomplisheth a kind of (...) or
glorification daily; and when it finds i^ self firmly seated and swiftly
carried herein, it no longer envies the translation of Elias. The spirit of
sanctification is in the soul as a burning fire shut up in the bones, which
makes the soul weary with forbearing, and so powerful in longings, that it
cannot stay; as the spirit of prophecy is described, Jer. 20. it is more true
of the spirit of God than of the spirit of Elih^, the spirit within
constrains, and even dresseth the soul, so that it is ready to swoun and
faint away for very vehemence of longing. S^e the am^rous spouse falling into
one of these fainting fi^s, Cant. 2. 5. and crying out mainly for some cordial
from Heaven to keep up her sinking spirits, Stay me with flaggons, straw me
with apples, for I am sick of love. Oh beautiful and blessed fight, a soul
working toward God, gasping and longing and laboring after its proper
happiness and perfection! Well, the sinking soul is relieved, Christ Jesus
reaches forth his left hand to her head, and his right hand embraces her; and
now she recovers, her hanging hands lift up themselves, and the (...) of her
^ading complex on (...) restored; now she sits down under his shadow with great
delight, and his fruit is sweet unto her taste. See here, the fairest sight on
this side Heaven; a soul resting, and glorying, and spreading itself in the
arms of God, growing up in him, growing great in him, growing full in his
fullness, and perfectly ravished with his pure love! O my soul, be not content
to live by any lower instance! did not our hearts burn within us said the two
Disciples one to the other, whilst he talked with us? But the soul in which
the sacred fire of love is powerfully kindled, does not only burn toward God,
whilst he is more familiarly present with it, and as it were blows upon it;
but if he seem to withdraw from it, it burns after him still; my beloved had
withdrawn himself and was gone, I sought him, I called him, Cant. 5. 6. And if
the fire begin to languish, and seem as if it would go out, the holy soul is
startled presently, and labors (...), as the Apostle speaks, to revive it and
blow it up again, calls upon itself to awake, to arise and pursue to mend its
pace, and to speed its heavy and sluggish motions. This divine active principle
in the soul maintains a continual striving, a holy struggling and stre^ching
forth of the soul toward God, a bold and ardent contention after the supre^m
good; (...), Religien has the strength of the Divinity in it, its motions
toward its object are quick and potent. That elegant description which the
Prophet makes of the wicked heart, with some change may be brought liv^^ly to
express this excellent temper of the godly soul; it is like the working Sea
which cannot ^est: and although its waters do not cast up mire and dirt, yet in
a holy impatience, they rise and swell, and cast up a froth and some toward
Heaven. In a word, that I may comprize many things in few expressions, no man
so ambitious as the humble, none so covetous as the heavenly-minded, none so
voluptuous as the self-denying: Religion gives a largeness and wideness to the
soul, which sin, and self, and the world had straightned and confined: But his
Ambition is only to be great in God, his Covetousness is only to be filled with
all the fullness of God, and his voluptuousness is only to drink of the rivers
of his pure pleasures: He desires to taste the God whom he sees, and to be
satisfied with the God whom he tastes. Oh now, how are all the faculties of the
soul awakened to attendance upon the Lord of life! It hearkens for the sound of
his feet coming, the noise of his hands knocking at the door, it stands upon
its watch tower waiting for his appearing, waiting more earnestly than they
that watch for the morning, and rejoices to meet him at his coming; and having
met him, runs into his arms, kisses him, holds him, and will not let him go,
but brings him into the house, and entertains him in the guest-chamber: The
soul complains that itself is not large enough, that there is not room enough
to entertain so glorious a guest, no not though it have given him all the room
that it has: It entertains him with the widest arms, and the sweetest smiles;
and if he depart and withdraw, fetches him again with the deepest groans,
Return, Return, O Prince of Peace, and make me an everlasting habitation of
righteousness unto thy self!

It will not be amiss here briefly to touch upon the Reason of the godly souls
so ardent pantings after God. And here I might show first negatively, that it
springs not from any carnal ambition of being better and higher than others,
not from any ^arnal hope of impunity and safety, nor merely from the bitter
sense of pressing and tormenting afflictions in this life. But I shall rather
insist upon it affirmatively. These earnest breathings (...) God spring from
the feeling apprehensions of self-indigency and insufficiency, and ^^e powerful
sense of divine goodness and fullness, they are begotten of the divine Bounty
and self sufficiency manifesting itself to the spirits of men, and conceived
and brought forth by a deep sense of selfpoverty: one might almost apply the
Apostles words to this purpose, we receive the sentence of death in our selves,
that we should not trust in our selves, but in him. I shall not discourse upon
these two heads disjunctly, but frame them into one notion, and so you may take
it thus; these holy longings of the godly soul after God, do arise from the
sense of its distance from God. To be so far distant from God who is life and
love itself, and the proper and full happiness of the soul, is grievous to the
soul that is rightly affected toward him; and hence it is that the soul cannot
be at rest, but still longs to be more intimately joined to him, and more
perfectly filled with him: and the clearer the souls apprehensions are of its
object, and the deeper its sense is of its own unlikeness to him, and distance
from him, the more strong and impatient are its breathings; insomuch that not
only fear (as the Apostle speaks,) but even love itself sometimes seems to
itself to have a kind of agony and torment in itself; which made the spouse cry
she was sick of love, that is, sick of every thing that kept her from her love,
sick of that distance at which she stood from her beloved Lord. The godly soul
being ravished with the infinite sweetness and goodness of God, longs to be that
rather than what itself i^, and beholding how it is estranged from him, by many
sensual loves, selfish passions, corporal clogs and distractions, bewails its
distance, and cries out within itself, Oh when shall I come and appear before
God! Oh when will God come and appear gloriously to me and in me! who will
deliver me from this body of death! Oh that mortality were swallowed up of
life! David's soul did wait for God as earnestly, and more properly than they
that watch for the morning; they may be said rather to be weary of the long and
cold and troublesome night, than properly covetous of the day; but he out of a
pure and spiritual sense of his estrangement from God longs to appear before
him, and be wrapped up in him. Heal the Godly man of all his affl^ctio^s,
grievances, adversities in the world, that he may have nothing to trouble him,
nor put him to pain; yet he is not quiet, he is in pain because of the distance
whereat he stands from God: give him the whole world and all the glory of it,
yet he has not enough, he still cries and craves give, give, because he is not
entirely swallowed up in God: he opens his month wide, as the Psalmist
speaks, and all the Silver and Gold, peace, health, liberty, pre^erment, that
you cast into it, cannot fill it, because they are not God, he cannot look upon
them as his chiefest good. In a word, A godly man does not so much say, in the
sense either of sin or affliction, Oh that one would give me the wings of a
Dove, that I may fly away and be at rest, as in the sense of his dissimilitude
to, and distance from God, Oh that one would give me the wings of an Eagle,
that I might fly away toward Heaven!

CHAP. V.
An expostulation with Christians concerning their remiss and sluggish temper,
an essay to convince them of it by some considerations; which are, first, The
activity of worldly men; secondly, The restless appetites of the body; thirdly,
The strong propensions of every creature, toward its own center: An enquiry
into the slothfulness and inactivity of Christian souls: two things premised,
and so an answer is given to the enquiry in five particulars. The grace of
faith is vindicated from the slander of being merely passive. A short essay to
awaken Christians unto a greater vigor and activity.

WE have seen in what respects Religion is an Active principle in the soul
where it is seated: give me leave to enlarge a little here for Conviction or
Reprehension. By this property of true Religion we shall be able to discover
much that is false and counterseit in the world. If Religion be no lazy,
languid, sluggish, passive thing, but lift, love, the spirit of power and
Freedom, a fire burning, a well of water springing up, as we have sufficiently
seen, what shall we say then of that heavy, sluggish, spiritless kind of
Religion that most men take up with? Shall we call it a spirit of life, with
the Apostle; and yet allow of a Religion that is cold and dead? shall we call
it a spirit of love and power, with the same Apostle; and yet allow of it,
though it be indifferent low, and impotent? or will such pass for current with
the wise and holy God, it we should pass a favorable censure upon it? And why
should it ever pass with men, if it will not for ever pass with God? But indeed
how can this inactivity and sluggishness pass for Religion amongst men? who can
think you are in pursuit of the infinite and supreme good, that sees you so
slow in your motions toward it? who can think that your treasure is in Heaven,
that sees your heart so far from thence? The more any thing partakes of God,
and the nearer it comes to him who is the fountain of life and power and
virtue, the more active, powerful and lively will it be. We read of an
Atheistical generation in Zeph. 1. 12. who fancied to themselves an idle and
slothful God, that minded not the affairs of the world at all, saying, the Lord
will not do good, neither will he do evil; which was also the false and gross
conceit of many of the Heathen, as Cicero confesses of some of the Philosophers
themselves, qui Deum nihil habere negotii dicunt and nihil exhibere alteri: And
indeed though it be not so blasphemous, yet it is almost as absurd, to fancy an
idle Saint, as an idle Deity. Sure I am, if it be not altogether impossible,
yet it is altogether a shamesull and deformed sight, a holy soul in a lethargy,
a godly soul that is not in pursuit of God. Moses indeed bids Israel stand
still and see the salvation of the Lord; but there is no such divinity in the
holy Scriptures as this, stand still and see the salvation of the soul (though
some have violently pressed those words, Exodus 14. 13. to serve under their
slothful standard:) No, no, the Scripture speaks to us at another rate, Phil.
2. 12. (...) work out your own salvation: and indeed the spirit of God does
everywhere describe Religion by the activity, industry, vigor and quietness of
it, as I hinted in the very beginning of this discourse, and could abundantly
confirm and explain, if there were need of it.

But that I may more powerfully convince and awaken the lazy and heavy spirit
and temper of many professors, I will briefly touch upon a few particulars,
which I will next propound to their serious consideration.

1. The children of this world, earthly and sensual men, are not so slothful,
so lazy, so indifferent in the pursuit of earthly and sensual objects. You say
you have laid up your treasure in Heaven; we know they have laid up their
treasure in the earth: now who is it that behaves himself* most suitably and
seemly toward his treasure? you or they? you say you have a treasure in
Heaven, and are content to be able to say so, but make no haste to be fully and
seelingly possessed of it, to enjoy the benefit* and sweetness of it. But they
rise up early, and sit up late, and either pine themselves, or eat the bread of
sorrow, to obtain earthly and perishing inheritances; they circuit the world,
travel far* sell all to purchase that part which is of so great price with
them: And when they have accomplished it, oh how do they set their heart upon
it, bind up their very souls, in the same bags with their money, and seal up
their affections together with it* yea and so they are not at rest neither, but
find a gnawing hunger upon their hearts after more still, to add house to
house* and land to land, and one bagg to another; the covetous miser is ready
to sit down and wring his hands, because he has no more hands to scrape with;
the voluptuous Epicure is angry that he has not the neck of a Crane the better
to taste his dainties, and ambitious Alexander when he dominee^s over the known
world, is ready to sit down and whine, because there are no more worlds to
conquer. What Christian can choose but be ashamed of himself, when he reads the
description which Plautus the Comoedian makes of a covetous worldling, under
the person of Euclio, how he hid his pot of Gold, heeded it, wa^cht it, visited
it almost every hour, would not go from it in the day, could not sleep for it
in the night, suspected every body that so much as looked toward it, and by all
means kept it even as his life? For where is the like eager and ardent
disposition to be found in a Christian toward God himself? Tell me, is it
possible for a man that vehemently loves a Virgin, to be content all his life
long to Court her at a distance, and not care whether ever he do actually enjoy
her or no? or must not such an one necessarily pursue a matrimonial and most
intimate union with her? let us now confess the truth, and every one judge
himself.

2. This dull and earthly body is not so indifferently affected toward meat
and drink, and rest, and the things that do serve its necessities, and gratify
its temper. Hunger will break down stone walls, and thirst will give away a
kingdom for a cup of water, sickness will not be eased by good words, nor will
a drowsy brain be bribed by any entertainments of company or recreation: no,
no, the necessities of the body must and will be relieved with food and physic
and sleep; the restless and raging appetite will never cease calling and crying
to the soul for supplies till it arise and give them. Behold O my Soul,
consider the mighty and incessant appetites and tendencies of the body after
sensual objects, after its suitable good and proper perfection, and be ashamed
of thy more remiss and sluggish inclinations toward the highest good, a
God-like perfection!

3. No creature in the whole world is so languid, slow, and indifferent in its
motions toward its proper rest and center. How easy were it to call Heaven
and earth to witness the free, pleasant, cheerful, eager addresses of every
creature according to its kind, toward its own center and happiness. The Sun
in the Firmament rejoices to run its race, and will not stand still one moment,
except it be miraculously overpowred by the command of God himself; the rivers
seem to be in pain till by a continued flowing they have accomplished to
themselves a kind of perfection, and be swallowed up in the bosom of the
Ocean, except they be benumbed with cold, or otherwise overmastered and
retarded by foreign violence; I need not instance in sensitives and
vegetatives, all which you know with a natural vigor and activity do grow up
daily toward a perfect state and stature. Were it not a strange and monstrous
sight, to see a stone settling in the air, and not working toward its center?
such a spectacle is a godly soul settling upon earth, and not endeavoring a
nearer and more intimate union with its God. Wherefore Christians, either cease
to pretend that you have chosen God for your portion, center, happiness, or
else arise and cease not ^o pursue and accomplish the closest union and the
most familiar conjunction with him that your souls are capable of: otherwise I
call Heaven and Earth to witness against you this day: and the day is coming
when you will be put to shame by the whole creation. Does every (even the
meanest) creature of God, pursue its end and perfection, and proper happiness
with ardent and vehement longings; and shall a soul, the noblest of all
creatures, stand folding up itself in itself, or choking up its wide and
divine capacity with dust and dirt; shall a godly soul the noblest of all souls
hang the wings, suspend its motions toward the supreme good, or so much as
once offer to faint and languish in i^s enterprises for eternal life? Tell it
not at Athens, publish it not at Rome, lest the Heathen Philosophers deride,
and hiss us out of the world.

But you will ask me when a Christian may be said to be sluggish and unactive,
and who these lazy souls are. I will premise two things, and then give you a
brief account of them. First, When I speak of a sluggish and spiritless
Religion, I do not speak as the hot-spirited Anabaptists or Chiliasts* who
being themselves acted by a strange fervor of mind, miscalled zeal, are wont
to declaim against all men as cold and benumbed in their spirits, who do not
call for fire from Heaven to consume all dissenters, under the notion of
Antichristian; who are not afraid to reproach the divine, holy, gentle, yet
generous spirit of Religion, calling it weak, womanish, cowardly, low, cold,
and I know not what. These men I believe (so far as I can guess at their
spirit) if they had lived in the days of our Savior, and had beheld that
gentle, meek, humble, peaceable and pacate spirit, which did infinitely shine
forth in him, would have gone nigh to have reproved him for not carrying on his
own Kingdom with sufficient vigor and activity; if not have judged Christ
himself to be much Antichristian. I hope you see nothing in all my discoveries
of the Active spirit of Religion, that savours of such a fiery spirit as this
is. Secondly, when I do so highly commend the Active spirit of true Religion,
and the vigorous temper of truly Religious souls, I would not be understood, as
if I thought all such souls were alike swift, or that any such soul did always
move with like swiftness, and keep a like pace toward God. I know that there
are different sizes of Active souls, yea and different degrees of Activity in
the same soul: as may be seen, Cant. 5. 3. compared with the sixth verse of the
same chapter; and in many other places of Scripture.

But yet that none may flatter and deceive themselves with an opinion of their
being what indeed they are not, I will briefly discover the sluggishness and
inactivity of Christians in a few particulars. I pray take it not ill though
the greatest part of Christians be found guilty; for that is no other than what
Christ himself has prophesied.

1. The Active spirit of Religion in the soul will not suffer men to take up
their rest in a constant course of external performances; and they are but
slothful souls that do place their Religion in any thing without them. By
external performances, I mean not only open and public and solemn services,
but even the most private, and secret performances that are in and by the body,
and ab extra to the soul. It is not possible that a soul should be happy in any
thing that is extrinsecal to itself; no not in God himself, if we consider him
only as something without the soul: The devil himself knows and sees much of
God without him, but having no communications of a divine nature or life, being
perfectly estranged from the life of God, he remains perfectly miserable. I
doubt it is a common deceit in the world, men toil and labor in bodily acts
of worship and Religion in a slavish and mercinary manner, and think (with
those laborers in the parable) that at the end they must needs receive great
wages, and much thanks, because they have born the heat and burden of the day.
Alas that ever men should so grossly mistake the nature of Religion, as to sink
it into a few bodily acts and carcase-services, and to think it is nothing else
but a running the round of duties and ordinances, and a keeping up a constant
set and course of actions! such an external legal righteousness the Apostle
Paul after his conversion, could not take up with, but counted it all loss and
dung in comparison of that Godlike righteousness which was now brought into his
soul, that inward and spiritual conformity to Christ, which was now wrought in
him, Phil. 3. 9, 10. I know indeed that men will be loath to confess that they
place their Religion in any thing without them; but I pray consider seriously
wherein you excel other men, save only in praying or hearing now and then, or
some other outward acts, and judge your selves by your nature, and not by your
actions.

2. The Active spirit of Religion, where it is in the soul, will not suffer men
to take up their rest in a mere pardon of sin; and they are but slothful souls
that could be so satisfied. Blessed is the man indeed whose inquities are
pardoned, Psalm. 32, 1, 2. but if we could suppose a soul to be acquitted of the
guilt of all sin, and yet to lie bound under the dominion of lusts and
passions, and to live without God in the world, he were yet far from true
blessedness. A real hell and misery will arise out of the very bowels of sin
and wickedness, though there should be no reserve of fire and brimstone in the
world to come. It is utterly impossible that a Soul should be happy out of God,
though it had the greatest security imaginable that it should never suffer any
thing from him. The highest care and ambition indeed of a slavish and mercenary
spirit is to be secured from the wrath and vengeance of God, but the breathings
of the ingenuous and holy soul, are after a divine life, and Godlike
perfections. This right gracious tempe you may see in David, Psalm. 51. 9, 10,
11, 12. which is also the temper of every truly Religious soul.

3. The Active spirit of Religion where it is in the soul, will not suffer men
to take up their rest in mere inn^cency, freedom from sin; and they are
slothful souls that could count it happiness enough to be harmless. I doubt men
are much mistaken about holiness; it is more than mere innocence, or freedom
from the guilt or power of sin, it is not a negative thing; there is something
active, noble, divine, powerful in true Religion. A soul that rightly
understands its own penury and self-insufficiency, and the emptiness and
meanness of all creature-good, cannot possibly take up its rest, or place its
happiness, in any thing but in a real participation of God himself; and
therefore is continually making out toward that God from whom it came, and is
laboring to unite itself more and more unto him. Let a low-spirited, fleshly*
minded Pharisee take up with a negative holiness and happiness, as he does Luke
18. 11. God I thank thee that I am not so and so: a noble and high-spirited
Christian cannot take up his rest in any negation or freedom from sin. Every
godly soul is not so learned indeed as to be able to describe the nature and
proper perfection of a soul, and to tell you how the happiness of a soul
consists, not in quiet, but in actu and vigore, not in cessation and rest, as
the happiness of a stone does, but in life and power and vigor, as the
happiness of God himself does: But yet the spirit of true Religion is so
excellent and powerful in every godly soul, that it is still carrying it to
the fuller enjoyment of an higher good; and the soul does find and feel within
itself (though it cannot discourse Philosophically of these things) that though
it were free from all disturbance of sin and affliction in the world, yet still
it wants some supreme and possible good to make it completely happy, and so
bends all its power thi^ herward. This is the description which you will
everywhere find made in Scripture of the true spirit of holiness, which has
always something positive and divine in it, as Is^. 1. 16, 17. cease to do
evil, learn to do well; and Ephesians. 4. 22, 24. Put off the old man* put on that
new man which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness. And
accordingly a truly godly soul (to use the Apostles words) though he know
nothing by himself, yet does not thereby count himself happy.

4. The Active spirit of true Religion, wh^re it is in the Soul, will not
suffer men to take up their rest in some measures of grace received; and so far
as the soul does, so it is sluggish and less Active than it ought to be. This
indeed often times comes to pass, when the soul is under some distemper of proud
selfishness, earthly-mindedness or the like, or is less apprehensive of its
object and happiness; as it seems to have been the case of the spouse, Cant. 5.
3. Some such fainting fits, languishings, su^ferings, in sensibleness must be
allowed to be in the Godly soul during its imprisoned and imperfect state: But
we must not judge our selves by any present distempers, or infirmities. The
nature of Religion, when it acts the soul rightly and powerfully, is to carry
it after a more lively resemblance of God, which is the most proper and
excellent enjoyment of him. A mind rightly and actually sound is most sick of
love; and the nature of love is, not to know when it is near enough to its
object* but still to long after the most perfect conjunction with it. This well
of water, if it be not violently obstructed for a time, is ever springing up
till it be swallowed up in the Ocean of divine love and grace. The soul that is
rightly acquainted with itself and its God, sees something still wanting in
itself, and to be enjoyed in him, which makes it, that it cannot be at rest,
but is still springing up into him, till it come to the measure of the stature
of the fullness of its Lord. In this holy, loving; longing, striving, active
temper we find the great Apostle, Phil. 3. 12, 13, 14. And by how much the more
of divine grace any soul has drunk in, the more thirsty is it after much more.

5. The Active spirit of true Religion, where it is powerfully seated in the
minds of men will not suffer them to settle into a love of this animal life,
nor indeed suffer them to be content to live for ever in such a kind of body as
this; and that soul is in a degree lazy and slothful that does not desire to
depart and be with his Lord. The godly soul eying God as his perfect and full
happiness, and finding that his being in the body does separate him from God,
keep him in a poor and imperfect state, and hinders his blissfull communion
with the highest good, groans within itself that mortality were swallowed up of
life, with the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5. 4. I know not how much, but I think he has
not very much of God, neither fight of him nor love of him, that could be
content to abide for ever in this imperfect, mixed low state, and never be
perfected in the full enjoyment of him. And it seems, that they in whom the
love of God is rightly predominant, potent, flourishing, do also look earnestly
for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, unto eternal life, Jude. 2. without
doubt they ought to do, 2 Pe^. 3. 12. What manner of persons ought ye to be in
all holy conversation and godliness, looking for and hasting unto the coming of
the day of God!

Let this suffice by way of general Reprehension.

2. More particularly, the consideration of the Active nature of true Religion,
may well serve to correct a mistake about that noble grace of faith. How
dishonourably do some speak of this excellent and powerful grace, when they
make it to be a slothful, passive thing, an idle kind of waiting, or a
Melancholic sitting still; which indeed and in truth, is Life and power. Be
not mistaken in so high and eminent a grace: True faith does not only accept
the imputed righteousness of Christ for justification, but by a lively
dependence upon God, drinks in divine influences, and eagerly sucks in grace,
and virtue and life from the fountain of grace for its more perfect
sanctification: And for this cause (I think) a purifying virtue is ascribed to
it, Act. 15. 9. Faith is not a lazy languid thing, content to wait for
salvation till the world to come; but it is even now gasping after it, and
accomplishing it too in a way of mortification, self-denial and growing up in
God: it is not content to be a candidate waiting for life and happiness, but is
actually drawing down Heaven into the soul, attracting God to itself, sucking
in participations of divine grace and image into the soul: Its motto is that of
the famous painter, nulla dies sine linea, it longs to find some divine
lineament, some line of Gods image drawn upon the soul daily. Faith is a giving
grace, as well as receiving; it gives up the whole soul to God; and is troubled
that it can give him no more: it binds over the soul afresh to God every day,
and is troubled that it can bind it no faster, nor closer to him. The believing
soul is wearyed because of muderers, murdering loves, lusts, cares, earthly
pleasures, and calls mightily upon Christ to come and take vengeance upon them:
it is wearyed because of those robbers that are daily stealing away precious
time and affections from God, which are due unto him, and calls upon Christ to
come and scourge these thieves, these buyers and sellers out of his own Temple.
In a word, the godly soul is Active, and faith is the very life and Action of
the soul itself.

Lastly, Let me exhort all Christians from hence to be zealous, to be fervent
in spirit, serving the Lord, and longing after him; Stir up the grace of God
that is in you Quench not, i. e. blow up, inflame the spirit of God in you.
Awake Christian soul out of thy Lethargy, and rejoice as the Sun to run the
race that is set before thee, and as a mighty man refreshed with Wine to fight
thy spiritual battles against the armies of uncircumcised profane and earthly
concupiscences, love, and passions. Eye God as your center, the enjoyment of
him as the Happiness, and full conformity to him as the perfection of your
souls; and then say Awake, Arise O my Soul, and hide not thy hand in thy
bosom, but throw thy self into the very heart and bosom of God, lay hold upon
eternal life. Again, observe how all things in the world pursue their several
perfections with unwearied and impatient longings, and say, come my soul, and
do thou likewise. Converse not with God so much under the notion of a Law*
giver, but as with love itself; nor with his commands as having authority in
them, but as having goodness and life and sweetness in them. Again, consider
your poverty as creatures* and how utterly impossible it is for you to be happy
in your selves; and say, Arise O my soul from off this weak and tottering
foundation, and build thy self up in God; cease pinching thy self within the
straits of self-sufficiencies, and come, stretch thy self upon infinite
Goodness and Fullness. Again pore not upon your seize, do not sit brooding
upon your present accomplishments, but forget the things that are behind, and
say, Awake O my soul, there is yet infinitely much more in God, pursue after
him for it, till thou have gotten as much as a created Being is capable to
receive of the divine nature. In a word, take heed you live not by the lowest
examples, (which thing keeps many in a dwindling state all their days) but by
the highest: Read over the Spouse her temper, sick of Love; David's temper,
waiting for God more than they that watch for the morning, breaking in heart
for the longing that he had to the Lord, and say, Arise O my Soul, and live as
high as the highest, it is no fault to desire to be as Good, as holy, as happy
as an Angel of God, And thus O my soul open thy mouth wide, and God has
promised to fill thee!

CHAP. VI.
That Religion is a lasting and persevering principle in the souls of men,
proved by several Scriptures. The grounds of this perseverance assigned, first
negatively; It does not arise from the absolute inamissability of grace in the
creature, nor from the strength of man's Free Will. Secondly Affirmatively, the
grace of election cannot fail. The grace of Justification is neither suspended
nor violated, The Covenant of grace is everlasting: The Mediator of this
Covenant lives for ever: The promises of it immutable; The righteousness
brought in by the Messiab everlasting. An objection answered concerning a
regenerate man's willing his own apostasy. An Objection answered drawn from the
falls of Saints in Scripture, as also from those Scriptures that seem to imply
a man's falling away. A discovery of counterfeit Religion and the shameful
apostasy of false professors. An encouragement to all holy diligence from the
consideration of this doctrine, the rather that we may stop the mouths of those
that falsely affirm that the same is prejudicial to true godliness.

I Come now to the third property of true Religion contained in these words,
and that is the perseverance of it. And here the foundation of my following
discourse shall be this proposition.

True Religion is a lasting and persevering principle in the Souls of good men.
It is said of the hypocritical Jews, that their goodness was as the early dew
that soon passes away, Hos. 6. 4. But that principle of true goodness which
God planteth in the souls of his people is compared to a well of water,
evermore sending forth fresh streams, and incessantly springing up toward God
himself: our Savior compares hypocritical professors to seed sown upon stony
ground that springs up indeed, but soon withers away, Mark. 4. 5, 6. but this
well of water which is in the sincere godly soul, springs up into everlasting
life, it springs and is never dried up, it is a spring of water, whose waters
fail not, or lies not, as it is expressed by the Prophet, Isa. 58. 11. Or if you
look upon it under the Metaphor of oil, as it is sometimes expressed in
Scripture, then it is truly that Oil that fails not, whereof the Widow of
Sarepthahs cruise of Oil was but a scant resemblance. Amongst other Texts
which the learned Dr. Arrowsmith brings to prove the infallibility of the
perseverance of Saints, this speech of our Saviors which is the subject of my
whole discourse, is one; who also quoteth Theophylact for the same mind, viz.
the perseverance of this principle, yea and some what more, even the growth and
multiplication of it. To the same purpose the same excellent Author quoteth,
Joh. 10. 27, 28. My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me;
And I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall
any man pluck them out of my hand. In which words our Savior strongly
asserteth the certain glorification of his elect, by using a Verb of the
present tense, I give unto them eternal life; he will as certainly give it them
as if they had it already; except the words do imply that they have it already,
viz. the beginnings of it, even in this life: and if so, then the words do yet
more strongly assert the doctrine of perseverance; for how can that life be
called eternal, which may be ended? In the same words he seems purposely to
prevent fears, and before hand to answer objections, by securing them both from
internal and external enemies, they shall never perish ( viz. of their own
accord) neither shall any one pluck them out of my hand; for the word in the
original is such as does secure them from the power of devils as well as men;
and what is said of the Church in general, is also certain concerning every
true member of it in particular; the gates of hell shall not prevail against
it. Christ has not only chosen and ordained his people that they should be
holy, but also that they should persevere in holiness; not only that they
should bring forth good fruits, but that their fruits should remain, Joh. 15.
16. Hence they are said to be born again of incorruptible seed, which lives
and abides for ever, 1 Pet. 1. 23. And he that is born of God, is said to have
the seed of God in him, and remaining in him, and so remaining in him as that
he shall never again commit sin, that is, shall not become any more ungodly, 1 John 3. 9. To all which may be added that strong and strengthening text, Romans 8.
38, 39. I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height,
nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love
of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord: which one text does excellently
assert both those high and comfortable doctrines of Assurance and perseverance;
and they are worthily to be honored in the Church of God, who have vindicated
it from the corrupt glosses and cavils of the Papists, who have endeavored to
rob Christians of the sweetness which may be sucked out of that pregnant
honey^comb: In a word, let the holy Psalmists experience of the supporting
virtue of this doctrine shut up the proof of it at present, who sound himself
wonderfully comforted by it after all his* fears and foyls, Psalm. 73. 24. where
he sings of the loving kindness of the Lord in time past, thou have holden me
by my right hand; and at present, I am continually with thee, that is, thou art
continually with me* and with the like courage and confidence he speaks of all
time to come, thou shall guide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive me
to glory. Now although the doctrine of the perseverance of Saints be thus fully
and clearly laid down in Scripture, yet it is easy to err in giving an
account of it and of the grounds of it. And therefore I shall proceed to the
grounds of it, which I will briefly lay down negatively and affirmatively.
First negatively,

1. The certain perseverance of the Saints in a state of grace does not arise
from the absolute inamissability of grace in the creature: It is one thing to
affirm that grace shall not be lost, and an other thing to affirm that it is
absolutely unloseable: God has told us that the world shall no more be
drowned, but who will say for all that, that it is not in itself capable of
drowning? whilst we think to honor God by asserting the permanency of grace,
we must take ^eed lest we make a God of grace, and so dishonor him. Grace as
it is in God, in the fountain, which divines sometimes call Active Grace is
eternal and unchangeable, not subject to any defection or alteration. There is
no time, or place, or case wherein the love and goodness of God fails toward
his elect. It is one and the same in God toward his people even when they are
under the greatest desertions, and have no sense at all of it; we must not say
the Sun is grown dark, as often as a dark cloud interposeth between it and our
sight. Yea however it be most certain that the pure and holy God hates sin
even in his elect, yet it is also certain that the good and gracious God loves
the persons of his Saints, even at what time they sin: For the love of God
toward the regenerate (says learned Davenant) is not bottomed upon their
perfect purity and holiness; but upon Christ Jesus the Mediator, who has
transferred their sins upon himself, and so has redeemed them from the wrath
of God. The love and kindness of God toward his people is absolutely
unchangeable and everlasting. But grace in the creature, itself being a
creature, is not simply and absolutely unchangeable or unloseable: There is a
possibility of losing inherent grace if it be considered in itself; yea and it
would actually be lost and perish, but that God upholdeth his people with one
hand whilst he ex^rciseth them with the other. Though with all my might I
desire to maintain the perseverance of the Saints, ye^ I dare not (as the
manner of some is) ground it upon the firmness and rootedness of faith in man,
but upon the goodness and faithfulness of God, which is such toward his elect,
that he will keep them by his mighty power through faith unto salvation, as the
Apostle expresses it, 1 Pet. 1. 5.

2. It does not arise from the strength of man's Free will, as if he were of
himself able to keep himself for ever in a state of grace, when God had once
put him into it. The saints indeed shall for ever will their own perseverance
(as we shall see anon) but it is God that works in them even this will, Phil.
2 13. man's own Free Will or self-sufficiency, is so far from being the ground
of his perseverance in grace and holiness; that I do believe nothing in the
world is more directly contrary to grace than habitual and predominant self
confidence; and even in the Saints themselves, there is nothing that does
strike a greater stroke toward their apostasy, than this selfconceit and
confidence of their own strength, as something distinct from God, though the
same be not habitual and predominant, for they themselves are many times sadly
weakened and set back by that means, and suffer many lamentable spiritual
decays. This seems to have sometimes been the case of Hezekiah and of David
too, and had like to have been the case of Paul, when he had so much abounded
in Revelations, 2 Cor. 12. 7. sure it is, that nothing does more estrange the
hearts of Gods people from him, nor bind up the influences of divine grace and
favor from them, than this security, confidence in the strength of their own
wills, and vain opinion of self-sufficiency, which thing the sad experience of
many holy Christians does attest: not only the Apostles James and Peter, but
indeed all the true Disciples of Christ in the world do agree to the truth of
that Proverb, God resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble. In a
word, though to do justly and to love mercy, have indeed much of Religion in
them, yet unto perseverance it is also required that a man deny himself and the
sufficiency of this own Free Will, and (in the Prophets expression) walk humbly
with his God. You know whose brag it was, Though all men shall be offended
because of thee, yet will I never be offended, and again, Though I should dye
with thee, yet will I not deny thee; and what was the lamentable consequence of
this self-confidence, you know likewise: wherefore let him that stands by his
own strength, take heed lest he fail.

I proceed now to speak something affirmitively concerning the grounds of the
Saints perseverance in a state of grace. I have already showed you that Active
grace is absolutely of an immutable nature: And although passive grace be not
so, yet it shall not be lost totally and finally. For,

1. The grace of Election cannot fail. when I think of that uncertain,
conditional, mutable decree of saving men, which some ascribe to God, who is
infinite and eternal wisdom and oneness, methinks I may with great reason
apply the Apostles words spoken concerning himself, and say when God is thus
graciously minded to Elect his people to eternal life, does he use lightness,
or the things that he purposes, does he purpose according to the flesh; after
the manner of men, who are unsteady and wavering in their determinations? Is
there with him yea, yea, and nay, nay? what does the Apostle mean by those
words 2 Timothy 2. 19. The foundation of God stands sure, having this seal, The
Lord knows them that are his? The Apostle in the foregoing Verse, having
related the apostasy of Hymeneus and Philetus, and the overthrow of some men's
faith by their means, immediately subjoyns this comfortable doctrine of the
stedfastness and firmness of Gods decree of election, to prevent the offense
which the Saints might take against the falls of others and to relieve them
against the fears that they might possibly conceive concerning their own
perseverance; q. d. let no one be offended, as if the salvation of the Elect
stood at uncertainties; it appears that these men were none of Gods elect,
because they are seduced, and the faith that they had is overthrown; and as for
your part who are elected, fear not lest ye also should apostatize, it is not
possible to deceive the elect in the necessary and fundamental truths of the
Gospel, ( Matthew. 24. 24.) fear not lest ye also should be drawn away by the
error of the wicked unto perdition, For the foundation of God stands sure,
etc. In which sentence, says Dr. Arrowsmith, almost every word breaths
firmness and performance: nothing is more firm in a building than the
foundation; that you may not doubt of that, it is also called sure or steady;
this sure foundation is said to stand, i. e. (say the Dutch Annotat.) abides
steadfast and certain; for it is the foundation not of man's laying, but of God,
with whom there is no variableness nor shadow of change: yea further, this
foundation is said to be sealed; now what is accounted more firm and sure than
those things which are sealed with a seal? especially such a seal as this, The
Lord knows who are his; though the wisest of men are often deceived in their
opinions, yet the knowledge of God is infinitely infallible; according to that
of Austin, If any of the Elect perish, God is deceived; but God is not
deceived, therefore none of the Elect can perish, for the Lord knows who are
his. When Samuel indeed went to separate one of the Sons of Jesse from the rest
of his brethren to be King over Israel, he first pitched upon Eliab, and
afterward rejected him, 1 Samuel 16. but God is guilty of no such inconstancy in
that eternal election which he makes of men to be Kings and Priests unto
himself. Those several acts of divine grace mentioned, Romans 8. 29, 30. though
they be many links, yet run one into an other, and all from first to last make
up but one chain; concerning which divine and mysterious concatenation one may
boldly use that peremptory prohibition which our Lord uses concerning a less
indisputable conjunction, Matthew. 19. 6. What God has joined together, let no
man put asunder.

2. The grace of Justification is neither suspended nor violated, it admits
neither of intercision nor rescission, neither of pause nor period. There is
nothing between Justification and glorification in the Apostles sentence, but
the copulative [and] Romans 8. 30. there is nothing between a justified soul and
glory, but a mere passage into it. May we be allowed to triumph with the holy
Apostle in the forequoted chapter, who shall bring an accusation against Gods
elect? It is God that justifies. But what though you be at present justified
may some say, is there not a possibility of being unjustified again, may not
the righteousness of the righteous be taken from him, may you not be condemned
hereafter? But who is he that shall condemn us? It is Christ that dyed: As if
the Apostle had said, the love of God toward his justified ones is not
grounded upon their purity, loveliness or perfection, but it is founded in
their Redeemer, which Redeemer has done enough, both to bring them into a
justified state, and to keep them in it for ever; It is Christ that dyed, to
free them from sin, it is Christ that is risen again for their justification;
that is at the right hand of God, to deliver them from all their enemies, that
makes intercession for them, for their perseverance. God loves nothing but the
communications of himself, so far as any thing partakes of the divine image, so
far it partakes of divine favor and complacency, so that whilst a good man
bears a resemblance unto God, so long he shall be accepted of him, and embraced
in the arms of his love* and that shall be for ever, as we shall see under the
next head. Until you have blotted out all the image and superscription of God
out of a godly soul, until you have razed out all the stamps and impressions
of goodness: in a word, until you have rendered him wicked and ungodly, you
cannot abandon him from the embraces of God; which thing men and devils shall
never be able to do, as I have partly showed already, and shall yet show more
at large.

It is true indeed that Adam fell from a just state though not from a justified
state, for that supposes sin formerly committed. But this is no great wonder;
for he had his righteousness in himself, and his happiness in his own keeping:
But the condition of believers is now more safe and firm, as depending not upon
any created power or will, but upon the infinite and effectual help and
strength of a Mediator, which will never fail.

3. The covenant of grace is everlasting. It has pleased God to enter into a
covenant of grace and peace with every believing soul; which I suppose I need
not go about to prove, all Christians acknowledging it, though they do not all
agree in one notion of it. Now this Covenant, wherein God engages himself to be
their God (for that is the summary Contents of it on his part) is expressly
called by the Apostle (...), the everlasting Covenant, Heb. 13. 20. and again
Jer. 32. 40. I will make an everlasting Covenant with them: which Covenant and
the everlastingness of it are fully explained in the following words, I will
not turn away from them to do them good: The inviolable nature of this Covenant
is also expressly asserted in that famous place, Jer. 31 31, 32. I will make a
new Covenant with the house of Israel, not according to the Covenant that I
made with their fathers which my Covenant they brake: as if he had said, I will
make a Covenant that shall not be subject to breaches: In the former Covenant
with their fathers, I gave them laws to keep which they kept not, but in the
New Covenant I will give them also a heart to keep my laws: It is not possible
that Covenant should be broken, one principle part of which is an heart both
able and willing to keep it. The similitudes which God uses in the 35, 36, 37.
verses of that same chapter, do also further confirm and illustrate this
Doctrine of the everlastingness of this Covenant of grace.

Under this head, let me glance at three things.

1. The Mediator of this Covenant lives for ever, and lives to make
intercession for believers, Heb. 7. 25. and from this the Apostle argues, that
they shall be saved to the uttermost, or evermore, as the Margin reads it. From
this also the Apostle argues the unchangeable state of believers, as we
observed before out of Romans 8. 34. Christ Jesus is always heard and accepted
of the Father in all the requests that he makes to him, according to that in
Joh. 11. 41, 42. Jesus lift up his eyes and said, Father I thank thee that thou
have heard me; And I know that thou hear me always. If these things be so,
then the perseverance of the Saints is built upon a most certain bottom, is
secured against the very gates of Hell, for Christ has prayed for them that
they may be where he is, Joh. 17. 24. and in the mean time that they may be
kept from the evil, ver. 15. and that their faith fail not, Luke 22. 32.

2. The promises of this Covenant are immutable, they are in Christ Jesus yea
and Amen, 2 Cor. 1. 20. as if one should say in Latin, Certo certiora,
perfectly sure and certain. God who is truth itself, will not, can not be unto
his people as a liar, or as waters that fail, as the Prophets phrase is; the
infinite fountain of grace and truth, cannot possibly become like one of the
brooks which Job speaks of, which seem to be full of water, and are so at a
certain winter season, but when the poor scorched Arabian comes to look for
water thence in summer, he goes away ashamed, because they are now vanished,
they are consumed out of their place, Job 6. 19, 20. Now the promise is
concerning not only grace, but the final perseverance of it: If he promise
pardoning grace, it is in these full and satisfying expressions, I will
remember their sin (any one of their sins) no more, Jer. 31. 34. If he promise
purging and purifying grace, it is in the like amplitude of phrase, that they
may fear me for ever; and again, they shall not depart from me, Jer. 32. 39.
40. with many other places of like importance.

3. righteousness brought in by this mediator is (...), an everlasting
righteousness, as it is expressly called, Dan. 9. 24. by which I do not
understand the righteousness of Justification (which was always one and the
same, and there was never any righteousness of that kind temporary or fading)
but the righteousness of real internal sanctification in opposition to that
positive and temporary righteousness, which depended upon the pleasure of God
that did prescribe it. This righteousness brought in and advanced by Christ
(who in a powerful and vital way dispenses the same by his holy spirit unto
the minds and souls of men) is not only true and inward, (in opposition to the
pharisaical, which was an external conformity only) but it is of an everlasting
and unchangeable nature; as being grounded upon and indeed comformable to
eternal and unchangeable truth, in opposition to that temporary kind of
righteousness which was grounded upon positive Laws, and the arbitrary commands
of God, if I may so call them. This eternal righteousness is by Christ Jesus
the Prince of lise put into the very souls of men, and being a plant of his
planting shall never be plucked up. We read indeed in the Prophet Ezekiel that
the glory of God departed out of the Temple made with hands; but this glory of
God, his image; shall never depart out of the living Temple, the souls of good
men, having once powerfully displayed itself there. And therefore God is said
to dwell in the souls of his people, in opposition to a wavering man who
turns in to tarry for a night. God indeed has promised that it shall be said
to them that were not his people, ye are the sons of the living God, Hos. 1.
10. but never on the contrary; he has no where threatened them that are the
sons of the living God that it shall at any time be said to them, ye are not my
people. True indeed, as to external profession, Church Membership, mere
Covenent-holiness, and ou^w^rd communion, God does many times disinherit and
reject them that were so his people: but as to true godliness; participation of
the divine image, internal and spiritual communion, we may confidently say with
the Apostle to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1. 9. God is faithful, by whom ye were
called unto the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord; or with the ^ame
Apostle to the Thessalonians, I These. 5. 24. faithful is he that calls you,
who also will do it: Do what? why that which he was speaking of, and praying
for, in ver. 23. v z preserve spirit and soul and body blameless unto the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

I conclude then that Grace in the Crea^ure is a partic^pation of him who is
essential and perfect grace and goodness, a communication made by him of his
holy nature, which becomes a living principle in the souls of men, a ^ountain
sending forth a continued (...) of holy dispositions and affections without
intercision or cessation: Though these streams run sometimes higher, sometimes
l^wer; sometimes swi^^er, sometimes slower, yet they are never wholly dried up
as the brooks of Tema were. For where God has once opened a fountain in the
soul, he feeds it (...) supplies from himself; as a (...) itself would dry up,
if it (...) not nourished by the supplies o^ subterraneous waters. The
perseverance of grace depends purely upon the supports and supplies of
uncrea^^d essential life and goodness. But how do we know that God will
certainly afford these supplies? We build upon his goodness and love in Christ
toward his elect, which is infinite and unspeakable; and upon his faithfulness
in accomplishing his promise, viz. that be will never leave nor sorsake them,
Heb. 13. 5. that he will keep them by his power unto salvation, 1 P^^. 1. 5.
They that are of the number of Gods holy and chosen ones shall no doubt
continue of that number according to that in 1 Jo^. 2. 19. they that are truly
in Christ shall abide in him, 1 John 2. 27. the seed of God remains in the
godly, and they cannot sin, because they are born of God, 1 John 3. 9. he that
is begotten of God keeps himself, and that wicked one touches him not, 1 John 5. 18. What can be more express and ample than that consolatory promise of
our Lord made to his poor frail sheep, Joh. 10. 28. I give unto them eternal
life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any one pluck them out of my
hand.

But some one may say perhaps, what if man will apostatize; what if the saints
themselves will forsake God? will he not then say of them, as the Apostle of
the unbelieving husband, If they will depart, let them depart. Will not God
forsake them that forsake him?

Answ. Yes, God will forsake them that forsake him; But they never shall
forsake him: They being rightly renewed after the image of God, and perfectly
overpowered by his grace, shall never will any such departure: I will betroth
thee unto me for ever, Hos. 2. 19. It is certain says Dr. Arrowsmith that God
will condemn all impenitent sinners; but it is as certain that all justified
and regenerate sinners shall repent, semper fit, procurante spiritu. It seems
unreasonable to demand what if man himself will apostatize; seeing he is by the
grace of God so renewed in his will, and put into such a condition, that he
cannot will any such thing. God does not give unto his Saints (says Austin)
only such help, without which they could not persevere if they would (which was
that which he gave Adam;) but he also works in them the will: that because
they shall not persevere except they both can and will, his bountiful grace
bestows upon them both the can and the will. For their will is so enflamed by
the spirit of God, that they therefore can, because they so will, they
therefore so will, because God works in them to Will. Neither is it any
disparagement or injury to the freedom of man's will, that it should be
overpowered by divine grace, and determined only to that which is good. The
indi^^erency and fl^ctuation of the will of man is indeed the imperfection of
it, and the more God reveals himself to the soul as the chiefest good, the more
this indifferency of the will is destroyed, and the faculty is determined; not
by being constrained, but indeed perfected. Oh unhappy liberty, for a soul to
be indifferently affected toward its own happiness, and to be free to choose
its own misery! The noblest freedom in the world is, when a soul being
delivered from its hesitancies, and healed of its indifferencies, is carried
like a ship with spread sales and powerful winds in a most speedy, cheerful
and steady course into its own harbor, into the arms and embraces of its own
object. The grace of God does never so overpower the will of man as to reduce
it to a condition of slavery, so as that man should not have a proper dominion
over his own acts; but I think we do generally conclude that in the world to
come, in the future state, the wills of all glorified Saints shall be so
advanced and perfected in their freedom, as not in the least to verge toward
any thing that is evil, but shall in the most gladsome and steady manner be
eternally carried toward their full and glorious object, which the glorified
understanding shall then represent in a most true clear and ample manner: And
this we take to be the souls truest liberty in the highest elevation of it. Now
although it be not altogether thus with us in this present world, (for by
reason of the weakness and muddiness of our understandings which do here
represent God unto us so faintly and disadvantagiously, it comes to pass that
the will cannot so freely and fervently, with so ardent and generous motions
pursue its excellent object, as it shall do hereafter) yet I believe that the
more God reveals himself to any soul, the more the fluctuations and
aequilibriousness of it are healed, and a true liberty of will increased; and
that he does so far reveal himself to every truly godly soul, as to establ^sh
this noble freedom in him, in such a degree as will keep him from willing a
final departure from him, and carry him certainly, (how remisly and faintly
soever) toward the supreme and sovereign good, till he come to be perfectly
swallowed up in it. A will thus truly and divinely free, thought it be not the
proper efficient cause, yet certainly is an inseparable concomitant of final
perseverance. So then the more God communicates himself to any soul, the more
powerfully it wills a nearer conjunction with him; and no soul I conceive to
whom God communicates himself savingly can at any time will an utter
separation from him.

As for the foulest falls of Scripturesaints, that are any where recorded, I
know not what more can rationally be inferred from them but that grace in the
creature admits of ebbs and flows, is subject to augmentations and diminutions;
which I know no sober person that denies. But I think the history of their
lapses, if we take it altogether, has a very favorable aspect upon the
doctrine of perseverance; yea for ought I know, one great design of God in
penning those relations might be to confirm this very doctrine, by giving us so
express and ample an account of their Repentance and Recovery, that we are
indeed to believe they were strengthened by their falls, so far were their falls
from proving mortal to them: one would think that if ever the habits of grace
should be utterly suffocated and extinct, if ever they should languish even
unto death, it should be under the power of such contrary Acts as David and
Peter committed, and especially Solomon, whose acts for ought I can see were as
foul, and also often repeated, which is the likeliest thing that I know, to
destroy gracious habits. I know there are instances given of good Joash,
Hymeneus, Alexander, Demas utterly falling from that gracious state, wherein
sometimes they had been. But it did never yet appear to me beyond
contradiction, that ever they were any of them in such a state. Joash is put
amongst the number of hypocrites by some that have rifled his story: And for
ought that can evidently appear to the contrary, Demas might be no better. Most
is pleaded for Hymentus and Alexander who put away a good conscience, and made
shipwreck of faith, 1 Timothy 19. 20. But it does not yet appear that the faith
which they made shipwreck of, was any more than the profession or doctrine of
the true faith; yea rather it does appear that it was no more. Neither does it
at all appear that they ever had that good conscience which they are said (in
our translation) to have put away; which may as fully be rendered [ rejected;]
for that we find to be the most common use of the Greek word (...) or (...)
arceo, prohibeo, resisto, renitor, repello, to reject, repel, or thrust away
from one. I am not confident that this apostasy of theirs was total neither.
supposing it to be an Apostasy; for however their faith was shipwrackt,
possibly some plank or other of it might be left. And who dare say that it was
final? The Apostle does not that I perceive give them up for lost, but executes
discipline upon them as it seems for their receovery, of which one might think
by the following words, that he had some hopes -- that they may learn not
blaspheme. In short then, as to these two men, I conceive, that good canscience
which they put away they never had, and the faith which they had was not that
good faith. And as to the other two that were named, and indeed as to all other
instances of the like nature, I suppose we may give this general answer, that
either they did but seem to stand, er they did but seem to fall: the former
perhaps was the case of Joash, and the latter of Demas. When ever you observe
therefore the backslidings of any seeming Christians take heed of concluding
rashly against the perseverance of Saints, but rather infer with the holy
Apostle, 1 John 2. 19. They went out from us, but they were not of us: had they
been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us; Which words if they be
meant only of a communion in doctrine and profession, so as to conclude against
the separation of such as are indeed in such a communion; then we may argue the
more strongly, a minore ad majus against the final apostasy of any that are in
a higher and more excellent communion.

As for those texts of Scripture that seem to suppose a man's falling away from
grace and turning from righteousness; I conceive a fair answer may be given
unto them by distinguishing of righteousness; and so it may be granted that
many men have turned away from, and utterly made shipwreck of their legal
righteousness, consisting in an external conformity to the letter of the
precepts of the law, void of the supernatural and divine principle: it is
indeed the common lot of these men that spring up thus fairly, and yet have no
root, to wither away, Mat. 13. 6. Luke 8. 6. And yet on the other hand it
abides an everlasting maxim of truth, whosoever is born of God, does not
commit sin, for his seed remains in him, and he cannot sin, because he is
born of God, 1 John 3. 9. If there be any texts that seem to speak of
apostatizing from an Evangelical righteousness, a righteousness of faith, and
so cannot well be salved by this distinction, as that in Heb. 10. 38. and some
others; it must be considered that suppositions are made of things impossible
as well as possible, yea and that even in the Scriptures themselves, as some
have observed from Gal. 1. 8. 1 Cor. 15. 14. which texts do not at all imply
what they suppose. I know indeed that external salvation is ordinarily entailed
upon perseverance, and so is promised to us in Scripture, as it were
conditionally, Joh 8. 31. If ye continue in my word, then are ye my Disciples
indeed, Col. 1. 21, 22, 23. you has he reconciled in the body of his flesh
through death to present you holy and unblameable and unreproveable in his
sight, If ye continue in the faith, and be not moved away from the hope of the
Gospel, etc. To the same purpose are those words, He that endures to the end,
the same shall be saved, and Rev. 2. 26. He that overcomes and keeps my
works unto the end, to him will I give, etc. All which do strongly imply that
there is no salvation but in a way of perseverance; and the words being laid
down thus conditionally (especially the words first quoted) are indeed
cautionary and quickening to the dull and sluggish minds of men, but do not
necessarily imply any uncertainty or doubtfulness in the thing itself; no more
than those words of the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 1. 10. compared with the latter
end of the 12. verse where he does affirm them to be established in the truth,
and yet at the same time does speak to them by way of caution and
encouragement. There are many Texts that do seem to suppose the apostasy of
men in a state of regeneration, but not one that does assert it, that ever I
could yet find; but they are almost without number that to my apprehension do
more than seem to assert the contrary, viz. their final perseverance: of which
perseverance we have also through the goodness of God thousands of instances;
but no man could ever yet produce one instance of the contrary, but by mere
conjecture; which conjectures, let them that make them see that they be neither
over-charitable toward men, or uncharitable toward God. Wherefore I do
conclude that what is said concerning Heaven and Hell in the Parable, (as to
one branch of it) is true of grace and wickedness; a gulf is fized, and they
that would pass from God to sin and the devil cannot: not that there shall ever
be in any a real and predominant desire so to pass, as I suppose I have already
proved; but it denotes the impossibility of the thing. It is equally impossible
that a godly soul should fall from God and become an hater of him, fall from
his love and image, and take upon him the image of the devil, as it was for
L^zarus to quit Abraham's bosom for the flames of hell: the case seems to be
the same, the former being the most real Heaven, and the latter the truest
Hell. True Religion is that holy fire which being once kindled in the soul from
Heaven, never goes out; whereof the fire of the altar was but a faint and
imperfect resemblance: It is as true in this respect of good men, as it is of
wicked men in an other, their fire never goes out.

And here now we are presented with another great difference between true and
counterfeit Religion. All counterfeit Religion will fade in time, though never
so specious and flourishing; All dew will pass away though some lie much longer
than other; All land-floods will fail, yea the flood of Noah at length dried
up, though it were of many months duration: But this well of water which our
Savior speaks of here, will never utterly fail; cold Adversity cannot freeze
it up, scorching prosperity cannot dry it up: The upper springs of uncreated
grace and goodness will evermore feed those nether springs of grace and
holiness in the creature. Though Heaven and earth pass away, yet shall the seed
of God remain; he that has begun a good work, will certainly perform it, Ephesians.
1. 6. Where the grace of God has begotten a Divine principle and spirit of
true Religion in a soul, there is the central force even of Heaven itself,
still attracting, and carrying the soul in its motions thitherward, until it
have lodged it in the very bosom and heart of God. If any principle lower than
true Religion do actuate a man, it will certainly waste and be exhausted;
though it may carry him swiftly in a rapid motion, yet not in a steady; though
it may carry him high, yet not quite through. A meteor that is exhaled from the
earth by a foreign force, though it may mount high in appearance, and brave it
in a blaze enough to be envyed by the poor twinkling stars, and to be admired
by ordinary spectators, yet its fate is to fall down, and shamefully confess
its base original. That Religion which men put on only for a cloak, w^ll wear
out and drop into rags, if it be not presently thrown by as a garment out of
fashion. You have read of the seeming righteousness of Jehu founded in ambition
and cruelty, the piety and devotion of Joash grounded upon a good and virtuous
education, the zeal of Soul for the worship of God, and his fat Sacrifices,
growing upon a root of superstition, as Samuel that man of God interprets it, 1 Samuel 15. 22. and you have seen the shameful issue of all these dissemblers,
and the stinking snuff in which all this candlelight Religion ended, very much
unlike to that sun-light luster of true and genuine goodness, which shines
more and more unto the perfect day, according to that elegant description which
the spirit of God makes of it in the writings of Solomon, whose pen has as
much adorned this great truth, as his life has blotted it, Prove. 4. 18. To
this purpose I might fairly allege the frequent testimonies which the Holy
Ghost in Scripture gives concerning such hypocritical and unprincipled
professors that having no root they wither away in a scorching season, that
they are again entangled in the pollutions of the world and overcome, that like
dogs they turn to their own vomit again, and like Sows wallow in the mire from
which they had been washed, 2 Pet. 2. 20, 22. together with many others of the
same nature: as also the prophesies that are made concerning them, that that
which they seemed to have, shall be taken away from them, Luke 8. 18. that they
shall proceed no further, for their folly shall be manifest to all men, 2 Timothy
3. 9. that evil men and seducers (and of those, self-seducers are the worst)
shall wax worse and worse, 2 Timothy 3. 13. with other places of the like nature.
It were easy to record many histories of many men, especially great men, who
have speedily; I had almost said disdainfully thrown off that semblance of
humility, meekness, self-denial, justice and faithfulness which they had put on
for a vizard during their probationarship for preferment, the better to
accomplish their selfish designs, and to be possessed of some base ends of their
own. But yet I will not deny, but that a hypocrite may maintain a fair
conformity to, and correspondence with the letter of the law of God, he may
continue fair and specious to the very end of his life, yea perhaps may go to
his grave undiscovered either to himself or any in the world besides. I believe
many men have lived and dyed Pharisees, have never apostatized from that
righteousness which they professed, but have persevered in their formality and
hypocrisy to the last. But yet although that counterfeit righteousness and
Religion may possibly not fade away, yet nevertheless being of an earthly and
selfish constitution, it is transitory and fading, and if it were soundly
assaulted and battered with persecutions and temptations, no doubt would
actually vanish and disappear; on the other hand, the promise of God is
pregnant and precious, Isa. 40. 31. They that wait upon the Lord shall renew
their strength, they shall walk and no faint.

Take encouragement from hence all ye that love the Lord, go on in the strength
of God; Be the more lively, by how much the more you are assured that this well
of water shall spring up in you into everlasting life. Make this good use of
this comfortable doctrine: will God indeed work in you, both to will and to do?
why then so much the rather work out your own salvation, according to the
Apostle, Phil. 2. 12. will the Lord God be with you, will he not fail you nor
forsake you, till you have finished all your work? why then Be strong, and of
good courage, and do, as good David inferrs and argues, 1 Chronicles. 28. 20. Have
you this hope, this firm ground of hope in the promise and goodness of God? why
then purify your selves as God is pure; according to the Apostle, 1 John 3. 3.
stop the mouths of those men that say the Doctrine of perseverance is
prejudicial to godliness; let them see, and be forced to acknowledge it, that
the more a godly soul is assured of the infinite and unchangeable love and care
of God toward him, the more is he winged with love and zeal, with speed
mounting up thither daily where he longs to arrive. They that understand the
doctrine of perseverance, do also understand that they must accomplish it in a
way of dutiful diligence, and watchful willingness; and if any grow profane
and licentious, and apostatize from the way of righteousness which they have
known, it is an evident argument to them that they are no Saints, and then what
will the doctrine of the perseverance of Saints avail them?

CHAP. VII.
Religion considered in the consequent of Not thirsting: the phrase explained
two ways, both resulting into the same general truth, viz. that divine grace
gives a solid satisfaction to the soul. This Aphorism confirmed by some
Scriptures, and largely explained in six propositions. The first, that there is
a raging thirst in every soul of man, after some ultimate and satisfactory
good: The second, that every natural man thirsts principally after happiness
in the creature: The third that no man can find that soul-filling satisfaction
in any creature enjoyment which every natural man principally seeks therein;
this prosecuted in two particulars: The fourth, that grace takes not away the
souls thirst after happiness, but much enflames it; the reason assigned. The
fifth, that the godly soul thirsts no more after Rest in any worldly thing,
but in God alone; this prosecuted in both the branches of it; in the former
more largely, where enquiry is made how far a godly man may be said to thirst
after the creature, and answered in four particulars: the latter briefly touched
upon. The sixth, that in the enjoyment of God the soul is at Rest; and this in
a double sense, viz. so as that it is perfectly matched with its object; two
things noted for the clearing of this; Secondly, so satisfied as to have joy
and pleasure in him; a double account given of that joy. The chapter expires in
a passionate lamentation taken up over the levity and earthliness of Christian
minds.

John 4. 14. Whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give him shall never
thirst, etc.
HItherto we have taken a view of true Religion as it stands described in this
pregnant text by its original, nature, and properties: we are now to consider
it in the certain and genuine consequent of it; and that is in one word
Affirmatively, satisfaction; or if you will, negatively, not thirsting: for so
it is in our Saviors phrase, whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give
him shall never thirst.

Whilst I address my self to the explication of this phrase, I suppose I need
not be so exact and curious as to tell you in order, with a certain kind of
Scholastical gravity, first, what is nor, and then what is meant by it: For I
presume no body will dream of a corporeal or gross kind of thirsting to be
meant here. Grace does no more quench the thirst of the body, than elementary
water can relieve the panting of the soul. Nay he himself was subject to this
gross kind of thirst, who gave to others the water whereof if they drank, they
should never thirst more. If it be understood of a spiritual thirst, yet I
suppose I need not to tell you neither, that then it must not be understood
absolutely: For it cannot possibly be that the thirst of a Soul should be
perfectly allayed, till all its faculties be filled up to the brim of their
respective capacities; which will never be until it be swallowed up in the
infinite and unbounded Ocean of the supreme good.

But I conceive we may fairly come to the meaning of this phrase [ never
thirst] either by adding or distinguishing.

First, Then let us supply the sentence thus, whosoever drinks of the water
that I shall give him, shall never thirst after any other water. There is no
worldly liquor can be so accommodated or attempered to the Palate as to give it
an universal satisfaction, so as that a man should be perfectly mortified to
all variety: But this Heavenly water which our Savior treats of here, is so
fitted to the Palate of spirits, and brings such satisfaction along with it,
that the soul that is made to drink of it does supercede its chase of all other
delights, counts all other waters but a filthy and stinking puddle, thirsts no
more after any other thing, neither through necessity nor for variety. The more
the soul drinks of this water indeed, the more it thirsts after fuller
measures, and larger potions of the same, and does not only suck in divine
virtue and influences, but even longs to be itself sucked up in the divinity, as
we shall see further in the procedure of this discourse: But its thirst after
all created good, all the waters of the Cistern are hereby extinguished, or at
least mastered and mortified. Or,

Secondly, By distinguishing upon thirst, the sense of the phrase will be
clearly this, whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give him shall never
be at a loss more, never be to seek any more, never be uncertain or unsatisfied
as to his main happiness or supreme object, be shall not rove and range up and
down the world in an unfixedness and suspense any more, shall not run up and
down to seek satisfaction and rest any more. From an internal unsatisfiedness
of the body spring violent and restless motions and runnings up and down, by
which thirst is contracted; so that by a Metonymy thirst comes to be used for
unsatisfiedness, which is the remote cause of it; and by a metaphor the same
phrase comes to be applied to the soul. I suppose I am warranted by the sacred
style thus to interpret, especially by the use and explication of the phrase in
Jer. 2. 25. where the Prophet intimates that by thirst is to be meant a
restless and discontented running up and down to seek satisfaction, withhold
thy foot from being unshod, and thy throat from thirst, which two phrases are
of the same importance, and signify no more than cease from gadding after your
Idols; and that this is the meaning of that thirsting appears by the answer
that the wilful and desperate people make in the sequel of the verse: For
instead of saying, no, but we will thirst, they cry, no, but after them will I
go. To thirst then, is in an unsatisfiedness and spiritual disquiet to range
up and down seeking something wherein ultimately to acquiesce. And in this
sense it is most true what our Lord here pronounces, that whosoever drinks
of the water that I shall give him, shall never thirst. Of which thirst that
famous Proclamation of our Saviors is to be understood, Joh. 7. 37. If any man
thirst, let him come unto me and drink; in which place also we must necessrily
understand what is here expressed, that then he shall never thirst more.

It matters not much by which of these two ways we explain the phrase here of
[ not thirsting;] for according to either of them it will result into this
theological maxim, viz. that*

Divine grace or true Christian Religion gives a real and solid satisfaction to
the soul that is principled with it. This will appear plain, though we apply
but out of each Testament of the holy Scriptures one text thereunto. I think it
cannot reasonably be doubted but that the Prophecy and promise made in Isa.
49. 10. is to be performed unto believers in this present life, for so must the
foregoing verses necessarily be understood; and there we have the doctrine
expressly asserted, They shall not hunger nor thirst, etc. for he that has
mercy on them, shall lead them, even by the springs of water shall he guide
them. To which those words of our Savior are parallel, Joh. 6. 35. he that
believes on me shall never thirst: which doctrine of his is yet amplified and
enlarged in Joh. 7. 38. he that believes on me, as the Scripture has said,
out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water. What greater security from
thirst can be desired, than that one should be led by springs of water? yes,
one may be led by the springs of water, and yet not be suffered to drink of
them: well therefore to put all out of fear, the godly soul shall contain
within himself a spring of water, he shall have rivers of living waters in
himself; and for his fuller security, these rivers shall be ever flowing too.
It shall suffice at present, thus briefly to have established this conclusion.
And now having lapt up the meaning of the words in this short position, I shall
endeavor to unfold it in these six following propositions.

1. There is a raging thirst in every soul of man after some ultimate and
satisfactory good. The God of nature has implanted in every created nature a
secret but powerful tendency toward a center, which dictates arising out of
the very constitution of it, it cannot disobey, until it cease so be such, and
utterly apostatize from the state of its Creation. And the nobles any Being is,
the more excellent is the object assigned unto it, and the more strong, and
potent, and uncontrollable are its raptures and motions thereunto. Wherefore
the soul of man must needs also have its own proper center, which must be
something superior to, and more excellent than itself, able to fill up all its
indigencies, to match all its capacities, to master all its cravings, and give
a plenary and perfect satisfaction: which therefore can be no other than
uncreated goodness, even God himself. It was not possible that God should make
man of such faculties, and those of that capaciousness as we see them, and
appoint any thing below himself, to be his ultimate happiness. Now although it
be sadly true, that the faculties of this soul are miserably maimed, depraved,
benighted, distorted, yet I do not see that the soul is utterly unnatured by
sin, so as that any other thing should be obtruded upon it for its center and
happiness, than the same infinite good that was from the beginning such, or so
as that its main and cardinal motions should be ultimately directed to any
other than its natural and primitive object. The natural understanding has not
indeed any clear or distinct sight of this blessed object, but yet it retains a
darker and more general apprehension of him, and may be said even in all its
pursuits of other things, to be still groping in the dark after him: neither is
it without some secret and latent sense of God, that the will of man chooses
or embraces any thing for good. The Apostle sticks not to affirm that the
idolatrous Athenians themselves did worship God, Act. 17. 23. though at that
time indeed they knew not what they worshipped: their worship was secretly and
implicitly directed unto God, and did ultimately resolve itself into him,
though they were not aware of it -- whom ye ignorantly worship, Him declare I
unto you; now that he declared God unto them, appears abundantly by the
following verses, what he says in point of worship* the same methinks I may
say in point of love, trust, delight, dependence, and apply it to all sorts of
Idolaters, as well as image-worshipers, and affirm that the covetous idolater
even when he most fondly huggs his bags, and most firmly confideth in his
riches, does ignorantly love and trust in God; the proud idolater in the
highest acts of self-seeking, and self-pleasing, does ignorantly admire and
adore God; the ambitious idolater even in the hottest chase of secular glory,
and popular applause, does ignorantly pursue, and advance God. For that Rest,
Contentment, peace, happiness, satisfaction, which these mistaken souls do aim
at, what is it other than God, though they attribute it to something else which
cannot afford it, and so commit a real blasphemy? For they that do in their
hearts and course of their lives ascribe a Filling and saisfying virtue to
riches, pleasures or honors, do as truly though not so loudly blaspheme, as
they who cried out concerning the Calf of Gold, Exodus 32. 4. These be thy Gods
O Israel, etc. And in this sense that I have been speaking, one may safely
affirm that the most professed Atheist in the world does secretly pursue the God
whom he openly denies, whilst his will is catching at that which his judgment
renounceth, and he allows that piety in his lusts which he will not own in
Heaven. The Hypocrite professes to know God, but in works denies him; on the
other hand the Atheist, though in words he deny God, yet in his works he
professes him: so natural and necessary it is for all men to acknowledge a
Deity, though some are so brutish and besotted, as to confine him to their own
bellies; of whom the Apostle speaks, Phil. 3. 19. Whose God* is their belly. I
say natural, for it is not only some few men of better education, and more
contemplative complexions that hunt after this invisible and satisfying good,
but indeed ^he most vulgar souls retaining still the nature of souls, are
perpetually catching at an ultimate happiness and satisfaction, and are
secretly stung and tormented with the want of it. Certainly the motions of a
soul are more strong and weighty than we are ordinarily aware of; and I think
one may safely conclude, that if there were no latent sense or natural science
of God, the poor man could not spend the powers of his soul so intensely for
the purchasing a little food and raiment for the body, nor the covetous man so
insatiably thirst after houses and land, and a larger heap of refined earth:
Did they not secretly imagine, I mean, some Contentment, Happiness, or
satisfaction were to be drunk in together with these acquirements, they would
seem to be but dry and insipid morsels to a soul; which ultimate happiness and
satisfaction, as I said before, can be no other than God himself, whom these
mistaken souls do ignorantly adore, and feel for in the dark. Neither let any
one think that this ignorant and unwary pursuit of God can pass for Religion or
be acceptable in the sight of God: for as it is impossible that ever any man
should stumble into a happy state, without foresight and free choice, and be in
it without any kind of sense or feeling of it, so ne^^her can God accept the
blind for sacrifice, or be pleased with any thing less than reasonable service
^r^m a reasonable creature. A^ the Athenians worshipping God by altars and
images, are counted superstitious not devout, so the whole generation of gross
and (...) admiring, loving, and (...) (...) after God in the (...) ^^ages of
true goodness; (...) blasphemers and (...) ^^ligious they cannot be. We cannot
excuse them from idolatry who direct their worship purposely to the true God,
by or through images; much less sure can we be favorable to them who bestow
their love, joy, confidence and delight ignorantly upon the supreme and
selfsufficient good by or through any created good, in which they, as far as
they understand, do terminate their devotion. I do not say that all souls have
a distinct discovery of the good they aim at, it is evident they have not; but
yet the will of every man is secretly in chase of some ultimate end and
happiness, and indeed in its eager tendencies outflies the understanding. All
which mystery seems to be wrapped up in that short but pithy enquiry, which if
it were a little otherwise modified, would be an excellent description of the
natural soul, Psalm. 4. 6. Many say, who will show us any good. The nature of
the object is set out in the word [ good] the eagerness of the motion in the
form of the question who will show us, and the ignorance of the mover appears
in the indeterminateness of this object, which is well explained by the supply
of the word [ any] who will show us any good: And that this is the cry of every
rational soul is insinuated by the word [ many] which many is also in Meter
multiplied into the greater sort, and must indeed necessarily be extended unto
All.

2. Every natural man thirsts principally after happiness and satisfaction in
the creature. The fall of the soul consists in its sinking it self into the
animal life, and the business of every unrenewed soul is in one kind or other
still to gratify the same life. For although, as I have shown, God is in the
bo^tome of these men's cares, and loves, and desires, and implicitly in all
their thirstings, yet I may well say of them as God says of the Assyrian
Monarch, at what time he executed his pleasure in correcting his people Israel,
Isa. 10. 7. howbe^t he means not so, neither does his heart think so: God is
not in all the^^ thoughts, whilst they pursue that (...) creature, which
really none but God alone can be unto them. They do ultimately direct, as to
their intention, all their cares, and covetings, and thirstings to some created
object, all which are calculated for the animal life, the gratifying and
accomplishing their own base lusts. This is very apparent in the idolatry of
the Pagans, whose lusts gave being to their Gods; and so their Deities were as
many as their concupiscences and filthy passions: To Sacrifice to their own
revenge and sensuality under the names of Mars, Bacchus and Venus, what was it
else but to proclaim to all the world, that they took the highest contentment
and satisfaction in the fulfilling of such kind of lusts* this was unto them
their God or supreme felicity. The case is the same, though not so expressly and
professedly, with all carnal Christians, who although they profess the true
God, yet in truth make him only a pander to their own lusts and base ends,
though they name the name of Christ, yet in very deed Deifie their own
passions, and sacrifice to the gratification of their animal powers. The
Psalmist, as we have seen, determines the main end of all men to be (...), or
good, Psalm. 4. 6. but left any man should be deceived in them, he presently
tells us where this good was placed, ver. 7. viz. in Corn and Wine; by which we
must understand the animal life, and whatsoever administers to the delight
thereof. And certainly this will go far; for not only meats and drinks,
venereal pleasures, gorgeous apparel, sumptuous buildings, splendid descent,
honorable preferments, popular applanse, inordinate recreations and an
unweildy bulk of earthly riches; but also orthodox opinions, philosophical,
political, yea and Scholastical learning, fair professions, much pompous
worship, yea and worship industriously void of pomp, specious performances, to
which we may add the most seemly exercises of undaunted valor, unshaken
constancy, unbribed justice, uninterrupted temperance, unspotted chastity, and
unlimited charity (if much giving may deserve so sacred a name) even all these,
and as many more may serve only as fuel for the rapacious fire of lust and
selslove, to maintain and keep alive the more animal or (at most) logical life,
and are ordinarily designed as sacrifices to that which we significantly call
self, in contradistinction from God. I need not here declare against covetous,
luxurlous, ambitious souls, the Apostle having so expressly prevented me by his
plain and punctual arraignment of such men, Col. 3. 5. Phil. 3. 19. where he
charges them with placing a deity in their bags and bellies: otherwise I durst
appeal to all the world that are not parties, yea to the parties themselves
whether it be God or themselves that these persons do intend to serve and
please and gratify, whether it be a real assimulation unto God, and the true
honor of his name, or some lust or humor of self-pleasing, self-advancing,
and self-enjoying that they sacrifice their cares and pains, and the main
thirstings of their souls unto. I am confident it will be easily acknowledged
that the covetous, voluptuous, and ambitious, do sacrifice all they are, and
do, to the latter; but alas it is not yet agreed among men, who are such; the
hypothesis is grented, but the thesis is disputed; and indeed this is no wonder
neither, for it is as natural for the animal selflife to shift off guilt as it
is to contract it, and the pride of the natural man is no less conspicuous in
his wrongful endeavors to seem innocent of what he is indeed guilty, than his
covetousness and voluptuousness is apparent in the matter wherein his guilt
consists. It is not only these and some few of the greatest and prophanest
sort of souls, that are guilty in this kind which I have been describing,
(though they indeed are grossly and most visibly guilty,) but verily the whole
generation of mere animal men, who have no principle of divine life implanted
in them, do spend all their days, bestow all their pains, and enjoy all their
comforts in a real strain of blasphemy, from first to last. What a blasphemous
kind of Philosophy was that which professedly placed the supreme good and
chiefest happiness of man in the fruition of pleasures? And indeed all those
kinds of Philosophy, which placed it elsewhere in things below God himself and
the enjoyment of him, were no less profane, though they may seem somewhat less
beastly. For whether the Epicureans idolized their own senses, or the more
exalted Stoics deified their own faculty, placing their main contentment in
their selfsufficiency and the perpetual serenity and tranquillity of their own
minds, it is too apparent that both the one and the other still moved within
the narrow and low sphere of natural self, and grasped after a Deity in the
poor dark shadows, and glimmering representatives of him. But I am speaking to
Christians: and amongst these let no man tell me how orthodox his opinions, how
pure and spiritual his forms, how numerous and specious his performances are,
how rightly he pays his homage, and prays to one living God, by one living
Mediator; I will willingly allow, and do with delight observe these things
where ever they are; but yet all this does not denominate a Christian: For
still that of the Apostle must hold good, Romans 6. 16. His servants ye are, to
whom ye obey; and I may add by somewhat a like phraseologie, His children ye
are whom ye resemble, His creatures ye are (as far as you can make your selves
so) whose sufficiency and sovereignty is mostly magnified in your hearts, His
worshippers ye are whom ye mostly love, trust in, delight in, depend upon; in a
word, That is your God, which your soul does mainly rest, and center, and wrap
up itself in. And (alas) how visibly dear and precious is the self-central
life, which is so universally pampered, cherisht, served and sacrificed unto,
besides the invisible and more spiritual oblations that are made thereunto.
This is as true an Antichrist in the mystery, as there is any literal
Antichrist in the world; and of this one may as truly say, as St. John does of
the other all the world wandereth after the beast. In a word then, (...) in his
heart concerning any thing that is not God, what that rich man in the Gospel
said concerning his goods, soul take thine ease in them, and be merry, the same
is an idolater and blaspemer: and this I affirm to be the language of every
Apostate spirit, and unregenerate soul of man.

3. No man can find that happiness, and soul-filling satisfaction in any
creature-enjoyment, which every natural man principally seeks therein. Here
are two things to be spoken to, viz. the enjoyments of men, or what they
possess, and the satisfaction which the natural man sceketh in such
possessions. For the first of these, I do not easily believe that ever any
natural man had his fill of such possessions, I mean as to the quantity of
them; he never had so much of them, as to be able freely to say, It is enough.
The rational soul has a strong and insatiable appetite, and wheresoever it
imagines its beloved prey to be found, and filling enjoyment to be bad, it is
exceeding greedy and (...) whether the same will ever be able to afford it or
no, it matters not. The animal life is that voracious idol, not like Bell in
the story which seems only to eat up, but which does really devour all the far
morsels, and sensual pleasures that are sacrificed unto it, and yet is not
filled therewith. The whole employment of the natural man quantum, quantum est,
is nothing else, but as the Apostle elegantly describes it, Romans 13. 14. To
make provisions for the flesh, to fulfill it in the lusts thereof: wherein yet
to speak the truth, he loses his labor, for he sacrifices all to an
unsatisfiable idol, and powers it into a gulf that has neither bottom nor
bounds, but swalloweth up all into its barren womb, and is rather made to
thirst, than to cease from thirsting by all that is or can be administered unto
it. I take that of Solomon, Eccles. 1. 8. to be a clear proof in general of
what I affirm, the eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear filled with
hearing; the eye of man, as little as it is, is bigger than the whole
conspicable world, which although it may be wearied with looking upon various
objects, as the English Annotators observe upon these words, yet still desires
new ones, and can drink them in without surfeiting: so that although the acts
of the eye be scant and finite, yet the lusts of the eye seem to have a kind of
infinity in them. And indeed by the unsatiableness of the eye and care, is
meant, the greediness or voracity of the flesh or animal life, as Mr Cartwright
has well observed upon, Prove. 27. 20. Hell and destruction are never full, so
the eyes of a man are never satisfied; where by not being satisfied is meant
not having enough in quantity, as appears by the similitude in the former part
of the verse. To the same sense he speaks, Eccles. 4. 8. and 5. 10. It would be
endless to relate the monstrous and inexpleble gapings of covetous, ambitious,
voluptuous, proud, vainglorious minds after their respective idols. And indeed
I need not descend to particular instances, for I suppose never any natural man
could heartily say he had enough of riches, promotions, applause, sensual
delights, eloquence, policy, prowess or victory, or of any other thing which is
accommodated to the gratification of the flesh, no more than any godly soul
sojourning upon earth could ever be yet able to say he had enough of God and
eternal life. So that in a word, I know not how to apply any description to
this insatiable and devouring principle more properly than that which the
Prophet makes of hell, Isa. 5. 14. She enlarges her self and opens her mouth
without measure, and all glory, multitude and pomp descend into it. I know
there are of these men that pretend to have enough in quantity of these fleshly
provisions; but I fear falsely and unjustly: For as for the rich and honorable
of the earth, it is too evident that they are still climbing higher, and
grasping after more, as the great Alexander is said to have whined after more
world, when he conceited himself to be master of all this; as for the poorer
and meaner sort of people who are as ready sometimes to lay claim to this
virtue of thinking themselves to have enough, as any other people whatsoever,
it is too manifest to a wise observer that it is not a real apprehension that
they have enough, but either a lowness and weakness of spirit arising from the
meanness of their education, or a down right despair of ever getting more.

But be it imagined that the enjoyments of some natural men are enough in
respect of quantity, yet still there is certainly wanting a true and sincere
satisfaction of soul in such possessions; no man of all these finds that real
happiness in those things which he so vehemently hunteth after. Solomon reduces
all of pleasure and contentment that is to be found in multiplied riches to a
very pitiful summa totalis, Eccles. 5. 11. what good is there to the owners
thereof, save the beholding of them with their eyes? And alas what is the sight
of the eye to the satisfaction of the soul! The whole conspicable world is
utterly too scant for and incommensurate to the wide and deep capacity of an
immortal spirit; so that the same can no more satisfy, than a less can fill a
greater, which is surely impossible. Whatever is in the world out of God is
described by the Prophet. Isa. 55. 2. to be not bread, there is the
unsuitableness; and not to satisfy, there is the insufficiency of it as to the
soul of man: on the other hand this soul of man is so vastly capacious, that
though it be also never so greedy and rapacious, snatehing on the right hand
and catching on the left hand as the Prophet describes the famelick people,
Isai. 9. 20. yet still it is hungry and unsatisfied. Which ravenous and
insatiable appetite of the sensual soul, is elegantly described by the Prophet
in the similitude of an whorish Woman, who prostituted her self to all comers,
and multiplyeth her fornications, yet is unsatiable, is not, cannot be
satisfied, Ezekiel. 16. 28, 29. The soul may indeed feed, yea and surfeit upon, but
it can never satisfy itself from itself, or from any created good: nothing can
ultimately determine and center the motions of a soul, but something superior
to its own essence; which whilst it misses of, it is as it were divided
against itself, perpetually struggling and fluctuating, and traveling in pangs
with some new design or other to be at rest; like the old Lioness in the
parable of Ezekiel, breeding up one whelp after an other, to be a Lion wherein
to confide, but disappointed in all^; or like the poor discontented butterflye
lighting and catching everywhere but sticking nowhere, adoring something for a
God to day which it will be ready to fl^ng the fire to morrow, after their
manner of creating Gods to themselves, whom the Poet brings in saying -- Hodie
mihi Jupiter esto, Cras mihi truncus eris, ficulnus, inutile lignum.

Neither the quantity, variety or duration of any created objects can possibly
fill up that large and noble capacity wherewith God has endewed the rational
soul, but having departed from its center and not knowing how to return to its
original, it wanders up and down as it were in a wilderness, and having an
imperfect glimmering sight of something better than what itself as yet either
is or has, but not being able to attain to it, is miserably tormented, even as
a man in a thirst which he cannot quench, yea the more he runs up and down to
seek water, the more is his thirst increased whilst he misses of it; so this
distempered and distracted soul, whilst it seeks to quench its thirst at the
creature-cistern, does but inflame it, and in a continual pursuit of rest
becomes most restless. That every unregenerate soul is in such a distressed,
weary, restless state as I have been describing, appears most evidently by
those famous Gospel Proclamations: one in Isa. 55. 1, 3. Ho every one that
thirsts, come ye to the waters; where by the thir^ters, are meant those
unfixed, unsatisfied souls, as appears by the second verse; the other in Mat.
11. 28. Come unto me all ye that labor, etc. where the promise of giving rest
does plainly imply the restless state of the persons invited. There is a
certain horror and anguish in sin and wickedness; even long before it be
swallowed up in hell; a certain vanity and vexation folded up in all earthly
enjoyments, though the same do not always sting and pierce the soul alike: so
true is that famous aphorism of the Prophet Isaiah, There is no peace to the
wicked.

4. Grace takes not away this thirst of the soul after happiness and plenary
satisfaction. Love and desire, and a tendency toward blessedness, are so woven
into the nature of the soul, and inlaid in the very essence of it, that she
cannot possibly put them off, however it is the work of grace to change and
rectify them; as we shall see under the next head: The soul of man is (...) a
kind of immaterial fire, an inextinguishable activity, always necessarily
catching at some object or other, in conjunction with which she thinks to be
happy: And therefore if she be rent from her self and the world, and be
mortified to the love of fleshly and animal l^sts, she will certainly cleave to
some higher and more excellent object; as will more clearly appear by and by.
Grace does not stupifie the soul as to its sense of its own indigency and
poverty; but indeed makes it more abundantly sensible and importunate. There
are more strong motions and more powerful appetites in the godly soul toward
its true and proper happiness, than in the ungodly and wicked. For the
understanding of the regenerate soul is so enlightened, as that it does present
the will with an amiable and satisfactory object, which object therefore being
more distinctly and perfectly apprehended, does also apprehend or lay hold upon
the soul, and attract her unto itself. Oculi sunt in amore duces is most true
of the eye of the soul, I mean the understanding* that first affects the heart
with amorous passions. The first and fundamental error and mistake of the
rational soul seems to lie here even in the understanding; here lies the very
root of the degenerate souls distemper; and if this were thoroughly restored
and healed, so as to present the will with pure and proper ideas and
representations of God, it might be hoped that this ductile faculty would not
be long before it clave unto him entirely; nay, it may be doubted whether it
could possibly resist the dictates of it. Now in the regenerate soul, this
faculty is repaired; yea, I may say, that the spirit of Regeneration first of
all spreads it self upon the understanding, and awakens in it a sense of
self-ind^gency, and of the perfect, a^l-sufficient, suitable, and satisfactory
^ulness of God, in whom it sees all beauties, sweetness, and lovel^nesses in an
infinitely in^ffable manner wrapped up and contained; which will be so far from
allaying the essential th^rst of the soul, and (...) its eager (...), that it
m^st needs give a mighty edge and ardour to its inclinations, and put it upon a
more bold and earnest contention toward this glorious object, and charm the
whole soul into the very arms of God. Therefore ^ot thirsting in the Text, must
not be understood absolutely, as if grace did utterly extinguish the natural
activities of the soul, and finish its propensions: But the regenerate and
gracious soul does not thirst in such sense, as thirst implies a want of a
suitable good, or dissatisfaction, or inclues torment properly so called. In
this notion of thirst, grace does indeed quench it, as I intimated in the
beginning of this discourse, and will surther appear in the procedure of it.
But as to this most essential thirst, this natural (...), or vergency of the
soul after a central rest and happiness, the same is so far from being
extinguished or moderated, either by divine grace, that it is bugely improved,
and mightily inflamed thereby. I suppose I need not stay upon so popular a
Theme, and so acknowledged a subject; therefore I will but present you with the
instances of holy David in the Old Testament, and gracious Paul in the New, and
so quit this head. I need not, I suppose, magnify the holy and divine frame of
David's spirit by any balbutient Rhetoric of mine; God himself has given the
amplest testimony, and fairest character of him that I remember to have been at
any time given of any man, when he owns him for a man after his own heart: And
what a longing, thirsting soul this was, I need do no more to demonstrate, than
to turn you to some passages and professions of his own in his devout Psalms;
such as Psalm. 42. 12. 63. 1. 143. 6. Where he borrows the strongest inclmations
that are to be found in the whole Creation, to represent the devout ardots of
his own soul; As the Heart pants after the water brooks, so pants my soul
after thee, O God. O God, thou art my God, early will I seek thee; my soul
thirsts for thee, my flesh longs for thee in a dry and thirsty Land, where
no water is. I stretch forth my hands unto thee, my soul thirsts after thee,
as a thirsty Land: Yea he seems like one that would swoon away for very
longing; Hear me speedily, O Lord, my spirit fails; hide not thy face from
me, lest I be like unto them that go down into the pit: I lift my soul unto
thee. I flee unto thee, etc. The very same temper you will find in boly Paul,
that chosen vessel of God, if you peruse his Epistles, in all which you will
meet with devout and strong breathings of the same kind; particularly, Phil. 3.
11, 12, 13, 14. Where he seems to be so thirsty after a state of heavenly
perfection, that he longs after (if I mistake not the meaning of the 11. verse)
something that yet he knows he cannot arrive at whilst he is in this world,
even the resurrection of the dead, or such a perfect state of purity and
holiness, as belongs to the children of the resurrection.

5. The godly soul thirsts no more after happiness in any creature, nor rests
in any worldly thing, but in God alone. This particular consists also of two
branches: the former and negative part whereof seems to me to contain in it the
scope and meaning of out Savior, in these words which I am now interpreting.
We have already seen, that every unsanctified soul is restless, and creaving,
wavering, unsatisfied, inconstant to it self, and its choice: By reason of its
natural activity, it is always spending it self in restless and giddy motions,
as we observed under the first head of this discourse; but by reason of its
ignorance, and unacquaintedness with the one, Supreme and All-sufficient good,
and the multiplicity of lower ends and objects, is miserably distracted, and
does necessarily grapple with inevitable disturbances, in a continual
unsteadiness, putting forth it self now toward one thing, anon to another,
courting every thing, but matching with nothing, like a fickle Lover that is
always enamoured with the last feature he saw, or a greedy Merchant, that
being equally in love with the pleasure of being at home, and the profit of
being abroad, can stay long no where with any content, but has always most
mind of the place where he is not, as he confesses of himself in the Poet,

Romae Tybur amo ventosus, Tybure Romam. The description that our Lord gives of
the unclean spirit that is gone out of a man, Matthew. 12. 43. seems very aptly
to agree to that unclean spirit that is in man, that being departed from God
its proper rest and habitation, walks thorough dry and desert places, I mean
empty and unsatisfying creature-enjoyments, seeking rest, but finding none. It
was an accidental affliction of believers, but it is the natural and necessary
affliction of every unbelieveing and wicked soul to wander up and down the
world distitute, afflicted; tormented. Sinful self is so multiform, and that
one root the animal life has such a world of branches, that it is impossible to
administer due nourishment to them all; and yet they are all importunate and
greedy suckers too: so that he must needs have a difficult task, and a painful
Province that is constrained to attend upon so many, so different, and yet all
of them so (...), and imperious Masters. But I shall lose ground by thus going
backward to what I spoke to under the second head, except I can make this
advantage of it, enforce that which I was going to speak of, with the greater
strengeh and clearer evidence. The case standing thus with the unregenerate
soul, as we have seen in this short review, I now say that divine grace allays
the multifarious thirst of the soul after other waters, filthy puddles, of
which it could never yet drink deep; or if it drunk never so deep, could not be
quenched; it determines the soul to one object, which before was rent in pieces
amongst many. It does not destroy any of the natural powers, nor dry up the
innate v^gour of the soul, as I made evident under the last head, but it takes
it off from the chase of all inferior ends, and inadequate objects, setting it
upon a vehement pursuit of, and causing it to spend all those its powers not
less vlgorously, but far more rationally and satisfactorily upon that objectum
par amori, the infinitely-amiable and selfsufficient God. When the soul has
once met with this glorious object, is once mastered with this sup^reme good,
is by divint grace ampliated and enlarged, it cannot with any ease stretch it
self upon the creature any more; that is too scant and insufficient for it.
Certainly the soul that understands its own original, nature, and capacity, and
once comes to view it self in God, will see it self too large to be bounded by
the narrow confines o^ self, or any creature, and too free to be bound down and
chained to any earthly object whatever. The world indeed may, yea and will
labor to take off the soul, What is thy Beloved more than another Beloved,
that thou art so fond of him? Are not Abara and Pharpar Rivers of Damasens,
better than all the waters of Israel? Be content, here is hay and provender,
stay with me this n^ght, let us dally and make merry together a little longer.
But these Syrenian songs are sung to a deaf ear, they cannot inchant the wise
and devout soul, that has her senses rightly awakened, and exercised to
discern between good and evil: Oh no, I am sick of love, and sick of every
thing that keeps me from my Beloved; and therefore however you may go about to
defile me through fraud or force, through surprise or violence, yet I will not
prostitute my self unto you. The gracious foul has now discovered the most
beautiful, perfect, and lovely object, even him whose name is Love it self;
which glorious vision has so blasted and withered the choicest flowers in
natures Garden, that they have now no more form nor comeliness, beauty or
fragrancy, as to deserve to be desired; she has tasted the pure and perfect
sweetness of the fountain, which has so imbittered all cistern-waters, that
she finds no more thirstings in her self after them; which is chat which our
Savior promises here -- shall never christ. A godly soul cannot posfibly be
put off with any thing short of God; give him his God or he dies: Give him
never so much fair usage in the world never so much of earthly accommodations,
they are not accommodated to his wants and thirsts, if they have not that God
in them, out of whom all worldly pleasures are even irksome and unpleasant, and
all fleshly case is tedious and painsul: Creature-employments are but a
weatisome Crudgery to a soul that is acquainted with the work of Angels; and
creature-enjoyments in themselves considered, are very insignificant, if not
burdensome to a mind that is feelingly possessed of the chiefest good.

But here it will be seasonable to take into consideration, a grand enquiry,
viz. whether a godly man may not be said in some sense to desire the creature,
and how far such a person may be said to thirst after it. This I shall speak to
as briefly, and yet as clearly as I can, in these four following particulars.

1. All godly souls are not equally mortified to worldly loves, nor equally
zealous and importunate lovers of God. This is so evident de facto, that I need
not insist upon it. Abraham seems to have been as much higher and nobler in
spirit than his Brother Lot, as Lot was more excellent than one of the ordinary
Sons of Adam, I had almost said, than one of the Sodomites amongst whom he
dwelled. The one leaves all the pleasant and plentiful accommodations of his
native Country, at the very first call going out, not knowing whither he went,
only relying upon the gracious guidance of him whom he followed; he seems to
reckon all soils alike for his sojourning, and the whole habitable world as his
own City and home; as appears by his read^ness to break up house, and quit his
present habitation, rather than interfere with the conveniences of his Nephew,
Genesis 13. 9. The other preferred a fruitful soil before a faithful society, and
so in some sense his body before his soul; and yet as if it had not been enough
to make so unadvised a choice, he rests in it too; yea though he was so
severely reproved by the captivity that befell him there, whereby he was not so
much called, as indeed carried away thence; yet this will not loosen him from
his earthly conveniences, but he returns to Sodom, and from thence he will not
part till he be fired out, nay and then also it is with much lingering and
loathness, Genesis 19. 16. It is evident, I say, de facto, both from this, and
many other instances which I purposely omit, that it is so, that all godly
souls are not equally careless of these earthly things, not carried out with
equal ardour and intemperance (as I may call it) toward the supreme and most
glorious object, of which I can assign no fitter reason than this, because they
are not all equally godly. For,

2. So far as grace prevails, and Religion in the power of is acts the soul
in which it is planted, so far earthly loves decay and wither. For these two
cannot stand together, mutuo se pellunt, the love of the world is inconsistent
with the love of God, 1 John 1. 15. If any man love the world, the love of the
Father is not in him. So far as any soul is sanctified, so far is it mortified
also to all creature-enjoyments, to all things that are only fuel for the
animal life, honor, ease, victory, plenty, liberty, relations, recreations,
all the entertainments and delights in this lower life, yea and this very life
it self. Earthly and heavenly loves, are to each other, as the two ends of a
pair of balances (save that they are never found equally poizing) as the one
rises, the other falls; just so much advantage as this gets, that loses. The
more the sensual and self-central life thrives and prospers, and the creature
is exalted, the more Religion and the divine life faints and flogeth in the
soul: And so certainly on the other hand, the more divine grace prevails, and
the divine life flourishes in the soul, the more all earthly objects wither
away and lose their beauty, and the soul cools and languisheth as to its love
and desire of them. So far as a regenerate soul is unregenerate, so far she
will be bufling after other Lovers: which regeneration will not. I conceive, be
thoroughly perfected, and therefore these lustings not utterly extinguished,
till this mortal put on immortality; or as the Apostle speaks elsewhere; till
mortality be swallowed up of life.

3. For the preventing of rash and uncharitable judging, I do affirm, that
divine and holy souls are often mistaken by them that behold their ordinary
converse and actions in the body: They are thought sometimes to take pleasure
in the creature, and to gratify the flesh, when indeed it is no such matter;
but they take pleasure in the stamp of God, or the evidence of his fatherly
love, which they contemplate therein, and do perhaps most of all serve a
spiritual end, and an eternal design in those very actions which others may
think are calculated for the gratification of the animal life, and the service
of the flesh. Let not the purblind world, nor the self-befriending hypocrite be
judge, and it will appear that the truly godly soul counts nothing savoury to
it self, but what represents, teaches, exhibits something of God, nothing
pleasant but what has a tendency to him: Such a soul does not feel himself in
his highest raptures, does not taste himself in his noblest accomplishments,
does not seek himself in his most excellent performances: be nor mistaken, he
does not so much thirst after long life, riches, friends, liberties, as indeed
after God in them all; these all signify nothing to him, if they bring him not
nearer to his God, and conduce to his real and spiritual happiness. Yea,
possibly in his most suspicable actions, and those that seem most alien from
Religion, and most designed to please the flesh, he may be highly spiritual and
pure: So was our blessed Savior we know even in his conversing with scandalous
sinners, eating and drinking with Publicans and notorious o^fenders, however he
was traduced by a proud and hypocritical generation; and so I doubt not is many
a good Christian, according to his measure, pure as Christ was pure. When a
painted Hypocrite, who can guess a^ the temper of others, no other way but by
what he finds in himself, and by what he should be and do if he were under the
same circumstances, comes to be Judge of the actions or disposition of one who
is transformed into the Image of the divine freedom and benignity, you may
easily imagine what a perverse sentence he will pass. It needs not seem very
strange, methinks, in spirituals, no more than it is in corporals, that the
most sound and healthful constitutions should (upon a lawful call) adventure
themselves further that the crazy, and sickly, and familiarly converse with and
handle, yea and make good work with those briars and thorns, which would prove
a snare, or a wound, or a pricking temptation to others. If it were possible
for any man to arrive at the purity and perfection of his Savior, and his firm
and immovable radication in true goodness, he would find himself so wholly
dead to sin, and all temptations, and motions thereunto, that he would be able
to dare to walk upon the most boisterous waves, without fear of bring swallowed
up in them, and to take up in his hands the most venomous Serpent, not dreading
the sting of it. However, the apprehensions and actions of more perfect and
more refined souls are not rashly to be judged; for they may easily be
mistaken, either by the unhallowed hypocrite, or the more imperfect and
impotent Saint.

4. To answer yet more fully, I do affirm, that no truly religious soul in the
world does so thirst after the creature, as to place his main happiness in it,
or to seek satisfaction from it. However all holy souls may not be alike weaned
from the world, nor equally loving of God, however the affections and actions
of some may really be, and of others may seem to be too gross and fleshly, yet
no one of all these, in whom this new and divine life is indeed found, does
erect a selfsupremacy in his own soul, nor take his full and complete rest and
happiness to consist in any creature-communion whatsoever. Surely this of not
thirsting, is so far a consequent of true Religion, as that no religious soul
in the world can be content to exchange the presence of God, and acquaintance
with him for any thing, for all things besides; or if you will, plainly thus,
no such person could be content, no not for all the world, (the glory of Heaven
not excepted, if it may be supposed) to be wicked and ungodly: So that by
thirsting here, must not be meant some weak wishings and fainter propensions of
the soul toward created objects (for certainly there is no soul found in a
body of earth, in which these are not found) no not yet some more lively and
stronger struglings after them (how strong they may be in a good Christian, and
yet predominated over by grace, we cannot punctually determine;) but by
thirsting, here must be meant the most quick and powerful breathings, the
highest and strongest ardencies, the predominant and victorious motions and
desires of the soul, which do as it were fold up the whole soul, and lead all
its powers and faculties with it into a grateful captivity. Thus shall be
thirst no more, who has once drunk of these waters which flow forth from the
presence of the Lord of life, and which the blessed Rodeemer of the world is
here said to give.

But (which is the latter branch of this particular) this insp^red soul which
we have been describing, thir^^ech after his happiness in God alone, that is,
in the enjoyment of him. We have already seen that grace does not destroy the
natural and essential longings of the soul after a satisfactory good, but
rather enhance them, and that the godly soul is most thirsty of all, but not
with a creature-thirst, as is before proved; it remains then that his thirsting
after rest and happiness is terminated upon God alone. And so indeed it appears
in the instances of holy men recorded in the holy Writ, which I have under the
last head spoke something to, and so partly prevented my self. But unto those
passages and professions which I quoted out of Psalm. 42. 1, 2. etc. You may add
such, as Psalm. 4. 6. which is the voice of every godly soul; Lord lift thou up
the light of thy countenance upon us: Psalm. 39. 6, 7. Surely every man walks
in a vain show; surely they are disquieted in vain; he heapeth up riches, etc.
And now Lord, what wait I for? my hope is in thee: Where you have the different
seekings and centrings of the ungodly, and of the godly soul elegantly
described. Lastly, you may in Psalm. 73. 25. again view the term or end of the
godly man's ambition; Whom have I in Heaven but thee, and there is none upon
earth that I desire besides thee! Which translation of the words does lively
sets out the godly man's end, and aim, and object, and happiness, and indeed
his all: or if we translate (perhaps more fitly) with Mollerus, yet they afford
us the same doctrine, Who will give me to be in Heaven, and with thee? on earth
I desire nothing.

And thus have we dispatched the fifth Proposition, viz. that the godly soul
thirsts no more after happiness in any creature, or rest in any worldly
thing; and come to the sixth and last particular designed for the explication
of this not thirsting of the religious soul, which is this.

In the enjoyment of God this soul is at rest, is fully satisfied. I do not
mean so satisfied, as not so thirst after any more of him, as I have often
hinted, but so satisfied, as to be perfectly maicht with an object
transcendently adequate to all its faculties, and their respective capacities;
and so satisfied, as to have peace and joy, and triumph in him. These two I
will speak something to distinctly, and so pass on.

Now for the better understanding of the first of these, it should be noted,
That the reasonable soul, and the faculties of it are of a vast, large, and
noble capacity. It is universally granted by all, that are not Sadduces, that
the capacity of Angels is very great and noble, and that the condition of the
humane soul is not much inferior to it, may, I think, be gathered from the
Pralmist's words, Psalm. 8. 5. Thou have made him a little lower than the
Angels: Which words, although the Auchor of the Epistle to the Hebrews applies
to Christ, Heb. 2 9. (And indeed, they have a marvelous aptness to him,
according to the Dutch Translation, which runs thus, We see Jesus crowned with
glory and honor, who was become a little lesser than the Angels, by reason of
the suffering of death a that he should by the grace of God etc.) Yet I see
nothing hindering, but that they may be well applied to the excel^ent condition
of man by creation; especially considering that many other passages of the Old
Testament have a double aspect, one more ordinary and obvious, which was most
clearly understood by the Prophet that wrote them; the other more obtruse, and
mysterious, principally intended by that spirit that inspired him, and only to
be understood by the revelation of the same spirit: Such are those passages, I
conceire, which are found in Isa. 7. 14. Hosea 11. 1. Interpreted by the
Erangelist, Mat. 1. 23. and 2. 15. As also Jer. 31. 15. with many more. But,
however it goes with that Text, and whether or no the souls of men be so near
of kindred to the Angels, as to their comprechensions; yet that they are
capable of a most noble and excellent happiness, and much allied to God
himself, does appear from such texts of Scripture, as do require them to be
holy, as God is holy, to be perfect, as their heavenly Father is perfect.
Neithen need it seem to any incredible, that the rational soul should be so
capacions; for we are no more to judge of the Angelical temper, and noble
actings of the separated soul, by what we see it to be and do in this body of
flesh, than one can judge of the prowess and puissance of a renowned Warrior
in the head of an Army, by what we discern in him when he lies bound in Chains;
or of the power and splend or of the Sun, by what we discern of it when it is
ecclipsed or miserably beclouded; or if you will, no more than we can judge of
a man, by the imperfections, balbutioncies, and titubancies of his childhood:
For so the Apostle Paul seems to state the case, 1 Cor. 13. 10, 11. Plainly
i^plying, that the present and future condition of the soul, is comparable to
the minority and adult state of a man; as if he had said, the soul in its
future and separate state will act as much nobler than what it does now; as the
soul of the wisest and discrcerest man in the world acts more nobly than what
it did when he was a child: Yea, and what is still more to our present purpose,
he seems clearly to intimate in the twelfth verse, that this improvement shall
happen, not so much by the more evident propounding of the object, as by the
more ample illumination and corrobotation of the faculties. In the next place,
it will be easily inferred, that all created good is too scant and insufficient
for this capacious spirit of man; too short a bed to stre^c^ it self upon; n^y,
it cannot contract it self so as to be accommodated to any worldly good,
without pain and anguish. From both which, it will be naturally and necessarily
concluded, that God alone is that adequate object which can match the soul of
man, and satisfy it, as being infinitely superior and transcendens to it. The
enjoyment of God is that ultimate end, and perfect good, that is only able to
fix the spirit of man, which otherwise, not meeting with its match, would be
tossed to and s^o, and labor under perpetual (...), and restless fluctuations.
God is that A mighty goodness and sweetness, who alone is able to draw us all
the poetites of the soul unto himself, satisfy all its cravings, charm ali its
restiess motions, and cause all its aculties in the purest and most
complac^ntial manner, to conspire together how to give up themselves wholly and
entirely to himself.

Secondly, From this conjunction with omnipotent goodness, arises pure peace,
yea joy and triumph to the religious soul. For the clearer understanding of
this, I should premise, what some have wisely observed, that there is a natural
congruity between God and the soul, she being a spiritual substance, and he
being a spiritual good, only suitable unto her. This seems to be evident by
experience; for we see how difficult, I had almost said impossible it is,
utterly to eradicate and extinguish all sense of virtue and goodness out of the
soul of man; to which purpose I think our Divines generally speak, when they
allow of some holy relics, something of the Image of God remaining in the most
degenerate souls, however all men have reduced the same to a very poor and
inconsiderable spark, and many have raked that very spark under ashes too, and
imprisoned that remainder of truth in unrighteousness, living according to
those unnatural and foreign principles and conceptions that they have
unhappily drunk in. Hence it is, I suppose, that sin and wickedness are so
often styled the defilement of the soul: Now we know, that whatsoever defiles,
is adventitious and improper: And hence it is that sin many times slings and
wounds the consciences of those that take most pleasure in it, namely, being so
perfectly contrary to this noble and inbred sense of the soul; allowing then
this natural sympathy that the soul of man has with its Creator; it will be
easy to give a Philosophical account of that peace, joy and triumph, of which
the soul must needs be possessed, or rather indeed transported with, that finds
and feels it self in conjunction with its center, and in the dearest embraces
of its Creator. It need not seem strange that the soul should mightily
congratulate it self in its arrival at its own haven; nay, it were strange if
it should not dissolve into secret joy and pleasure in the hearty
entertainments of so blessed and proper a guest as God is unto it: Nay, indeed
it were unreasonable to imagine, that the conjunction of so noble and
discerning faculties, with so perfect and proper an object, should not beget
the truest and sincerest delight and pleasure imaginable. The delights of an
earthly and sensual mind, are filthy and dreggy, in comparison of these
pleasures of the refined and purified soul, which must needs live most
gracefully, triumphantly, and deliciously, when it converseth with God most
intimately. Certainly if there be any innocent and well-natur'd self-feeling,
or self-pleasing in the world, this is it; though indeed, to speak truly, it
deserves a better name. It cannot be but that a godly soul, being in its right
senses, should taste a sweetness in these pure and divine accomplishments
wrought in it by the eternal Spirit of Righteousness; which self-pleasing is no
more blameable, than that natural pleasure, which every creature finds in the
enjoyment of that which is most aptly accommodated to its necessities, and most
perfective of its happiness; which pleasure, I say, arises in the soul from
its sensible union with God in the spirit, and enjoyment of him: By which
enjoyment of God, you will easily perceive that I do not mean the bare pardon
of sin, or an abstract Justification; (for this is not the attainment that is
perfective of the soul, neither could it alone (if we could suppose it alone)
fill up the capacities of the soul, or make it happy, however the rapturous
joys of the unprincipled hypocrite spring principally from the opinion and
false apprehension of this; which indeed I take to be a notable (though not
infallible) sign of a mercenary, low-spirited, and fleshlyminded Christian:)
but by it I mean the souls being really regenerated into the Image of God,
consisting in knowledge, Righteousness and Holiness, and her implantation into
the ^oot Christ Jesus, by which she partakes of his divine life, power, and
spirit.

And yet besides this, I conceive there is a more Theological account to be
given of these joys and pleasures which the renewed soul does so plentifully
reap, upon her return to God, from whom she had so long straggled by sin and
wickedness. For the God of hope fills the godly soul with all peace and joy
in believing, Romans 15. 13. Christ does on purpose speak words to the hearts of
his Disciples, that their joy may be full, Joh. 15. 11. But whether the most
benign and gracious Father of spirits does immediately from himself inspire the
holy soul, with divine joys and pleasures, kindled, as I may say, with nothing
but his own breath; or whether he bring them to his holy Mountain, and into his
house of prayer, and by that or any other the like means make them joyful, and
of glad heart, as in the day of a solemn festival, as he has promised to do,
Isa. 56. 7. and Isa. 25. 6. However it be, I say, sure it is that he frequently
puts a gladness into their hearts beyond that of the Harvest or the Vintage,
Psalm. 4. 7. and makes them to rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory, 1
Pet. 1. 8.

Having now unfolded the meaning of the gracious soul's nor thirsting any more,
I should pass to the last thing contained in the Text; but finding my self
oppressed in my spirit, by the consideration of this necessary consequent of true
Religion, when I compare the temper of Christians with it ((...)) I must crave
leave to stay a little and breathe. And what shall I breath but a sad and
bitter complaint over that low, earthly, selfish, greedy spirit, which
actuateth the world at this day; yea and the generality of Professors of that
sacred Religion, which we call Christianity. Alas! what a company of thieves
and murderers, I mean, base and sensual loves and lusts, lodge in those very
souls, who would be taken for Temples consecrated to the name, and honor, and
inhabitation of the eternal God, the spirit of Truth and Holiness. Oh what
pity is it that the precious souls of men, yea and of Christians, the best of
men, that are all capable of so glorious liberty, so high and honorable a
happiness, should be bound down under such vile and sordid lusts, feeding upon
dust and gravel to whom the hidden Mannah is freely offered, and God himself is
ready to become a banquet! And oh what a shame is it for those who profess
themselves children of God, Disciples of the most holy Jesus, and Heirs of his
pure and undefiled Kingdom of Heaven; for these, I say, willingly and greedily
to roll themselves in filthy and brutish sensualities, to set up that on high
in their souls, which was made to be under their bodies, and so to love and
live as if they studied to have no affinity at all, but would be as unlike as
they could to that God, and Redeemer, and unfit for that inheritance! How often
shall it be protested to the Christian world, by men of the greatest devotion
and seriousness, that it is utterly mad, and perfectly vain to dream of entering
into the Kingdom of Heaven hereafter, except the Kingdom of Heaven enter into
our souls during their union with these bodies? How long shall the Son of God,
who came into the world on purpose to be the most glorious example of true and
divine purity, exact and perfect self-denial, and mortification, how long shall
he lie by in his word, as an antiquated pattern only cut out for the
Apostolical ages of the world, and only suited to some few morose and
melancholic men! Is it not a monstrous spectacle, and to be hist out of the
world with the greatest indignation, a covetous, voluptuous, ambitious, sensual
Saint? With what face can we pretend to true Religion, or a feeling
acquaintance with God and the things of his personal service and Kingdom,
whilst the continual bleatings and lowings of our souls after created good, do
bewray us so manifestly, and proclaim before all the world, that the beast, the
brutish life, is still powerful in us? If ye seek me, says Christ to his
followers, as well as he did once to his persecutors, then let these go; let go
the hold of these earthly objects, let vanish these worldly joys and toys,
withold your throat from thirst, and your feet from being unshod, and come
follow me only, and ye shall have treasure in Heaven; for he that will not deny
all for me, is not worthy of me. But O curvae in terras animae, etc. Ah sad and
dreadful fall, that has so miserably crampt this royal offspring, and made
the Kings Son to be a same Mephibosheth! Ah dolesul Apostasy! How are the Sons
of the morning become Brats of darkness, and the heirs of Heaven, vassals and
drudges to earth! How is the Kings Daughter unequally yoaked with a churlish
Nabal, that continually checketh her with more divine and generous motions! How
unhappily art thou matched, O my soul! And yet (alas) I see it is too properly a
marriage for thou have clean forgotten thine own people, and thy Fathers house.
Take up, oh take up a lamentation thou Virgin, Daughter of the God of Zion:
Sometimes indeed a Virgin, but now (alas) no longer a Virgin, but miserably
married to an unworthy mate, that can never be able to match thy faculties, nor
maintain thee according to the grandeur of thy birth, or the necessary pomp of
thy expenses, and way of living; nay, thou art become not only a miserable
wife, but in so being, thou art also a wicked adulteress, prostituting thy self
to the very vilest of thy lawful Husbands servants: if thou be not incestuous,
it is no thank to thee, there being nothing in this world so near of kin to
thee, as to make way for incest. Return, return, O Shulamite, return, return;
put away thine adulteries from between thy breasts, and so shall the King yet
again greatly desire thy beauty; for so he has promised, Jer. 3. 21. that when
there shall be a voice heard upon the high places, weeping and supplications of
the children of Israel, because they have perverted their way, and forgotten
the Lord their God, and the backsliding children shall return, that then he
will heal their backslidings.

CHAP. VIII.
The term or end of Religion eternal life, considered in a double notion.
First, as it signifies the essential happiness of the soul. The second, as it
takes in many glorious appendices. The former more fully described, the latter
more briefly. The noble and genuine breathings of the godly soul after, and
springing up into the former; in what sense she may be said to desire the
latter. The argument drawn from the example of Christ. Moses and Paul
moderated. A general answer given to the Quaery. It ends in a serious
exhortation made to Christians, to live and love more spiritually, more
suitably to the nature of souls, redeemed souls, resulting from the whole
discourse.

I Am now come to the last thing whereby this most noble principle is
described, viz. the Term or End of it; and that is said here in the Text to be
Everlasting Life. This is the (...), or highest pitch of perfection, unto which
the New Creature is continually growing up; which the Apostle Paul has expressed
with as much grand eloquence, as words are able to magnify if, calling it
(...), the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ: This is that
unbounded Ocean, which this living fountain, by so many incessantissues, and
unwearied streamings perpetually endeavors to empty it self into, or rather to
embosom it self in. Now what this is, we must confess with the Apostle John,
(and indeed we have more reason to make such a confession, than he had) that it
does not yet appear, viz. neither fully, nor distinctly: But yet, since I am
thus cast upon the contemplation of it, it will be a pertinent piece of
pleasure, a little to enquire into it; and though it surpass the power and
skill of all created comprehensions to take the just dimensions, and faithfully
give in the height and depth, and length, and breadth of it; yet we may essay
to walk about this heavenly Jerusalem (as the Psalmist speaks of the earthly)
and tell the Towers thereof mark her Walls, consider her Palaces, that we may
tell it to the generation following.

First, Then we will consider Eternal Life in the most proper notion of it, as
it implies the essential happiness of the soul; and so it is no other than the
souls pure, perfect, and established state. By a state, I do designedly
disparage that grosser notion of a place, as that which scarce deserves to
enter into the description of such a glory, or at best, will obtain but a very
low room there: By purity, I do purposely explode that carnal ease, rest,
immunity, affluence of senfual delights accommodated only to the animal life,
which last the Mahumetans, and the former too many professed Christians, and the
Jews almost generally do dream of, and judge Heaven to be. By perfection I do
distinguish it from the best state, which the best men upon earth can possibly
be in. So then I take Eternal Life in the primary and most proper notion of it
to be full and perfect, and everlasting enjoyment of God, communion with him,
and a most blissful conformity of all the powers and faculties of the soul to
that eternal goodness, truth, and love, as far as it is, or may become capable
of the communications of the divinity. This life was at the highest rate
imaginable purchased by our ever blessed Lord and Savior in the days of his
flesh, and here in the Text promised to every believing soul. Now, in as much
as we are ignorant both of the present capacity of our own faculties, how large
they are, and much more ignorant, how much more large and ample they may be
made, on purpose to receive the more rich and plentiful communications of the
divine life and image, therefore can we not comprehend neither the transcendent
life, happiness and glory, nor that degree of sanctity and blessedness which
the believing soul may be advanced unto in another world. The Popish Schoolmen
do nicely dispute about the sight of God, and the love of God, to wit, in
whether of these the formal blessedness of the soul consists, ill separating
those whom God has so firmly joined together; as if it were possible that
either a blind love, or a jejune and unaffectionate speculation could render a
soul entirely happy: But it is much safer to say, that the happiness and
eternal life of the soul, stands in the possession or fruition of God; and
this does necessarily import the proper perfection of every faculty. Nothing
can be the formal happiness of a spirit that is either iuferiour or extrinsecal
to it; it must be something divine, and that wrought into the very nature and
temper of it, I doubt not to affirm that if the soul of man were possibly
advanced, so as to receive adoration or divine power, yet if it were in the
mean time void of divine dispositions, and a god-like nature; it were far from
being glorified, and made happy as to its capacity. What health is to the body,
that is holiness to the soul; which happily the Apostle alludes to, when he
speaks of the spirit of a sound mind, 2 Timothy 1. 7.

Secondly, There is another notion of Eternal Life (which some contend for) by
which they mean not barely the essential happiness of the soul, but that with
the addition of many suitable and glorious circumstances, the essential
happiness of the soul, as it is attended with the appendixes of a glorified
body the beholding of Christ, the amicable society of Angels, freedom from
temptations, the knowledge of the secrets of nature and providence, and some
such like: To which may be also added (though of a lower degree) open
absolution, or a visible deliverance of the Saints out of the overthrow of the
wicked, at the conflagration of the world, power over Devils, eminence of
place, enjoyment of friends, and some other like. Now let us briefly consider
what tendencies there are in the religious soul toward each of these: And here
I must crave leave to speak jointly both of the End, and of the Motion
thereunto; though it may be thought that the former only falls fairly under our
present consideration.

First, Then I suppose that Eternal Life in the first sense of it, is intended
here, to wit, the essential happiness of the soul, or its perfect and
everlasting enjoyment of God. For the description is here made of Religion it
self in the abstract, or that principle of divine life, which Christ Jesus
implanteth in the soul; and being so considered, it is hard to conceive how
that should spring up into any of these appendant circumstances, or into any
thing but the completion and perfection of it self; though the religious soul
taken in the concrete, possibly may. And indeed, though we should allow (which
we shall take into consideration under the next head) that many of those high
scriptural phrases which are brought to describe the future condition of
believing souls, do principally respect the appendixes of its essential
happiness (as a Kingdom, a house not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens,
an inheritance reserved, a place prepared, and the like) yet it seems very
unnatural to interpret this phrase, Life, and Eternal Life, any otherwise than
of that which I call the essential happiness of the soul: But if we interpret
it of this, the sense is very fair and easy; thus, this principle of divine
life is continually endeavoring to grow up to its just altitude, to advance it
self unto a triumphant state, even as all other principles of life do naturally
tend toward a final accomplishment, and ultimate perfection. Carnal self, or
the animal life may be indeed said to be a well of water too, poisonous water;
but that springs up into a sensual life, popular applause, self-accommodations;
or if you will in the Apostles phrase, into the fulfillment of the lusts of the
flesh. This I speak only by way of illustratory opposition: for to speak more
properly, this corrupt principle has in it the central force of death and
Hell, and is always tumbling downward; whereas this divine principle is
always climbing upward: But they do both agree in this, that they do both seek
their own gratifications, and study to acquire their respective perfections.
The everlasting and most glorious enjoyment of God is certainly most perfective
of the soul; and therefore is most properly and most deservingly said to be its
Eternal Life, according to that of our Savior, Joh. 17. 3. Now this Eternal
Life is not a thing specifically different from Religion, or the image of God,
or the divine life; but indeed the greatest height, and the most possible
perfection of it self: even as the Sun at noonday is not a light really
distinct from what is was in the first dawnings of the morning, but a different
degree, and far more glorious state; which seems to be the very similitude
whereby the Spirit of God illustrateth the matter in hand, Prove. 4. 18. Or as a
man of perfect age is not a distinct species from a child, but much more
complete and excellent in that species; to which the Apostle refers, treating
of this subject, 1 Cor. 13. 11. Man has not two distinct kinds of happiness in
the two distinct worlds that he is made to live in; but one and the same thing
is his blessedness in both, which, as I said before, must needs be the
enjoyment of God. The translation made of the Text is very suitable to this
notion; for this divine principle is said to spring up, not unto, but into
everlasting life, q. d. it springs up till it be swallowed up into the perfect
knowledge, love, and enjoyment of God: Even as youth is swallowed up in
manhood, so this grace is swallowed up in glory, and not so much abolished, as
indeed perfected.

By this phrase, the genius of true Religion, and the excellent temper of the
true religious soul, is most lively described. This is the soul, that being in
some measure delivered from its unnatural bondage, and freed from its unhappy
confinement now spreads it self in God, lifts up it self unto him, stretches it
self upon him, is not content with a Heaven merely to come, but brings down
Heaven into it self, by carrying up it self unto, and after the God of Heaven.
God is become great, only great in the eye of such a Christian; he is indeed
become All things to him; whilst this principle ^is rightly and actually
predominant in him, he knows no interest but to thrive and grow great in God;
no will, but to serve the will, and comply with the mind of God; no end, but to
be united to God; no business, but to display and reflect the glory and
perfections of God upon the Earth; the main business of his life, I say, is to
serve him, the main ambition of his soul to be like unto him, and his main
happiness in this world to be united to him, and in the world to come, to be
swallowed up in him, in this world to know, and love, and rest, and delight in,
and enjoy God more than all things, and in the world to come to enjoy him more
than so. The gladsome growings up of the tender flowers unto the friendly Sun,
being once powerfully surpised with his precious and benign influences, and
the cheerful have with which the sympathetick needle so amorously pursues the
enchanting loadstone, being once rightly touched and affected with it, do a
little (though but a little) resemble and represent the motions of a spirit
impregnated with this divine principle, and strongly impressed with the image and
stamp of God: he puts in his hand by the hole of the door, and the bowels of
the espoused soul are presently moved, yea, melted for him, Cant. 5. 4. He
casts the skirt of his garment, the mantle of his love, and presently the
converted soul leaves all to follow him. Faith, Hope, and Love are knitting and
springing graces, and this Eternal Life is the end and perfection of them all;
not that any one of them (I conceive) shall be utterly incassated and
abolished, as some conclude concerning the two former (though without good
ground I think) from the Apostles words, 1 Cor. 13. 13. But Faith will be
ripened into the most firm and undisturbed confidence, affiance, and
acquiescence in God, hope will be advanced into a more cheerful, powerful, and
confident expectation, having for its object the perpetuation of the souls
felicity; and love will become much more loving, and more clearly
distinguishable from the imperfect longings and languishings of this present
state, when it shall flower up into pure delights and complacencies, resting
and glorying in the arms of its adequate, satisfactory and eternal object. The
faith of the hypocrite (and indeed his hope too) is still springing up into
self-preservation, deliverance, liberty, a splendid and pompous state of the
Church (that is of his own party) or some such thing as will gratify the
animal life, and there i^ terminates; but the faith of the sincere and
religious soul springs up into eternal life, it knows no term but the salvation
of the soul, 1 Pet. 1. 9. As his hope knows no accomplishment but a state of
god-like purity and perfection, 1 John 3. 3. The more natural man lives within
himself, within a circle of his own, and cannot get out; whether he eat, or
drink, or pray, or be zealous for the popular pulling down of the political
Antichrist, he is still in his own circle, he is still sacrificing in all this
to that great helluo the animal life, as I have already made evident: But the
godly soul is disinterested of self, and so is still contriving the advancement
of a nobler life within it self, and moving toward God, as his supreme and
all-sufficient good. Give him all that the whole world can afford, he cannot
fix, nor settle, nor center here: God has put into him a holy restless
appetite after a higher good, which he would rather be, than what he is. I know
indeed that the soul that is thus divinely free, may be hindered in its flight;
but it will deliver it self from the clog at length: you may choke and damm up
the streamings of this fountain perhaps, but they will burst out again; you may
cast ashes upon this pure fire for a time, but it will flame out again; such a
damp cannot arise, no not from Hell it self, as to extinguish it. The
Philistines, I remember, stopped the wells of water which Abraham had dug in
Gerar, and filled them with earth, Genesis 26. 15. But this well of water which
God diggeth in the holy and humble soul, cannot be stopped, neither by the
Devil that King of Gerar, (that is, of wanderings) Job 1. 7. nor by any of his
servants, but it will find vent upward: though you endeavor to fill it with
earth, which indeed is the likeliest to choke it, (for amor rerum terrenarum
est viscus spiritualium pennarum) though you cast dust and gravel of earthly
pleasures, profits, or preferments into it, yet it is a well of living water,
and will work its passage out. The hungrings of the godly soul are not, cannot
be satisfied, till it come to feed upon the hidden Manna, nor its thirstings
quenched, till it come to be swallowed up in the unbounded Ocean of life and
love.

But I see I cannot divide springing up from Eternal Life, nor pursue the term
of Religion, but I must also take in the motion of the Religious soul, whereby
he pursues it, which I have already handled in my discourse, therefore I will
quit this head, and take a short view of the second.

The secondary and more improper notion of Eternal Life, I told you, was that
which takes in the circumstances or appendices of it. And here we must needs
allow, that the holy Scriptures do openly avonch some of these circumstances,
as those especially of the first rank that I named, of some of which it seems
to make great account; and possibly the Scripture may some where or other imply
all the rest, even those of the inferior rank. Again, we will allow, that many
of those phrases which the Scripture uses to describe the blessed state of the
other world, do principally respect these appendices of the souls essential
happiness: Such perhaps are the Crown of Righteousness mentioned by the
Apostle, 1 Timothy 4. 8. The price of the high Calling, mentioned by the same
Apostle, Phil. 3. 14. The House which is from Heaven, spoken of, 2 Cor. 6. 2. A
Kingdom, an incorruptible Inheritance, a place prepared, Mansions, a reward,
praise, and honor, and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 7.
And that glory, honor and peace spoken of by the Apostle Paul, Romans 2. 10.
These are all Scripture descriptions of the other state, and I suppose we may
grant them to have a peculiar reference to this secondary and preter-essential
happiness of the soul: Though I know not any necessity there is to be so
liberal in our concessions; for it may be fairly said concerning all* or most
of them, that the design of these phrases, is not so much to establish this
less proper notion, or to point ou^ to the circumstances of the glorified
state, as to insinuate how much more ample and glorious that state shall be
than this in which we now are; as a prize is looked upon as somewhat more
excellent than what is done or expended to acquire it (it must needs be so
esteemed by runners and wrestlers) a Kingdom is a more glorious state than that
of subjection, and an Inheritance is incomparably more ample than the pension
that is allowed the heir in his minority.

But these things being conceded, it does not appear how far, or under what
notion the religious soul (as such) does spring up into these additional
glories, and thirst after them. I know there are many that speak very highly of
these appendices; and allow the godly soul a very high and irrespective
valuation of them: And this they do principally infer from the examples of
Christ himself, as also of Moses and Paul. Give me leave therefore to suggest
something, not to enervate, but to moderate the Argument drawn from these
persons, and after that I shall briefly lay down what I conceive to be most
Scriptural and rational in this matter.

First, As for the example of Christ, it seems to make not much for them in
this matter. For however the Text is very plain, that for the joy that was set
before him, he endured the cross, and this joy seems plainly to be his session
at the right hand of God, Heb. 12. 2. Yet if by this joy we understand a more
full and glorious possession of God, and a more excellent exaltation of his
humane nature, to a more free fruition of the divine, then it cannot be applied
to any thing but the springing up of the gracious soul into its essential
happiness; which I have already contended for, as being the proper genius of
such a soul; or if by this Joy and Throne we understand the power that Christ
foresaw he should be vested with of leading captivity captive, trampling under
feet the powers of hell and darkness, and procuring gifts for men (which seems
to me to be most likely) then it belongs not at all to men, neither can this
example be drawn into* imitation.

As for the instance of Moses, who is said to have had respect to the
recompense of the reward, Heb. 11. 26. It is not yet granted, that that
recompense of reward relates principally to these appendants of the souls
essential happiness, neither can it, I suppose, be evinced: But, though I
should also allow that, (which I incline to do) yet all that can be inferred
from it is but a respect that Moses had, as our Translation well renders it, or
some account, which he in his sufferings made of this recompense; which was a
very warrantable contemplation.

The Apostle Paul indeed does openly profess that he looked for, and desired
the coming of Christ from Heaven upon the account of that glorious body which
he would then cloth him with, Phil. 3. 20, 21. And so he might sure, and yet
not desire it principally and primarily, but secondarily, and with reference.

And this leads me to the general answer that I was preparing to give, which is
this. Some of these circumstances which I named, especially that of the
glorified body, may be reduced to the essential happiness of the soul, or
included in it, so as that the soul could not otherwise be perfectly happy. It
is the vote of all Divines I think, that a Christian is not completely happy,
till he consist of a soul and body both glorified. And indeed, considering the
dear affection, and essential aptitude that God has planted in the humane soul
for a body, we cannot well conceive how she should be perfectly happy without
one: And this earthly body is (alas) an unequal yoke fellow, in which she is
half stifled, and rather buried than conveniently lodged; so that it seems
necessary even to her essential happiness, that she should have some more
heavenly and glorious body, wherein she may commodiously and pleasantly exert
her innate powers, and whereby she may express her self in a spiritual and
noble manner suitable to her own natural dignity and vigor, and to her
infinitely-amiable, and most beloved object.

Concerning the rest of the circumstances which cannot be thus reduced, I
conceive that such of them as are necessary to the essential happiness of the
soul by way of subserviency, may be eyed, and desired, and thirsted after
secondarily, and with reference, as I said before, that is, under this notion
only, as they are subservient to that essential blessedness; I confess I do not
understand under what other notion a religious soul can lift up it self unto
them, I mean, not so far forth as it is holy and religious, and acts suitably
to that divine principle which the Father of Spirits, or rather the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ has implanted in it. And if there be any other
circumstance which cannot be reduced to one of these kinds, I suppose it may be
reckoned amongst the objects and gratifications of the animal life, and not to
make up any part of the godly man's Heaven, or that Eternal Life which Religion
springs up into. For I do easily imagine, that a fleshly fancy may verily be
mightily ravished with the desire of such a Heaven as is suitable to it; and
that a mere animal man may be as heartily desirous to be in such a Kingdom of
God, as he has shaped out to himself, as he is utterly unwilling that the true
Kingdom of God (such as the Apostle describes, Romans 14. 17. consisting in
righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost) should be in him. If our
continual cry be after safety, self-preservation, liberty, redemption, and
deliverance from those things only that oppress and grieve our fleshly
interest, and our thirstings principally terminated in Knowledge (though it be
of God himself) freedom from condemnation, power over Devils, yea or any
visible pomp, glory, or splendor, though it be of never so ethereal and
heavenly a nature, what do we more than others? what is all this more than may
naturally spring up from the animal life, and be ultimately resolved into
carnal self?

Wherefore as a result from the whole discourse, especially from this last part
of it, let me earnestly entreat all the professors of this holy Religion, which
the blessed Messiah Christ Jesus has so dearly bought for the world* and so
clearly revealed in it, not to value themselves by any thing which the power of
natural self-love may exert or desire, perform or expect, nor by any thing
below the image of God, and the internal and transforming manifestations of
Christ Jesus in them; the perfection of which is eternal life in the most
proper and true notion of it, as you have heard. I know that I have often
suggested the same lesson in this short treatise, but I know also that I can
never inculcate it often enough; nay the eloquence of Angels is not sufficient
to imprint it upon the hearts of men. Possibly it may startle some hypocritical
professors, and carnal-Gospellers, (God grant it may effectually!) and make the
ears of many that hear it to tingle, but yet I will proclaim it, It is possible
for a man to desire, not only the things of this world (which S^. James speaks
of Jam. 4. 3.) But even Heaven it self, to consume it upon his lusts; and he
may as truly be making provision for the flesh, to fulfill it in the lusts
thereof, in longing after a kind of self-salvation, as in eating, and drinking,
and rising up to play. Certainly a true Christian spirit rightly ^nvigorated
and actuated by this divine and potent principle, Christian Religion, cannot
look upon Heaven as merely future, or as something perfectly distinct from him;
but he eyes it as life, eternal life, the perfection of the purest and divinest
life communicable to a soul, and is daily thirsting after it, or rather as it
is in the Text, growing up into i^. I know that Heaven is sometimes called a
Rest, in opposition to the dissatisfaction of the un^entred and unbelieving
soul; but in opposition to a sluggish, inert, and dormient rest, it is here
said to be life, eternal life. Let us show our selves to be living Christians,
by springing up into the utmost consummation of life: Let it appear that Christ
Jesus the Prince of Life, who was manifested on purpose to take away our sins,
(1 John 3. 5.) has not only covered our shame, and as it were embalmed our
dead souls to keep them from putrefaction, and st^^wed them with the flowers of
his merits, to take away their noisome stink from the nostrils of his Father,
but has truly advanced, re^instated, and made to flourish the souls that sin
had so miserably degraded and deflowred. Deliver your selves (O immortal souls)
from all those unsuitable and unseemly cares, studies and joys, from all those
low and particular ends and lusts, which do not only pinch and straiten, but
even debase and debauch you! Let it not be said, that the King of Sodom made
Abraham rich, that your main delight, happiness and conten^^ent is derived from
any prosperous, plentiful, peaceable, pompous state, any thing that may be
called a self-accommodation, either in the world that now is, or that which is
to come; but from the righteousness of Faith, and your vital union with the
Father and the Son: To whom in the unity of the spirit, be honor and glory,
world without end.

Amen.
1 John 1. 3. -- Our f^llowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus
Christ.
THese words do express the way of a Christians living, and that kind of
Converse whereby a good man is distinguished from all other men.

A good man is not differenced from other men by any thing without him, any
Church Privileges which are common to hypocrites and sincere Christians; any
external visible performances, in which the Disciples of the Pharisees may be
more abundant and more specious than the Disciples of Christ, Mat. 9. 14. much
less by any corporal or temporal enjoyment or ornament, strength, beauty,
riches, descent, etc. nor by any carnal relation, though it were to Abraham, as
the Jews bragged of their Father Abraham, Joh. 8. 33. but by something
internal, substantial, by a relation to God; The character of a good man must
be fetched from his correspondence to the chief good* and the happiness of a
soul must be judged of by its relation to life, and love and blessedness it
self. Things external, corporal, temporal, make some difference amongst men,
but it is but nominal and titular in comparison: By these, men are said to be
rich or poor, noble or ignoble; but men are really and substantially
differenced by the relation that they have to God; by this they are good or
bad, Godly or wicked. This is the most certain and proper note of a good man,
viz. communion with God: In all other things he may be li^e other men, but in
this he differs from and excells them all. This is a character proper quarto
modo, for it agrees to every good man, to none but a good man, and always to
him, as we shall see hereafter. The ground of my discourse then shall be this
short and plain Proposition. viz.

A godly man has communion with God.

In order to the more distinct handling hereof, I must premise a few things
briefly.

1. That the gracious and loving God made nothing miserable of all that he had
made. There are no slaves born in his great house of the world. He made all
things out of himself, and he has no idea of evil in himself, so that it was
not possible that he should make any thing evil or miserable. Every thing was
good, Genesis 1. and so in some sense happy. He was free to make the world, but
making it, he could not make it evil or miserable. Every thing is the product
of Almighty love and goodness.

2. The happiness of every creature consists in its acting agreeably to that
nature that God gave it, and those ends which he propounded to it, and suitably
to those laws which he gave them; which laws were contrived with the greatest
suitableness to those natures, and subserviency to those ends. Every creature
is in its kind happy, whilst it acts agreeably to that nature which the wise
creator implanted in it; as the Sun runs its race without ceasing, and rejoices
so to do, and is in some sense happy in so doing. Departing from that nature it
becomes miserable, as the earth bringing forth briers and thorns instead of
those good fruits which it was appointed to bring forth, is said to be cursed,
Genesis 3. 17, 18.

3. The happiness of the creature is higher or lower, greater or lesser,
according as it comes nearer to God, or is further off from him, according as
it receives more or less from him, according to what communion it has with
him. The life and happiness of the Sun is much lower than that of a man,
because it cannot enjoy such high and excellent communications from, or
communion with God as man does.

4. There can be no communion without likeness. The Sun shines upon a stone
wall, as well as upon man, but a stone wall has no communion with the Sun,
because it has no eyes to see the light of it as man has, nor can receive the
benign influences of its heat as the herbs do. A log of wood lies in the water
as well as the Fish, but it has no communion with the water, nor receives no
advantage by it as the Fish does. God is present (according to his infinite
essence) with the Devils as well as with the Angels, but they have no likeness
in nature to him, and so no communion with him, as these have.

5. God bath given a more large and excellent capacity to man, than to any
other of his creatures upon earth. God has endued man with reason, and so made
him capable of a higher life, and a more excellent communion with his Maker
than all the rest. The rational soul of all sublunary creatures is only capable
to know, love, serve, enjoy, imitate God, and so to have a glorious communion
with him. The Sun in all its glory and brightness is not so excellent a Being
as any soul of man upon this account. And although man by his fall lost his
actual communion with God, yet be is a reasonable creature still, he has not
lost his capacity of receiving influences from him, and enjoying communion with
him. The world when it is at the darkest, is yet capable of being enlightened.

6. When the nature of man is by divine grace healed of its distemperedness,
and restored to its former rectitude to act suitably to the end for which it
was made, and to spend it self upon its proper object, then (...) to have a
right communion with God, and to be happy. All ratio^^^ souls are capable of
holding communion with God, but all do not hold communion with him, but they
that express the purity and holiness of the divine life, that know God and live
like him, these are hi^ children, Mat. 5. 15. and those only do rightly and
really converse with him: when the spirit of God informs these rational souls,
and derives the strength of a divine life through them, and stamps the lively
impressions of Divine perfections upon them, rendering our hearts, will* and
ways conformable to that glorious pattern, that infinite good, then do we
enjoy a proper communion with him, and are truly blessed; though we are not
completely blessed, till this conformity be perfected according to what those
souls are, or may be capable of.

This is the true and proper notion of man's communion with God; and relation to
him, which we cannot fully describe till we do more fully enjoy. That soul that
truly lives and feeds upon God, does taste more than it can tell; and yet it
can tell this, that this is the most high, excellent, noble, glorious life in
the whole world.

This communion, as also the intimateness and closeness of it are described
variously in the Holy Scriptures, by the similitude of members being in the
body, 1 Cor. 12. 27. Of branches being in the Vine, Joh. 15. 1, 2. By being
formed according to Gods image, Romans 8. 29. Changed into his image, 2 Cor. 3.
18. By Gods dwelling in the soul, and the soul in him, 1 John 4. 16. By Christ's
being formed in the soul, Gal. 4. 19: By the souls having Christ, 1 John 5. 12.
By Christ's supping with the soul, and the soul with him, Rev. 3. 20. Because
nothing is more our own, nor more one with us, than that which we eat and
drink, being incorporated into us; therefore is this spiritual communion
between God and the godly soul ofttimes in Scripture described by our eating
and drinking with him. Thus God was pleased to allow his people under the law,
when they had offered up a part of their Beasts in Sacrifice to him, to sit
down and feast upon the rest, as a token of that familiarity and oneness that
was between him and them. By the like action our Savior shadowed out the same
mystery, when in the Sacrament of his supper he appointed them to sit down and
eat and drink with him, to intimate their feeding upon him, and most close
communion with him: yea the state of glory which is the most perfect communion
with God, is thus shadowed out too, Mat. 8. 11. Rev. 19. 9. And which is worth
noting, I think the Sacramental eating and drinking has some reference to that
most intimate communion of the Saints with God in glory: our Savior himself
seems to imply as much in that speech of his, Luke 22. 30. That ye may eat and
drink at my Table in my Kingdom: In which words he seems plainly to allude to
the Sacramental eating and drinking which he had a little before instituted,
viz. ver. 19. Which makes some to believe that that gesture is to be retained
in that ordinance, which is most proper and usual to express familiarity and
communion, and to take away that gesture, is to destroy one great end of our
Savior in appointing this Supper, which was to represent that familiar
communion which is between himself and every believing soul. I will not here
examine the validity of their argument, which possibly if pressed home might
introduce a rudeness into the worship of God under pretense of familiarity: but
it seems very plain that the nature of that ordinance does shadow out the
intimate communion between God and a godly soul.

I have already in part prevented my self, and showed you wherein the souls
communion with God consists: But yet to give you a more distinct knowledge of
this great mystery, I shall unfold it in these three following particulars.

1. A godly soul has communion with God in his Attributes. When the Soul of
man is molded and formed into a resemblance of the divine nature, then has it
a true fellowship with him. Now this communion with God in his Attributes is to
be seen two ways.

1. When the soul is in its measure, according to the capacity of a creature,
all that which God is. This is the communion which the Angels have with God:
Their beholding of the face of God is not to be understood of a mere
speculation, or an idle gazing upon a Deity; but they see him, by receiving his
Image upon themselves, and reflecting his glory and brightness; they partake of
the goodness, purity, holiness, wisdom, righteousness of God, which makes them
such glorious spirits; and the want of this makes the other whom we call
Devils, to be what they are. Thus godly men shall have communion with God, they
shall see God, Mat. 5. 8. Heb. 12. 14. Yea thus they have communion with him in
some measure: They do not only see God in the world as the Devils do, nor see
him in the word as many hypocritical and wicked men do, but they see him in
themselves, in the frame of their own souls, they find themselves molded into
his image, and a resemblance of him drawn upon them. This is a beautiful vision
of God true and real though not full and complete. This is set out in Scripture
by being holy as God is holy, 1 Pet. 1. 16. perfect as God is perfect, Mat. 5.
ult. This our Savior exhorts us to seek after Mat. 11. 29. take my yoke upon
ye, learn of me for I am meek and lowly; and the Apostle, Ephesians. 5. 1. Be ye
followers of God as dear Children. When the nature and perfections of God, his
holiness, goodness, righteousness, wisdom, etc. are coppyed out upon our
natures, and the same Spirit is in us, which was in Christ Jesus, then have we
a true communion with God, which blessed communion, when the soul becomes all
that which God is by a conformity of nature!

2. When the soul in its actions as a creature, does rightly answer to the
Attributes of the Creator. As when the soul does answer the goodness of God
with suitable affections of love, and joy, and delight; when the soul does
correspond to the Sovereignty and wisdom of God by the Acts of self-denial and
resignation; does converse with the righteousness of God by patience and a holy
Acquiescency. When the soul does rightly exert those Acts which are proper and
suitable to the nature of God, then it may be said to hold communion with him
in his attributes; when the actions and notions of the soul do correspond to
the divine nature and attributes. Now this suitableness of the soul I mean
especially with reference to the incommunicable attributes of God, where there
is no place for imitation, though it hold good in the rest also.

2. A godly soul has communion with God in his word. To read, profess or hear
the word is not to hold a real communion with God therein: many do so that are
strangers to God: A man may read my letters, and yet correspond with my enemy.
That Son in the Gospel that heard his Fathers command, and answered, I go sir,
but went not, had no right communion with his paternal authority. But when the
soul is ennobled into such a frame as this word does require, then it holds
communion with God in his word: e. g. when the soul puts forth those acts of
humiliation, holy fear and reverence, godly trembling which do suit the nature
of a divine threatening; when the soul answers the command of God with suitable
resolutions, repentings, reformations, and real obedience, when it entertains
the promise with suitable acts of holy delight, joy, refreshment, recumbency,
and acquiesces in the same, then does it truly converse with God in his word.

3. A godly soul has communion with God in his works. And that is, when the
(...) does answer the several providence of God with suitable and pertinent
affections and dispositions. The godly soul does not only eye and observe the
hand of God in all things that fall out, but does comply with those
providence, and is molded into that frame, and put upon those duties which
such providence do call for. Then does the soul rightly hold communion with
God in his works, when it is humbled under humbling providence, is refreshed,
strengthened and grows up under prosperous providence, as they did Act. 9. 31.
who having rest given them, were edified, comforted, multiplied, etc. when the
soul does rightly comport with every providence, and the will is molded into
the will of God, then do we hold communion with him in his works. This theme is
large, because the works of God are manifold of Creation, Redemption,
Preservation, works toward other men, and toward our selves, both toward our
outward and inward man: A godly soul has communion with God in all these; in
the sense that I named even now, though perhaps not equally in all, yet
sincerely and truly.

By what has been said, you understand that right fellowship with God is not a
bare communion of names; To have the name of God called upon us, and to be
called Christians, or the people of God, or to name the name of God, to profess
it, to cry, Lord, Lord, does not make any one really and truly the better man,
does not make a soul rightly happy: It is not enough to cry the Temple of the
Lord, the Temple of the Lord with them in Jer. 1. 4. to make our boast in the
Law with them, Romans 2. 23. to call our selves the Children of Abraham, as the
Jews did in John Baptists time, Mat. 3. 9. These privileges and professions
are extrinsecal to the soul, and do nothing to the true ennobling of it. But
right fellowship with God is a communion of hearts and natures, of will and
affections, of interests and ends: To have one heart and will* the same
interest and ends with God, is to be truly godly; A Godlike man is the only
godly man: A Christ like nature brought into the soul does only denomin^te a
man a true Christian. It is not speaking together, but loving and living
together that brings God and the soul into one, I live, yet not I, but Christ
that liv^th in me, Gal. 2. 20. And thus I suppose you have a fair account why
the Apostle James, chap. 2. does so much prefer works before faith, (for
indeed faith is nothing worth, save only that faith which joins the soul to the
object, and makes the thing believed ones own) as also why the Apostl^ Paul
prefers love before a faith of mi^acles, 1 Cor. 13. 2. Though indeed a
justifying says is the most miraculous: that faith that unites the soul and
God together is more excellent, and indeed more miraculous than the faith that
removes Mountains. When I consider the proper happiness and perfection of a
soul, and the nature of this true blissful communion with God* I cannot but
wonder how it is possible, that men should take their communion with God to
consist in an overly acquaintance with him, profession of him, performances to
him. I am confident it is not possible that men should have any true feeling of
happiness in such acquaintance; no more than a man can be really filled with
the seeing or carving of meat, which he eats not.

Before I apply the Doctrine, give me leave to lay down some rules or positions
tending further to explain and clear it.

1. This must be held, which I touched upon before, that there can be no
communion between God and man, but by a likeness of nature; a new, a divine
principle implanted in the soul. A beast has no communion with a man, because
Reason the ground of such communion is wanting. Of all the Creatures, there was
none found that could be a meet help for Adam, that could be taken into the
humane society, till Eve was made, who was a humane person. So neither can
there be any conjunction of the soul with God, but by oneness of spirit, 1 Cor.
6. 17. He that is joined to the Lord is one spirit.

2. There can be no communion with God but by a Mediator, no Mediator but
Christ Jesus who is God-man. Two cannot walk together, nor hold communion
except they be agreed, And there can be no agreement made between God and man
but by Christ Jesus. Therefore it is said here, our communion is with the
Father and the Son, q. d. with the Father by the Son. And faith, whereby the
Soul and God are united, is still said to be faith in Christ, as we find up and
down the Scriptures.

3. There can be no perfect communion with God in this life. Ou^ communion with
Heaven whilst we* are upon earth is imperfect, our resemblance to God is scant
and dark in comparison of what it shall be. We know but in part, love but in
part, enjoy but in part; we are but in part holy and happy. There can be no
perfect communion with God, till there be a perfect reconciliation of natures
as well as persons; and that cannot be whilst there is any thing unlike to God
in the soul, whilst any impure thing dwells in the Soul which cannot truly
close with God, nor God with that. The Holy Spirit can never suffer any defiled
thing to unite it self with it; (...), it is not lawful for any impure thing to
mix it self with pure Divinity, so Socrates the Heathen. What communion has
righteousness with unrighteousness says the Apostle 2 Cor. 6. 14. and so far
as a righteous man is in any part unrighteous, so far he is a stranger to God:
The unregenerate part of a regenerate man has no more communion with God than
a wicked man, than the devil himself has, no more than darkness has with
light.

4. Our communion with God must be distinguished from the sense and feeling of
it. Many have run upon sad miscarriages (and those indeed extremes*) whilst
they place communion with God in the sense and feeling of it, in raptures of
joy, ecstasies, and transports of soul; which indeed (if they be real) are not
so much it, as the flower of it, something resulting and separable from it.
Communion with God cannot be lost in a Saint, for then he is no Saint* for it
is the proprium quarto modo of a Saint* to have communion with God: and a Saint
under desertion has communion with God even then as rea^^y* though not so
feelingly as at any other time, so far as he is sanctified. But the sense of
this communion may be very much (if not altogether) lost, and oftentimes is
lost.

5. A souls communion with God cannot be interrupted by any local mutations. It
is a spiritual conjunction, and is not violated by any confinement, the walls
of a Prison cannot separate God and the godly soul; banishment cannot drive a
soul from God, -- Coelum non animum mutant, etc. The blessed Angels those
ministering spirits, when they are dispatched into the utmost ends of the world
upon the service of God, are even then beholding the face of God, and do enjoy
as intimate communion with him as ever: The case is the same with all godly
souls, whose communion with God ^os not depend upon any local situation; It is
not thousands of miles that can beg^t a distance between God and the soul.
Indeed nothing but sin dos it, or can do it -- Your iniquities have separated
between you and your God, Isa. 59. 2. nothing but sin is contrary to this
divine fellowship, and so nothing but that can interrupt this spiritual
society. To speak properly, sin dos not so much cause the souls distance from
God, as it self is that distance. Man and Wife remain one, though at a hundred
miles distance; and believing souls do maintain a certain spiritual communion
one with another* though in several parts of the world. The society and
communion of godly souls one with another, so far as it is spiritual, cannot be
interrupted by bodily distance, much less then the fellowship of God with the
godly soul, who carries about with him and in him a divine nature, the image of
God, a holy godlike disposition whither soever he goes.

6. This communion with God which I have been speaking of is much better than
all outward acts and enjoyments, duties and ordinances whatsoever, though they
be never so many or specious. God himself long since decided this matter that a
broken and contrite heart is better than all Sacrifices, Psalm. 51. 17. that to
obey was better than Sacrifice, 1 Samuel 15. 22. that mercy was better than
Sacrifice, Hos. 6. 6. that to do justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with
God was to be preferred before thousands of Rams and ten thousands of Rivers of
Oil, Mie. 6. 7, 8. It holds in reference to Gospel duties, though they may
seem more spiritual, than the oblations of the Law. A real soul-communion with
God, a communion of hearts and natures, of wills and affections, of interests
and ends is infinitely more excellent than all hearing, praying, celebration of
Sabboths or Sacraments, Jam. 1. 25. as the end is more excellent than the
means: For so stands the case between them.

Yea I will add (though some proud and wanton spirits have made strange work
with it, yet) it is a sure and most excellent doctrine, that this spiritual
communion is a continual Sabbath, (a Sabbath of communion is much better than a
Sabbath of rest:) this is the Sabbath that the Angels and Saints in Heaven
keep, though they know no such thing as a feast day in the week, have no
reading, preaching, or praying amongst them. This is a continual praying, an
effectual way of praying in silence. A right active sucking faith dos vertually
contain a prayer in it; Right believing is powerful praying. The knees, eyes
and tongues bear the least share in prayer, the whole of the work lies upon the
soul, and particularly upon faith in the soul, which is indeed the life and
soul of prayer. Faith can pray without words; but the most elegant words, the
phrase of Angels is not worthy to be called prayer without faith. I speak not
so much of faith inditing a prayer, or giving life to it, as of its being
vertually prayer, if not something more; for indeed faith is a real bringing
down of that God, and sucking in of those influences into the soul, which
prayer only looks up for.

Communion with God is a continual fast, it is that spiritual and most
excellent way of fasting, whereby the soul emptying it self of it self and all
self-fullness, self-sufficiency, self-confidence receives of the fullness of God
alone, and is filled therewith. A soul communing rightly with God, is a soul
emptied of, and as it were fasting from it self; which is the most excellent
way of fasting.

It is a continual thanksgiving; and indeed the best way of thanksgiving in the
world. To render up our selves to God purely and entirely, to reflect the glory
of God in an holy and godlike temper, is a real and living thank-offering. This
is that Hallelujah, so much spoke of, which the Angels and Saints in glory do
sing perpetually: what other adjunct of it there may be, I will not here
dispute.

This communion of hearts and wills is a constant and most excellent
celebration of Sacraments. The Soul that is really Baptized into the spirit of
the Lord Jesus, and feeds upon God, and is one with him, keeps a continual
Sacrament; without which, the Sacramental eating and drinking is but a jejune
and dry devotion. In a word, it is not possible for any thing that is
extrinsecal to the soul to make it happy, but the soul that is advanced into
the noble state of communion with God, is made partaker of a new nature, and is
truly happy.

Nay further I will add, that this communion with God is not only better than
all duties and ordinances, but even better than all revelations, evidences,
discoveries that can be made or given to the soul ab extra, all that are from
without, a manifestation of God, i. e. of a divine life in the soul, is much
better than such a manifestation as Moses had of his glory in the cleft of the
Rock, Exodus 34. Many think, oh if they might but be assured of the love of God,
of the pardon of fin, of an interest in Christ, they should be happy: why I
will tell you, if you had a voice from Heaven, saying that ye were the beloved
Children of God, as Christ had; an Angel sent from God to tell you that ye were
beloved and highly favored of God, as his Mother Mary had, yet were communion
with God to be preferred before these: For these things could not make a soul
happy without real communion with God, but communion with God can and does make
a soul happy without these: And to this purpose I suppose I may apply that
famous speech of our Savior's by way of allusion, It is more blessed to give,
than to receive, to give up ones self, ones heart, will, interests and
affections to God, than to receive any external discoveries and manifestations
from him. Why do we so earnestly seek after signs from without us of Gods
presence with us; as if there were any thing better or more desirable to the
soul than Emanuel God with us, or as the Apostle speaks, Christ in us the hope
of glory? He that desires any other evidence of grace, but more grace, dos not
only light up a candle to see the Sun by, but indeed he acts like one that
thinks there is something better than God himself; though I do not say that all
do think so who are covetous of such manifestations. But this I will say, and
you may do well to chew upon it, that holy longings after a true and spiritual
communion with God do certainly spring from a divine principle in the soul;
whereas a thirst after assurance of Gods love, and reconciliation of our
persons with him, may be only the fruit of self-love and interest. -- Let me
dye the death of the Righteous! you know whose wish it was.

7. Though communion with God do concern the whole soul, and all the faculties,
affections, and motions of it, (it is Gods spreading his influences and
exercising his Sovereignty over all the powers of the soul, and their mutual
spending of themselves upon him and conforming to him,) yet the great Acts of
the soul whereby it chiefly holds communion with God are loving and Believing.
Love is the joining and knitting of the soul to God; Faith is the souls
laboring after more intimate conjunction with him, a sucking in influences
from him, and participations of him into the Soul. We may say that faith
fetches in supplies from Heaven, and Love enjoyes them; faith sucks in
sweetness and virtue from Christ, and love feeds upon it. Certainly these two
eminent graces grow, and live, and thrive together, and are inseparable
companions. It is somewhat difficult to distinguish them, or to assign to each
his proper place and work in the soul; they seem mutually to act, and to be
mutually acted by each other: perhaps the Apostle might have respect to this
mystery, when he speaks so doubtfully, Gal. 5. 6. (...), which words may be
translated, either Faith acting by love, or faith acted by love. We know indeed
that in the state of perfect communion (which we call glory) love shall abide
and flourish more abundantly, and there shall be no room for faith there, not
as to the principal act of it; but whether has the greater part in maintaining
our communion with God in this world, is not easy, nor indeed needful to
determine. The godly soul is the most proper Temple wherein God dwells,
according to that, 2 Cor. 6. 16. Ye are the Temple of the living God; Faith and
Love are the Jachin and Boaz the two great Pillars which keep up the Soul as a
Temple, take away these, and it remains a soul indeed, but the soul dos not
remain a Temple to the Lord. In a word, these two are the souls principal
handmaids which she uses about this blessed guest; Faith goes out and brings
him in, and Love entertains him; by faith she finds him, whom she seeks, and by
love she kisses him whom she finds, as the spouse is described, Cant. 8. 1.

8. The communion that is between God and the godly Soul is altogether
different from that communion that is between creatures. Here I might show you
how it exceeds and excells that, in many respects; but I shall not insist upon
any of those particulars, nor indeed upon any of those many differences that
are between them, save only upon this one: The communion that is between
creature and creature is perfect in its kind, and so consequently gives mutual
satisfaction; I mean it terminates the expectations, so that nothing remains to
be enjoyed in them more than what is enjoyed. The creature is shallow and soon
fathomed, we soon come to the bottom of it: A finite can grasp a finite Being
and enjoy it, as I may say, all at once. A man may come so near to his friend
that he can come no nearer, enjoy him as fully as he is capable to enjoy, or
the other to be enjoyed: Created sweetness may be exhausted to the very bottom.
But the souls communion with God dos not give it any such satisfaction, though
indeed, in some sense, it gives a satisfaction of a much higher and more
excellent kind. I told you before that the souls communion with God is
imperfect in this life, and therefore it must needs follow that it cannot
satisfy; that is, not terminate and fill up the desires of it. Communion with
God is maintained by faith and love as you have heard, which proves it to be
very sweet; but it also admits of Hope, which proves it to be not satisfactory:
For where there is yet any place left for hope, there is no full or
satisfactory enjoyment. This may serve as a certain note whereby to judge of
the truth of that communion with God; it is not glutting to the soul, but will
certainly manifest it self in incessant hungrings; inter opes inops, the soul
is in the midst of plenty, and yet cries out as if it were ready to starve for
want. When I consider the temper of some perfectionists, who cry down duties
and ordinances as low and unprofitable rudiments, and boast of their full and
inaccessionable seize, and compare it with the temper of the great
Apostle, who did not reckon that he had attained, but still followed after that
he might apprehend, who forgot the things that were behind, and reached forth
unto those things that were before, pressing toward the mark, etc. Phil. 3.
12, 13, 14. I am ready to cry out Aut hic non est Apostolus aut hi non sunt
Apostolici; But an Apostle he was, and had very intimate communion with his
Lord, and therefore I confess I cannot allow these men so high a place in my
opinion as they have in their own. God is infinite, and therefore though the
soul may be ever grasping, yet it can never comprehend; and yet the soul finds
him to be infinitely good, and so cannot cease grasping him neither. The godly
soul sees that there is yet much more to be enjoyed of God, and in him; and
therefore though it be very near to him, yet cries out and complains of its
distance from him, -- Oh when shall I come and appear before him! though it be
united to him, yet it longs to be yet more one with him still, to be in a
closer conjunction. The godly soul forgets with Paul what it has received, not
through disingenuity and unthankfulness, but through a holy ardour and
covetousness: All that he has of God seems little, because there is yet so much
to be had. Though the godly soul do drink of the fountain, yet that is not
enough, it would lie down by it; though it do lie down by it, yet so it is not
satisfied neither, except it may bath it self, and even be swallowed up
therein. Behold a Paradox, the godly soul is most thirsty, though according to
Christ's promise, it thirst no more: it is most restless, though according to
his promise it have rest. It is proper to God alone to rest in his love, for
the creature cannot in this imperfect state: By this we know that we are not
yet in Heaven, for it is a state of perfect rest, not sloth or cessation, but
satisfaction. Faith is the Fever of the soul, rendering it more thirsty by how
much the more it drinks in of the Water of Life, the living streams that flow
forth from the Throne of God and of the Lamb. As the Waters of the Sanctuary
are described by the Prophet growing deeper and deeper, Ezekiel. 47. so hope which
is the souls appetite grows larger and larger, and cannot be satisfied till the
souls capacity be filled up.

The Doctrinal part being thus briefly dispatched, it will be easy to infer
some things by way of corolary. I shall content my self with three only amongst
many.

1. All wicked men are strangers to God. We know indeed that God according to
his infinite essence is present with all his creatures: not only men but even
devils too have their being in him, he has spread his omnipotence as the
foundation whereupon the whole Creation does stand; he reared up the world in
himself, and in him it does subsist at this day. However Angels and men have
sadly fallen from God, yet they may be truly said to live in him still; and
although all wicked souls do straggle off from God as to their dispositions and
affections, ingrafting themselves into another stock by sin and wickedness, yet
they cannot possibly straggle from him as to their subsistence, as the Apostle
teaches the Athenian Philosophers, Act. 17. 27. He is not far from every one of
us, though few feel after him or find him. And it may be truly said in some
sense, that all the Creatures, yea the very worst of them, have a communion
with God, all partake of him, no creature has any thing of its own really
distinct from him. Every thing that has a Being, has a relation to that
infinite and supreme Being, and every living thing may be rightly said to have
communion with him who is life it self. And all those several excellencies that
are in the Creatures, are effluxes from God, who has derived various prints of
his own beauty and perfection upon every thing that he has made. Gods making
of a thing is no other than the communicating of himself thereunto. And
therefore when you look into the world, do not view any creature in the narrow
point of its own Being, but in the unbounded essence of God, and therein love
and admire it. But upon the immortal soul of man, God has coppyed out his
Divine perfections more clearly and gloriously than upon any other Creature in
this world. God could not make a rational soul without communicating of his own
infinite wisdom, power, life, freedom unto it: so that there is more of the
Divine nature to be seen in the understanding and will of any one man, than in
the whole fabric of Heaven and Earth.

Notwithstanding this, wicked men are strangers to God. They live and move in
God indeed, but they know it not, they consider it not; they act as if they had
no dependence upon him, no relation to him. Though they have some kind of
communion with God as Creatures, yet this makes them not at all happy; for they
are departed from God in their affections and dispositions, they have
degenerated from that subserviency and subordination to the Divine Will which
is the proper perfection of the creature, and are alienated from the life of
God, as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 4. 18. It is not the souls moving in God that
makes it truly and happily nigh unto him, but its moving toward God as the
chief object, and according to the will of God, as the chiefest rule, and
therefore wicked men who pitch upon other objects, and walk by other laws, even
the lusts and ordinances of their own flesh and fancy, are properly strangers
to God and miserable. He is not properly said to know God, who has a notion of
him formed in his head, but he whose heart and will is molded into a conformity
to God, and a delight in him; so that a wicked man, though he know and believe
and tremble as much as any of the Devils, yet not loving nor delighting in him
as his chiefest good, not being conformed to his Image, as the highest and
purest perfection, may be truly said to be estranged from God; which is a state
of hell and death and darkness. This is the man who though not in words, yet
interpretatively and really says unto God, Depart from me, I desire not the
knowledge of thy ways, with them in Job 21. 14. These do really exempt
themselves from the dominion of Christ, and do really, though not audibly, say
with them in the Gospel, Luke 19. 14. We will not have this man to reign over
us. However men pretend to, and boast of their relation to, and acquaintance
with God, certainly all that live a mere sensual life, non-conformists to the
image of God, are truly said to be strangers to him, and in a state of
noncommunion with him. 1 John 1. 6. 2 Cor. 6. 14.

2. The life of a true Christian is the most high and noble life in the world;
it exceeds the life of all other men, even of the greatest of men. The
character that is here given of the godly man is the highest that can be given
of any man, or indeed of any creature. It is the highest glory and excellency
of the creature to partake of the life of God, of the perfections of the
Creator; and such is the description that the spirit of God here makes of the
godly man. What an unreasonable and senseless reproach is that which this
wicked world does cast upon Religion, calling it a low and despicable thing,
and upon Religious and godly men, calling them low spirited, puny people. Can a
man be better spirited, than with the spirit of God? Can any thing more truly
ennoble a soul than a divine nature? Can a man be raised any higher than unto
Heaven it self? So noble is the godly soul, Prove. 15. 24. The way of life is
above to the wise; And consequently all wicked men lead a low life, and are
bound under chains of death and darkness: The righteous man is of a high and
divine original born of God, born from above, and therefore is more excellent
than his neighbor, than any of his neighbors, even a King himself being
judge, Prove. 12. 26. What a hellish baseness is that sinful gallantry of
spirit, what a brutishness is that sensuality of living, which the degenerate
Sons of Adam do so much magnify! True goodness and excellency of spirit must
be measured by the proportion that it bears to the supreme good, the infinite
pattern of all perfection. What excellent persons were those renowned Saints of
old, of whom the Apostle says, that the world was not worthy, Heb. 11. 38.
however they were thought not worthy to live in the world. What a noble and
generous spirit of true Christian valor, patience, meekness, contempt of the
world and self-denial was that, which was to be seen in the blessed Apostles,
however they were esteemed as the filth and sweepings of the world, the
offscouring of all things? To which of the noble, wise, mighty men of the
world, as such, did God ever say, these as the men that have fellowship with
me, these are the men that lead a noble and divine life? No no, not many noble
are called; and when they are called, they are made more noble, than ever they
were by birth or descent, by places of preferment or command. The life of every
wicked man, of what rank or size soever he be in the world, is but a low life,
a life in most things common to the very beasts with him; If the main of his
business and delight be to eat, and drink, and work, and sleep, and enjoy
sensual pleasures, what does he? what enjoys he more than the beasts that
perish? But the life of the meanest soul that has true and spiritual communion
with God, is a life common to him with the blessed Angels, those sons of the
morning, the flower of the whole Creation. That life which has self for its
center, must needs be a penurious and indeed a painful life: For how can the
soul of man possibly feed to the full upon such spare diet, such scant fare as
it finds at home? Nay indeed how can it choose but be in pain and torture;
whilst it stretches itself upon a self-sufficiency, or creature-fulness which
is not at all commensurate to it? But the soul that rightly stretches and
spends all its faculties upon the infinite and blessed God, finds all its
capacities filled up to the brim with that fountain of goodness, and it self
perfectly matched with a suitable and satisfactory object. This is the true and
only nobleness of spirit, when all the powers and faculties of this immortal
soul are exalted and advanced into a true and vital sympathy and communion with
the chiefest good, formed according to his will, conformed to his image.

And oh that wisdom might be more justified of her children! Oh that the life
of God did but clearly manifest it self and shine forth in the lives of them
that call themselves godly! Alas that ever God himself should suffer reproach
by reason of the low-spiritedness and laziness of his servants! For this cause
is Religion evil spoken of; The Lord awaken and ennoble us to express and show
forth the divine life with all power and vigor, to live as high as the calling
wherewith we are called, and so roll away this reproach!

3. The life of a Christian is not a heavy sluggish thing, but active and
vigorous, as the phrase communion with God imports. Religion is a communication
of life and vigor from him who is life it self; which makes the truly godlike
soul to be quick and powerful in its motions. Every thing is by so much the
swifter and stronger in its motions, by how much the nearer it is to its
center, as Philosophy tells us. Certainly by how much the nearer any man is
gotten to God who is the center of souls, by so much the more does he covet
after more intimate communion with him, and the more eagerly lay hold upon him.
Communion does necessarily imply reaction or reflection: the soul that receives
of God and his fullness, will certainly be emptying it self into him again.
Communion in the very force of the phrase implies a mutualness; we cannot
suppose a soul partaking of God, but it must needs mutually render up it self
to him again. There can be no commerce nor correspondence without returns: but
what return can the godly soul make unto God, why it renders up its whole self
unto him? Faith is a giving grace as well as a receiving, it gives up the soul
back to Christ, as well as take Christ into the soul, it sucks in strength and
grace from God, and reciprocally spends the same and the whole powers of the
soul upon him. The happiness of a godly soul does not consist in cessation and
rest; the soul it self being a powerful and Active Being, the happiness of it,
the very rest of it must also be active and vigorous. Where there is communion,
there must needs be quick and lively returns, reciprocations, reflections, and
correspondencies, the drawings of God are answered with the souls running,
Cant. 1. 41. The motion of Christ's fingers begets a motion in the Christians
soul, Cant. 5. 4. My beloved put in his hand by the hole of the door, and my
bowels were moved for him. These are the divine and harmoneous responses which
are made and maintained in the godly soul, the Temple of the living God. Oh
shake of that lazy and drowsy spirit, which has so benumbed many in this cold
and stupid age of the world; work out your Salvation with all care and
diligence! If your Religion be nothing but a spiritual kind of sleep, you^
Heaven will prove to be nothing but a pleasant kind of dream.

Communion with God speaks something divine, active, vigorous. The life of a
Christian does not consist only in cessation from evil, reformation of sin, or
dying thereunto; Mortification is but one part of Regeneration. It is the
conceit, and I doubt the deceit of many nominal Christians, that if they can
but keep up an indifferent even spirit, and conversation free from gross and
scandalous sins from day to day, they are happy enough, their utmost ambition
is to be innocent and harmless. This indeed is necessary and praise worthy; but
surely the happiness of a soul lies higher: Thus happy are all the Creatures
that keep in the station, and keep up the order prescribed them of God: Thus
happy is the Sun in the Firmament running his race continually, and never
departing from the office which is assigned to it. But the soul of man is
capable of a higher kind of happiness, viz. communion with God; which is, when
the faculties thereof being awakened, refined and acted by the spirit of God,
do reciprocally act and spend themselves upon him, longing to be perfectly
swallowed up in him, and to be all that which God himself is, as far as the
Creature is capable to drink in the perfections of the Creator, and become one
with his Maker. This is that truly noble and divine life, which is here called
communion with God, which the high-spirited and generous soul labors yet more
and more to be growing up into, and perfected in. Keep your selves with David
from your iniquities; it is something to be freed from the guilt and power of
sin; but there is somewhat higher than this, a more excellent attainment, a
more divine accomplishment, go on therefore with the same David, and aspire
after this pure and blissful state, this Heaven upon earth, waiting for the
more ample and glorious manifestations of God to you, and in you, more than
they that watch for the morning, as he did, Psalm. 130. 6. This inference was
only of instruction, but the sweetness and needfulness of the subject almost
prevails with me to turn it into an earnest exhortation, but that I would not
prevent my self. Therefore I proceed to the next way of improving this
doctrine, which shall be by way of conviction or Reprehension.

1. Our fellowship is, It reproves them that can take up with a shall be, a
Heaven to come. I am now speaking, not to the worst of men, whose very souls
are swallowed up in sensual enjoyments, and imprisoned in their senses: For
these men either think of no Heaven at all, or else they place their Heaven and
happiness, in the enjoyment of themselves or of the creature. Nor yet do I
speak to those men who being persuaded of a future state, do indeed wish for a
Heaven to come, but then it is a poor kind of low and earthly Heaven consisting
in case, rest, safety, freedom from troubles or torments; which is the best
happiness which most men understand, the highest Heaven that any carnal mind
can see or soar up to. But I am speaking to a better and finer sort of souls
than these, that are verily possessed with a sense of a pure and spiritual Heaven
in the world to come; yea they are so overpowered with the foresight of it, as
that they do earnestly expect and wish for it; yea the hopes of it do sustain
and strengthen their hearts under the manifold temptations and persecutions of
this present world; they are so verily persuaded of the truth of it, and of
their own title to it too, that they are content to abide this long and
disconsolate night of dimness and anguish and frightfulness, merely in
expectation of the dawning of that day, that clear and bright day of their
glorious and everlasting Redemption. And herein I am far from blaming them, nay
I must needs commend their magnanimous faith, and self-denial. But in the mean
time they dwell too much upon Heaven as a future state, and comfort themselves
only in a happiness to come, not longing and laboring to find a Heaven opened
within themselves, a beginning of eternal bliss brought into themselves; they
are too well content with a certain reversion, and do not eagerly enough,
endeavor a present possession, to be actually enstated in so much of the
inheritance of souls as may fall to their share even in this lower world: This
slothful temper and inactivity I do condemn wherever it is found, yea though it
be in my own soul. Every thing in the world by a natural principle thirsts
after its proper rest, and a happiness suitable to the nature of it; no
creature can be content (though it may be constrained) to be at a distance from
its center, but is still carried out toward its own perfection. And why then
should a godly soul, who is Gods only new creature in the world be content with
a state of imperfections? why should not he as eagerly cove^, and as earnestly
pursue the most intimate and close communion and conjunction with his God, as
they do with their respective centers? Can any earthly sensual man be content
with an inheritance in reversion, so as to suspend his minding and following of
the world till hereafter? Can any ambitious spirit, who places his main
happiness and contentment in popular estimation and worldly greatness, be
content to stand gazing at preferments; will he be willing to sit still and
wait till this drop into his mouth? No, no, there is a raging thirst in the
soul which will not suffer it to be at rest, but is still awakening and
provoking all the powers of the whole man, till they arise and fetch in water
to quench it. And therefore we read of men making haste to be rich, Prove. 28.
22. and hastening after another God, Psalm. 16. 4. which eager and ardent
passions toward earthly objects, you may see livelily described in the
instances of Ahab, Amnon and Haman in the holy story. And is there any reason
to be given, but why that new nature and divine principle, which God puts
into regenerate souls, should carry them as hastily and forcibly to a present
fruition of their proper object and happiness, (so far as at present it may be
enjoyed,) as that corrupt and degenerate nature does hurry on them, in whom it
rules, toward the satisfaction of their beastly lusts? Divines speak
sometimes of making Heaven and eternal life present to our selves, and say that
this is the work of faith; which is an high and excellent doctrine, but I
doubt, not thoroughly understood by ordinary Christians. To make Heaven present
to ones self, is not only to insist upon a state of future happiness in
frequent meditations, to think much of it, neither is this that noble
employment of saving faith: But the life and power of faith is most eminently
exerted in sucking in participations of life and grace from Christ, and in a
real bringing down of God and Heaven into the Soul. The truth is, Heaven is a
state of perfect communion with God, a state of love, joy, peace, purity,
freedom; and as far as any soul is in such a state upon earth, so far he is
above the earth, and may be said to be in Heaven. Therefore a right active
soul, that truly understands his proper and spiritual Heaven and happiness; so
far as he is thus act ve and sensible, cannot be content to stay for all his
happiness till the world to come, cannot be content to be unhappy, no not for
an hour, but still growing up in God, and springing up into everlasting life,
John 4. 14.

2. It reprehends them that make a stir about the Kingdom of Christ in the
world, and men's being brought into the communion of the Church, but advance not
his Kingdom in their own souls, nor long not to have their own souls advanced
into that noble state of communion with the Father, and with his Son Jesus
Christ. There is doubtless a generation of such popular Christians, who being
strangers to the life, and power, and spirit of true Religion, do endeavor to
put off themselves to the world, and commend themselves to the charity of their
brethren, by a pretended zeal for the Kingdom of Christ in the world, and the
glorious manifestation of it, as they speak. I know indeed that it is worthy
the cares and prayers and utmost diligence of every serious Christian, to
spread and propagate the knowledge of the Gospel, to pour out the ointment of
Christ's name far and near: A more pure and spiritual administration of all
Gospel ordinances throughout the world is bighly desirable; yea and I think an
indifferent and careless disposition toward the worship of God argues much of
an earthly and atheistical mind. But I fear that Kingdom of Christ, and those
glorious manifestations and discoveries which are so much pretended to by many,
if they should be thoroughly examined, would be at length resolved into nothing
else but the advancement of some one party or interest above all the rest, or
the exchanging of an old form and dress of Religion for a new one; and that
this zeal would be found little better than the blazings of self-love, a fire
kindled not by a coal from the Altar, but by a spark of their own. But be it
so, that this disposition of theirs is sincere and spiritual; should not this
charity begin at home? The most proper Kingdom of Christ is that whereby he
rules in the hearts of men; the most excellent Worship is when the soul it
self becomes a temple for the living God to dwell in, and to receive and
reflect the manifestations of his glory, when a fire of Divine love is kindled
in it, and therein it does offer up, not bulls and goots, no nor 10 much
prayers and meditations, as indeed it self unto God, which is a reasonable
service as the Apostle speaks, far more glorions than the Mosaical, or
Evangelical dispensation either, if you consider it in the letter only.
Whatever men may pretend, no man can be truly and rightly studious of the
advancement of the Kingdom of God in the world, that has not first felt the
mighty power and blessed effects of it in his own soul. Communion with the
Church is only so far to be valued, as it lies in order to a real and spiritual
communion with God; which communion with God, if we do indeed sincerely wish to
others, we shall more abundantly labor to promote in our selves. I cannot
believe that he does heartily seek the happiness of others, who himself sits
still and is content to be miscrable, especially when their happiness and his
is one and the same.

3. It condemns them for no Christians, whose fellowship is only with their
fellow creatures. We have seen that it is the character, the distinguish^ng
character of a godly man, to have fellowship with God; it must needs follow
then, that those degenerate souls that rise no higher than the world, that
converse only with self or any other creature, are verily strangers to true
Christianity, whatever their confidence or presumption may be. Christians, tell
not me what you profess of Christ, what you believe of the Gospel, what
orthodox opinions you hold, what an honest party you side with, how many and
specious duties you perform, no nor what hopes or wishes you have of going to
Heaven; But tell me, where is your principal communion; what do you mainly
mind, follow, converse with; what pattern do you conform to; what rule do you
live by, what object do you ultimately aim at? The whole world of worldly men
does hasten after another God, as the Psalmists Phrase is, though not all after
the same God; they spend their souls indeed upon various objects, and use
different methods to obtain rest, but yet all their happiness and contentment
is ultimately resolved into creature-communion. That dreadful sentence, that
the Apostle delivers universally concerning all men, is to be limited to all
wicked men only, and of them it is undoubtedly true, Phil. 2. 21. All seek
their own, and none the things of Jesus Christ: And of All these it is that the
Psalmists Many is to be understood, Psalm. 4. 6. There be many that say who will
show us any good, i. e. any creature-good, as the words following do explain
it. All unregenerate souls are bound up in the creature, some creature or
other; and therefore the noblest of them, whatever brags they may make, is low
and ignoble; their main converse is but with their fellow creatures, and indeed
creatures much inferior to themselves, corn and wine says the Psalmist,
earthly things says the Apostle, Phil. 3. 19. Who mind earthly things. In a
word, though it be true what the Apostle says in one place, that all men in
the world do live in God Act. 17. 28. yet it is also true, that most men, as
the same Apostle speaks elsewhere, do live without God in the world, have their
hearts staked down to one, creature or other, and so fall short of this
honorable character which the Apostle here gives of godly men, -- our
fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ.

And now I shall wrap up the remainder of this Discourse in an humble request
and earnest expostulation.

Reckon not upon any happiness below this communion. There are many things
which a Christian may take to be comforts, but only one, this one, that he
ought to take to be the Happiness of his life, I design not to speak any thing
to the prejudice of natural or civil ornaments or accomplishments, much less to
the dispa^^gement of any of those endowments or employments which are in a
sense spiritual, commonly called gifts and duties: But I must confess it is one
of the great wonders of the world to me; to see such a noble and intelligent.
Being as the soul of man is, attending to, and pursuing after things either
extrinsecal or inferior to it self, in the mean time carelessly forgetting, or
wilfully rejecting its main happiness, principal end, and proper perfection. As
for those sensual persons, those mere Animals, whose souls are incarnate in
their senses, and seem to perform no higher office in the world than the souls
of beasts, that is to carry about their bodies, who value themselves by their
bodies, or which is baser by the apparel that clothes them* or the estates that
feed them. I shall not now trouble my self about them, but leave them to be
chastised by Seneca or Plutarch, or indeed any ordinary Philosopher. I shall
rather apply my self a little, to a sort of higher spirited people, whom by a
(...) d^-scension of charity we call Christians, who valuing themselves by
external professions, privileges, performances, may indeed be said to be
somewhat more scrupulous and curious, but no less mistaken than the former: for
if the grosser sort of sensualists do deny and professedly abjure their own
reasons, and the finer sort of hypocrites do more cunningly bribe theirs, each
method amounts to no more than a cheat, and both parties will be alike
miserable, save that the latter will be somewhat more tormented in ^issing of a
happiness which he l^^k'd and hoped for. It is not proper to my p^esent
discourse to speak so highly and honorably of these externals of Christianity;
nor to press unto them so zealously as I do at all times when I have occasion;
for I do verily value all ordinances of Christ, and duties of Gods worship at a
high rate; nay I know not any serious and truly godly soul in the world, but is
of this same profession with me: But I must confess I think it is one of the
greatest and most pernicious cheats in the world, for men to feed upon the dish
instead of the meat, to place their happiness in those things which God has
only appointed to be means to convey it. This was the great destruction of the
Jewish Church, by this they perished; Thus they are every where described in
Scripture, as a people resting in their privileges and performances, boasting
of their Sacrifices and Temple-service; they made account of a strange kind of
fleshpleasing Heaven, something distinct from them, and reserved for them, to
be given them by way of reward for the righteousness which themselves had
wrought by the power of their own free will (which freewill they say is an
effect of man's fall, but they make it a cause of man's rise, for now he can
purchase and merit a happiness, which happiness is also more illustrious than
that given of mere grace;) which righteousness (if we look either into their
own writings, or Gods writings concerning them) we shall find was nothing else,
but a strict observance of the precepts of the law, according to the letter and
external dispensation of it. Such a low and legal spirit was generally found
amongst the Jews; I wish the greatest part of us who are in profession and name
evangelical be not found as truly legal in spirit and temper as they were. If
we cry the Gospel of Christ, the Gospel of Christ, with the same spirit as they
cried the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, our confidence will as
surely betray us into a final misery as theirs did. True indeed Prayers,
Sacraments, Sermons are somewhat finer words than the old obsolete ones the
Law, Sacrifices, Ceremonies; but alas they are but words; at least they are not
Gods, no more fit to terminate our devotions and affections than these. I
beseech you therefore Christians, be not mistaken in this matter. True
Christianity is not a notion, but a nature; that is not Religion which is lapt
up in Books, or laid up in men's brains, but it is laid in the very constitution
of the soul, a new principle implanted by God in the highest powers of the
soul, refining and spiritualizing all the faculties thereof, and rendering them
as like to God himself, as such a creature can resemble its Creator. It is a
truth as clear as the Sun is clear, that nothing can make a Soul truly happy,
but what is wrought into the nature of it, and that must be somewhat more
excellent than it self; and that can be nothing less than something divine,
even the image of the blessed God. If you be Christians in deed and in truth,
value all the ordinances of God and the duties of Christian Religion, but value
not your selves by these, your happiness by these: Attend upon them all for the
maintaining and increasing of real fellowship with God; for though these be not
it, yet they a^^ the way wherein it pleases God (...) give it: drink the
sincere (...) the Word, but let it be only (...) holy design of growing
thereby, of growing up into God, and a divine life. Away with those low and
base thoughts of happiness; the happiness of a soul is a high and excellent,
indeed a divine thing; it is in some sense common to God and the soul; God is
happy in himself alone, and the soul can only be happy in him. What
contentment, what real happiness, Christian, can the rising of thy party in the
world, or the rising of thy name in the country bring thee, if in the mean
time, thou thy self harbourest any carnal will, selfinterest that does rise up
in opposition to the pure and perfect will and nature of God? How art thou
happy in thy prayers, if thou cast sin out at thy mouth, and in the mean time a
fountain of iniquity be springing up in thy heart! What avails it toward a
state of perfection, to be of the most orthodox opinions, the honestest
society, the f^irest profession, the most popular and sanctimonious form, or
the most plansible performances either, the soul being in the mean time
alienated from the life of God, and feeding upon some earthly trash or other,
which destroys the native powers and vigor of it, and keeps it under a
perpetual languor? even just so much as a silken stocken upon a gouty leg, or a
Princely Diadem upon an aching head, avails toward a state of ease and
foundness and ^u^rasie of body. Let nothing limit year ambition, but a state of
godlike perfection, let nothing set bounds to your loving and longing souls,
but a real fruition of God himself: nay let not that bound them neither, but
the more you enjoy, see, and cast, the more let your love be strengthened,
after the manner of fire, which the more it is fed, the more hungry and
devouring it grows. In a word, let nothing satisfy you lower than the highest
character that can be given of mortal man, to be men after Gods own heart, to
have God dwelling in you, to be filled with his fullness, to have this real and
excellent Communion with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ; To whom be
all honor praise and glory, for ever and ever!

FINIS.

