THE Great Commandment.

A DISCOURSE Upon Psalm. 73. 25.

SHOWING That God is All things to a Religious Soul.

BEING A further Explication of a short Discourse called, The Angelical Life,
formerly Written by the same Author S. S.

I labored more abundantly than they all; yet not I, but the Grace of God
which was with me,

1 Cor. 15. 10. I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me,

Gal. 2. 20. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, and with all
thy Soul, and with all thy Mind. This is the first and Great Commandment,

Mat. 22. 37; 38. LONDON, Printed by R. W. for H. Mortlock, at the White-Hart
in Westminster Hall, and at the Phoenix in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1678.

Imprimatur Hic Liber cui titulus, The Great Commandment, etc.

Geo. Thorp R mo. in Christo P. and D. Domino Gulielmo Archiep. Cant. a Sacris
Domesticis.
May 17. 1678.
To the Right Honorable and most Accomplished Lady, the Lady Mary, Daughter to
the Right Honorable the Countess Dowager of Huntingdon, and Consort to Mr.
William Jolliff of London.
Madam,
AMongst the many Excellencies wherewith it has pleased the Father of Lights
to adorn and illustrate you, this is not the least of your Virtues, that you do
not love to be told of them: And for my part, such is the Reverend regard that
I bear to your sweet modesty, that I fear to write what I suspect your Honor
would blush to read. In my judgment I do esteem your Honor to be a Person fit
to be addressed to for your Patronage of a Discourse of this nature, and that I
in so doing am not far from the same circumstances wherein the great Doctor of
the Gentiles stood toward King Agrippa, when he accounted himself happy that he
had to do with so competent a Judge. And in ingenuous gratitude I account my
self tantum non bound publicly to beg your perusal and owning of this latter
Discourse, whose acceptance of the former (when it was only offered you as a
private Present) I found so kind and affectionate. I know your Honor is not
ashamed of Religion, neither name nor thing, and I hope you will neither be
ashamed of, nor offended at him, who out of a sincere desire to promote the
happiness of men's Souls, has adventured to explain and recommend it to the
World, though he be but,

Madam, The meanest of your Honors Servants, S. S.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
REligion is deservedly esteemed the highest accomplishment of the rational
nature, both humane and Angelical, as being the converse which the highest
created powers and faculties maintain with the supreme and uncreated good. And
it is worth observation, that even amongst the Heathens, who yet had no
distinct knowledge of the true God, acquaintance with their gods, and a
relation to them, was accounted their greatest glory: which made all
Prophetical and Priestly persons of what capacity, yea or sex soever, who
pretended to be Secretaries or menial servants to the gods, to be had in so
great veneration. Yea the very Princes and Heroes amongst them, though they
were otherwise very powerful, wise and valiant, and made no great Conscience of
being proud of it neither, were still most ambitious which of them should be
accounted nearest of Kin to the gods; and those that pretended nearest Kindred,
gloried in that, more than in all their other accomplishments. Thus the great
and noble and valiant Hector is brought in by Homer, as being in nothing short
of Minerva and Apollo, and failing of divine honor, save only that his
extraction was not immediately divine: And there you will find that the same
Hector when he could wish for no greater thing, cries out, (...), etc. Iliad. v.

I would I were as sure the son of Jupiter, and that Juno had born me, as I
will plague the Grecians this day. Virgil brings in his Aeneas glorying indeed
of his Piety, Counsel and Prowess, but of nothing so much nor so often, as of
his relation to Venus; Nate Dea is the salutation that he is most pleased with.
Ovid brings in the blustering Ajax not over modest indeed in telling of his
Valor and Feats of Arms, but his greatest brag of all is his -- A Jove tertius
Ajax And yet for the further commendation of Religion, it is as much, if not
more observable, that every where it put such a grace upon all the persons who
professed it, that they were had in greatest estimation who were the truest to
it, and justified the profession of it by the severest conformity. What ever
Religion has been at any time publicly owned amongst any Nations, so far as I
can understand, has been accounted so sacred and venerable, that if any man
whatsoever should venture to profane it, or in his Works to deny it, he was
accounted the most profligate of all men, and not fit to live. It was ever
esteemed an honorable Character of the greatest Princes and Heroes to be
devout and pious, according to the professed Religion. If we will believe
Homer, Agamemnon, Achilles and Nestor, and all the famed Grecian Heroes were
pious Princes, who would seldom either fight, or treat, or con-consult, or
undertake any matter of moment, without the preface of a Prayer, or Sacrifice,
or both. The despisers of the gods and Religion, were had in common
detestation, and nothing could be said worse of any man, than that he was
contemptor superum; or as Horace calls it in his penitential Ode, Cultor Deorum
infrequens. God does by his Prophet in a wondering way make an enquiry, whether
it was ever known that a people forsook their g^ds, who yet were no gods, Jer
2. 11. which I may well allude to, and with astonishment enquire, whether ever
any people reproached and vilified their own Religion, which yet was no
Religion, or accounted it their honor to be thought irreligious? And yet alas
it is too too obvious, that in a Christian Nation, in this Protestant Nation,
many men do really hate that Religion which yet they do profess, and account it
a piece of Fanaticisme and madness to be and act according to the Gospel which
they own; that is, in short, to be honest men and true to their Words. These
are a generation of men whom one may well call profane Hypocrites; and indeed
they do not so much dishonor Religion as themselves, who like dishonest men do
openly oppose and hate what yet they openly profess. But there are besides
these another sort of men, who knavishly and malignantly, but ignorantly and
superstitiously reproach Religion. These men would very honestly have all men
to live up to their Religion: but then they make Religion to be nothing else,
but some Systematical or mechanical thing without them, by which they measure
themselves, or unto which they make their outward man to conform. And thus,
whilst they maintain such or such Opinions, or are of this or that Persuasion
or Party, or are careful to observe such and such Modes and Forms of Worship,
they fancy themselves as Religious as needs to be: in the mean time being
ignorant of, or little attending to that agreeableness of soul to the nature
and perfections of God, which is man's Religion and only Glory. Nay sin and
Apostasy is the sinking of his soul from God down into self and the creature;
and Religion is the recovery and restitution of this lapsed soul, caused by the
Regenerating power of the Divine Spirit: And until the soul be thus raised, and
God and his holy Will come to be advanced into a supremacy in the soul,
Religion cannot be said to be, much less to be perfect there. It is to be
feared that the greatest part of men, even of those men who speak much of God,
of His Will and Glory, of His Word and Kingdom, that speak much unto Him as His
Suppliants, and from Him as His Ambassadors, yet still fixing upon a
Self-center, and moving within a circle of their own, may be too truly said
notwithstanding their pretensions to Religion, to live without God in the
World: and that there are infinite numbers of men, who scorn to be accounted
Covetous, (and indeed in the common acceptance of the word are far from it)
that yet in proper speech, mind earthly things. To heal these distempers, and
to rectify these mistakes, I have adventured once more to explain and
recommend Christian Religion in this short Discourse; which I think, is
agreeable to the holy Word of God, and which I humbly pray the same blessed God
to make effectual for this end to some soul or other. I dare not say, I have
already attained, but through the grace of God I can say, that this thing I do,
viz. in my judgment renounce Self-love, Self confidence, Self-seeking, and
Self-feeling, and desire that God may be the object of all my Ambition,
Covetousness and Voluptuousness, if I may so speak with reverence. As I have
not calculated this Discourse for the palate of any one Party of men, so I
expect the praise, or dread the censure of none; but to the ever blessed God I
humbly commend it for success, and thee for edification, and rest

Thine in Him and for His sake, S. S.
Nov. 26. 1677.
PSALM. 73. 25. Whom have I in Heaven but Thee; and there is none upon Earth
that I desire besides Thee.
CHAP. I. The Introduction, guessing at the Author of the Psalm, and showing
the occasion of it, viz. the observation of the prosperity of wicked men, and
the afflicted condition of good men in the World: Wherein also a brief account
is given of the misapprehensions of men about that matter. A brief Explication
of the Connection of the Psalm. The words resolved into this Conclusion, That
God is the good man's All.
IT is disputed by some, whether David were not the Pen man of this Psalm, and
whether he did not deliver it into the hands of Asaph, as he is said to have
done some others, 1 Chronicles. 16. 7. But I think it is more generally concluded,
that it was composed by Asaph, for sundry reasons: the principal whereof seems
to be that which Mollerus, that learned Critic in the Hebrew Language,
renders, viz. for that the style and Phrase thereof does much differ from
David's. But about this I list not to contend. The occasion of it was a sharp
conflict which the Psalmist had with himself, being tempted to harbor envious
thoughts toward the wicked, and hard thoughts of God and Godliness, by
observing the prosperity of evil men and the afflicted state of good men in the
World. This very thing has indeed usually been a great offense and occasion of
stumbling to good men in all Ages, by reason of that remainder of carnal and
corrupt apprehensions which is found even in them, they oftentimes judging of
things more by fancy and sense than either by Faith, or right reason. It
seems to me, that as the promises and the threatenings of the Law savoured
more of Earth than the Gospel does, and were calculated for the morning of
Religion rather than the Meridian of it, for the minority of men rather than
their maturity; so that the minds even of good men under the Law, were
generally more affected and influenced with worldly things than under the
Gospel. And yet it cannot be denied, but that men of the most refined Gospel
minds may sometimes be somewhat surprised, and for the present startled at the
consideration of the seeming inequality of God's dealings, which yet upon due
deliberation may be easily solved, yea, and at length resolved into perfect
wisdom, righteousness and goodness too. The Psalmist begins with an elegant
kind of abruptness, laying down the conclusion of the whole in the very first
Verse, more like a triumphant Conqueror than a wrangling Disputant. It seems
his heart was very much upon this, to assert and vindicate the goodness of God
toward His people, and having been in some danger to have been depraved in his
apprehensions concerning God, he glories in this, that he was resolved to hold
the conclusion, however he knew not well how at present to answer the premises.
It is said to the great commendation of Job, that he attributed nothing
unseemly to God, Job 1. although he seemed to deal so harshly with him. And
truly this does highly concern us, to maintain right and honorable
apprehensions of God, yea though we be not able to answer the Arguments brought
against him and his dealings.

Having thus briefly and pathetically asserted the Position about the
controversy arose, in these words, Truly God is good to Israel (which our
English Meter renders very emphatically, However it be, yet God is good, and
kind to Israel) he falls presently upon the Narrative; wherein he relates a
combat between faith and sense, a victory that faith obtained, and the means
by which it obtained it, even by the sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of
God. At the 23 Verse you have him come to himself again; and so the residue of
the Psalm is the voice of Faith alone, triumphing and glorying in God, and in
the consolation, satisfaction, and confirmation received from him.

We Translate the words of the Text by way of interrogation, implying a
vehement negation; others Translate them in the form of a Prayer quis mihi
(dabit) in coelo, etc. making them the same in Phrase with 2 Samuel 23. 15. and
the same in sense with Psalm. 4. 6. But which way soever we Translate them, the
sense will be much what one, and either translation will indifferently serve
for the end for which I pitch upon them. For however you express them in
English, the meaning and intendment of them is to declare the dear esteem which
the Psalmist had of God above all things in the World. Yet they are somewhat
more emphatical to my present purpose, according to our Translation of them,
Whom have I in Heaven but Thee; and there is none upon Earth that I desire
besides Thee. By Heaven and Earth must needs be meant the whole Creation: If in
neither of these the soul of the Psalmist can be matched with a suitable and
satisfactory good, then certainly not in the whole World: If God be better and
dearer to him than both Earth and Heaven, then certainly we may justly lay down
this proposition from the words, that

God is the good man's All, or that God is All things to a gracious soul.

CHAP. II. A general Description of the Apostate condition of Souls. The
Doctrine of Evangelical Redemption and true Liberty asserted and explained.
THE Soul of man is naturally debased and depraved; by falling from God it
loses its original and most natural freedom and amplitude, and sinks into the
creature, and settles upon a Self-center. Wicked men are sadly pinched and
straitened by fixing their minds upon poor fading particularities; they move up
and down in a narrow sphere and circle of their own; and therefore are base,
low and narrow-spirited persons, whatever greatness of spirit and generousness
of mind they vainly pretend to. In this sense, I Am sure, there are none more
certainly imprisoned, nor more miserably confined than they that live and
converse perpetually at home: For Self, though it be the home, yet is certainly
the dungeon of the sensual soul: It is sin alone that contracts the soul of man
and cramps and cripples all the powers of it, strangely enfeebling and
captivating all its vigorous and generous faculties. But the grace of
regeneration redeems the captive soul from this bondage, thaws its congealed
affections, knocks off the Chains and Fetters from its hands and feet, and so
spirits all the powers thereof by its kind and powerful insinuations, as that
they dilate and spread themselves in God, even as the poor charmed Flowers do
gladly open their arms wide to entertain and welcome the beams of the Sun, and
the precious influences thereof. This is indeed that Redemption which the
Almighty Savior of the World, the true dispenser of life and liberty, came
into the World to accomplish for us: This is the true freedom according to the
Evangelist, John 8. 36. and he is the only purchaser and dispenser of it, If
the Son shall make you free, then shall ye be free indeed. And this is that,
which when it shall be perfected, shall be found to be the glorious liberty of
the Children of God, according to the Apostles phrase, Romans 8. 21. Whatever
other liberties and deliverances men may pretend to have by Christ Jesus,
certainly this is that releasement and redemption which is so often spoken of
and intended by those phrases of Christ's being sent to proclaim liberty to the
Captive, and the opening of the Prison to them that are bound, (Isa. 61. 13.)
of his bringing out the Prisoners from the Prison, and them that sit in
darkness out of the Prisonhouse (Isa. 42. 7.) of his saying to the Prisoners,
Go forth, etc. Isa. 49. 9. For so the Apostle interprets this freedom, 2 Cor.
3. 17. Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is Liberty. The godly soul is
free by Christ Jesus, the true Redeemer of souls, and the powerful dispenser of
Liberty from that straitness and selfishness, under which it labored; and
endued with a noble largeness and amplitude. Whereas it was formerly pinched
and shrivelled, and wrapped up in particular created goods; now it spends it self
wholly upon the uncreated goodness, and is as it were Universaliz'd: God is All
things to the Godly Soul.

This Doctrine I shall explain and confirm at once in several particulars.

CHAP. III. The natural understanding is sunk into matter, and the imaginations
of carnal men are gross. Unregenerate men neglect God, and ascribe Events to
Fate or Chance, or humane Wit and Industry: But the understandings and
apprehensions of Regenerate Souls are refined and spiritualized. They apprehend
the perfections of God in all things. It is of great importance to have right
and proper notions of things, especially of God and of the relation in which
the world stands to him.
1. GOD is All things to a godly man in his Aprrehensions. The natural
understanding is sunk into matter, and pent up in poor petty particularities.
The imaginations of a carnal and unregenerate heart are gross, and terminated
in the outside, or in the particular being of things: He that is of the Earth
is Earthly, says the Baptist, Joh. 3. 31. the natural wisdom is Earthly and
sensual, says the Apostle, James 3. 15. These fools are ready to say in their
hearts, There is no God, Psalm. 14. 1. or if they do acknowledge a Deity, yet
they make him but a kind of an idle Spectator or Supervisor, that neither does
good nor evil, Zeph. 1. 12. phancying to themselves, that all things fall out
in the World by a certain kind of fatality, casualty or humane wit and
industry. Hence you hear those brags of themselves, that they are some great
ones, Acts 8. 9. and of their Works and Achievements, Is not this great Babel
that I have built, Dan. 4. 30. I have dug and drunk waters, and with the
sole of my feet have I dried up all the Rivers of the besieged places, Isa. 37.
25. They apprehend little more in the Creation, than what with their senses
they see, or hear, or taste, or handle. One says; mine own Hand has saved me,
Judge. 7. 21. our Lips are our own, and who is Lord over us, say others, Psalm.
12. 4. others proclaim their own goodness, Prove. 20. 6. will not cease from
their own wisdom, Prove. 23. 4. seek their own glory, Prove. 25. 27. My River is
mine own, and I have made it for my self, says another, Ezekiel. 29. 3. We have
taken to us Horns by our own strength, say they in Amos 6. 13. By my wisdom, my
understanding, my great traffic have I gotten Gold and Silver, cries he in
Ezekiel. 28. 4, 5. By the strength of my hand, and by my wisdom have I done it,
for I am prudent: I have removed the bounds of the people, and I have put down
the Inhabitants like a valiant man; thus brags the great Assyrian Atheist, Isa.
10. 13. I have made my self to differ, cries another. And so God is not in all
their thoughts, Psalm. 10. 4. They consider not the operation of his hands, Isa.
5. 12. they live without the sense or apprehension of God in the World: Ut nemo
supra sese ascendere tentat!

But the understanding and apprehension of the Godly Soul is much refined and
spiritualized. He sticks not in the creature, but by every thing that is Good
and Perfect, climbes up with the Apostle James unto God himself the Father and
Fountain thereof. Though the understandings of all good men are not made
learned, yet they are all refined from sensual grossness, and made somewhat
Metaphysical or spiritual. The godly man views not himself in the small point
of his own being, but in the infinite essence of God: he views not the creature
in its own particular and limited existence or goodness, but in the nature and
perfections of the Creator: He looks upon the whole World as not subsisting of
it self, nor for it self, but in and for God who is above all, through all, and
in all, Ephesians. 4. 6. in whom the whole Creation stands, and we all live, move
and have our beings, Acts 17. 28. To him the whole World is as the Temple of
God, all mankind, and all their several excellencies, an Image and Portraicture
of God; yea, to him Monstrat quaelibet herba Deum, the Grass of the Field reads
a Divinity Lecture; In a word,

Huic Deus est quodcunque videt, quodcunque movetur, He apprehends the Power,
Wisdom, Perfection and Will of God in all that he sees, does, receives or
sustains. Though Religion do not consist in Notions, yet true, proper and
spiritual Notions of things, especially of God, and of the relation wherein the
whole World, stands to him, are mightily conducing to it, if not a substantial
part of it: So thought the Apostle Paul sure, when he corrected the
superstitions and false conceits of the Athenians concerning a Deity, Acts 17.
And so thought our Blessed Savior, when he would not suffer the Jewish Ruler
to ascribe goodness to him, whom he believed to be no more than a mere man,
Luke 18. 19. Why call thou me good? none is good save One, that is God.

CHAP. IV. God is all things to the godly man in his Affections. The Desires of
Unregenerate men run out only after Creature good. The Objection of wicked men
having good desires, answered: Wherein is showed that all desires of good are
not good desires, and an account given of it. Men may be carnal in their
desiring of spiritual good. James 4. 3. explained, wherein is showed how many
ways men seek their own lusts instead of God, and the carnality which may be
found in Prayers that seem spiritual. God is All to the godly man in his
desires of things temporal, and in his hopes of Heaven.
2. GOD is All things to the godly man in his Affections. The wicked man as he
views himself in himself, and the several creatures in themselves, so he loves
and delights in himself and the creatures, as something distinct from God. But
the godly soul endeavors by all means to keep all his affections pure and
chaste for God alone. Now in as much as the affections of the soul are many, it
will be necessary to explain the matter in some particulars.

1. God is All to the godly man in his desires and cravings, in his lookings
and waitings, in his hopes and expectations. I put all these together under one
Head, because they seem to be much what the same, or at least of great affinity
one to another. The desires and appetites of the unregenerate soul do run out
only after creature good, self accommodations and things that do gratify the
mere animal life. Thus the Psalmist describes their temper, Psalm. 4. 6. Many
say, Who will show us any good: which our English Meter interprets very truly,
The greater sort crave worldly goods. That is a short, but yet a very true and
full description that the Apostle Paul makes of these men, Phil. 3. 19. They
mind Earthly things. It were easy to be large here in demonstrating (in a
general way) that there is nothing in the worldly nature, but the lust of the
flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life; according to the
distribution which the Apostle makes, 1 John 2. 16. But I shall not further
insist upon that general. It seems as if wicked men sometimes had good desires
and good wishes; and indeed it cannot be denied but that some of their desires
are materially good: who can say but that of Balaam was a good wish, as to the
matter of it, Numb. 23. 10. Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my
last end be like his; It was materially a good wish (though a bad bargain) of
Simon Magus, that by the imposition of his hands men might receive the holy
Ghost, Acts 8. 19. It is not to be doubted but that many wicked men, yea
perhaps the most of them, at one time or other, do heartily desire that their
sins may be pardoned, and their souls saved, and they go to Heaven; according
to that of our Savior, Luke 13. 28. Many will seek to enter in and shall not
be able. But however these may seem to be good desires, yet they are not really
so: All desires of good are not good desires: If men should desire the presence
of Christ in glory, and the Kingdom of Heaven, in subordination to self, and
subserviency to a fleshly interest, it would be so far from being indeed a
good, that it would scarce be a lawful, it may be a blasphemous wish. And it is
very clear, that all the seeming good wishes, and prayers, and desires of
unsanctified minds are ultimately resolved into a fleshly interest, and self
gratification. It is not God, but themselves that they really seek, even then
when they desire him to be at peace with them, and that they might be with him
in his Kingdom. It is only true of all unregenerate men which the Apostle
affirms of all men, Phil. 2. 21. All men seek their own things, and not the
things which are Jesus Christ's; and this holds good of them, not only when they
are with Saul seeking their Asses, or with Absalom seeking an earthly Kingdom;
but even then when they are seeking to enter into the Kingdom of God.

But God is All in the desires and prayers and hopes of the godly soul. The
whole World is too short a bed for such a soul to stretch it self upon. The
appetites and cravings of such a soul being excited and awakened by the sense
of its own large and excellent capacity, the inadequateness and insufficiency
of the creature, the infinite self-sufficiency and sweetness, and suitableness
of God the supreme good, cannot possibly fix or rest or terminate themselves in
any thing below him, and the enjoyment of him. Thus the desires of the godly
are described by the Psalmist in opposition to the lustings of the wicked,
Psalm. 4. 6. Lord, lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us: And so in
the words of the Text, if they be understood by way of prayer, Who will give me
to be in Heaven with thee?

The prayers of the wicked although they may be for things good and lawful, yet
are ultimately resolved into self-gratification: They may be as fluent in
words, as loud in their cries, as hearty and fervent in their requests as other
men: If it be for Corn, and Wine, and Oil, they can roar and howl as loud as
the best, and yet this is not interpreted as seeking of God, but of themselves,
Hos. 7. 17. They have not cried unto me with their heart, when they howled upon
their beds; They assemble themselves for Corn and for Wine, etc. That is a very
memorable expression of the Apostle James, Jam. 4. 3. Ye ask amiss, that ye may
consume it upon your lusts. Which indeed is the design of unregenerate souls,
even when they seem to pray for things in their own nature spiritual. Wicked
men are carnal even in praying for spiritual things. But godly men are not so;
they are so far from that, that on the contrary, they are spiritual in praying
for carnal and earthly things. They wrap up a Prayer in a Prayer; they have a
farther reach than the mere enjoyment of the creature, when they pray for
creature good; a higher end than the pleasing and serving of themselves, when
they pray for themselves, or their own private and personal concernments.
Certainly it is not only an absurd, but a monstrous and blasphemous thing for
any man to pray to God to fulfill his lusts; the interest of God being so
perfectly contrary to the interest of carnal self. And yet I fear there are
very many that do thus interpretatively blaspheme God, even in their Prayers,
when they pretend to honor him; and these sometimes, perhaps, not of the very
worst of men neither. What would it have been else but a prayer of lust, if the
two Disciples had been suffered to have prayed for fire from Heaven upon the
heads of the poor Samaritans, to revenge their Master's quarrel, as they would
have done, Luke 9. 24? What was it else but a prayer of lust when the same two
Disciples petitioned their Lord for the chiefest place and preeminence in his
Kingdom, Mark 10. 37? Only our gracious Savior was pleased somewhat to excuse
them, by reason of their ignorance, Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are
of; and again, Ye know not what ye ask. I will not dispute how far a devout and
well meaning soul may pray upon a mistake, nor how far such a soul may possibly
mistake the interest of his lusts, for the interest of Religion, and the
Kingdom of Christ: But methinks such mistakes are very dangerous, and much more
dangerous and inexcusable now, than they were in the days of the Son of Man.
And yet as dangerous as they are, I fear they are too too common even in these
days. Charity covers a multitude of sins indeed, but yet it is the endowment
of a rational soul; and so the Charity that is stark blind, is no Charity: Yea,
I may add, that it is the part of Charity to discover a multitude of sins
before the eyes of those that commit them, as well as to cover them before ones
own. It is too evident (if we compare the constant talk and temper of men with
their devotions, and if with their prayers you compare their practices which
they use in pursuit of them,) that passion, revenge and self-interest do indite
the prayers of many that seem to be zealous for the Lord; every thing is
Antichristian, that is contrary to their opinion, ease or interest; and then
is the Kingdom of Christ exalted, when they themselves are advanced into a
peaceful, honorable and ruling state. What if it should come to pass that
some, even of them that seem to be most forward to sit at the right and left
hand of Christ in his Kingdom, should be found to stand on his left hand with
the impure Goats, in the day of the decision of all things? And what can we say
of those animose and furious strivings and groanings of men in prayer, against
all that dissent from themselves; but that their prayers are rather the
bublings and boylings up of interest, than the language of the pure, peaceable
and gentle spirit of God. I fear these men's prayers are not put up without
wrath, as the Apostle exhorts, 1 Timothy 2. 8. and I wish their hands be found so
holy as they should be, if ever they have opportunity to use them. Nay, what if
many of our most fervent and affectionate groanings after deliverance, liberty
and redemption from afflictions and oppressions (as innocent as they seem to
be) should be found to be nothing else, but the raging of our own animal
passions, and such prayers as an oppressed Beast might put up as well as we, if
he could express them so affectionately. I know it is very lawful and
warrantable to put up prayers unto God for relief in our troubles, and release
from our pressures; but yet it is no more than what is natural unto men, no
more than what Jonah's heathenish Mariners did as well as he. Man seeks for
deliverance from troubles properly as an animal, not as a Christian. And if
this be All we aim at in our prayers, they will be interpreted (if not as a
begging for our lusts, yet) as mere breathings of the Animal life, and
outcries of our own sensual affections, no better fruit than may be found upon
Publicans; For do not even the Publicans the same? But this is not all that the
Godly soul aims at in his prayers and hopes; but God is All in his hopes
whether of things in this World, or in another.

It is not the mere naked abstract enjoyment of prosperity, liberty, or life it
self in this World, that the godly soul so vehemently looks, longs, prays and
hopes for; but it is some real communication from God, or something that may
capacitate him for God in all these. Every man that is wronged and oppressed,
would gladly be righted and delivered; But the godly man sets not his heart so
much upon his own ease; as upon the honor of God, and the interest of Truth
and righteousness, which he desires may take place in the World. Every man
would be great; but the good man alone accepts of worldly power merely for this
end, that by his authority he may the better serve the honor of his great God;
which seems to have been purely David's design, Psalm. 75. 2. When I shall
receive the Congregation, I will judge uprightly. Victory is sweet and
acceptable to all; but that truth should be mighty and prevail, that equity and
justice should triumph in the World, this is dear and desirable only to the
godly soul, the soul that is purified from earthly and selfish loves. The mere
worldly life desires worldly liberty; but that higher principle which is seated
in the godly soul, covets a more spiritual and excellent freedom, even the
glorious liberty of the Sons of God. Life is sweet to all; but to the godly
Soul to be without God, would not be to live, For his loving kindness is better
than life, Psalm. 63. 3. In a word, it is the interest of God and communion with
him, which spirits and impregnates all the hopes and expectations of the
renewed soul, which he conceives concerning earthly things.

And if this be so, it need not be doubted but that God is All to him in his
hopes concerning the World to come, the All of Heaven. I fear there are many
Christians that are high in their own hopes of Heaven and of their going
thither, who little think of God there, and are little acquainted with the
spiritual nature of right happiness. But God is All of Heaven it self to a
right gracious soul: The great thing which he hopes for in the world to come,
is to be perfected in the image of God, and live everlastingly in communion
with him. And therefore when the Apostle Paul speaks of his departure out of
this world, he gives us to understand what was mostly in his eye and upon his
heart, and that was to be with Christ, Phil. 1. 23. And the Apostle John, when
he speaks of the glory and blessedness of a future state, describes it by the
resemblance that the soul shall bear to God at that time, 1 John 3. 2. When he
shall appear, we shall be like unto him. Heaven is but a name and notion
without God, God himself is not the happiness of a soul except he be enjoyed,
and he can no other way be enjoyed but by a spiritual union with him, and
assimilation to him. The word (...) in the Text signifies either who or what:
Now then there are many that are for ease, many for peace and liberty, many for
pomp and preeminence in Heaven; But our Psalmist has nothing desirable, no
not there, but God alone; Whom have I, or what have I in Heaven but thee?

CHAP. V. God is All to the godly man in his delight and pleasure. The
pleasures of wicked men are sensual. There are degrees of sensuality amongst
carnal men. The delight that an unregenerate man takes in spiritual things is
carnal. The godly soul feeds upon God in every thing: He loves and admires his
own soul in God. Grace does not overthrow the judgment of sense, but it
regulates the senses as to their actings, and enables the soul to delight in
things sensual, in a super sensual manner.
2. GOD is All to the godly man in his Delight and Pleasure. As the appetites
of the unregenerate soul are sensual, so are his sentiments and resentments.
This must needs follow; as indeed it does follow in the fourth Psalm: their
desire is, Who will show us any good, verse. 6. their delight is in Corn and
Wine, and in the increase of them, verse. 7. They know no higher good than
peace, plenty, liberty and length of days; know not how to entertain
themselves any better than by sitting down to eat and drink, and rising up to
play. Thus you find the desport and jovialty of the wicked described, Job 21.
10, 11, 12, 13. Am. 6. 4, 5, 6. Luke 12. 19. and many other places. But you
will say, these are a grosser sort of sensualists; all wicked men sure are not
so brutish, so swinish as to wallow in such kind of mire as this is. I confess
they do not all welter in the same mire; there are almost as many kind of
Idolaters, as there are kinds of creatures to be idolized. There seems to be a
greater and lesser brutishness amongst the brutes themselves; a Sheep will not
wallow in the mire like a Swine, nor a Pidgeon feed upon such stinking Carrion
as a Crow, and yet they are brutes as well as they. All wicked souls do not
feed upon the same husks, but all feed upon husks that have forsaken the bread
of their Father's house. There are several sorts of Dishes whereupon the
earthly life feeds. Lust is oft-times fed by things materially good, as well as
by those that are materily evil. A man may be as unchaste and adulterous with
his own gifts and parts, as with his neighbors Wife, and a woman may fall into
as unclean dalliances with her own beauty, as with a man that is not her
Husband. The Logical life (when men adore their own souls, and feed upon their
own perfections) is as truly unholy and unclean, though not altogether so
gross, as that which is mere sensual. And thus I doubt not but that many of the
Stoical Philosophers, with their Autaesthesie and self-enjoyment, were as
unclean and idolatrous, as the Epicurean Atheists with all their meats and
drinks and strange flesh.

Yea though the unregenerate mind should be much delighted with the outward
dress and dispensation of Religion, as they were in Ezekiel. 33. 31, 32. yea
though it should be mightily pleased and tickled with the notions of God's
Free Grace, Justification by the blood of Jesus, an everlasting inheritance in
the Paradise of God, and such spiritual things as these (as I do easily
conceive it may) yet were his delight, that he takes in these very things,
unclean and earthly: For still it is resolved into this, it is self and not God
which he ultimately takes pleasure in.

But God is All in the delights and complacencies of the truly godly soul. He
delights not in himself or any other creature abstractly considered, and in
separation from God. It is said of one (I think it is of Austin) that after his
conversion he could take no pleasure in Cicero's Orations, because he could not
find the name of Christ there: but surely in a good sense the name of Christ
may be said to be inscribed, and something of his image drawn upon every
creature; for by him all things were made, and he has copyed out something of
his own perfections upon them all: And this is that which the holy and wise
soul gathers up and feeds upon with delight. I know indeed that Grace does not
destroy natural affections in men, no nor overthrow the judgment of sense; but
it does certainly confer upon men a far more excellent and spiritual faculty of
discerning and delighting. What I said before concerning the spirituality of a
godly man's desires of Heaven and heavenly things, may be applied to his
delights also. But I conceive that the greatest doubt does not lie there.
Therefore as to the pleasurable objects of this World; whereof the chiefest
seems to be a man's own soul, The godly man loves, and admires and reverences
his own soul no less, but much more purely, than any other man. He admires the
infinite and uncreated wisdom, understanding, love, life, liberty, displaying
and discovering it self in the constitution of his own mind, Free Will, and
Affections, and the excellent capacities and functions of these faculties: and
so by giving God the glory of his wonderful making (Psalm. 139. 14.) he escapes
the brand of a self-admirer. There are many other objects of delight in this
World, all which it is the proper work of Divine Grace to spiritualize to the
soul; such as food and raiment, Houses and Lands, Friends and Relations, and
many the like. It cannot be denied, but that the godly man loves his friends,
his Wife and Children and Parents with a natural love; but he loves them also,
and all that is lovely in them, with a spiritual love, which is predominant:
that by which they are any of them pleasant and amiable, he understands to be a
communication of God unto them, and under that notion labors to relish them
most of all. Whilst we are in this bodily mixed state, we cannot be freed from a
delight that is merely sensual. Meat and drink (no doubt) affected our Saviors
sense, and afforded the same relish to his palate, whilst he had an animal
body, as they afforded to other men's, although he was so infinitely pure and
spiritual, as that it was his meat and drink to be doing the Will of God. The
power of Grace does not enable any man not to taste a sweetness or bitterness
in things that are really sweet or bitter: It does not fall under the power of
my reason or will, whether or no I will relish or sensate the sweetness of my
morsel; I cannot help that, although I can keep my self from eating it: so then
it cannot fall under the power of grace. But although Grace do not destroy the
sensation of the senses, yet it regulates and moderates all the senses, as to
their actings. Hence Job is said to have made a Covenant with his eyes, Job 31.
1. and David to have kept his mouth as with a bridle, Psalm. 39. 1. And as it
governs the senses as to their actings, so it also bestows a more excellent
ability upon the soul to delight it self in things sensual, in a supersensual
way and manner. Besides the pleasure of the senses, which is animal and common
to all men, yea indeed and beasts also, the gracious soul does relish something
Divine, something of God, his Love, his communications in all delectable
objects, which confers upon them a transcendent substantial sweetness. And thus
he may be said to taste God in every morsel, to smell the Divinity in every
Flower, and to converse with him by a kind of secret feeling in all that he
touches, tastes or handles in the World.

CHAP. VI. God is All to the godly man in his Trust and Confidence. The
creature-confidence of carnal men is Blasphemy. Good men are afraid of
distrust: How great reckoning they have always made of their Faith. The only
fear of carnal men is the violation of self interest. God is All in the fears
of good men. They fear him only, though they are not afraid of him. God is All
to the godly man in his grief and sorrow explained.
3. GOD is All to the godly man in his Trust and Confidence. The degenerate and
unregenerate soul as it is sunk into the creature, so it sticks there; it
sticks by love and delight, and sticks fast by confidence. It were endless to
give you but the Scripture instances of Self-confidence and
Creature-dependance. In Creature-confidence there is much Atheism, or rather
indeed blasphemy: For to ascribe that firmness, faithfulness, sufficiency,
which God alone is, to any thing besides him, must needs be blasphemous and
idolatrous. And thus do wicked men blaspheme, whilst they lay the stress of
their souls upon the Arm of flesh, upon Chariots and Horse men, upon friends
and Allies, upon carnal interests or worldly riches: And thus we know they do,
Psalm. 20. 7. Some trust in Chariots, and some in Horses. Prove. 18. 11. The rich
man's wealth is his strong City, and as a high Wall in his own conceit.

But godly men have God alone for their refuge and confidence, according to
that of the wise King, Prove. 18. 10. The Name of the Lord is a strong Tower,
the righteous run into it and are safe. I know they may be, and often are
surprised with fears and doubts, but yet even then they will not let go their
hold of God, Psalm. 56. 3. What time I am afraid I will trust in thee. It is as
much the part of a godly soul to rely and rest upon God, as to love him and
pray unto him; he is afraid of distrust, unbelief, and casting away his
confidence, as well as of Drunkenness or Debauchery. I cannot but take notice
what great reckoning the Saints have made of their Faith, as if the very life
of their souls had been bound up in it. How expressly and pathetically does the
Apostle charge us concerning this, Ephesians. 6. 16. Above all taking the Shield of
Faith; and again, Heb. 10. 23. Let us hold fast the profession of our Faith,
without wavering; and again, Verse. 35. Cast not away your confidence which has
great recompense of reward. Job when he had lost all, yet resolves not to part
with his Faith, whatever became of him, Job 13. 15. Though he slay me yet I
will trust in him. And doubtless an ingenuous and steady reliance upon the
grace and strength and help of God alone, is an excellent argument of a sound
and gracious soul. Good men know how to make use of second causes, and they see
commonly as far into all creature-probabilities, as any other men; but it is
the virtue and strength of God that they rest upon in all means and instruments.

4. God is All to the godly soul in his fears. The ungodly are full of worldly
fears, slavish fears, scarce ever free from fears about one thing or other; yea
though there be nothing visible to make them afraid: But as their interest is
bound up in self and this present World, so their great and only fear is
concerning the violation of this self-interest. He that has placed his
happiness in the enjoyment of any created good, has made a miserable choice,
for he is in danger of being utterly ruined every hour; all created good being
subject to so many spoilers, that a man can never be secure in his possession.
And therefore no wonder that his heart is haunted one while with the fears of
death, another while with the fears of losses, loss of Friends or Children,
loss of Goods or Reputation, fears of wants, fears of disgrace, and many things
more which his slavish heart is awed with continually.

But God is All in the fears of good men; He is their fear and their dread. as
the phrase is, Isa. 8. 13. Not that they are properly afraid of God (for they
discover nothing in him but what is most amiable and grateful to them, and
therefore converse with him as with love it self, serve him as accounting it
their happiness and interest to do so, and obey his Commands as those which are
most equitable, and suitable, and most perfective of their natures, with all
gladness and cheerfulness) but they are afraid of sin, so as wicked men are
afraid of sickness and death, viz. as that which is hurtful to them and
destructive of their happiness. Sin is all their fear, by reason of the
opposition it bears to the pure nature of God; and so it may be said that God
is All in their fear. Thus Moses seems to have been more solicitous for the
honor of God, than for the preservation of the whole Congregation; and more
afraid of the sin of the Egyptians, than of the death of the Israelites, Numb.
14. 13, 14, 15, 16. whereunto many more Instances might be added.

Lastly, To name no more of the Affections, God is All things to the godly soul
in his grief. Concerning the sorrow of the wicked one, I may say partly the
same as I said even now concerning their fears; it is a worldly sorrow, derived
from, and terminated in the Creature. But the sorrow of the godly soul is a
godly sorrow. He is grieved indeed for many things; but still the reason of his
grief is derived some way or other from God. He grieves when he is injured or
Persecuted; but there is a hidden cause of his grief; he is not so much
troubled that himself is injured, or his own personal interest wounded, as that
truth and righteousness are violated therein, and God dishonored. He grieves
over the Wars and Fightings, confusions and distractions that are in the
Kingdom, as well as other men; but yet not as other men; for he most of all
lays to heart the lusts of men, which as the Apostle James speaks, are the
occasion and Original of them. He grieves over his Losses, of Goods, Children,
Liberty and the like; and yet not so much over his Losses, to speak properly,
as over the cause and consequent of them, as he apprehends sin to be the cause
of them, or that himself shall be some way or other rendered less serviceable to
God by them. I suppose no man in this World is so far refined, perfected and
exalted in his nature, as to be altogether free from the affections and
passions that are merely natural and animal: A good man's tears are of the same
kind of water as other men's are of, though possibly not altogether from the
same Fountain; or if from the same Fountain, yet they are purified from much of
that mud and acrimony that cleave to other men's. When the Women that attended
upon Phineas his Wife in her travail endeavored to comfort her fainting spirit
with the tidings of a Son, she made no answer at all to that, but she does as
good in effect as tell them, That they mistook her grief, when she called the
Child Icabod, signifying thus much, that the departure of Irael's glory did
more affect and oppress her heart, than all her other pangs, 1 Samuel 4. I do not
read that ever all David's enemies wrung such plenty of tears from his eyes, as
the enemies of God did, Psalm. 119. 136. nor that all Paul's Persecutions ever
wrung such a groan from him, as the sense of his own sin did, Romans 7. 24. O
wretched man that I am, etc.

CHAP. VII. The unsanctified man performs all his natural, civil and sacred
Actions in, to, and for himself, though there may be some difference in the
external grossness. To a godly man, God is the spring and end of all his
actions. The notion of designing all things for God and directing them to his
glory explained, and how a man may be Religious in the very natural and civil
actions of his life. The Sacrilegious selfishness of carnal men in their sacred
actions discovered. The contrary temper of the regenerate soul.
WE have seen that God is All to the godly soul as to his Apprehensions and
Affections.

3. God is All things to the godly soul in his Actions. Actions are either
Natural, Civil or Sacred: All which the wicked man performs in, and to, and
for himself: He eats and drinks, and embraces, and performs all other animal
actions, as any other Creature does, for the gratification of his mere animal
appetite, and the satisfaction of his own sensual lust. What can be more plain?
Whose God is their Belly, says the Apostle, Phil. 3. 19. whose ultimate end is
the satisfaction of their senses. By God must needs be understood their
ultimate end, and by their Belly must be understood the pleasing and fulfilling
their sensual appetites. So it is in his Civil actions: He Ploughs and Sows,
Fights and Studies, Plants and Builds, confers and consults, and all to and for
himself. It were easy to demonstrate and explain each of these in particular:
but in any one we prove all. The ploughing of the wicked, is sin, says
Solomon, Prove. 21. 4. which certainly it would not be if it were designed and
performed for God, as it ought to be; but it is designed ultimately for self,
and that makes it sinful. I know, all wicked men are not so gross as to brag of
their Buildings openly with the Chaldean Monarch, Dan. 9. This is Babylon that
I have built by the might of my power, and for the honor of my Majesty: All
that go out to fight, do not in words boast and magnify themselves against
God, as the Assyrian Monarch did, of which you read Isa. 10. but the secret
Genius and temper of them all is alike, they have all one heart. It is as
proper to say the lust of Ploughing, Planting, Studying, Fighting, as of Eating
and Drinking. Yea, and thus it is in his sacred actions too; he serves himself
when he pretends more especially to serve God in the Acts of Worship. I do not
think that all are so gross as Jezabel in proclaiming and celebrating Fasts:
but it is most clear that the most solemn Acts, and the most sanctimonious
services of wicked men are a mere piece of superstition, terminated in
self-accommodation, and resolved into a fleshly interest. Hence it is that you
have God flatly denying, and disowning their very prayers, and saying expressly
they were not prayers to him, Hos. 7. 4. you have him plainly forbidding such
addresses, Isa. 1. 13, etc. upbraiding them and clothing them with reproachful
names, Isa. 66. 3. yea abhorring and abominating their prayers, incense and
sacrifices, Prove. 28. 9. 21. 27. Isa. 1. 13. And no wonder that such Sacrifices
should be an abomination unto God; for to speak properly, the things which
these superstitious minds do sacrifice, they sacrifice to self, and the
interest of flesh, and not to God.

But God is All to the godly man in all these sorts of actions. God is the
spring of them, and the end of them all. He undertakes all in the name and
strength of God, (...). It is not he that atchieveth ought, but God by him. I
labored, says the Apostle Paul, more abundantly than they all, 1 Cor. 15. 10.
but presently he corrects himself, as if he had spoken rashly, Yet not I, but
the grace of God that was with me. David makes his boast in God at all times,
and in all things happily performed: By my God have I leaped over a Wall; and
again, By my God have I ran through a Troop, Psalm. 18. 29.

And he designs all his actions sincerely, and as much as may be particularly
for God. When I say, that he designs all his actions for God, I do not mean,
that he frames a distinct notion of God in his mind, when ever he undertakes
any thing; but he does all things for good, and for the advancement of truth,
peace, righteousness, and holiness in the World. He eyes that which is good,
just, sober, temperate, chaste, pure and decorous in all the natural and civil
actions of his life, in opposition to the appetite and interest of the flesh.
If I Plough or Sow, Eat or Drink, Build or Plant, Fight or Study, or consult
with reference to the command of God, with reference to the advancement of the
Kingdom of Christ in my own soul, or in the World, or to some end higher than
the pleasing of my flesh, and the gratification of my animal passions; I may be
said to do that for God, although I do not directly meditate upon the Being of
God at that time. And so the Religious Christian even in his recreations (which
of all civil actions may seem to be most alien from a Religious design) may
truly eye and serve God. If we were so abstracted from sense, and purified from
flesh-pleasing, as were to be desired, we might consult the health of our
bodies, and the exoneration of our minds by recreations, and serve God as truly
by them, as by taking either food or Physic: yea though we did receive a
satisfaction from those things which are purely sensual (a thing which we
cannot hinder) yet might we be said to be supersensual and Religious in those
very acts: For it is not the having of animal senses, no nor the pleasing of
them as such, that is our fault; but our sacrificing to, and being sunk into
the animal life, this is our sin and shame, and misery. He that does work or
play, Marry or give in marriage, sincerely respecting the true good of his
soul, cannot be said to be sensual in such actions, although his senses may,
and indeed will have their part in the delights thereof. All things cannot be
said to be done for flesh-pleasing, in which it falls out that the flesh is
pleased. For some of those very actions that are principally designed and
calculated for the glory of God and the interest of the soul, may yet
indifferently serve for the gratification of the senses, and the entertainment
of this animal body; as may eating and drinking, though it be directly to the
glory of God; and Marrying, though it be never so much in the Lord.

In his sacred Actions, there the godly soul is yet more spiritual and refined:
Here is indeed no great danger of sensuality, properly so called; and yet here
the wicked man can make a shift to be carnally-minded and selfish, as you have
already heard. But in these kind of actions God is All to the godly soul: He
feels not himself in these, he seeks not himself by them. O how common a thing
is it for men to carry an image of themselves before their eyes, even in the
things that they pretend to do for God! I suppose Jehu was no little fond of
himself, and his own valourousness, and thought God was not a little endebted
to him for it, when he calls for witnesses and spectatours of it, Come see my
zeal for the Lord. And truly the Sacrilegious selfishness of other men is as
great, though not altogether so gross, who although they do not so loudly
proclaim themselves, nor set up such visible Trophies of their own prayers, yet
do magnify themselves in their own eyes, and secretly applaud themselves in an
unhallowed sense of their own Achievements and seize. But the truly
Religion soul though he cannot but know his own worth and excellencies, yet
knows it not, no delights not in it as his own, but as a communication of the
Almighty goodness, and infinite perfection of God unto him. When he shines most
gloriously in the exercises of gifts and the actings of grace, he does not
presently fall in love with his own picture, dote upon his own perfections, nor
wantonly dally with his own gifts; but looks upon his luster only as a poor
reflection of the divine light and glory, which has spread it self upon him.
As a rendering nothing to God but what is indeed his own; Of thine own have we
given thee, and all this store comes of thine hand, and is all thine own, 1 Chronicles. 29. 14, 16. Have ye not read how sharply the Apostle Peter takes up the
wondering Jews, that seemed not to acknowledge God in the miraculous cure
wrought upon the Crepple, Acts 3. 12. Ye men of Israel, why look ye so
earnestly on us, as if by our own power and holiness we had made this man to
walk! The godly man feels not himself in his Religious performances: neither
does he seek himself by them. He makes not Religion a piece of p^licy, nor
serves himself of God when he pretends to serve him; as that hypocritical
Generation did, of whom our Savior speaks, Matthew. 23. 14. who made long
prayers in subserviency to oppression; and after him his Apostle James, Jam. 4.
3. who prayed on purpose that they might have to spend upon their lusts. This
has been a very reigning superstition in the world. Did Saul, think ye,
properly seek God, or himself and his own safety in those forced
burnt-offerings of his which he speaks of in 1 Samuel 13. 12. Therefore I said,
the Philistines will come down now upon me to Gilgal, and I have not made
supplication unto the Lord; I forced my self therefore and offered a
burnt-offering? Did Judas, think ye, properly seek the honor of God, or
himself and his own enriching, when he made a motion for giving three hundred
pence to the poor? Let the Spirit of God be Judge of this, whose determination
you will find in Joh. 12. 6. Some serve their own covetousness, some seek their
own safety, some study to advance their own name and reputation, by their
Fastings, Prayers and Alms: But a godly soul is a stranger to all these low and
sorry ends: It is not wealth, nor fame, nor peace, nor victory over his
enemies, nor deliverance from distresses, no nor any other external glory, or
only reward in another World, which he pursues in his Religious course: But he
draws nigh to God, that God may draw nigh to him; he waits upon him in Duties
and Ordinances, waiting for communications from him; he knows nothing better
than God himself, for which he should serve him; he accounts his end, happiness
and honor to resemble him and grow up in him. In a word, he does not only
perform the duties of Religion, as being God's Work, which he has set him
about, and promised a reward unto; but indeed as his own work, his own
business; he reckons it the true interest of his own soul to be good, and do
good; and therefore will spend himself in these endeavors, though no body will
pay him, no nor thank him for it. Mark the different temper that was in Christ,
and some of his followers: they served God for meat and drink, Joh. 6. 26. but
he accounted it his meat and drink to serve him, Joh. 4. 34.

CHAP. VIII. God is all to the godly man in his Sufferings. An account of
Self-sufferers, Papists and others. God is All to the godly man in the
Efficient, the Material and Final cause of his sufferings, explained. God is
all to the godly man in his manner of fearing Afflictions and Persecutions.
4. GOD is All to the godly man in his Sufferings. I know that unsound and
hypocritical spirits are much more forward to do than suffer; and yet no doubt
the power of self-love and affectation of applause, without any higher
principle, may prepare and prompt men to endure Persecution: And it need no
more be wondered at, that the mere animal and selfish life should expose it self
to much smart, and many severities, than that a generous Cock should fight to
crow, and expose himself to death it self, to get the victory over his
Antagonist. It is well known how much the superstitious Papists will deny, and
debase, and degrade, and torment themselves, what Penances and Pilgrimages, and
poverty they will undergo: and all this out of a slavish fear of God, and a
design to keep their lusts alive: They will half kill their own bodies, rather
than crucify their lusts, or mortify the body of sin: These things they do,
not for the mortification of lusts, but indeed these things they do rather than
they will mortify them, for these things with them supply the place of
Mortification: But I fear we have many Self-sufferers in the World, that will
not own themselves to be of that Society. I believe it is a malicious reproach
that is by some cast upon the generality of Protestant sufferers at this day in
the World, viz. that they suffer for humor and self-conceit, out of obstinacy,
and a spirit of contradiction, for applause and a greater corroboration of
their party: But yet it may reasonably be feared, that there are too many that
do so. It seems not at all strange to me, that a man should study
Self-advancement by a pretended Self-denial, that he should seem to lose his
life, on purpose that he may find it, I mean that he should pretend to crucify
the mere animal and selfish life, on purpose to enjoy it the more securely, and
hug it the more dearly; that a man should take joyfully the spoiling of his
Goods, rather than violate his fleshly interest, or expose his lusts to spoil.
Men do sometimes most of all maintain and pamper this dying life of theirs,
when they seem to starve it; and drive on the same design with Judas, even when
their Persecutions seem to be the same with Paul's. Men may as verily feel
themselves, and as passionately please themselves in the seeming constancy,
courage and patience of their sufferings, as in the pretended zeal and devotion
of their actions; and as truly seek and set up themselves, and a Self-supremacy
in their own souls, by the one as by the other.

But God is All to the truly godly soul in his Persecutions. This I might
explain as to the Cause of them, the End of them, and the Manner of sustaining
them. As to the efficient cause of them, he does not fret, and storm, and rage
at men, whether open Enemies or false Friends, whether Informers, Accusers,
Lawgivers, Executioners; but he looks higher, and sees and owns the hand of
God in all things that befall him by the ministry of men. David knew that Shimei
could not have cursed him, if God had not opened his mouth, 2 Samuel 16. 10. And
our Savior presently replies unto Pilate, when he bragged of his power, Joh.
19. 11. Thou could have no power at all against me, except it were given thee
from above. As to the material cause, or matter of his Persecutions, God is all
in that too: For he suffers for righteousness sake, Mat. 5. 10. and for well
doing, 1 Pet. 3. 17. not for toys and trifles, petty persuasions and private
opinions, or matters of mere indifferency. His soul is employed about more
substantial and important matters; he will not so much as go to Law about such
things, much less expose himself to the rigor of a penal Law for them; he will
not so much as be in a heat about them, much less will he burn for them. And
therefore it is not out of pride, humor, or sullenness (as the Persecutors do
slanderously report) but out of conscience toward God that he endures grief, 1
Pet. 2. 19. He knows no interest but that of his soul, which consists in his
most exact conformity to truth and holiness; and it is to this interest, and
the propagation of it that he is well content to sacrifice whatever else may be
reckoned dear or grateful to him.

As to the End of his sufferings God is All unto the godly soul here too. There
are many base, and low, and selfish ends, which a man may propound to himself
in suffering for a good cause, which it were too long to insist upon: All which
the truly Divine soul abhors. He is not so prodigal of his blood, as to shed
one drop of it to purchase a name written in Red Letters; he will not expose
his Goods to spoil in order to a more ample restitution; he will not fall on
purpose to rebound the higher; nor have his person confined, that so his name
may spread, and his credit be enlarged. But he is well content to be
reproached, that so God may be honored; and to be starved that truth may be
maintained; he is content to wither in his estate, that so he may flourish in
grace, to perish in the outward man, that he may be renewed in the inward; to
die for the people, if so he may preserve them from perishing. The glory of God
and the Salvation of souls, or if you will in plainer terms, the exercise of
grace, the defense of truth, the advancement of the Kingdom of Christ in his
own soul, and the propagation of it in the souls of others, are the grand
designs of the godly soul, when he takes up any cross.

Lastly, God is All to the godly soul in the manner of his suffering
Persecutions. His way of sustaining them is with a pure, peaceable, humble,
self-denying, patient, constant, cheerful and charitable mind, a mind prepared
to wish good, and do good to his very enemies and Persecutors, Mat. 5. 44. In
which excellent temper he feels not, he pleases not, he enjoies not himself, or
any self-excellency, but glorifies God who gives such power unto men, and
admires Divine grace in that Heroical and most Christ-like passive frame which
he finds derived into his soul. I shall wave the farther prosecution of this
particular, because I foresee it will fall fitly also under another Head.

CHAP. IX. God is all to the godly man in his Enjoyments. What are the
Enjoyments of Mind, of Body, of Estate. The unregenerate mind enjoyes all these
in a sensual or selfish manner: But the godly man tastes a Divine sweetness in
every thing that he enjoies; though there be different degrees of refinement in
Souls that are refined. God is All to the godly Soul in his Endowments. The
unregenerate mind, gross in admiring his own and other men's excellencies. The
godly soul entitles God to all that is good in himself or others. God is the
All of a good man's life, and yet he is not satisfied with what he enjoies of
him here, but perpetually thirsts for more. The Doctrine to be understood with
three cautions, that are briefly laid down
5. GOD is All to the godly man in his Enjoyments. The enjoyments of men in
this World are manifold; it is impossible to run thorough them all paticularly.
They may be reduced according to the old division, unto three kinds, animi,
corporis, and fortunae. The enjoyments of the mind are such as these, peace,
comfort, experiences of Divine assistance, conquest of temptations and victory
over spiritual enemies; besides the gifts and graces of the mind which are
rather endowments than enjoyments, and will fall more directly under the next
Head.

Those of the body are such as relate to the maintaining, adorning, feeding,
clothing, refreshing of the body. Of the Third sort are riches, honors,
peace, victory, flourishing Families, gainful trading, and more of the like
nature. All which the unregenerate mind loves and enjoyes in a gross and
unspiritual manner, viz. either in a way merely sensual and brutish, or else
selfish and Idolatrous. These Swine feed upon husks, rest upon the lowest round
of the Ladder, and dwell upon the dark side of every creature: They know not
the love of God, taste not his sweetness, admire not his perfection and image
shining forth and manifesting it self in all created good.

But the godly man tastes another kind of sweetness, even the Divine goodness
in every thing that he enjoyes. It is the stamp and impression of God, viz. of
his love and image which indeed gives the value to and puts the price upon
every creature. Have you not known some men put a high esteem upon a small
piece of Silver that bears the image of their Prince, or testifies the love of
their friend? Why even so it is here. It is a derivative sweetness, goodness
and amiableness, which commends the creature to a judicious palate. There is
almost as much difference between man and man, in the way of enjoying of
things, as between men eating of the Fruit, and Swine devouring the husks, men
picking out the marrow, and Dogs gnawing of the bones. All godly souls are not
indeed alike refined, as we may show hereafter. Isaac loves his son Esau too
much for his Venison (Genesis 25. 28.) though his father Abraham loved him for the
Promise and Covenant sake: And yet all such souls are so far exalted and
restored by grace to an understanding of their own dignity and happiness, that
they cannot possibly live and feed upon any thing below God himself.

6. God is All to the godly man in his Endowments, the All of what he is, as
well as of what he has. I have in part showed already how profanely the
wicked man magnifieth himself in his wisdom, courage, strength, and all other
endowments of body and mind. To which I might add, that he is also very gross
in admiring the endowments of other men, and the several excellencies that are
in other creatures. The barbarous people of the Island Melita seemed to be more
devout in this respect than the incrassated Jews: they when they saw how
miraculously Paul was endowed, concluded it was something Divine in him; only
they put it into an ill phrase, for they said that he was a God, Act. 28. 6.
But these stand staring at Peter, as if they thought that he by his own power
or holiness, had wrought such wonders, Act 3. Oh how are the understandings and
apprehensions of natural men captivated, confined and terminated in poor
particularities!

But the godly and renewed soul, eyes and loves the excellency of God shining
forth in all accomplishments and endowments, whether his own or any other
creatures: In all these he sees another kind of beauty than the wicked man
takes notice of. As he owns God in all that he does, performs, possesses, so
he entitles him to all that he is. He himself is not wise, just, humble, holy
in mind, nor strong, beautiful or excellent in body; but God is All this in
him. The flattering Ruler looks upon Christ, but as a mere man, and yet
ascribes goodness to him, Good Master, etc. But our Savior leads up his
thoughts to the Fountain, None is good but God. The Jews wonder how Christ came
by all that learning; but he presently resolves them, Joh. 7. 16. My Doctrine
is not mine, but his that sent me.

In a word, God is the All of a good man's life; In whom he enjoies it, in whom
alone it is sweet, for whom he spends it, and for whose sake alone he is
content to prolong it; reckoning with his Lord and Savior that he came not
into the World to serve himself, or to seek his own glory, but the glory of him
that sent him, Joh. 7. 18. God is so All to him, as the soul is to the body,
Tota in toto and tota in qualibet part, wholly in his soul and in all the
faculties of it, wholly in his life and in all the passages thereof.

God is so All to him that he is not satisfied with him neither, except he may
enjoy more of him, except he may enjoy all of him that is to be enjoyed by a
creature of such a capacity. He aspires after this perfection, to know, nor
love, nor enjoy nothing but God in the World: He labors to attain to the very
Resurrection of the dead whilst he is yet alive, Phil. 3. 11. that is, to such
a pure, perfect and Divine Life, as the Children of the Resurrection shall be
advanced to.

And now understand all that I have said with these Cautions.

1. This is principally to be understood of Good men, grown up to some
perfection of Stature. You see already, and may further see that it is exactly
true of Christ Jesus, and and that it is also true of David and Paul, and other
eminent servants of God. But we know that there are also babes in Christ,
spiritual men that are yet in a great measure carnal, 1 Cor. 3. 1. That mighty
Spirit of Jesus that sits as a Refiner of Silver in the souls of men, refines
them by degrees; and yet is content that those should be called pure, in whom
yet much dross remains.

2. It only holds of good men when they are themselves, when they are in their
right spiritual wits, of good men when they act upon deliberation, when they
are free from temptations, dejections, passions, disturbances. For there is a
season wherein even the wise Virgins do slumber, Matthew. 25. 5. wherein even the
Spouse of Christ, who was all fair and spotless, is secure and careless, Cant.
5. There was a season when good Josiah fought his own battle, and not the
Lords; when good Hezekiah magnified himself, and gloried in his own Treasures,
more than in the magnificence of God; when holy David himself resolved to
sacrifice the lives of innocents to his own lusts, and to avenge a quarrel of
his own, 1 Samuel 15. Therefore,

3. This is only to be understood of regenerate persons, so far as they are
regenerate: In Paul himself there remained something that was unregenerate,
perverse and rebellious, Romans 7. though he will not acknowledge that it was he
himself, verse. 20. Every regenerate and true Christian soul, so far as he is
regenerate and acts up to the height of Divine principles, does thus see,
taste, enjoy, and design God in all, as I have showed. For the very life and
essence of Religion is the dethroning of Self and advancing of God into
preeminence. In as much therefore as God being supreme and his interest
prevailing in a soul, is the very life and soul of Religion; it will
necessarily follow that the Doctrine holds good concerning every truly
regenerate soul, and that every such soul has this temper as to the
predominancy of it.

CHAP. X. The improvement of the Doctrine laid down by way of examination. A
general direction what Queries men are to put to themselves, as to the finding
out of this matter. Certain instances of a Self-emptied and God-exalting mind.
The first instance, When we are concerned in all the wickedness committed in
the World as truly as if it were committed by our selves. The second, when we
are more affected with the iniquity of an action, than the injury that is done
to our selves thereby.
YOU cannot but by this time be somewhat in love with this excellent and
Angel-like temper, and desirous to find whether you your selves be thus
spirited. It is doubtless a scrutiny and meditation becoming the most serious
and generous minds: For all Religion is reduced to this summa Totalis; and
Religion is the only concernment of souls. Examine therefore I pray you, and
that not only once and generally, but frequently and precisely, and rifle into
all the particular, and (if it be possible) into all the individual motions and
actions of your hearts and lives to find this Divine temper; Examine your
selves in all the forementioned particulars, whether God be All to you in your
Apprehensions, Affections, Actions, Sufferings, Enjoyments, Endowments. Enquire
whether the truth of God be dearer to you than your own party or persuasion;
whether the interest of God lie nearer to your heart than self-interest, the
interest of your own credit and reputation, whether the advancement of the
Divine Life be more desirable to you than Self-accommodation or
Self-advancement; whether the love of God, or the naked possession of the
creature do most delight you in every enjoyment; whether the Image of God, or
your own, do most affect you in your Children; whether the glory of God, or
your own, do most spirit you in your Actions; whether you be rent from
Self-enjoyment, and centred upon God alone; whether you be emptied of
Self-will, and molded into the Divine Will; whether you abound in your own
sense and Self-feeling, or be filled with the fullness of God; In a Word,
whether all Self-love, and Self-supremacy be thrown down, and God alone do
exercise his Sovereignty over all the powers of your souls. These are very
substantial enquiries. For your better discovery, I will therefore propound to
you some certain marks or signs of such a Self-emptied and God-exalting mind,
as I have been commending; which yet indeed are rather branches and instances
of it than signs.

1. When we take our selves to be concerned in all the wickedness committed in
the World, as truly as if it were committed by our selves or our relations; I
mean so far as to be grieved for it. We are wont to be dejected by reason of
any gross sin, that we our selves fall into; this I do not condemn, nay judge
necessary as our Duty; and yet this may possibly arise from a mere
superstitious principle, and may be found springing up in the heart of a slave.
We are apt to be troubled when our Children or near friends prove ungracious or
openly rebellious against God; this I do not simply condemn neither, and yet I
must tell you, that this may arise from a mere natural affection and a
principle that is carnal. But if the interest of God lay so close and warm to
our hearts as it ought to do, and as it does to the Saints and Angels in
Heaven, we should mourn over the sins of all men, even our Enemies and
Persecutors, as truly as our friends; we should be grieved for the Apostasy of
mankind, yea, and of the Devils themselves. The predominancy of Religion in the
soul would refine natural affections into spiritual, and exalt particular
affections into universals. You have heard of a man who vexed his soul with the
ungodly conversations of strangers, 2 Pet. 2. 7. and of another, who when ever
he looked abroad and beheld transgressors, was grieved, Psalm. 119. 158. And I
have known a man, who when he looked upon an Assembly of ignorant and
hypocritical and ungodly men, either in a Church or in a Market, would have
wept over them, as if they had all been his own Family. It is an argument of
God's supremacy in the soul, when we mourn over sin because it is a degeneracy
from the pure nature of God, and not because it is found in them whom we love
or are related to.

2. When in the wrongful persecutions committed against us, we can look through
our own injury, and be mostly affected with the wickedness of the action. I do
not say it is unlawful to be sensible of, or affected with the injury and
violence offered to us: But I say it is no more than is common to a Publican or
Harlot; no more than what is common to an Elephant, a Lion, or a Dog, as well
as to us; and therefore though it be a lawful thing and necessary, yet it is no
great thing. But when we can look upon the reproaches cast upon our names, and
have our hearts mainly concerned for the Name and Honor of God; when we can
forget the burden of our own fetters, and as it were not feel the smart of our
own stripes and wounds, because of the greater load and pain which we sustain
by the lusts of men that do inflict them, it is certainly an excellent instance
of God's supremacy in our souls. But you will say, Is this possible? Is it
possible that the soul, whilst it is embodied, should be more concerned for
God, than for its own body? I must confess it is somewhat difficult, and very
rare: Men complain of the Injuriousness of men, but seldom of their
Unrighteousness; of the cruelty of their enemies as it is exercised upon them,
but not as it is a departure from the holy and loving nature of God. But yet it
is not impossible neither, thus to neglect the smarting of our own flesh and
carnal interest, in comparison of the interest of truth and holiness and the
glory of God. For thus did our blessed Savior, who seemed to forget his own
pangs upon the Cross, in comparison of the sin of them that Crucified him,
praying, Father forgive them, for they know not what they do, Luke 23. 34. And
that I may not seem to over-shoot you with Examples, thus did Stephen a man of
like infirmities with us, whose last and loudest voice was, Lord lay not this
sin to their Charge, Act. 7. ult. as if his heart were more broken with the
sin, than his body bruised with the Stones of them that persecuted him: Thus
did Moses, and thus did David, whose zeal and anger against his enemies was
principally upon the account of their sin, Psalm. 119. 139. My zeal has
consumed me, because mine enemies have forgotten thy Words. Upon which words
Mollerus glosses thus, David in suis aerumnis non tam afficitur malorum suorum
sensu and privatis injuriis, quam quod videt nomen Dei ab hostibus contumelia
affici.

CHAP. XI. Three more Instances of a God exalting mind. When in the afflictions
that befall us we can overlook all creature comforts and delight in the Will of
God. When we repent of sin and hate it for its own sake, and esteem nothing
worse than it is. When we take pleasure in the gifts and graces of God shining
forth in others as well as in our selves. Joshua and Jonah taxed. This temper
proved to be Angelical.
3. WHen in the Afflictions that befall us more immediately from the hand of
God, we can overlook all the creature comforts which are taken from us, and
kiss the hand of God that takes them. There is all reason that the Will of God
should be dearer to us than any created good, however our fond and sensual
hearts may contradict and blaspheme. Is not the Will of God to be seen in all
our crosses, losses, sicknesses, in all our personal, domestical and national
disturbances? And is not even this Will of God, God himself? Is it not
infinitely wise, holy and perfect? What are our sorry, scant, mixed enjoyments
then in this World, that they should be valued against this Almighty and Sacred
pleasure? We magnify the good Will and pleasure of God in our peace, plenty,
health, prosperity; and it is good to do so in a right spiritual manner: But
possibly it may be the sweetness of the enjoyments themselves that we do so
much relish, and not the good Will of God in them. But if in the sharpest and
sorest afflictions that do befall us, we find our selves so mastered and
overpowered with the sense of the purity and perfection of the Will of God,
that we can adore and reverence it, yea cleave to it and love it more than any
of our creature comforts, more than our lives themselves nakedly considered, it
is an excellent instance of that sovereignty which God has obtained in our
souls. This was the temper of our blessed Savior, who seemed scarce to taste
the bitterness of the Cup, for the excellency of the hand that reached it to
him, Joh. 18. 11. The Cup which my Father has given me shall I not drink it.
The affliction which the Lord sends, shall I not bear it, says old Eli, 1 Samuel 3. 18. It is the Lord let him do what seems him good. The Book which was
given to the Prophet Ezekiel to eat, was as sweet as Honey to him, because it
was given him by the hand of God, although it contained nothing in it but
lamentation and mourning, and woe, Ezekiel. 2. 10. 3. 3. the Will of God was
pleasant and delightful to him: for though the contents thereof were grievous,
yet he gladly assented to the end and scope of these providence, as the Dutch
Annotators gloss upon the words.

4. When we esteem nothing worse than sin is, for which we should repent of it
or hate it. You may fright superstitious minds by telling them of judgments
and punishments, and scare hypocrites with everlasting burning: but certainly
there is that in the very nature of sin, that is more dreadful to an ingenuous
soul, than fire and brimstone can fully represent. Such a soul cannot sin
without pain; he esteems sin to be the very same to his soul, which a disease
is to the body; and therefore he is not so properly said to be grieved for it
(which seems to respect the evil consequences of it) as indeed to be sick of
it, as one is of a distemper, or weary of it, as one is of a painful burden. It
is well when men will reform their evil ways for fear of the punishments of
this World, or the Hell of another (though I fear such reformation is rather
superstition than true conversion in God's account:) but it were much better if
men would be drawn to God, and not driven to him. Perhaps the fear of wrath and
Hell may at length end in a more ingenuous and generous temper; but for the
present it seems to me to be nothing else but a spirit of bondage: when Isaac
is once grown up in the soul, this Bondwoman and her son must pack; Love when
it is perfected will cast out fear, 1 John 4. 18.

5. When we can rejoice and take pleasure in the gifts and graces of God
shining forth in others, as heartily and really as in our selves. It were to be
wished that we could do it as much: but this is a rare attainment, and for
ought I know, reserved for the other World. However if we do it as truly and
really, it is an argument, that God is greater than self in our souls. Joshuah,
though a good man, being transported with zeal for his Master's credit failed
in this, when he was offended at the gift of Prophecy conferred upon Eldad and
Medad, and cried, My Lord Moses forbid them, Number. 11. 28. And it lies as a
blemish to this day upon Jonah the Prophet, that he valued his own reputation
above the kindness of God showed upon the poor Ninevites. We profess to
disrelish this temper in Joshuah and Jonah; but (alas) we are apt to indulge it
in our selves. For where shall we find a soul so emptied of it self, and so
ravished with the Divine beauty and glory, that can be heartily well pleased
with the temporal prosperity of others, when it seems to jar with our own, or
the beamings forth of Divine luster upon the souls of others, when we our
selves come to be eclipsed thereby. If God were so supreme in our souls as he
ought to be, we should overlook our selves; look upon the excellencies of other
men without disdain or envy, yea, and admire and delight in the communications
of God to our fellowcreatures, as heartily as if our own particular Beings were
adorned with them. Certainly there is no such thing as Meum and Tuum amongst
the Inhabitants of the upper World, but God is All in All unto them: and we
commonly say, that one part of the happiness of Heaven will be, that there will
be no place for envy and emulation; From whence I infer, that those souls that
are in this World most refined and universaliz'd, have most of Heaven come into
them, and do most plentifully taste the First Fruits of Eternal Life. This
heavenly temper we find in Moses, made manifest in his answer to Joshuah, Numb.
11. 29. In his Father-in-law Jethro, who rejoiced for all the goodness that the
Lord had done to Israel, Exodus 18. 9. In the Apostles who glorified God, and
were right glad, because that unto the Gentiles also God had granted Repentance
unto Life, Act. 11. 18. And in Mr. Calvin, who is reported to have spoke thus
concerning Luther, Lutherus est charus Dei servus, etiamsi me diabolum millies
mill vocaverit. It is an excellent sign of Self-debasement, and the exaltation
of God in the soul, when propriety cease.

CHAP. XII. The sixth Instance an Universal Love. The notion of the love of the
Brethren examined. Who is our Brother according to the Apostle James. No man
can be truly said to love God, who does not love the Image of God. The spirit
of some men, even in their pretenses to the love of God, is rather Devilish
than Divine. To be content that men should go to Hell, implies a contentment
that men should be wicked, which is against the Honor of God. The seventh
Instance, an holy unsatisfiedness with all the Seize of this Life. It is
an Argument of a mercenary and penurious spirit to be only desirous to know the
lowest degree of saving Grace. To take up our rest in Evidences destroies the
nature of those Evidences. The Conclusion is an Exhortation to men to endeavor
to make God All to themselves, to which they are briefly moved and directed.
6. AN Universal Love, a Love of the whole Creation; If we love all men, some
with a love of delight, others with a love of compassion, it is an excellent
argument of God's supremacy, yea of his Allness in our Affections: For it must
needs be for God's sake, if our Charity be thus large. Many men do mightily
please themselves with this, that they love the Brethren; though in the mean
time they can well allow themselves to hate all, whom themselves are pleased to
esteem otherwise: But I say unto you (says Love it self) Love your Enemies,
Mat. 5. 44. There is nothing more akin to the nature of God, than a mind thus
unbounded in its Charity and Benevolence, verse. 45. Men boast much of their
love of God: why no man has seen God at any time (says the Apostle, 1 John 4.
12.) only he has copied out himself in the Creation: and if we love not that,
it is absurd to talk of loving him: as if a man should brag that he loved an
Universal, when in the mean time he hates all the particulars through which
that Universal derives it self. The Apostle John speaks much of loving our
Brother: but would you know who is this brother? he describes him in the 1 John
4. 20. His Brother whom he has seen; which must not be understood, as if our
love were to be limited to them only whom we have actually set our eyes upon;
but rather it is to be extended to every man that may be seen, q. d. Omne
visibile est amabile. All particular loves are capable of being defiled; yea
the love of good men may possibly be a bad, that is, a selfish love: But when
we find our hearts formed into an universal love of mankind, it is a sign that
God is principally concerned in our hearts; for all men are not in themselves
lovely, nor obliging to us. I cannot but wonder that ever men should imagine
that they are then most loving of God, and mightily zealous for him, when they
most rage against his enemies, curse them, kill them, and devote them to
destruction, and allege David's Prophecies to justify their Imprecations.
Shall I say concerning these men, as our Savior to his Disciples, they know
not what spirit they are of? Truly one may much suspect it to be Devilish,
because it is envious, bitter, wrongful, censerious and damning; rather than
Divine, which is pure, peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy,
etc. However, sure I am that the wrath of man works not the righteousness of
God, Jam. 1. 20. God forgive our hasty and rash passions! But to be in cold
blood well content that any man should go to Hell, is a sad sign that ones self
is not in the way to Heaven, nor spirited according to God: For God is Love,
and desires not the death of a sinner, but wills all men to be saved, and to
come unto the knowledge of the truth, 1 Timothy 2. 4. God's glory is indeed the
communication and beaming forth of himself unto the creature; he is then
honored, when he is imitated; sin and wickedness is only contrary to the
honor of God, as darkness alone is contrary to light. Yea to be content that
men should go to Hell, implies a contentment that men should be wicked: For it
is wickedness alone that brings men to Hell; nay indeed to be wicked is to be
in Hell.

7. An holy unsatisfiedness with all things here below, yea with the very
gracious seize of this life, and an eager panting after a state of
perfection in God. It is an argument of a mercenary spirit, and a sign that men
look upon Eternal Life rather as a Bargain, than their proper happiness, when
they are only desirous to know the lowest degree of saving grace, and would go
to Heaven at the cheapest rate. When men do desire to find evidences of grace
in themselves, on purpose that they may take up their rest in them and fix
there, it is a sign of a penurious, shrivelled and parsimonious mind; and in so
doing, they do ipso facto destroy the nature of these evidences. The surest
evidence of grace is that which springs up in the soul it self, and discovers
it self in the growth of true goodness, and in restless motions after God. He
that can be content with any measure of holiness that is competible to man in
this earthly mixed state, content to live an eternity in this kind of body, yea
though he could do it without sin, has not such honorable thoughts of God as
he ought to have. But when the soul is unsatisfied with all its present
acquisitions and seize, and springs up incessantly into God, and the
further and fuller resemblance of him, and into a state of perfect purity (as
the Apostle Paul did, Phil. 3.) it is a certain argument and instance of an
absolute supremacy that God has obtained in such a soul. And truly I cannot
reckon that God is so great in my eye, nor so high in my heart as he ought to
be, till I arrive at this temper.

To Conclude then, Labor to make God All things to your selves, according to
all the forenamed instances, viz. in your Apprehensions, Affections, Actions,
Sufferings, Enjoyments, Endowments, to be abstracted as much as can be from all
poor, pinching particularities. And now, shall I need to tell you that this is
the most noble and Angelical Life? You your selves surely know that that which
makes the life of Saints and Angels so much happier and more glorious than
ours, is, that they are not sunk into any senses nor drowned in any matter, but
are perfectly centred upon God and filled with him. Shall I need to tell you,
that thus we shall live in that other World, to which we all hope to come; or
that this will be to us (not only an infallible evidence, but indeed) a real
beginning of that blessed Life? I hope I need not insist upon such motives.

Be often pressing upon your selves the vanity, emptiness, insufficiency and
unsuitableness of all created good. Self and the creature must be nothing in
our eye, before God can be All things in it.

Consider well the worth of your own Souls. Think of that excellent Angel-like
capacity which God has bestowed upon them, which nothing but himself can fill
up, and live not below the dignity of your own souls.

Meditate often upon Christ Jesus, who lived to propound this way of living,
and both lived and died to purchase it. Of his example you have heard already;
see Joh. 4. 34. 6. 38. 7. 16, 18. 9. 4. 12. 27, 28. 14. 24. 17. 4. Luke 22. 42.
and many other places. And that he lived and died to purchase this blessed life
for us, is plain, 2 Cor. 5. 19. God was in Christ reconciling the world to
himself. The great end for which Christ came into the World and went out of it
was, to restore the souls to God, who were fallen from him into self and the
creature; to reunite and reconcile us, and make us partakers of Divine fullness.

THE SPIRITUAL MAN IN A Carnal Fit: OR, The former Doctrine Illustrated by its
opposite, in a famous Instance from PSALM. LV. 6.

LONDON, Printed by M. White, for Henry Mortlock at the Sign of the Phoenix in
St. Paul's Churchyard, and at the White-Hart in Westminster Hall, 1678.

PSALM. 55. 6. And I said, O that I had wings like a Dove! for then would I flee
away and be at rest.
CHAP. I. The meaning of the Words: The division of the Verse into its parts,
with a gloss upon each. The Proposition contained in the Words. That the hearts
of good men are sometimes surprised with fearfulness, impatience of troubles,
and eager desires of rest from Adversity. This proved by Examples, but most
largely by the Example of David in this place, wherein the Emphasis of the
several words in the Text are observed.
THis Psalm contains a Prayer of David relating to himself, and his enemies.
The Prayer that he puts up for himself, is for deliverance from his troubles,
verse. 1, 2. The occasion of it is laid down, verse. 3, 4, 5. and amplified,
verse. 6, 7, 8. It is generally supposed to be Penned by the Psalmist in the
time of his being persecuted by Saul, when he was reduced into some eminent
strait. But what particular strait it was that he was now in, is not certain.
Some refer it to the time of his flight to Nob, which is recorded in 1 Samuel 21.
Others refer it to the time when he was conspired against by Saul, and like to
be betrayed by the men of Keilah, whom he had a little before so much obliged;
mentioned 1 Samuel 23. But whenever it was, it is very clear that his distress
was great, and himself ready to sink under his burden. The words may possibly
seem at first hearing to be the cry of a devout mind, and an expression of a
raised temper. But if we look narrowly into them, and ponder all the
circumstances, we shall find indeed that they are the voice of an impotent and
impatient spirit, and do discover a great infirmity in this holy man, and are
more elegant than devout, have more of Rhetoric in them than Divinity; like
those of Saul to the men of Ziph, Blessed be ye of the Lord, for ye have
compassion on me: And what was this compassion, but their administering to his
malicious and revengeful lusts?

In the Words there are Three Parts.

1. Optandi forma, a form of wishing, Oh that I had: In the Hebrew it is Mi
jitten li, who will give me? which is their form of wishing, and not of
doubting or despairing, as some through their ignorance of the Hebrew Idiom
have imagined. This form of wishing is very usual in Scripture, which we
Translate sometimes by Oh that, as in Job 11. 5. 13. 5. Jer. 9. 1. Oh that mine
head were waters! and Psalm. 53. ult. Oh that the Salvation of Israel were come
out of Zion! Sometimes we Translate it by Would God, as Deuteronomy. 28. 67. In the
morning thou shall say, Would God it were even, etc. Judge. 9. 29. Would to God
this people were under mine hand.

2. Optationis materia, the matter of the wish, a wing like a Dove. Eber
cajonah. He first lays down the matter of his wish, a wing; and then
illustrates or amplifies it, as of a Dove, or like a Dove. It is ordinary in
the Hebrew Idiom to put the singular number for the plural, and so it is here.
And yet there may be something more in it too; in wishing for a wing and not
wings, possibly he describes the great fear and haste and passion that he was
in. What a thirst was that rich man in, when he expected so much relief from a
drop of water, Luke 16. And what a fright was David in when he wishes so
earnestly for one single wing? The more inconsiderable and small a thing is
which one catches at, the greater argument is it of distress, fear and
distraction of mind. If instead of the wing of a Dove, he had cried out for the
feather of a Dove, it had been yet a more lively description of his amazedness;
and indeed the Word here in the Text does signify a Feather as well as a Wing;
and so we Translate it, Psalm. 68. 13. Her Feathers with yellow Gold. But it is
not any kind of Wing that will serve his turn; it must be like the Wing of a
Dove, the swiftest that he could think of, as we shall see by and by. Certainly
it was a great fright of mind that indicted this strange wish: and indeed so he
confesses in the fourth and fifth verses, where he calls it pain, yea pain of
heart, terror, yea a terror of death, fearfulness, trembling and horror, yea
a deluge of horror. Here Is just the heart of a silly Dove, that spies the Hawk
and trembles and flies, and therefore it is fit it should be matched with Wings
of the same, Oh that I had wings like a Dove.

3. Optati sinis, the end of a thing wished for; that is twofold, Medius and
ultimus, I will fly away and be at rest: he would speedily escape out of the
dangers and troubles that he was in, and keep himself out of harms way for the
time to come.

All the Divinity that I can pick up out of this elegant and pathetical wish
will be contained under this one Proposition.

The hearts of good men are sometimes surprised with great fearfulness,
impatience of troubles, and eager desire of rest from Adversity.

Here are three thing to be spoke to, Fearfulness, Impatience of trouble, and
eager desire of rest. The first of these is not indeed directly found in the
Text, only it seems to be implied in the word Dove, which is Meticulosa avis
and imbellis. And therefore I shall not speak much distinctly to that, but to
the two last. Only I cannot but intimate, that there is a vast difference
between fearing of God and being afraid of him. To fear him is often made the
Character of an ingenuous holy, childlike spirit, and is therefore made the
sum of all Religion, Eccles. 12. 13. but to be afraid of him, to worship him
as a severe numen or a saevus dominus, with a kind of horror and invidiousness
of mind, with a secret kind of wrath and jealousy or doubting, does certainly
argue a superstitious and legal spirit, a mind that for the present is in
bondage; yea if I mistake not the meaning of the Prophet, he makes this the
badge of an hypocritical people, Isa. 33. 14. Fearfulness has surprised the
Hypocrites: who amongst us shall dwell with devouring fire; who amongst us
shall dwell with everlasting burning? As soon as Adam had sinned against God,
he becomes afraid of him and flies from him, Genesis 3. And to this day men do
secretly hate him whom they fear.

As for the fear of the creature and fear of trouble in the flesh, it is a
predominant principle in carnal minds where self rules, but it is incident to
the best of Saints, and is recorded as their infirmity for our caution; as in
Isaac, David, Peter, who for fear of men, denied one his Wife, another his
reason, a third his Savior. But it is weariness of troubles, and eager desires
of rest from Adversity, that are most plainly found in the Text, and which I am
therefore to speak to. I think I need not speak to them singly, for I think
they are never found single, but are inseparable Companions.

And here I shall endeavor to show that good men are subject to these
distempers. Secondly, Show the cause of the distemper. Thirdly, Prescribe the
cure of it. And lastly improve the Doctrine in some few Inferences.

That the hearts of good men are sometimes surprised with impatience of
troubles and eager desire of rest from Adversity, will appear by the Examples
of several eminent Saints. I will not peremptorily determine whether the
Prophet Elijah were thus distempered, when he fled from the Persecution raised
against him by Jezabel, gat him all alone into the Wilderness, and requested
for himself that he might die, 1 King. 19. But I doubt not to affirm that holy
Job was under this distemper: He sticks not to confess, that he is even tired
out, and wearied, and wasted, and exhausted in his spirits with the Afflictions
that were upon him; Wearisome nights are appointed to me, Job 7. 3. My soul is
weary of my life, it is bitter within me, Job 10. 1. Therefore you have him
even cursing the day and night of his birth almost through the Third Chapter;
and wishing to be hid in the Grave over and over, and that with a great deal of
vehemence, Job 6. 8, 9, 10. O that I might have my request: and that God would
grant me the thing that I long for! Even that it would please God to destroy
me, that he would let loose his hand and cut me off. And the Prophet Jeremiah
was wearied with the Persecution and Oppression of his Countrymen, although
the same was light in comparison of what he was to suffer, Jer. 12. 5. he was
wearied with running even with the Footmen. At another time you have him also
cursing his Birthday through impatience, and the man that brought tidings of
his coming into the World, because he slew him not from the Womb, Jer. 20. 14,
15, 16, 17. The same Prophet could be content to live a solitary, unpleasant,
unprofitable life, like an Anchoret, so he might but escape the treachery of
the people, Jer. 9. 2. What a coffeehouse and passion Jonah was in, and that
for a light matter, all know, and how he will needs be gone out of the World in
a pet, his History does fully relate. Concerning David and his impatience,
disquietness, weariness and perplexity of mind, I have many things to say, and
the book of Psalms does afford many pregnant instances: How long will thou
forget me, O Lord, how long shall mine enemies exalt themselves over me, how
long shall the Adversary reproach, how long shall the wicked triumph, etc. But
I need not go far from my Text to demonstrate the greatness of David's
distemper. In the words of this Text, and the two following Verses you will
discern the greatness of his weariness, and the eagerness of his desires of
deliverance, if we consider the following particulars.

1. In general, he seems to apprehend his case desperate, out of which there
was no escape. Videntur hae voces esse hominis desperati, says Mollerus. The
Words of the Text seem to be rather a boiling up of passion, than the putting
up of a Prayer, a wise or well grounded Prayer. This is a sad distemper of
mind, very dishonorable to God and unbeseeming a godly soul; and yet so
diseased in his mind does David here seem to be; as also at other times: as
when he forgot all the promises that God had made to him, and cried out, All
men are Liars, and I shall perish by the hand of Saul.

2. More particularly, he is so weary of his Persecution, and so intent upon
deliverance, that he puts God upon the working of Miracles for his escape, and
such a Miracle as we never read that he wrought for any man, Oh that I had
wings! What, must the course of nature, and the order of the Creation be
inverted for him? It was a devout and holy zeal in David to envy the Sparrows
and the Swallows because they were allowed to come nearer the Altar of God than
he, Psalm. 84. 3. But to be content to be transformed into a silly Bird, merely
to have the benefit of her wings to escape a temporal danger, is certainly a
strange distraction in a holy man. Oh how wonderful great is the power of this
animal life, which puts men upon such strange contrivances for its own
preservation, yea even such men as in whom the reigning power of it is
destroyed, and a higher life has taken place! Certainly the wings of David's
Soul, the wings of Faith and hope were sadly moulted away, or he would never
have invented such a strange device, as a winged body.

He is so eager, that any kind of wings will not serve his turn neither, they
must be wings of a Dove, the swiftest that he could think of; Oh that I had
wings like a Dove. For so I judge that he names the wings of a Dove rather than
any other Bird, because of the great speediness of her flight; though I know
some men to excuse the Prophet, or rather indeed to show their own wit, have
invented other reasons. Naturalists speak much of the swiftness of the Dove in
flying, they say she can out-fly the Hawk, and need not to fear him, if she
would but keep a direct and simple flight, but when she begins to clap with her
wings in a certain kind of pride and wantonness, then she becomes a prey.

4. Yea, so eager is he, that if he had such wings, he would presently fly with
them. He does not wish the wings of a Dove for ornament and beauty, but for
speed; and if he had them he would not stand picking and dressing, and trimming
them, as sometimes Doves do, but he would presently spread his new sails and be
gone. We Translate the words, Oh that I had wings like a Dove, for then would I
fly away; but in the Hebrew, there is nothing between the wings of a Dove and
flying with them: The words run thus, Oh that I had a wing like a Dove, I will
fly away and be at rest.

5. Yea, he would hasten with them. He would not simply fly with his wings, but
use them to the utmost expedition: As if the wings of a Dove and flying with
them were not enough, he will also hasten with them, he will fly as fast as
wings will carry him, Verse. 8. I would hasten my escape from the Storm and
Tempest; In which words he seems to continue his Metaphor, and to allude to the
manner of Doves, who when they are abroad and presage a Storm, make all
possible speed to recover their Cote.

6. So great is his impatience and eagerness, that he will be content to
wander, to have no certain place, not to be fixed any where; so he may but
escape; he cares not whither it is, Verse. 7. Lo then would I wander, etc.

7. He would be content to wander afar off; he cares not how far, as far as
wings will carry him, Verse. 7. Lo then would I wander afar off. He that used to
be so loving of the Land, and so desirous of the Sanctuary, that he was once
ready to wish himself a Swallow or a Sparrow, that he might fly thither, now
wishes himself a Dove that he might fly far enough from it, into some of the
utmost parts of the earth. It was wont to be his Policy to abide in some of the
borders of Judah, and to hover about the skirts of that Land, that so he might
be ready to lay hold of any advantage that God should put into his hand for the
obtaining of the Kingdom (as it is the manner of most men, to contrive to dwell
as near as they can to their hopes:) but now his hopes of a Kingdom are
expired, and all his policys are expired with them, he is so eager to be got
out of harms way, that he never thinks of being in the way of preferment, Lo
then I would wander afar off.

8. So impatient and eager is he, that he cares not though he rested in a
Wilderness, so he might but rest. He that was wont to take so much delight in
good company, as you may see in the 14 Verse. of this Psalm, can now be content
to sit down in a solitary Wilderness, void of all humane Society. He that used
to be so loving of the company of men, can now be content to converse amongst
Beasts in the Wilderness, and expose himself to their savage and ravenous
temper. This seems indeed to imply that the lusts of his enemies were grown to
a great height of sury and fierceness, when he apprehended it safer conversing
with the Beasts of the Wilderness than with them. (...), as Antisthenes used to
say: But yet it argues the greatness of his distemper, who would be content
with a life amongst Beasts, which is a most unprofitable life, scarce worthy to
be called life, so he might but live at rest. But may some say, he would have
only retired into the Wilderness for a season, he would have returned when the
Storm was over. It seems otherwise to me, for,

9. He will be content not only to escape thither, but even to dwell there,
Verse. 6. Eschonah habitabo, and Verse. 7. Alin, I would remain in the
Wilderness. He seems as if he would forget the promise of the Kingdom, and bury
all the hopes of it in an everlasting Self-banishment. Now put all these
together, and you will say with me, That here is an Example of a good man in a
very sad distemper of Impatience of trouble, and eager desire of Rest from
Adversity.

CHAP. II. An enquiry into the causes of the foresaid distemper in the minds of
men. The first cause assigned, viz. A misapprehension of the Nature of God, and
a misinterpretation of his Providence. A correction of these misapprehensions,
and a prescription of a cure in reference to this cause of the distemper.
AND now I will enquire what may be the cause of such a disease as this in holy
minds. Here I shall lay down some of the immediate causes as I apprehend, and
for brevity sake annex the cure to each, which is by taking away the cause.

The first Cause of this distemper of Impatience of troubles, and eager desires
of rest from Adversity, is, a misapprehension of the nature of God, and a
misinterpretation of His Providence. Men are apt to imagine God to be like
unto themselves, a peevish, self-willed, Arbitrary Being, acting merely by
prerogative, or carried by passion, after the manner of some great King or
Judge upon Earth. It is the misery of these captive and degenerate souls of
ours, that they are fain to borrow Notions and Ideas from men and their manner
of acting and governing their petty Dominions, whereby to apprehend and
conceive of God, and his infinite nature and unsearchable Providence: and by
this means we come to attribute those things to God which indeed are utterly
inconsistent with his perfect nature, because the same are found in those
earthly Potentates from whom we derive those Ideas, and form these
resemblances. Now such a God as we fancy to our selves must needs be
burdensome and grievous to us, especially when he afflicts us. Who would not
vex, and fret, and rage under the Sentence of such a Judge, as he supposed did
command him to be punished, merely because it was his pleasure, or to show his
Authority, when there was no reason in the thing? Who can patiently bear the
Yoke of such a God, as does impose his commands only Pro imperio, and inflict
his punishments only Pro arbitrio, only to show his Authority?

But such is not the God whom we serve; All his Laws are the products of his
Wisdom and Infinite understanding, and not imposed upon his Creatures till his
own goodness and the good of the Creature was first consulted: All his
Providence are the result of Infinite Love and Benignity, and carried on by
the Eternal Laws of Righteousness. If you would therefore possess your souls in
patience, labor to purge your minds from imbittering thoughts of God, as if he
did seek to get a name and make himself famous by the suffering of his
Creatures, or were pleased with the sighs and groans which his Almighty
severity can extort from those whom he has a mind to make miserable. Be ye
verily persuaded that the Will of God, however absolute and unlimited it is,
does always proceed according to the Eternal Rules of goodness and
righteousness: And this will heal your spirits of all fretfulness, and
reconcile your minds not only to those Laws and Institutions of his, which seem
to be most Arbitrary, but also to those Providence which seem to be most
severe or unequal.

By a like mistake we are apt to ascribe Passion to God, and to represent him
to our selves as if he were all in a rage and very angry, when he afflicts us.
Which Notion destroies all that cheerful acquiescence under his hand, and that
quiet and friendly conversing with his Providence which we ought to maintain;
and so an imaginary wrath in God begets a real rage in our peevish and inpotent
minds. When as indeed the nature of God is as free from Anger, Hatred, Revenge,
and all the passions of our minds, as it is from Hands, or Eyes, or Feet, or
any of the Members of our Bodies. God is good and does good, says our
Psalmist, Psalm. 119. 68. God is Love, says the beloved Apostle again and
again, 1 John 4. 8, 16. And there is nothing more certain, than that God would
never afflict his Creature, if some greater good were not in view. He envies
not his People any of their Ease, Peace, Health, Liberty or other Enjoyments;
but he loves them with a strong and Holy and Wise Affection, and therefore will
Afflict them in these things whether they will or no, that he may bestow upon
them some more substantial good. Labor to converse with God in all his
Providence, as with Wisdom, Goodness, Righteousness and Love it self, and then
you will not be weary of his Discipline, or peevishly affected toward any of
his Dispensations. We are apt to cry out, Oh if we were but sure of the Love of
God toward us in all our Afflictions, we could be then content and patient!
Why, go you and possess your souls in patience, and get your Wills reconciled
to the Providence of God, Love him and delight in him, and believe in him
though he Afflict you never so sore, and then be assured that God loves you:
for the Love and good Will of God, is not his giving the Creature, but it is
the communication of himself, and his Divine Perfections to your Souls.

CHAP. III. A Second Cause assigned, viz. A misunderstanding of our true
interest. This Explained; Where the true interest of Souls is Stated, and the
Cure prescribed in reference to this Cause of the Distemper. A third Cause
assigned, viz. The want of a right discerning of Good and Evil. Where the
nature of Good and Evil is Explained, and Direction given how to discern them
by way of Cure.
2. ANother Cause of this distemper, is, A misunderstanding of our true
interest. Alas how are we sunk into this body! How studious are we, and fond of
the accommodations and conveniences of this animal life! What fears and
jealousies, cares and contrivances, what watchings, and prayings, and
strivings, and all for the peace and welfare of the flesh! Certainly we judge
our main interest to lie in the preserving, pleasuring, accommodating of the
body, and not of the soul: which wicked apprehension, as it destroies all true
Religion, so particularly it breeds the distemper that I am speaking of. We are
strangely fond of this Life, as miserable as it is, and of this body, as
unsuitable as it is, and therefore are we so much offended with all things that
are grievous and hurtful to the same; yea we are apt to fret against God
himself, if he do not please and pamper them as much as we. It is a woeful
degeneracy that has befallen the soul of man, which makes him mis-judge and
mistake his main interest; the like mistake is not to be found in the whole
World sure. I will not say with the Prophet, Pass ye over the Isles of Chittim,
and send unto Kedar, and see if there be such a thing; but indeed pass ye
through the whole Creation, and visit all the particular beings that are
therein, and you shall not find such a thing; such a degeneracy as this is: you
shall not find any Creature that thus forgets it self, or thus mistakes its
main intetest, although the same be no interest, in comparison of the
concernment of an immortal soul. Be astonished, O ye Heavens, at this monstrous
absurdity! The Fig Tree in Jonathan's Parable would not leave its sweetness, to
go to be promoted over the Trees; but this noble plant of the Lord's planting,
the rational soul, has forsaken its interest and forgotten its proper
sweetness, and renounced its own pleasure and felicity, to go serve its own
servant, and study the interest of flesh and blood: To the service whereof it
is so entirely devoted, that God himself must be quarrelled with, if he use not
this Dalilah kindly, if he offer to put it to any pain.

Be advised, I beseech you, therefore to get a right understanding of your
grand interest, and where it lies, in order to the healing of this distemper.
Value your selves by your souls and not by your bodies, by your spiritual and
not by your corporal state. Is that man happy, whose body and bodily
concernments are all in a peaceful and flourishing state, when in the mean time
his soul is defiled, depraved, deformed, impoverished, and become more vile
than the Dung upon the earth, and more wretched than the Beasts that perish?
How then can that man be judged miserable, whose nobler part is beautiful,
healthful, rich, and prosperous, although his corporal and temporal estate be
squalid, sordid, contemptible, and much afflicted? Our Savior has fully
resolved this Question in the persons of Dives and Lazarus, Luke 16. Live like
souls, as much as may be, abstracted from the body, provide, take care for,
view and visit your souls, value your selves happy or unhappy, according as it
fares with your souls; and then you will find it more natural and easy for you
to bear up patiently and cheerfully under all the Storms that light upon your
outward man.

3. The want of a right discerning of Good and Evil. This is somewhat akin to
the former. Our souls are so sadly sunk into matter, and so fondly inamoured of
our bodies, that we are ready to judge of all things to be good or bad
according as they accommodate or incommodate them; and so we come many times to
put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter, Isa. 5. 20. This is certainly a
proper and immediate cause of our flying from, groaning under, and hastening
out of Afflictions and Persecutions, because we judge them hurtful and evil to
us. And why evil? Forsooth because they gall our backs, offend our senses,
pinch and oppress our flesh. And is this indeed a right rule whereby to judge
of the goodness or evilness of things? Nay, but if you would indeed possess
your souls in patience in the midst of bodily pressures, then exercise your
spiritual senses to discern aright between Good and Evil, as the Apostle's
phrase is, Heb. 5. ult. But how shall we thus discern; by what rule shall we
judge them? Good is the rule whereby to judge of Evil, Rectum est Index
obliqui: and then for created good, the nature of God the supreme good is the
rule whereby to judge of that; Perfectum in suo genere est mensur a reliquorum.
So then judge of all things by their relation that they bear to the nature of
God, and the tendency that they have to make us partakers of it. And if we thus
judge sincerely, we shall not be so much offended at those Providence that are
forming us into a resemblance of Christ Jesus, nor be so hasty to run out of
that Furnace that is refining us to be Vessels of Honor fit for our Masters
use. If David had at this time judged as discreetly, and discerned as clearly,
as afterward he did, he would rather have wished for the strength of an Ox to
endure, than the wings of a Dove to escape these pressures; for in the up shot
of all, when he had viewed and compared all together, and well recollected
himself, he professed openly that he accounted it good for him that he met with
such usage in the World, Psalm. 119. 67, 71, 75. God is the supreme good; that
is good for us that brings us nigh and makes us like unto him: and that is not
only Prosperity (though indeed that ought to do it, and I hope often does it)
but even Adversity also, Heb. 12. 10. He chasteneth us for our profit, that we
might be made partakers of his holiness.

CHAP. IV. The Fourth and last Cause assigned, viz. Selfishness. Self-love
briefly touched upon. Self-will more largely described, with an earnest advice
to bend all our powers against this rebellious Giant.
THese Causes of this Distemper are to be found in the understanding.

The Fourth and last Cause that I shall name is in the Will, and it is
Selfishness. By this I mean two things, Self-love, and Self-will. By Self-love,
in this place, I mean sensuality, or a judging of things by sense, which I have
touched upon already; and an over high valuation of this mere earthly life, and
the conveniences thereof. Why are we so weary of Sickness, and so impatient
under Persecution? Will it not come to this at length, because we are so afraid
to die. There can be no farther end of the greatest Afflictions in this World,
than the parting of soul and body: Is not this the worst that can come? It
seems then that it is an immoderate love of this wretched life that is the root
of all these bitter fears and passions.

Labor therefore to be Crucified to the love of this natural life. There are
many inconveniences and miseries that do arise from this root, which I cannot
now name; certainly this distemper which I am speaking of is a very great one:
For however you find David here laboring under it, yet elsewhere we find him
earnestly laboring to be rid of it, Why art thou cast down, O my soul, and why
art thou disquieted within me, etc. Psalm. 42. 5, 12. 43. 5. He is troubled at
his being troubled, and cannot with patience think how impatient he had been.
Strike therefore at the root of this Distemper, labor to get your over-fond
love and over-high valuation of this earthly life mortified. He will be able
not only to endure, but even to contemn all Adversity, who has once well
learnt to contemn his own life. He cannot be in the power of any who has death
in his own power, says Seneca: which admits of a good sense and agreeable to
our Christian Divinity, though he did not mean it so.

The other branch of selfishness is Self-will: And this also is a pestilent
disturber of the mind, and engages the soul in many quarrels against God. The
understanding indeed may be mistaken, and the flesh may smart, and the Devil
may tempt, but I think the proud, petulant, perverse Self-will is the Achan;
the grand troubler of the soul: This is the Sea from whence arise all those
Clouds and Storms that trouble the Earth and infest Heaven it self. If this
were thoroughly mortified, I dare say all the skill of earth, all the Magic of
Hell, all the passions and pangs of the body could not make a clamorous soul.
This was the cause of Jonah's heat and rage, and desire of death, viz. because
he might not have his own will. Yea, and it seems that Job's will was not
molded into the Will of God, and that that was the cause of his impatience; for
his complaint is called a contending with the Almighty, and that by Job
himself, Job. 40. 2.

I do earnestly advise you therefore to bend all your strength against this
rebellious Giant, and be daily begging more strength than yet you have. If you
can overcome your own Wills, you need not fear being overcome by any Adversity:
He that can deny himself, can do any thing. The Will of God is holy, pure and
perfect, and indeed it is not only the duty, but the glory of man to comply
with it freely and cheerfully. What can be more Divine than a will according to
God's Will, an Heart according to God's Heart? It was the commendation of David
you know, yea it is the perfection of Angels. I have often observed with great
delight the excellent patience, and composure of David's spirit in the time of
his flight from Absalom, which you will find recorded in 2 Samuel 15, and 16
Chap. and you may see that he possessed his soul in so much patience by this
means, by eying the absolute goodness of the Will of God, and resigning himself
thereunto, Chap. 15. 26. and Chap. 16. 10. The patience of our Lord and Savior
was much more admirable than his; and he was a person whose will was swallowed
up in the Will of God, Luke 22. 42. Not my will but thy Will be done. The time
and matter, and manner, and measure of all your afflictions are all ordered by
a Will and Wisdom which is above, that is infinitely pure and perfect: O
therefore labor to get your wills reconciled to this Divine Will, and your
hearts at all times overpowered and mastered with the sense of the infinite
goodness and holiness thereof; and so shall you find all wrath and doubtings,
all discontents and jealousies to die and wither away, and you will possess
your souls in peace and gladness, in patience and serenity, in the midst of all
your Afflictions.

I know several other causes might be brought of this distemper; but I conceive
they are either such as are inferior and less principal; or such as may be
reduced to some of these that I have assigned. Therefore I pass on to the
Improvement.

CHAP. V. The Improvement, by way of Concession, that there is an averseness in
the humane nature from Afflictions which is purely natural: How it becomes
sinful. Secondly, It is a greater distemper when unlawful means are used for
deliverance out of Adversity. Thirdly, An Exhortation to beware of this
Disease, and to labor after a contrary temper. Which temper recommended in
three things. First, Patience under the troubles of this life. This pressed
with two or three weighty considerations. Secondly, Weariness of the
Imperfections of life. Thirdly, Eager desires of Eternal rest. How to turn
David's Rhetoric into Divinity.
AND here I will grant, that there is an averseness in the humane nature from
Afflictions, and a desire of release from them, which is purely natural, which
is not properly sinful as I conceive, no more than eating, or drinking, or
sleeping is. But it easily becomes sinful many ways; when it is not rightly
ordered, directed and bounded by our wills, or when our wills do concur with
the disorderliness and excess of it: And so it is when the averseness of the
nature becomes impatience in the will, and desires in the appetite become
turbulent passions in the higher powers of the Soul.

2. If impatience of troubles, and eager desires of rest from Adversity be a
Distemper, then much worse is it when unlawful and indirect means and courses
are added thereunto: David indeed was eager, over eager of deliverance; yet we
do not find that he used unlawful ways to decline the rage of Saul, and to
save his life, but he consulted with God and prayed unto him, and so stood upon
his own defense. The wings of a Dove are swift indeed, but they are honest and
innocent. But what shall we say to them that take to themselves wings to
escape, and that the wings of a Hawk or a Vulture, that deliver themselves by
Injustice, Rapine, Murder and Deceit, that break the Snare by breaking Vows,
and Oaths, and Promises; that care not if they swim through a Sea of Blood, so
they may but get safe to Land; that to redeem their bodies will not stick to
sacrifice their souls. David's indeed was a great distemper, but this is a
desperate and Devilish madness.

But that which I do principally infer, and most of all press from the
consideration of David's distemper, is, that you would diligently endeavor to
beware of the like: The infirmities of Saints are not recorded for our
imitation, no nor to afford us a way of excusing our selves, but indeed for our
caution, and they will render us the more inexcusable, if we beware not that
whereof we are so warned. Now that you may be safe and sound from this
distemper, labor to get a contrary temper. Three things therefore I exhort you
to in opposition to this distemper, to wit, Patience under troubles of this
life, Impatience of the imperfections of this life, and eager desires of
eternal rest.

1. Labor to be patient and during of the troubles of this life, and moderate
your desires of deliverance and rest from Adversities. Think not much, nor
think not long concerning any trial, as if some strange thing, or some unequal
thing befell you: Labor to be mortified (as much as may be) to the sense of
all bodily Afflictions, and moderated in the expectations of temporal
deliverance, in as much as the former is not properly your misery, nor can the
latter of it self be your happiness. What an unseemly thing is it to hear
Christians venting all their passions, spending all their complaints upon their
outward state, Oppressions, Injuries, Persecutions, and spending all their
Prayers upon their fleshly interest, as if it were by that that they must live
and be happy. Oh that the voice of this weeping might be heard no more amongst
us! Was it not a childish thing in the Israelites to weep and whine after a
little flesh? Do but read the story in Numb. 11. 4, 5, 6. and you will take it
rather to be the puling of Children, than the complaint of men, and especially
the men of Israel. Wherein was the cry of the men of Israel after Corn, and
other sensual accommodations, better than the howling of Dogs; to which it
seems to be compared, Hos. 7. 14. Concerning this impatience of trouble, and
eagerness after relief and ease, and rest; I need not say as our Savior says,
Matthew. 5. Do not even the Publicans the same; but do not even the Beasts the
same? do not they groan under their burden? do not they long to be delivered
from their pains and pressures, and restraints? And shall the longing of souls
be no higher nor purer than those of a mere animal appetite? Shall the Prayers
of the Sons of God be of no higher a strain than the Children of the Raven,
which are said to cry unto God for meat, Job 38. ult. Set aside the elegancy of
them, and all your groanings under Affliction, and lusting after deliverance,
are common to the beasts that perish as well as you. And this may well be the
first Motive to the duty which I exhort you to.

2. Consider that if you be thus weary of Affliction, and eager after rest, you
do* secretly find fault with a chief piece of God's dispensations in the World,
and frustrate the ends which God has in bringing tribulation upon the
righteous. The exercise of Graces, such as Patience, Self-denial, Faithfulness,
Courage, Constancy is the great end of God in all his afflictive Providence
upon his people: and if we be so soon weary of them, and so importunately bent
upon deliverance from them, how can this great design of Heaven be fulfilled?
For can the Plaster work a Cure except it may be suffered to lie on?

3. Consider that there is really more valor and true greatness of mind in
enduring hardships patiently and constantly, than in all these fightings and
contendings for God, which pass with many men for such a noble zeal. To dare to
live in an unpleasant and bitter time, is much more magnanimous than to wish to
die; and to endure the anguishes of life with an humble patience and submissive
spirit, is more Divine than to endeavor to escape them. This passive valor
was the mighty courage of the Son of God, whereby he overcame all that was
against him. How easy was it for him to have revenged himself upon all his
enemies, by Legions of Angels, or Fire from Heaven? How easily could he have
frowned them all into their first nothing? But he gave his back to the smiter,
and his cheeks to them that pulled off the hair; he was dumb as a Sheep before
the Shearers: whereby he gave us an Example of the most admirable longanimity
and magnanimity too; and by enduring the Cross did perfectly vanquish all that
Crucified him. We do mightily admire the valiant Acts of David's Worthies, when
we read how one slew eight hundred at one time; another resisted the whole Army
of the Philistines, and slew many of them; another defended a piece of Ground
from a whole Troop of Philistines, and slew them; another slew a Lion and two
Lion-like men; another went down to an Egyptian Champion only with a Staff, and
first spoiled the Egyptian of his Spear, and then slew him with it. I will not
disparage this valor of theirs; but I will affirm that David in his flight
from Absalom manifested a more excellent courage, than when he slew the great
Philistine; and that the valor of these his Worthies in it self considered, is
no more to be compared to the admirable Patience, Self-denial and submission of
the Redeemer of the World, or to that of Moses, who was but one of his
servants, than the passions of a Beast a^e to be compared unto the ingenuous
resolution of a rational soul. For such a kind of animal courage, fierceness
and killing faculty, many of the Beasts of the Earth have as much, Adino,
Eleazar, Shanimah, or Benaiah the son of Jehojadah, so much commended in the 2 Samuel 23. True valor consists not in the greatness of bones, but in the
greatness of mind, not in strength of sinews but in strength of Grace, not in
the fierceness and sightingness, but in the meekness and patience of
disposition. That Is not the true generousness of spirit which cannot brook
injuries; but indeed that which can: That Is not the true valiant mind which is
resolved, what ever comes of it, to have its own will; but that which most
freely resigns it self to the Will of God. Quo minus quid sibi arrogat homo, eo
evadit nobilior and divinior.

2. Instead of being weary of the Persecutions of life, be ye weary of the
imperfections of life: Let the body of death, rather than the troubles of God,
be the cause of your weariness and complaint, O wretched man, etc. It is valor
to endure patiently the Afflictions of the body; but to mourn under the infirm
and imperfect condition of the soul, whilst it is embodied, is also devout and
pious: yea to be content to spend an Eternity in such an imperfect state, and
such an unsuitable body as this, were an argument of a mind over sluggish and
forgetful of its own bliss. And yet I cannot say, but that there is something
of Religion in the souls patient enduring of its imperfect condition in the
body, because the Will of God is so.

3. Convert the animal appetites into Divine longings; instead of eagerness of
rest from Adversity, be as eager as may be of Eternal Rest, of a state of
perfection and glory. Let not the Beast be above the Man, the sensual appetite
be stronger than the spiritual, let not David's thirsting after the waters of
Bethlehem (2 Samuel 23.) nor the Bond-servant panting after the shadow (Job 7.
2.) condemn your lazy souls that have a more desirable object set before them.
It is good to be a Horse-Leech here; suck in what you can of Eternal Life, and
after all yet cry, Give, give. In a word then, to turn David's Rhetoric into
Divinity; Instead of, Oh that I had wings like a Dove, cry ye, Oh that I had
the Heart of Dove, chastely adhering to God, innocently behaving it self toward
men, and patiently enduring injuries! Instead of, Oh that he would give me
wings like a Dove, that I might fly away, pray ye, Oh that one would give me
the wings of Faith and Hope, that I might soar aloft in a disdain of Worldly
Evils! The wings of the Ostrich that lifts up her self on high, and scorneth
the Horse and his Rider! Instead of the wings of a Dove to fly away and be at
rest, wish rather, Oh that one would give me the wings of an Eagle, that I
might fly away toward Heaven!

FINIS.

