Salvation BY GRACE. And Never the Less of GRACE, Tho it be through FAITH And
not without it.

In several Sermons on EPHESIANS. II. vsii.

By John Sheffield.

Romans 4. 16. Therefore it is of Faith, that it might be by Grace. LONDON:
Printed by S. Bridge, for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in
Cheapside near Mercers-Chapel, M DC XCVIII.

To my Beloved Friends the Members and Auditors of my Congregation.
Dearly Beloved,
THese Discourses when first meditated, were designed chiefly for your
Instruction and Edification in Faith and Holiness; and was never intended to be
made more Public, than the Auditory to whom they were Preached; but many of
those that heard them, having often expressed their Desires that they might be
Published, hoping that themselves should reap further, if not more Benefit by a
deliberate Reading, than the bare transient Hearing of them. And withal, hoping
that what they had found beneficial to themselves might be so to others; and
when after some considerable Delay some did continue to enquire when they might
expect it; these Things did at length prevail with me, to consent to the
Publishing of them; though not without some Reluctance: Both because I judged
the work it self not fit for Public view, especially in a Time when we are so
full of good Books, and many more excellent ones than this can be supposed to
be, lie by neglected. And also, because I have been much pleased with that
common saying, Been vixit qui been latuit; and the Advice that a Grave and
Pious Person when Dying, gave to his near Relation, that he would endeavor to
pass through the World without making any great noise as he went. For indeed a
noise is troublesome, but especially if it be a contentions one. But this small
Tract I hope will be far enough from administering any occasion of that Nature;
if I could foresee that it was like to do so, it should never come abroad. For
alas! we have too much of that already.

You have it here offered to your Eye, the same as it was to your Ears, without
any Alteration; bating only some few Excerptions where they might be spared
without prejudicing the Sense, that I might gratify your Desire with as little
Charge to you as might be. If I am not mistaken, you have here (though very
briefly) the true Doctrine of Salvation by Grace betwixt the extremes on both
Hands; however weakly it be handled.

For I am Confident, that many weak People, who think they do exalt Grace, do
greatly dishonor it, and strip it of its principal Glory, while they set it in
Opposition to Evangelical Holiness and Obedience; and therefore my earnest
Prayer to God for you, and all the People of God, is the same with the Reverend
Mr. Fountain Life, p. 435.
Flavell, says he, God preserve all his People from the gross and vile
Opinions of Antinomian Libertines, who cry up Grace and decry Obedience; who
under specious Pretenses of exalting a naked Christ upon the Throne, do indeed
strip him naked of a great Part of his Glory, and vilely dethrone him, thus far
Mr. Flavell: You have here (as I Judge) the true Doctrine of Grace, in a Plain
and Easy Method and Style, suited to the Capacities of the Meanest; and if
this do contribute any thing to the settling of your Minds in the Truth and
against Errors on either Hand; and to the furtherance and increase of your
Faith and Holiness, I have my End and Design. If you and others of Christ's
Servants do but reap this Fruit by it, I matter not what others shall say of
the Author, or the Work it self. And that you may do so, is and shall be the
earnest Prayer of him, who is ambitious of no greater Thing in the World, than
to be the Servant of Christ, and of your Souls, for his Sake,

John Sheffield.

Books Sold by Mr. Tho. Parkhurst. All Mr. Nath. Vincent's Works, particularly
mentioned at the End of this Book.
THE Divine Conduct: Or, Mystery of Providence, its Being and Efficacy asserted
and vindicated: All the Methods of Providence in our Course of Life opened,
with Directions how to apply and improve them.

The Fountain of Life opened, or a Display of Christ in his Essential and
Mediatorial Glory; containing Forty two Sermons on various Texts. Wherein the
Impetration of our Redemption by Jesus Christ is orderly unfolded, as it was
begun, carried on, and finished by his Covenant Transaction, mysterious
Incarnation, solemn Call and Dedication, blessed Offices, deep Abasement and
Supereminent Advancement.

A Treatise of the Soul of Man, wherein the Divine Original, excellent and
immortal Nature of the Soul are opened; its Love and Inclination to the Body,
with the necessity of its Separation from it, considered and Improved. The
Existence, Operations and States of separated Souls both in Heaven and Hell
immediately after Death, asserted, discussed, and variously applied, etc. All
by Mr. John Flavell.

SALVATION OF GRACE.
EPHESIANS. II. viii. For by Grace are ye saved through Faith, and that not of your
selves, it is the Gift of God.
THE Apostle tells these Ephesians, Chap. 1. 16. That he did not cease to give
Thanks to God, and Pray for them: To give Thanks for what God had already
wrought in them, and done for them; and to pray for a greater increase of the
Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation, that they might know what is the Hope of their
Calling, and what the Riches of the Glory of the Inheritance; and the
surpassing greatness of his Power toward them that Believe, ver. 18, 19. which
he compare to that mighty Power which raised Christ from the Dead, to the End
of the first Chapter.

And Chap. 2. ver. 1. He shows, what was the Effects of this exceeding
greatness of Power toward them, which was the quickening of them, when they
were dead in Trespasses and Sins; and the preserving and increasing that Life,
and perfecting of it in Glory, and that they might be sensible how mighty a
Power was exerted toward them, he shows how sad their Case was; Dead in Sin,
and Children of Wrath, ver. 1, 2, 3. Both legally and spiritually Dead; Dead in
Sin, and Dead through Sin, or by Reason of Sin; dead to God, and to all
spiritual and saving good; and liable by guilt to Eternal Death.

But if this be our Case, how or by whom are we saved and delivered out of it?
Why, this is wrought by the exceeding greatness of God's Power, which he had
spoken of. But what was the impulsive or moving Cause? Why, his own Grace; and
here the Apostle does in this Text and Context, heap up many words, much of a
like Import and Signification, as if he could never enough express the
greatness and freeness of the Grace and Mercy of God toward Sinners: Rich in
Mercy, great Love or much Love (...), ver. 4. And exceeding Riches of Grace,
ver. 7. By Grace ye are saved through Faith.

We have here two Things. 1. The principal impulsive or moving Cause of the
Salvation of Sinners, and that is Grace. 2. The Way or Means of our being made
actual Partakers of this Salvation of Grace, and that is through Faith.

To explicate the Terms; First, What is meant by Grace? There are several
Acceptations of this word Grace, but two most notable. 1. It is sometime taken
for Gods free Favor and good Will. 2. And sometimes for the Effects of it in
us. But here it is meant in the first Sense; the free Favor, good Will, or
good Pleasure of God.

Here are several Words in this Text and Context, that do all express the
impulsive, moving Cause of our Salvation; and every one has something peculiar
in it, the more fully to set forth the free Favor, gracious Pleasure, and good
Will of God in the Business, of the Salvation of Sinners. 1. Here is Love and
great or much Love, which Notes a great or ardent Desire and Affection to any
Thing or Person, and such as the Person loving does rest or take pleasure in,
and so some derive (...) from (...), as it is expressed, Zeph. 3. 17. He will
rest in his Love.

2. Here is Mercy, and rich Mercy, that Notes Gods great Pity and Compassion
toward those that are miserable, God loves the Angels, and is gracious to the
Angels, but he is not said to be merciful to them, because they never were
miserable.

3. Again, here is Grace, and exceeding Riches of Grace, and that Notes the
freeness of Gods Love and Kindness, whereby he does Things freely, without
merit or desert, Grace does all gratis without any precedent Debt or Obligation.

2. Are saved, some say that is inchoate and so would limit it to
Justification. But other learned Expositors, as Zanch. Simpli. and Beza, say
here is intended not only Justification, but whole and complete Salvation, as
is manifest from the whole Context; in ver. 7. of the former Chapter, he says,
we have forgiveness of Sin, in which is included Justification, and that of
Grace. And then Chap. 2. ver. 1, 5. There he speaks of Sanctification, and
adds, that this was by Grace; and now again in the Text, he says, For by Grace
ye are saved, quasi dicat, all the steps and degrees of Salvation from the
beginning to the end, from first to last is of Grace.

Through Faith or by Means of Faith, Faith being the means, dispositive
Condition, Qualification, or Instrument of our receiving or being actually
Partakers of it.

And that not of your Selves, (...), there is some Difference amongst
Expositors, what this (...), does refer to, some think to the whole Sentence,
quasi dicat, and this, that you are saved is not of your Selves; but rather I
should think with other Expositors, that it does refer to Faith, that is the
immediate antecedent, Ye are saved by Grace, through Faith, and this Faith, hoc
ipsum, this very Thing is not of your selves.

Doct. I. That the principal Efficient and first moving Cause of a Sinners
Salvation, from first to last is the free Grace of God. Doct. II. That we
receive and partake of Salvation, of Grace, through Faith, or by means of
Faith. Doct. III. That Salvation being through Faith, does not hinder or oppugn
its being of Grace, for Faith it self is of Grace, or the Gift of God which is
the same; nay, Faith is so far from being opposite to Grace, or making it to be
less of Grace, that the Apostle says, Romans 4. 16. It is of Faith, that it
might be by Grace.
This great Work of the Salvation of Sinners, the Scripture sometimes ascribes
to God the Father; thus he is called, God our Savior, and it is God that
Justifies: And sometimes to Christ the Mediator, therefore was his Name called
Jesus, a Savior, because he shall save his People from their Sins; and again,
sometime we are said to be saved by Grace, as in the Text and elsewhere; and
sometime by Faith; as Christ said to that Woman, Thy Faith has saved Thee; and
the Apostle to the Jailer, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shall be
saved, and thy House. You see the Scripture uses these several forms of
speaking, in the Matter of Salvation; God saves us, and Christ saves us, and we
are saved by Grace, and saved by Faith; and every one of these have a distinct
Notion in the business of Salvation; and yet not one opposite to another, but
one subordinate to another; and all do admirably Consent and Agree, and do not
in the least interfere or clash.

When God is said to be our Savior, that Notes, that he is the first Fountain
and Original, the principal Author and efficient Cause of it. And when we are
said to be saved by Mercy, or Grace, that shows us, what was the first internal
moving Cause, that it is his own free Favor or good Will, without any Merit or
Desert in the Sinner. And when Christ is called our Savior, and said to save
us, that shows the principal medium, the meritorious Cause through or for whose
sake God vouchsafes his Mercy and Grace, and the blessed Effects of it to us;
thus the very Words before the Text, and Tit. 3. 6. Again, when Faith is said
to save us, that Notes the qualifying Condition, or receptive Disposition,
whereby we are made, qualified, disposed and meet subjects of the Salvation
that Gods free Grace does give, and Christ's Merit has purchased for us.

It is the principal Efficient, first moving Cause of a Sinners Salvation, that
I shall speak to from this Text; which from first to last is the free Grace of
God.

Which Grace, that we may the better see; understand what a State we are all in
by the fall; and that is in this Context, dead in Sin, legally and spiritually
Dead.

Legally Dead, or as it is in other Terms, under the Curse, Children of Wrath.
And spiritually Dead, or Dead in Sin, dead to God, and Holiness, and all
spiritual and saving good; having no more Inclination or Disposition to any
spiritual and gracious Acts, than there is in a Dead-man to the Actions or
Comforts of Life; again Dead in sin, as fast bound, chained, and inslaved under
the Power of fleshly vicious and sinful Dispositions, and habits, as a Dead-man
is by Death, from ever rising by his own Power, such are we in a spiritual
Sense.

If we have what is our due, that is Death, Eternal Death; but if we be saved,
that is of Grace and Favor.

It is God that is the principal Author and Efficient of Salvation. But if you
ask, what moved him to it? why he would so concern himself for the Recovery and
Salvation of lost and miserable Sinners? Why, it was only his own Grace, and
free Favor that moved him to it. Consider Salvation in all the Parts of it, in
all the Degrees and Steps that lead to it from first to last, and you shall see
that Grace does all.

1. It was of his Grace that he gave his Son to be our Savior; the Scripture
every where Attributes it to the Love of God, to lost Sinners, that he gave his
Son Jesus Christ to be their Savior, John 3. 16. God so loved the World, that
he gave his only begotten Son. Romans 5. 8. God commended his Love to us, in that
while we were Sinners Christ dyed for us. Heb. 2. 9. But we see Jesus -- that
by the Grace of God he should taste Death for every Man; this Grace and Favor
of God in providing us a Savior, is expressed in all those Scriptures, that
speak of God giving his Son, and sending him into the World, to be a Savior,
and a Propitiation for our Sins. Gal 4. 4. But when the -- God sent his Son
made of a Woman, etc. 1 John 4. 9, 10. And this providing, and giving a Savior
for us, can be put upon no other account, but the free Grace and Favor of God
toward us, for we deserved that God should have sent an Executioner from
Heaven, to execute the just Penalty of his broken Law upon us: As he sent an
Angel to destroy the firstborn of Egypt, and into the Camp of Assyria, that
slew one hundred fourscore and five thousand Men in one Night. I say, we might
rather have expected, that God should have sent an Executioner of his Wrath
amongst us, and not a Savior to save us from it. If God had dealt with us in
Justice, according to our Deserts, we had then been as the fallen Angels are,
bound in Chains of Darkness, without Hope or Possibility of Deliverance; it is
only his Grace and free Favor that makes all the Difference that there is
betwixt us and them.

2. It was of his Grace, that in Christ, and for the sake of Christ, he has
made and offered to us a New Covenant, a better Covenant that offers Pardon,
and Life, and Salvation, upon easier Terms, than the first Covenant did; hence
it is called by way of Distinction, and Eminence, the Covenant of Grace, and
the Gospel of the Grace of God.

1. Partly because free Grace has the principal Hand, and Stroke in the making
of it; hence the Covenant is called by the Name of Mercy it self, Mic. 7. 20.
God might, had he so pleased, have dealt with us, upon the Terms of the old
broken Covenant, and since we had violated the Precept, he might with rigor
have executed the Threatening. Justice deals with Men according to Desert, but
it is Grace that gives that which is not due.

2. It is fitly called the Covenant of Grace, partly because of the abundant
Riches of Gods Grace that it does reveal, and make known to the World; the
Infinite Power, and Wisdom of God, was gloriously Displayed in the Creation;
his Righteousness and Holiness; the exact Justice and Purity of his Nature in
the Perfection of his Law; but the Rich and Abundant Grace, and Mercy of God,
was not made known to the World, at least not so gloriously, but by the New
Covenant, Tit. 2. 11.

3. Again, it is fitly called the Covenant of Grace, because of the gracious
Effects of it, or the great, free Favors, and Blessings that it confers upon
all that are under it, and interested in it; it Pardons those that are guilty
of the Violation of the first Covenant, it forgives the Debt of Punishment,
that the first Covenant did exact; it justifies and acquits those that the
first does condemn; it saves those that by the first were Sentenced to
Everlasting Destruction. It is Gods Instrument, whereby he gives many great,
unspeakable, and undeserved Blessings and Privileges, to miserable and lost
Sinners; as a King does by his Charter, grant many Privileges and Immunities
to a Corporation. Why so, the New Covenant is Gods Charter of Grace, whereby he
gives the great and invaluable Privileges, of Pardon and Peace with God,
Justification, Adoption, Eternal Glory and Happiness to Sinners, that are
altogether undeserving of these Things; nay, that by the first Covenant deserve
the contrary.

It is a Covenant of Grace, because the Grace, Favor and Good Will of God does
freely give all the Benefits and Privileges, that it does contain, and does
confer upon the Children of Men.

4. Again, it is a Covenant of Grace, as it promises, and gives Grace, to
perform whatsoever it requires, as a Condition of its subsequent Benefits.

3. It is of mere Grace that any are elected and chosen to obtain Salvation by
Christ. And this is the Spring of all that special Mercy that some of the lost
Children of Men receive, more than others. That there is a Christ, a Savior,
given to the lost World, a new and better Covenant, made and offered to undone
Sinners for their Acceptance; this is Grace, and rich Grace, vouchsafed to the
humane kind in general, which is not done to the fallen Angels. We Children of
Men have a Savior, provided and given for us, when they have none, we are
through the Grace of God in Christ under a better Covenant than that we broke;
while they are held strictly bound to the Terms of their broken Covenant.

But now Election, that is a more special and distinguishing Grace still, this
is a Grace vouchsafed, to some of the Children of Men and not unto others.

That there is an Election whereby God from Eternity, does pick and choose some
from amongst the rest of Mankind, whom he will actually bring to Salvation by
Christ, in the way and means that he has appointed in the Gospel, cannot be
denied without manifest Violence to the Scriptures; and this is merely of his
Grace, and good Pleasure, Ephesians. 1. 5, 6. Romans 11. 5, 6. Grace is the sole Spring
of this Election, it is not out of any foresight of Merit; or Desert in those
that he chooses, any more than in those that he passes by. He did not choose
any to Life and Salvation, because he foresaw that they would believe; or more
readily comply with the Gospel Offer and Call, than others; as some say: No,
God did not choose any because he foresaw that they would believe, or be more
Holy and Obedient than others, but that he might make them so, Ephesians. 1. 4. Romans
8. 29. What he says of the the whole Nation of the Israelites, is true of
every Elect Soul, Deuteronomy. 7. 7, 8.

But here take Notice, that though God does of rich Grace, and the mere good
pleasure of his Will, choose some to life, and not out of a foresight of their
Faith, or Holiness, or good Improvements; yet it does not therefore follow,
that he does of his mere Will and Pleasure decree to damn any, without any
consideration of their Sin and Demerit; for there is a vast difference betwixt
these two, Election to Life and Salvation; and ordaining to Wrath and
Perdition: for in the one viz. That execution of his Wrath and Justice, he acts
as a righteous Governor, and deals with Men according to his Laws, that he
gave them for their rule; but in the other he acts as a gracious Benefactor and
free dispencer of his own Gifts, and so may without Partiality, or Injustice,
or wrong to any, bestow his free Benefits and Favors, upon whom, and in what
measure, and degree he please.

4. Effectual calling, which is another link in the golden chain of salvation,
is of grace, 2 Timothy 1. 9. Who has saved us and called us with a Holy Calling,
not according to our Works, but according to his own Purpose and Grace. As the
Heirs of Salvation are distinguished from others, by Election, in the Bosom
and secret Purpose of God from all Eternity; so they are in time distinguished
from others, by Regeneration and Effectual Calling; and this you see is of
Grace too; not upon the account of any Worth, Merit, or Desert in them that are
Called and Regenerated, more than in others that are not so: though the
ordinary way whereby God Calls and Converts any, is in the Use of the Means
that he has appointed for that end, and in the serious diligent Attendance
upon them, yet even that is of Grace too; Grace disposes the hearts of some to
use the Means of Salvation, while others do neglect and slight them; and Grace,
that is a more Common Grace, makes some serious and diligent therein, or else
they would be as vain and heedless, and slighty in them as any others; it is
Grace that leads Men on step by step from one thing to another, from Ignorance
to Knowledge, from Carnal Security to a Conviction of their undone and lost
Estate, and from Conviction to Conversion, and a hearty Closure with Christ
upon the Gospel Terms; Grace has a secret, powerful, though often an undiscerned
hand, in leading a straying Sinner unto Christ, and in turning a carnal,
worldly Heart to fix it self upon God, as its end and chief Good. As a River or
Fountain, that runs a great way underground unseen, but at last breaks out into
view upon the surface of the Earth; so Election is a secret, that is a great
while hidden and undiscerned, but in the Effectual Calling and Conversion of a
Soul, then it does as it were appear above ground, in its precious and saving
Fruits and Effects. This Effectual Calling is the beginning of Salvation in us,
all that we have before that, is no more than what many may have that perish
for ever. many have great Knowledge of Divine things, and Convictions, and some
superficial Joy in the Word and Ordinances; as the stony-ground-hearers, and
yet perish at last; but when we are Effectually Called, and truly Converted,
then we begin to be saved, then we partake of those things that accompany
Salvation, as the Apostle speaks; then we taste the delicious Fruits of Grace,
then we experience its powerful, and saving Effects in and upon our selves;
then the Day Star arises in our hearts; then the blessed Day of Grace begins to
dawn, and we see the light of it, and feel the Warmth of the Sun of
Righteousness, refreshing and healing our Souls. Now that this is of Grace, and
not from the good Improvement only of the Natural Power in some, more than in
other, does thus appear.

1. From the plain direct Assertion of Scripture, Romans 9. 16. It is not of him
that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy. 1 Cor. 5. 7.
Who makes thee to differ from another? If any could reply, and say, that he by
the mere Power or Improvement of Nature, had made the difference for the better
betwixt him and another, or that he had acquired any spiritual Indowment or
gracious Disposition that was not the Free Gift of Grace to him; that would
quite invalidate and overthrow the Apostles Argument in that place; but the
Apostles Argument is undoubtedly good; Ergo.

2. That Effectual Calling is of Grace and Favor, does appear from the
manifest arbitrary distinction that it makes, in those those that are the
Subjects of it; we see that Grace does pick and cull out, here one and there
another, arbitrarily; often we see those called that have less Helps and
Advantages for Salvation, while those that have greater are left still in their
Sat of Sin and Death; and those that to all appearance seem less prepared for
Grace, while those that have greater are passed by; as our Savior says, Two
shall in be the same House, or Bed together, the one taken and the other left;
so Grace does manifestly in the Dispensation of it in the Gospel. Often we see
the Children of the same Parents, that have the same Education, Instruction,
and Advantages everyway, yet one taken, and another left; those that sit under
the same Ministry, and hear the same Sermons, yet one taken and another left;
Grace does pick and cull out, here one and there another, and leaves others
that to all appearance, was in as good, nay, a better Preparation to receive
Grace. As our Savior says I thank thee O Father, that thou have hid these
things from the Wise and Prudent and have revealed them to Babes; and for what
reason? why; because it so pleased Thee.

3. But there are some extraordinary Instances of Conversion, that will put it
past all doubt, that it is Grace, and Free Grace that makes the difference
betwixt one and another, and not the good Improvement of natural Power; who
will say that Paul while he was a Persecutor, and a Blaspemer, and in the
height of his Rage against Christ, and his People and interest, was in a
greater Preparation for Grace, than that young Man in the Gospel, of whom it is
said Christ loved Him, and said he was not far from the Kingdom of God, and yet
for ought we do know, he never entered into it; and is it likely that the Thief
upon the Cross, or the Samaritan Woman that lived in Adultery, was in a greater
preparation for Grace, than those many that followed Christ up and down from
Place to Place to hear his Heavenly Doctrine? and yet it is said of them, Joh.
6. that They went back and walked no more with Him.

All must confess, whether they are wiling or not, that it was pure Grace, and
Free Grace that in these, and many such like Instances, does make the
difference, and not the good Improvement of Nature.

I readily acknowledge, that it is not Gods usual way, to take Persons as it
were reeking-hot out of their Sins, into a State of Grace and Favor; to call
Men to himself while in the neglect of his Instituted Means; and as it were,
fighting against Him.

Well; but it is the same Grace, that extraordinarily calls some few; and
ordinarily calls most in the serious and diligent Use of his Appointed Means.
If it be beyond all Question, that it is mere Grace that calls some that were
running away from God as fast as they could; none (that considers what the
consequences will be) will venture to say, that it is not the same Grace, that
calls all that are called, though in a different way: God meets with some few
in the midst of their Career of Sin, that none shall be able to deny the
efficiency of his Grace in the work, but his most usual, ordinary way, wherein
he calls most, is in a serious, close attendance upon Ordinances, that his
Wisdom may be glorified, together with his Grace, in blessing Means that he
has appointed and uses for that End.

5. Justification is of Grace, which is another link in the Golden Chain of
Salvation. Justification is God's accounting us righteous and dealing with us
as righteous Persons, in discharging us from the Curse of the Law and Eternal
Condemnation, for the sake of Christ's Meritorious Sacrifice and Righteousness
made ours by Faith. And this is an act of Gods Free Grace toward us, Romans 3.
24. being Justified freely by his Grace and Tit. 3. 7. That is of Grace or
Favor, when a Benefit or Privilege is bestowed that was not due, that could
not in Justice be claimed, thus the Apostle opposes Grace and Debt, Romans 4. 4.
Now our due is Death and Wrath; it was just and due, that we should suffer the
Penalty of that Law which we had violated. but God instead of executing the
Penalty and Curse of the Law, which we had deserved; for the sake of Christ and
his Righteousness, he does freely acquit and discharge us of it; he accounts us
righteous, and deals with us as righteous Persons, for the sake of Christ, whom
in Justice he might have condemned and executed as guilty and rebellious
Sinners.

6. Sanctification is of Grace, now Sanctification, as it is distinguished from
Regeneration and Conversion, is but the further increase and improvement, the
further strengthening and confirming, that Principle or Seed, or Habit of
Grace, that was first given, and infused in our Effectual Calling; and
therefore all the Parts of it, such as Faith, Love, Resignation to God, Trust
and Dependence upon him, Subjection to his Governing and Disposing Will; these
and such like, that are the parts of Sanctification, are called the Graces of
the Spirit, because Grace does freely give and bestow, both the first
Principle, and the after increase and improvement of them. It is good, says
the Apostle, that the heart be established with Grace; and why called Grace?
but because it is the fruit and effect of Gods free Grace and Favor to us.

7. Perseverance, and holding on to the end in Faith and Holiness is of Grace
too; the same hand that works the Principle of Faith and Holiness at first,
does constantly cherish and preserve it, that it do not fail or be extinct; as
Conservation is said to be a continued Creation, that is, God puts forth the
same Almighty Power in preserving his Creatures in their being, as he did at
first in bestowing it upon them; so the same Grace and Favor is renewed and
continued, in the exercise, increase, and persevering in Grace to the end, as
was at first put forth, in the working of it. And hence our Savior prays for
his Disciples, John 17. 11. Holy Father! Keep them through thy Name. 1 Pet 1.
5. Kept by the Power of God through Faith unto Salvation. Phil. 1. 6. He that
has begun a good Work in you will perfect it. Alas! should Grace turn us off
to shift for our selves, and look to our selves alone; (after it has brought
us into a State of Grace, and to an Interest in Christ and his Covenant) we
should quickly prove Bankrupts, and lose all again. Such is the strength of
remaining Corruption within, and of Temptations and Alurements without; and
such is the Subtilty, Malice and Power of the Devil to manage all to the best
advantage against our Souls; that if Grace did not keep it is hold of us we
should quickly make Shipwreck of Faith, and a good Conscience, and our Souls
too. Grace in the Souls of the best, but especially in young Converts, is like
a Spark of Fire in the midst of a Heap of Ashes, that if the kind Breath of
Grace did not constantly cherish and keep it in, it would quickly be
extinguished.

8. The Eternal Reward of Glory and Happiness in Heaven is of Grace too, this
we have in the Text, By Grace ye are saved: That is completely, Tit. 3. 5. Not
by Works of Righteousness which we have done, but according to his Mercy he
saved us. Romans 6. 23. The Gift of God is Eternal Life. After all that we have
done in a patient continuance in well doing, and working out our Salvation with
Fear and Trembling, and persevering in Faith and Holiness to the end; yet
Eternal Life is a free Gift after all this; though it be in some Sense a
Reward, yet that makes it nevertheless a Gift in it self, Jude 21. Looking for
the Mercy of our Lord Jesus unto Eternal Life; thus you see, that the Salvation
of guilty Sinners is from first to last of Grace; Grace begins, and carries it
on, through the various steps and degrees of it in this Life; and Grace
perfects and compleats all at last too; the Scripture does delight to compare
the new Creation to a beautiful and stately Building, wherein Grace does all,
lays every Stone in it from first to last; Grace lays the Foundation and the
chief Corner Stone, which is Redemption by Christ and our Election in him, 1
Pet. 2. 6. Behold I lay in Sion a chief Cornerstone -- and Grace carries on
the Building, and Rears up the Walls, in Effectual Calling, Sanctification and
Perseverance therein; and the Roof and Top-stone of Eternal Life and Glory is
laid on with shouting, crying Grace, Grace unto it; as it is said of the second
Temple, Zach. 4. 6, 7. Thus as one well says, the New Man is from the Sole of
the Foot, to the Crown of the Head, all made up of Grace, and all the Links in
the golden Chain of Salvation, are all of pure beaten and massy Grace.

2. I shall now show you the Properties of this Grace, or the Epethites that
are given to it, for the Scripture does not only call it Grace, but it gives
many Epethites to it, the better to show its Nature, and the more fully to
discover and manifest its Glory.

1. It is free Grace, self-moving Grace, that fetches not its Motives and
Inducements of any thing it bestows from Man, as a deserving and procuring
Cause, but it Acts toward us, and bestows its Gifts and Blessings upon us of
its own, free, gracious and bountiful Inclination, Grace it self, signifies the
freeness of the Gift; for Grace is as much as Gratis, and does all Gratis, that
is freely. As a Gift signifies the freeness of what is bestowed; so God is said
to give Christ, and give Faith, and give Repentance, and give Eternal Life, and
give the Heavenly Kingdom; one would think that these Words themselves should
sufficiently express the freeness of Grace: So true is that common saying, What
is freer then Gift? Yet the Scripture does frequently adjoin the Word Free, and
freely, to Grace, and Gift, as if it could never enough set forth, how Free the
Grace of God is in the Salvation of guilty, and Dead Sinners, Romans 3. 24. Being
justified freely by his Grace. Ver. 32. How shall he not with him freely give
us all Things? And to this Sense do some expound that Scripture, John 1. 16. Of
his fullness have we received, Grace for Grace, that is Grace for Graces sake;
indeed there is nothing that we receive from God, all things that tend to
Salvtion, the Principle, the Degrees of it, and Salvation it self at last; but
as to the Thing it self, it is altogether a Free Gift of God to us, though as
to the Order of confering, some of Gods Gifts do require a preceding
Disposition and Qualification in the Subject; which is also a Gift of Grace too.

2. The Grace whereby we are saved is a large and an abundant Grace, thus the
Scripture does not only call it Grace, but abundance of Grace, Romans 5. 17. Yea,
and exceeding abundant, 1 Timothy 1. 14. The word abundant, is supra modum, not a
short, narrow, scanty Grace, but a Grace that overflows, and exceeds all
Measure, a Grace that cannot be measured, or fully comprehended, whose
Dimensions cannot be founded or fathomed; and so likewise it is called, Riches
of Grace, Ephesians. 1. 7. Nay, exceeding Riches of Grace, Ephesians. 2. 7. Now Riches you
know speaks great Plenty, Largeness, Fullness, and Abundance, of the Things that
we speak of; and it is rich and abundant Grace considered either as it is in
God, or as to the Fruits and Effects of it as bestowed upon us.

This Grace of God is an everspringing and over flowing Fountain-Grace, nay an
Ocean Grace, that has neither Banks nor Bottom; as does appear.

1. From the great unworthiness and very ill deserving of those that are the
Objects of it; alas! we were not small Offenders, but such as had provoked,
dishonored, and contemned God in a very high manner; we were not only Sinners,
but loathsome Sinners, such as his Holy Eyes could not but abhor; not only
loathsome Sinners, but Enemies, and that is worse still; it is less for a Man to
show kindness to an unworthy, unlovely Person, than to a to a mortal Enemy;
nay, we were not only Enemies, but stubborn Enemies, proud contemptuous
Enemies, that neither did seek nor desire his Favor, now the worse those are
that are the Objects of his Grace; the more abundant is that Grace, that
extends it self to them. It is less in the King, to extend his Favor to an
ordinary Malefactor; than if he should do it to a professed Enemy to his Crown
and Dignity; and it is less to show Favor to Enemies that sue and entreat for
it, than to contemptuous Enemies that seem to scorn and slight it: Why, such
were we all when Gods Grace and Favor first shone upon us: O! the
superabundant Riches of Grace.

2. The abundant Riches of Grace does appear from the number and greatness of
our wants and miseries that it supplies; and of our Sins that it Pardons and
Forgives. Alas! if it was not a rich and abundant Grace; our slights and
neglects of it, our resistings and strivings against it, our unworthy carriage
under it; our repeated sinning after Pardon received; our violating the
Obligations even of Mercy and Grace it self; our often breaking our solemn Vows
and Promises, of new and better Obedience; So that had it not been an exceeding
abundant Grace, it had been wearied and tired out before this Time; as God
says of the old World, when he saw that the wickedness of Man was exceeding
great, it is said, That it repented him, that he had made Man, and it grieved
him at his very Heart, Genesis 6. 6. So were not his Grace toward us an exceeding
abundant Grace, our many Provocations, Frowardness, and ill Returns would have
made him repent before now, that ever his Grace did take in hand, to recover
and save such untractable, froward, and ungrateful Wretches as we.

3. This Grace of God whereby we are saved is a wise Grace too, a Grace that in
the Dispensation of it, or the bestowing of its Fruits and Effects upon us,
does discover and manifest the unsearchable Depths of Gods Wisdom, as well as
of his Love and Goodness; Ephesians. 1. 7, 8. -- According to the Riches of his Grace
wherein he has abounded toward us in all Wisdom and Prudence. Here you see,
that it is Grace, and rich Grace that is the rise and spring of all, that lost
and undone Sinners do receive from God, and in this, Grace God abounds toward
us, but it is in all Wisdom and Prudence; now I conceive the meaning to be
this, that though it be free Grace and Favor in God that is the Spring of all
that we receive, yet an infinite and unsearchable Wisdom, does order, direct,
and appoint the way and manner of its being communicated and bestowed upon us;
Grace saves us, but Wisdom dispences it in such a way and order, as does most
exalt the Glory of the Divine Majesty, and that not only of some, but of all
his Perfections; and yet so, as that the Creature is most strongly obliged and
engaged to his Duty too, viz. to the greatest Subjection to God, and dependence
upon him: Grace does all in the business of Salvation, and yet in such an Order
and Method, that Man is not left to his own Will, to live as he list; n^ nor
allowed or indulged in Sloth and Carelessness, in Negligence or Indifferency:
But contrarily is obliged more strongly then ever, to the closest adherence to
God and Obedience to his Commands; here is the Wisdom of Grace, that while it
does all, and we can do nothing without it; and the whole Glory of our
Salvation must be ascribed to Grace; and nothing to our selves; yet our
Obligations to Duty, are not the less, but the greater; while Grace saves us
freely, yet it obliges us to the greatest seriousness and diligence in working
out our own Salvation with Fear and Trembling. Yea, to strive, and fight, and
run, and give all Diligence to make our Calling and Election sure.

The Wisdom of Grace might be showed at large, both in the Impetration, and the
Application of Salvation; as in reconciling the Justice and Mercy of God; and
the Honor of God as Rector, and of his violated Law; together with the
Impunity and Happiness of the Sinner. And in the Application; in making God and
Christ to be all in all, in the business of our Salvation, and yet in such a
wise way and order, that Man's Duty in seeking, and praying, and waiting: Yea,
and that in the closest Attendance upon God in the use of his appointed Means,
and in the Duties of Holiness and Obedience, is not vacated or made needless
thereby; but contrarily is more strongly enforced than it could have been any
other way.

There are too many look only at the freeness of Grace, and never consider the
Wisdom of it, whereas this is the Thing that most of all fills the Angels with
wonder, Ephesians. 3. 16. -- Might be known the manifold Wisdom of God. 1 Pet. 1. 12.
-- Which Things the Angels desire to look into; (...), it signifies, such a
narrow intent prying, as we use to do into a curious Piece, wherein we discern
a wonderful deal of Art and Skill; and were the Wisdom of it, but considered
and understood by us, it would make us say with the Apostle, O the Depths of
the Riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God, how unsearchable! etc. All
the Perfections of God, do mutually reflect a Luster upon each other, so here
the Wisdom of Grace does not in the least diminish its freeness; but greatly
adds to the Glory of it.

4. The Grace whereby we are saved is a Pure and Holy Grace; in that while it
embraces the Sinner with a most free and abundant Favor; yet without the least
Countenance or Favor to Sin it self; tho it pardon the Sinner, yet it does not
spare, but most severely punishes the Sin; nay, it discovers the greatest
hatred and abhorrence of Sin, while it shows the richest and most abundant
Favor and Kindness to the Sinner: Though it Pardon the greatest and worst of
Sinners, and multiplies Pardons in blotting out Sins that are numberless, and
for quality of the most Crimson dye; yet it does this in such a way that it
gives not the least Countenance, or Encouragement to any to Sin or to continue
in it; nay, the rich Grace displaied upon Mount Sion does more effectually
suppress and destroy the Reign of Sin then all the Fire and Thunder of Mount
Sinai; though it Pardons Sin freely, yet it does it in such a way and order,
that it does more powerfully restrain and awe the Soul from continuing in the
Practice of it; then all the terrible Threats of Wrath in the Law, Tit. 2. 11,
12. The Grace of God that brings Salvation -- teaches us to deny ungodliness
and worldly Lusts, and to live soberly, righteously and godly; hence when God
proclaims his Name so full of Grace and Mercy, Exodus 34. 6, 7. -- Mercyful,
gracious, long-suffering, abundant in Goodness and Truth, forgiving Iniquity,
Transgression and Sin, (yet it is added) and that will by no means clear the
Guilty. Psalm 99. 8. -- Thou wast a God that forgavest them, but tookest
Vengeance of their Inventions; those emblematical appearances of Christ, that
we read of, Rev. 1. 13, 14, 15 do not obscurely show his Holiness and Purity,
his Hatred and Revenges of Impenitence and Disobedience commixt with his Love,
and Grace, and Kindness to Sinners. Here you see him represented in his
Priestly Garments, ver. 13. which shows his Love and Grace to Sinners, in his
Sacrifice and Intercession; but ver. 15. His Feet as it were Brass that burns
in a Furnace, which shows his fiery Wrath and Indignation against all
impenitent ones: Hence it is manifest, that those who do from the freeness and
abundance of Grace take encouragement to Sin, never had any Experience of this
Grace in themselves.

5. The Grace whereby we are saved, is a powerful Grace, Ephesians. 1. 19. -- And
what is the exceeding greatness of his Power to usward, who believe; it is an
exceeding Power that Grace puts forth, in the Conversion and Salvation of
carnal, and dead Sinners. It overcomes the Resistance and Opposition that the
carnal, corrupt will, assisted by the Devil and all that the Powers of Darkness
can make against it. It is a mighty Power indeed, that of Stones raises up
Children to Abraham, that raises dead Sinners to Life, that have not only,
like Lazarus, lain four Days in the Grave; but that have lain many Years
rotting in their Filth and Putrefaction; that is a mighty Power, that makes dry
and dead Bones to live; which makes a Holy Temple for God himself to dwell in,
of that Heart, which was a sty of every filthy and unclean Lust. Were not this
Grace whereby we are saved, an Almighty Grace, we had been all to this Day,
yea, and for ever, rotting in the Grave of our Sins, bound in the Chains of
guilt and Death; and as it is a mighty Power that first raises us to a
spiritual Life, so it is the same mighty Power that keeps us still, through
Faith unto Salvation, 1 Pet. 1. 5. I shall briefly open the other two Points,
and then Apply all together.

1. What is the meaning of this Salvation being through Faith.

The meaning is this, that God and Christ in the Gospel Covenant, do require
Faith on our parts, in order to our being actual Partakers and Possessors of
this Salvation; which Gods Grace does freely give, and Christ has merited for
us; our actual Interest in and claim to this Salvation, is suspended till we
believe; which is the same that our Savior himself says; when he commissioned
his Apostles to Preach the Gospel of Salvation to the lost World, Mark 16. 16.
Go Preach the Gospel -- He that believes shall be saved, and he that believes
not shall be damned. It is freely offered and given by God and Christ in the
Gospel Covenant, but Faith is required as a necessary Disposition, in all that
shall actually receive and partake of it.

1. Sincere Faith, which is the unfeigned Consent of the Heart to receive and
close with Christ upon the Terms of the Gospel Covenant, is necessary to our
first Interest and Title to it; that is, before a Soul is brought to this
believing or closing with Christ, it is (as to the special and principal
Effects and Fruits of it) but a Grace offered, a Christ, a Savior, and
Salvation offered and tendered; but when we believe then it is a Salvation
begun in us, then we actually partake of some of the saving Fruits and Effects
of this Grace, and have a just Title and Claim to complete Salvation, to be
given us in Gods Time and Way.

2. The continued Exercise of, and persevering in this Faith, and the necessary
Fruits of it; Holiness and sincere Obedience to Christ and his Commands, is
necessary to our final and complete Salvation; that is, to our full Deliverance
from Sin and Satan, Death and Hell; and our Possession of Eternal Life and
Happiness, not that one who truly believes, if he should Dye the next Day of
Hour, before the Performance of any one further Act of Holiness and Obedience;
would want any Thing, to qualify him for complete Salvation; no, you must not
understand it so. For true Faith, as it justifies the Believer at the very
Moment of his believing; so it would save him if he should Dye the next Moment:
But if God gives us further Life and Time, Perseverance in Faith and Holiness
to the very end of our Lives, is necessary to continue our Right and Title to
Salvation; as Faith was at first to the obtaining of it. Hence are those
Promises of complete Salvation to continued Perseverance in Faith and Holiness,
Romans 2. 7. To them who by patient Continuance in well doing seek for -- Eternal
Life. James 1. 12. Blessed is he that indures Temptation, for after he is tried
he shall receive the Crown of Life. Rev. 2. 10. Be thou faithful to the Death,
and I will give thee a Crown of Life. 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7, 8, 11. Give Diligence
to add to your Faith Virtue, and to Virtue, Knowledge, etc. -- for so an
entrance shall be ministered unto you, into the Everlasting Kingdom of our Lord
and Savior: And those Threats on the other Hand to those that do not
Persevere. Heb. 10. 38. -- If any Man draw back, my Soul shall have no Pleasure
in him. Heb. 12. 14. -- And Holiness, without which no Man shall see the Lord.

What I shall say to the last Point of Doctrine, ( viz. That Salvation being
through Faith, does not hinder or oppugn its being of Grace) shall be in
answering three Questions or Objections, that may be made against its being of
Grace.

Quest. 1. How is our Salvation of Grace, since it is not without the Merit and
Satisfaction of Christ? But before I come directly to Answer this, I must
Premise something for the better Understanding of this Matter which is this.

That the Scripture, speaking of the Salvation of Sinners, as it does assert
that it is of Grace; so we frequently meet with this Phrase that it is through
Faith, and elsewhere most frequently, that it is through Christ. It is of Grace
through Faith, says the Text, 2 Timothy 3. 15. -- Wise unto Salvation, through
Faith in Christ Jesus. Heb. 6. 12. -- Who through Faith and Patience inherit
the Promises. And elsewhere we find that Salvation and all the Parts of it are
said to be through Christ, Romans 3. 24. -- Through the Redemption that is in
Christ Jesus. Ephesians. 1. 7. -- Redemption through his Blood. Tit. 3. 5, 6. -- But
according to his Mercy he saved us -- which he shed on us abundantly through
Jesus Christ our Savior; in these, and many other Scriptures, you may observe,
that Grace, Mercy, or Love, as it is a Love of Benevolence or Goodwill; is at
the Head or Top of all; which is Gods gracious Free, Propension and Inclination
to do good to us, to Pardon and Save us; this you see is at the Head of all,
and before all; but the Effects and Fruits of it, is said to be given to us
sometimes through Christ, through his Blood, and through his Redemption, and
sometimes through Faith; and yet these hinder not its being of Grace.

1. Salvation is through Christ with respect to God giving and bestowing of it,
that he may give such great and undeserved Mercies and Benefits to Sinners, in
a way becoming himself, becoming of his Wisdom, Holiness, and Justice, which
could not be, if they were given absolutely without respect to the Redemption
and Satisfaction of Christ.

2. And it is said to be through Faith, with respect to our receiving and being
made actual Partakers of these Benefits, of Pardon, Life, and Salvation: We
must receive these great and undeserved Benefits through Faith, and partake of
them only by Faith; that we may in our very partaking of them, honor both the
Father and the Son, both our Supreme Rector, and Redeemer; that is we must
receive and partake of them in such a way, wherein we shall acknowledge,
admire, and adore the Love and Mercy, the Wisdom, Holiness, and Justice of God
the Father: Together with the Love, Grace, Condescension, and Kindness of our
Savior and Redeemer. God gives Salvation through Christ and his Redemption,
that he may give as becomes himself, so as becomes, an infinitely Wise, Holy,
and Just Governor; and we must receive or partake of it only through Faith,
that we may receive it as becomes our selves, that is, as becomes miserable,
guilty, lost, and undone Sinners; we must receive the Salvation of Grace, in
such a way, wherein our very receiving, is an acknowledgment that our selves
are nothing, and that God and Christ is all; that even when we receive a
Pardon, we shall at the same time, yea, in the same Act acknowledge that we
deserve to be condemned; and that Gods Grace freely bestows all upon us for the
sake of the Redemption and Satisfaction of Christ; so much in the general, and
which will afford Light for the solving of the following Questions or
Objections.

Obj. 1. How is our Salvation of Grace, and of such free Grace, when it is not
without the Merit and Satisfaction of Christ, when so great a Price, as the
Life and Blood of the Son of God, was exacted by God, and paid by Christ for
the Purchase of it?

Ans. The Socinians will easily answer this in their way, for they say that our
Pardon and Salvation; is merely an Act of Dominion and Favor; and not procured
by the Sufferings of Christ, as a Punishment and Satisfaction for our Sins: For
they say that Christ's Sufferings was no Punishment for our Sin, nor any proper
Satisfaction to Divine Justice; and that our Sin was no antecedent inpulsive
Cause of Christ's Suffering, nor his Sufferings any meritorious Cause of our
Pardon or Salvation. But this cannot be admitted, without subverting the whole
Gospel, and destroying the very Foundations of the Christian Religion; for this
makes the whole Mediation, Death and Sufferings of Christ to be in vain, or of
very little use; for they assign but little, if any thing more, to the Death of
Christ then what may be attributed to the Death and Sufferings of the Martyrs.

This therefore must be acknowledged that the Death and Sufferings of Christ
were a Punishment for our Sins, a proper Satisfaction to Divine Justice, a
price of our Redemption, and yet that our Pardon and Salvation is of Grace
notwithstanding.

For the right Understanding of which it is necessary to show.

1. How or in what Relation God is chiefly to be considered in this business of
the Redemption and Salvation of Sinners. 2. What is the Reason and Use of
Christ's Sufferings.
1. God in the Business of Redemption, is to be considered principally as the
supreme Ruler and Governor of the World; infinitely Wise, Holy and Just, who
was greatly offended and provoked by Sin; and his Law and Government slighted,
despised, and trampled upon by Sinners; and yet of his own infinitely good and
gracious Nature, was propense and inclined to show Pity and Mercy, yea, to
deliver and save his miserable Creatures, that had made themselves so by their
Sin and Apostalie. But this could not be effected without some way or medium,
whereby the Honor of God's Law; and of his Wisdom, Justice, and Holiness, as
the righteous Governor of the World shall be secured and preserved; for God
can do nothing unjustly, nothing unwisely, or unholily; but should he of mere
Grace and Favor without any Punishment of Sin, or a sufficient Satisfaction to
his Justice, have pardoned the Sin of Man, there would have lain great
Imputations against his Wisdom, and Holiness; his Truth and Justice, and such
inconveniences as would have reproached, if not subverted his Government. It
may not be amiss to give you alight touch of this; for I design to not insist
upon it so largely as it might be.

1. If God should have pardoned and saved Sinners without a Satisfaction, this
would have reflected upon his Wisdom; for since he had with infinite Wisdom and
Counsel made a Law for the Government of his Creatures; with a Penalty annexed,
in case of Disobedience; how could it stand with his Wisdom to suffer the
Contempt and Violation of it, and of his own Authority therein; to go
altogether unpunished? What? to have his Law trampled upon; and as it were made
void as soon as made; if he should suffer this to go unpunished, he would seem
to disregard his own Law, in the Sanction of it, as much as his Creature had
done the Precept of it.

Again should he suffer the Violation of of his Law to go altogether
unpunished; would it not seem as if he now saw Reason to alter his Mind; since
he saw good not to exact that Punishment he had denounced.

2. And if he should have exacted no Punishment or Satisfaction for Sin, there
would lie a great Impeachment against his Justice and Wisdom together; for,
either Sin did deserve Punishment, and as great a Punishment as was threatened,
or it did not deserve it. If it did not deserve it, then it was unjust to enact
it in the Law: But if it did deserve it, as no doubt it did; then upon the
entrance of Sin Justice must necessarily require, that either the Punishment
threatened, or an equivalent, and such as shall be full Satisfaction be exacted.

And here observe, that though a Creditor, may freely forgive a Debt; that is
owing to him without Injustice, yet a Governor in many Cases connot forgive a
Criminal without Injustice, because Punishments are in some Cases absolutely
necessary, for the keeping up a due Reverence and Regard of the Governor, and
of his Laws. And likewise for the good of the Commonwealth, the preserving of
due Order, and the securing of the Lives and Properties of the Subjects; why;
God is here to be considered as the righteous Governor of the World.

3. And there would lie an Impeachment against his Truth and Veracity too; for
having threatened such a Punishment for the Violation of his Law; would not his
Veracity be called into Question if none was exacted.

4. And from all these there would arise a great inconveniency and disorder in
the future Government of the World; for Men would hence take occasion to
imbolden themselves in Sin; and flatter themselves with Hopes of Impunity in
it; for they might thus Reason; if God did once, without any Satisfaction, show
mercy to his sinning Creatures, and that contrary to the Sentence of his own
Law, then why may he not do so again? And, if it be not inconsistent with his
Nature, and governing Justice, to let one Sin go unpunished (and that such a
one as did quantum in se spoil the design of his works as soon as made) then why
not another, and another, and so Men would be encouraged to Hope, that
notwithstanding all the threatenings of Gods Law, that yet they might have
Peace though they did walk on in the ways of their own Hearts.

Nay; and it would lay a Foundation for Men to distrust and be suspicious, of
the certainty and stability of his Promise too; for if God do disregard the
threatening of his Law, then why not the Promise too; and so both the stability
of his Promise, and the awe and terror of his Threats, would be mightily
shaken at once; the wicked imboldened and hardened in Sin, with Hopes of
Impunity, notwithstanding all his Threats. And the Comforts and Confidence of
the Righteous weakened notwithstanding all his Promises.

These and many more such like great inconveniences and disorders would
necessarily have followed if Sin should have been pardoned, and Sinners saved
without a Satisfaction to the Justice of God.

These Things are necessary to understand the Reason and Use of Christ's
Sufferings.

2. And now here comes in the Necessity, and Reason of Christ Sufferings; not
that God was so delighted with the Blood and Sufferings of Christ, merely
considered as Sufferings; that he would sell his great Benefits to us, for the
Blood of his innocent Son: nor to incline God to be merciful, that was before
averse to it. No; but since he was propense to show Mercy, he might in this way
do it, without any prejudice to his other Perfections, because in the Death and
Sufferings of Christ, there is a sufficient salvo for the Honor of his Law and
Government, and of his Wisdom, Holiness, and Justice; so that now his Mercy and
Kindness is exercised in pardoning of guilty Sinners, without any Impeachment
of the Honor of his other Perfections; he can now be just as well as merciful
in Pardoning, and holy as well as pitiful and kind in Sparing.

And his rich and free Grace in pardoning and saving Sinners in this way does
thus appear.

1. In that this way for the Satisfaction of his own Justice, and for the
vindicating the Honor of his Law and Government, was of his own finding out
and provideing; the Scripture every where attributes the contrivance of
Redemption to God himself, Job 33. 24. -- I have found a ransom; God did out
of his own Treasure provide for the Satisfaction of his own Justice; the giving
of Christ to be our Redeemer, was the Fruit of his free self-moving Love and
Grace, Joh. 3. 16. God so love the World that he gave his Son.

2. His Grace appears in accepting of what Christ did and suffered for us, so
as thereupon, and for the sake of Christ to Pardon and Acquit us, when we
believe in him; for though the Suffering of Christ, were abundantly sufficient
to make Satisfaction; yet it is of the free Grace of God to accept them on our
behalf; for in that very Thing there is a Relaxation of the Law, for that did
threaten every Offender in his own Person, and none else.

3. Nay here seems to be a more abundant Grace and Love in giving Pardon and
Salvation through Christ, then if he had given it as a mere Act of Dominion and
Favor, without any Satisfaction to his Justice. For you see that the
Sufferings of Christ was not to purchase Gods Love of Goodwill to us, for that
was Antecedent to the Sufferings of Christ, and the moving Cause of his giving
Christ; but the true Reason of Christ's Sufferings is, that the Honor of his
Law and Government, and of all his Perfections might be secured and provided
for, in the exercise of his Grace, and pardoning Mercy toward us. Now that he
should give his only begotten and dearly beloved Son; to be so humbled and
abased, to undergo such Shame and Misery and Death for us, this was of all
others the highest Instance and Demonstration of his Grace and Love to us; it
was impossible that he should be merciful at a dearer Rate, or show his Love
and Kindness in a more stupendous Way. We have a story of Zaleucus King of
Locris, that when his own Son was found to have transgressed a Law, that
threatened the loss of both Eyes to the Offender, the King resolves to execute
the Law, to save that from Contempt; and yet withal to show Mercy and Kindness
to his Son, and that by this means, he consented to have one of his own Eyes
put out to save one of his Sons Eyes; now will not all acknowledge that herein
he showed his Love to his Son, more than if he had freely remitted the whole
Penalty. Why, thus it is here, God has showed his Grace and Love to us much
more in giving his Son, and saving of us through his Satisfaction, than if he
had done it as a mere Act of Dominion and Favor. So much in Answer to the
first Objection.

Obj. 2. How is Salvation by Grace, since it is only by or through Faith, and
not without it; since such a Condition, Disposition or Qualification is
necessary to our actual receiving or partaking of it.

Ans. 1. Grace and Faith are not inconsistent, not opposite or contrary one to
another, so that it may be, and is, nevertheless of Grace, though it be only
through Faith and not without it; for, Faith, is no procuring, meriting, or
deserving Cause of Salvation, only a necessary Disposition to our receiving of
it; viz. that which makes us duly qualified and disposed Subjects; as the Sun
Communicates its Light freely, but the Window-shuts must be removed before it
can inlighten our House and Dwelling; and as the taking away of the
Window-shuts is no Cause of the Suns-light, only it removes that which did
hinder its shining into our House; so it is in this Case, Faith is but like the
unstoping of the Window, the removing that which did hinder the healing and
saving Beams of Grace from shining into our Souls.

2. Faith as to the most vital and essential Act of it (which is the Consent or
Choice of the Heart and Will) is but a hearty, thankful Acceptance of the Gift
of Grace, according to its proper Nature and Use; for when you do heartily and
sincerely Consent to take Christ, for all the ends and uses that he is offered
to you for, in the Gospel, then are you Believers indeed, and Christ and
Salvation is yours in Right and Title; when you thankfully accept of Christ to
save you from Sin, as well as from the evil Consequents and Miseries that
follow it, then Christ is yours, and Salvation is yours in Title; now I hope a
Gift is nevertheless free, though it be given to none but those that are
willing to receive it, yea and to those only that will heartily and thankfully
receive it. If the King Pardon a Traitor on Condition that he will thankfully
Accept it, and Promise to Rebel no more, but become a Loyal Subject, I hope he
Pardons freely though upon such a Condition; if you give any thing to the Poor
on this Condition, that they reach forth their Hand to receive what you give,
and be thankful to you for it, would you not reckon that you give freely? and
nevertheless freely, though you require that they should thankfully receive
your Alms: Why, thus is our Salvation of Grace, though it be only through Faith
and not without it, for Faith is but our hearty, thankful, receiving of the
Gift according to its Nature and Use.

Obj. But it may possibly be objected against this, that many carnal and
ungodly Men would gladly accept of Salvation, and yet they are not therefore
saved, nor have any Right or Title to it.

Ans. Take notice, that I say, that Faith is but a hearty, thankful, accepting
of the Gift according to its proper Nature and Use? and is any carnal and
ungodly Man, while such, heartily willing and desirous to accept it so? No, he
is not, nor can he be, while he remains carnal and ungodly; But you will say,
He is willing to accept of Salvation: Yea, no doubt, but what sort of
Salvation? Not the Salvation of the Gospel; not that Salvation that is
Purchased and Offered by Christ. At most, he desires only a part, but not the
whole of it; he would be saved from Hell, but he would not be saved from Sin;
he abhors and loathes that part of Salvation, as much as he does wish for, and
desire the other. No doubt, there are none but would be saved from the Miseries
of the Damned, from Everlasting Burnings, and Chains of Darkness; but there are
Thousands that would not be saved from their vain, carnal, earthly, sensual,
and selfish Disposition of Mind and Heart. Alas! All that we can do, we cannot
persuade Men to this, we cannot by all manner of Arguments and Entreaties,
prevail with Men to be willing to be saved from these: And Salvation from these
and such like evil and carnal Dispositions, is a great and Principal Part of
the Salvation of the Gospel.

Again, There are many that are willing to accept of Christ; but how? Not
wholly and entirely, as he is offered in the Gospel; they would have him to
Pardon them, but not to rule overthem; they would have him to save them from
the Guilt of Sin, and the Curse for Sin; but not from the Power and Dominion of
it: They would, with all their hearts, have him to make them happy, but not to
make them holy, not to conform them to the Image of God; No, in this respect
they hate him, as much as they desire him in other respects; they would have
Christ to be to them a Hiding Place from the Wind, a Refuge and Shelter from
the Storms of Wrath, but they would not not have him as a Physician to heal
their diseased Souls of their inordinate love of Self and the World, and
Creaturecomforts, of their Sensuality, and Selfishness.

Thus when it comes to be examined, it will be found, that there is not a
carnal Man in the World that is truly willing and desirous of Salvation, in
the true and full sense of it.

3. Faith it self is the Gift of God, though it be but a hearty thankful
acceptance of the Gift, according to it is proper Nature and Use, yet such is
the Pravity and Corruption of our Nature, such is the Carnality, Earthliness,
Sensuality of our Dispositions, naturally, that we should never consent to
this, unless Gods special Grace did incline and persuade us to it. Did not God
give us Faith we should never have it. All the Entreaties, Promises,
Threatenings of the Gospel would never persuade our hearts to it without the
special Grace of God; all the Arguments taken from God or our Selves, from Life
and Death, Heaven and Hell, everlasting happiness or misery, would never
prevail with the carnal, corrupt Heart of Man to believe, without the powerful,
efficacious Grace of God: This is clear from many express Testimonies of
Scripture, the Text says, it is not of our selves, it is the Gift of God.
Phil. 1. 29. unto you it is given -- to believe in him -- Isa. 53. 1. Who has
believed our report; and then follows as a reason of it, to whom has the Arm
of the Lord been revealed.

Now tho God give Salvation to none but Believers, yet since Faith it self is
his Gift too, that makes it to be nevertheless of Grace still. Indeed was Faith
a Disposition, acquired merely by the power of Nature, or only by our own
Diligence and Industry in the Use of Means, without the Grace of God; then it
would lessen the Glory of Grace indeed; and at best make it to be partly of
Grace, and partly of our Selves. But it is not so; Faith that does qualify and
dispose us for Salvation, is Gods Gift as well as Salvation it self; Grace
gives all, both the Disposition to receive, and the consequent Benefit received
too. But he always gives it in this wise, and holy Way and Order, that he makes
one Gift to be the necessary Qualification to dispose the Soul for the
receiving of another: He gives Repentance, to dispose the Soul to receive
Forgiveness of Sin; gives Faith, to dispose the Soul to receive the great
benefits of Justification and Adoption; gives Holiness and Purity of Heart, to
dispose the Soul for Communion with God and the everlasting Enjoyment of him;
and he always observe this Order and Method, in bestowing the great and saving
Gifts of his Grace, and never varies it. So that those shall never have the
Gift of forgiveness of Sin, that have not first the Gift of Repentance; and
those shall never have the Gift of Salvation that have not first the Gift of
Faith and Holiness.

Obj. 3. But if Salvation be by Grace though it be through Faith, (which is but
the hearty, thankful, acceptance of the Gift) yet how is complete Salvation,
that is the Possession of Eternal Life and Glory of Grace; when so much Care
and Diligence and persevering Continuance in the Duties of Holiness and
Obedience, is required in order to the Possession of it.

Ans. 1. It must be acknowledged, that the greatest Diligence and Seriousness
in the Duties of Holiness and Obedience, and Continuance therein to our Lives
end, are required to our complete Salvation; yet this is not opposite to Grace,
nor make Salvation to be ever the less of Grace.

That these are necessary, see what the Scripture says, Phil. 2. 12. Work out
your own Salvation with Fear and Trembling. Romans 2. 7. To them who by patient
continuance in well doing -- Eternal Life. Heb. 12. 14. follow -- and Holiness
without which no Man shall see the Lord. 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7, 8, 10. And besides
this giving all Diligence, add to your Faith, Virtue -- It discovers great
ignorance for any to call the Preaching of, and Pressing of Holiness and
Obedience, as such, legal Preaching: For if so, never was greater legal
Preachers heard then the Apostles Peter and Paul. Nay, if the mere pressing of
such Duties be legal Preaching, then our Savior himself was a legal Preacher
too, Luke 13. 24, 27. Strive to enter in at the strait gate. -- Mat. 5. 16, 17,
19, 20. and Mat. 7. 24. He that hears these sayings of mine, and does them --
And what Sayings were these? why, those excellent Precepts of Holiness and
Obedience that he had Preached to them in his Sermon upon the Mount; whence it
is plain, That it is not the pressing of the Duties of Holiness and Obedience
that makes Preaching to be Legal Preaching; but it is the Ends and Uses that
they are pressed for, that must denominate it: If they are pressed for
Gospel-Ends and Uses, that is Gospel-Preaching; and I see not how the Gospel
can be truly Preached without the pressing of them in their place; and if any
do pretend to Preach the Gospel without it, they either Preach not Christ's
Gospel, or but by the Halves; but if any do press the Duties of Holiness and
Obedience for Legal-ends and purposes, that is Legal Preaching indeed.

But tho Holiness and sincere Obedience are necessary to Eternal Life and
Salvation, yet it is nevertheless of Grace; for whosoever sets Grace and
Evangelical Holiness and Obedience, in opposition one to another, they set
Christ, and his Word or Gospel against it self, and make it to speak
Contradictions; and they ignorantly lessen, and reproach and degrade that Grace
which they would seem to exalt; for Salvation is never the less of Grace, tho
Holiness and Obedience are necessary, as the Means and Way to attain it; which
will thus appear.

1. Because Evangelical Holiness and Obedience is it self a Gift of Grace, even
as Faith is; for Faith is the Root and Principle of all true Obedience; and all
Holiness and Obedience is the Natural and Necessary Fruits and Products of it:
So that Holiness and Obedience are given virtually in the Gift of Faith it
self; when God gives a principle that necessarily produces such and such
Effects; he truly gives those Effects themselves in giving of the Principles;
as he that gives you a Tree that naturally and certainly will bear such Fruits,
he gives you the Fruit in giving of you the Tree; as in Creation God gave Man a
Principle of Reason, which does principally Difference him from bruit
Creatures; why now in giving him this principle of Reason he gave all the
following Acts of Reason, whereby a Man Acts in a higher and more excellent way
than the Bruits are capable of, why thus it is here.

2. But further, Grace does not only give the Principle of Holiness and
Obedience; but Grace does still continue to actuate the Principle, and concurs
to the Production of every individual Act of Holiness and Obedience. Grace does
not turn us off to Trade with the Stock that is first given and bestowed upon
us, but it daily gives forth, and communicates renewed influxes to us; there is
an exciting quickening Grace, that stirs us up when we are dull, and rouses us
up to a Holy Diligence and Fervor when we are Drowsy and Slothful; and there
is helping, aiding, or assisting Grace, given forth to every renewed Act of
Obedience; Without me, says Christ, you can do nothing; And if you abide in
me, as the Branch in the Vine, then you shall bring forth Fruit, but not else,
John 15. Phil. 2. 13. -- For it is God that Works in you both to will and to do
of his own good Pleasure; hence it is most plain that Salvation is of Grace,
notwithstanding such Care and Diligence in the Dutys of Holiness and Obedience
be necessary in order to it: For you see that Evangelical Holiness and
Obedience it self is of Grace.

3. Further still, the more Holy and Obedient any are, the more Grace do they
receive from God, and the more they are beholden to Grace, and the greater
Obligations they have to Praise and Admire the Riches of it toward them; for
the more Holy and Obedient any are, the more large and bountiful is Grace in
its Gifts to them, 1 Cor. 15. 10. By the Grace of God, I am what I am, and his
Grace bestowed upon me, was not in vain, for I labored more abundantly than
they all -- and to this Purpose, we have a saying of St. Augustine, the more
any one does, the more Holy and Obedient he is, the more is he a Debtor to the
Grace of God. Mr. Rutherford in his Book of the Covenant of Grace, p. 198.
Speaking of the difference betwixt Gospel Obedience, and that of Adam in
Innocence; says, in Gospel Obedience, we offer more of the Lords own, and less
of our own, because he both Commands, and gives us Grace to obey. You may hence
see, what strange Preachers of Grace they are (if such there be, as is said)
that set it in Opposition to Evangelical Holiness, and Obedience. For, alas!
they do (unwittingly no doubt) lessen Grace and deny many of its greatest
Gifts, and strip it of a principal Part of its Glory, while they think they do
exalt it. This whole Matter may be illustrated by a Similitude or two. Suppose
a Nobleman takes a Beggar from the Dunghill, designing to make him his Heir; or
to give him an Estate of many hundreds or thousands per Annum; but before he
will bestow it upon him, he will make him an accomplished Man, fit to be useful
and serviceable in his Country, or else he will not give it him; and in Order
hereunto, he is at a great deal of Pains, and Care, and Charge, in educating of
him, at the Schools, and at the University, and the Inns of Court; and when he
is completely accomplished, he gives his Honor and Estate to him; now does this
make his Gift to be ever the less, or the less free, because he gave him the
former Gift of his Education, and made that a Condition of his receiving the
other? Will not all Men acknowledge, that his Bounty, was so far from being the
less, that it was really the greater for it: That the Gift of his Education,
did much the more inhance his Bounty and Kindness to him, than if he had given
him his Estate alone without it; and that he was much the more obliged and
beholden to him, in that he gave him not only his Estate, but his Education too.

Why, really this is our Case, should God give us Heaven, without Holiness (was
that possible) his Grace would be unspeakably less to us than it is; in first
making o^ us Holy and Obedient, that we may thereby be made fit and meet to
enjoy it.

Again, suppose a Coundemned Traitor, that is likewise Sick of a Mortal
Disease, that if he Dye not by the Hand of Justice, he is sure quickly to Dye
of his Disease; now is it not a far greater Grace and Favor of the King, to
procure him a Physician and Pay for his Cure, and to Pardon his Crime too; than
it would be only to Pardon his Crime and leave him to Dye of his Disease? Why,
this is our very Case, we are Diseased as well as Condemned Sinners; and were
our Crimes pardoned, and our Diseases not cured we should be miserable still,
but the rich, free, and abundant Grace of God, does not only Pardon our Crimes,
but heals our Diseases too, by making of us Holy and obedient.

USE of Information.

1. If it be so, that it is by Grace that we are saved; then this is directly
against the Doctrine of the Merit of our good Works, for Grace and Debt are
directly opposed by the Apostle as inconsistent, Romans 4. 4. and Romans 11. 6.
Grace does not destroy our Obligation to Works of Holiness and Obedience but
increases it, and lays greater Obligations upon us than ever; but it quite
overthrows the Merit and Desert of them; or their being any way procuring, and
deserving Causes of Salvation; Grace obliges more strongly than ever, to the
greatest Diligence, Industry and Endeavor in the Practice of them; but when we
have done all that we are able, we must renounce all in Point of Desert, and
say, we are unprofitable Servants.

2. If Salvation be of Grace, then this likewise overthrows that Doctrine of
the Power of Nature or Free Will; as being sufficient and able of it self for
Conversion without the Grace of God; for these two are inconsistent, that it
should be of Grace, and yet that the Power of Nature should be sufficient,
without Grace, and therefore the other must be false. It is not of him, that
wills nor of him that runs, but of God that shows Mercy; And who made thee to
differ from another, or what have thou that thou have not received? 1 Cor. 4.
7. and Phil. 2. 13. Its God that Works in you both to will and to do of his own
good Pleasure.

2. But let us come to some Use of this Doctrine that may be more for our
Practice; Of you that have heard this Doctrine, that The Salvation of Sinners
is of Grace, I reckon there are these two sorts of you. Some that have had as
yet no Experience of the saving Effects of this Grace in your selves; and
others of you that have had Experience of it. Now let us consider, what
Direction and Instruction this Doctrine of Gods Grace may afford to both these
sorts; to the one sort, in Order to their getting into a State of Grace and
Salvation; and to the other sort, in Order to their furtherance and increase in
Grace and Holiness and Comfort; there is much in it for the Instruction and
Help of both sorts, if God give you but Wisdom and Skill, and Hearts to draw it
out. But I would first say something to both in general; and then show what
Instruction there is in it to both more particularly.

1. In general, let me Caution all Persons whatsoever to take special heed,
that they do not wrest and abuse this Doctrine of the Grace of God; we have
great need of this Caution, because of that marvelous Proneness, that there is
in all Men to it. Partly through the ignorance and weakness of our
Understanding; and especially through the carnal, selfish, and corrupt
Disposition of our Hearts; 1. Most Men's Understandings are so weak, that they
think those things to be opposite or inconsistent that are not so, but are
subordinate; as Gods Grace and Man's Duty, and his Care and Diligence in the use
of Means; and all our Natures are so corrupt, that we are apt to turn the most
precious Doctrine of Grace into Poison to our Souls; as the Spider sucks Venom
out of the most sweet and wholesome Plants and Flowers that be. The Apostle
knew very well, how prone Men are to wrest and abuse the Grace of God; and
therefore, when he had been discoursing largely of the riches and freeness of
it in the former Chapters, he subjoyns a Caution against the abusing of it,
Romans 6. 1. What shall we say then, shall we continue in Sin, that Grace may
abound? God forbid. And Jude 4. We are told that many did turn the Grace of God
into Lasciviousness; therefore when ever this Doctrine of Gods Grace is
Preached, all have need to be Cautioned against the abuse of it. And for a
Caution against it, consider these two Things. First, To wrest and abuse Grace
is of all Sins the most provoking to God. Secondly, And the most Dangerous and
Pernicious to Men's Souls.

1. The Abuse of Grace is of all Sins the most provoking to God, as we say,
Corruption optimi est pessima, the abuse of the best Things is of all other the
worst, and does most heighten and aggravate the Sin and Guilt of those that do
so. If it be so heinous a Sin to abuse the Mercies of Gods common Providence,
such as his Benignity, Patience and Long-suffering; so as thereby to be more
bold and fearless in sinning against him, when they should be led thereby to
Repentance and Thankfulness; as it is Romans 2. 4, 5. Then how much more heinous,
and crimsondyed a Sin must it needs be, to wrest and abuse his Grace that
brings Salvation, that offers Salvation, that tends to Salvation, that aims at
and designs our Salvation, that is the first moving and efficient Cause of
Salvation to us: What can be imagined worse than for Men to be evil, and the
more evil because God is good to them! It is a Sin to return evil for evil to
Men; and what is it then to return evil to God for the greatest good of all?
There is nothing so provoking to a Man, as to have his free Love and Kindness
abused and turned against himself, or to an end quite contrary to what he
designed it, and so it must needs be to God; to abuse his Grace seems to be a
greater Sin than to distrust his Power, or to slight his Authority, or to
trample upon his Laws; you only have I known of all the families of the Earth,
therefore I will punish you for your Iniquities.

2. To abuse Grace is of all others the most pernicious and destructive to Men's
Souls; for this closes up the Fountain of all our Blessings, this makes Grace
it self a Man's Enemy; and then who or what shall Plead for him; and Justice
will not fail to avenge the quarrel of abused Grace, nay Grace it self will
complain of the Wrong, and solicit for Vengeance upon the Abusers of it. If
the only thing that can recover the Sinner, be abused, so that he falls the
lower thereby, that will be an irrecoverable fall indeed; If a Man make Mercy
and Grace it self his Enemy, then who or what shall be his Friend?

But how or wherein is Grace abused?

1. The Doctrine of Grace is notoriously abused, when Men from hence do think
that they are exempted or discharged from the Law, as a Rule to govern their
Hearts and Practices by; this abuse may arise from a misunderstanding of that
passage of the Apostle Romans 6. 14. Ye are not under the Law but under Grace. As
if Grace, and the Law, was in all respects, opposed to one another, because
they are in some; as if because God does acquit a Believer from the
condemnation of the Law, therefore we are discharged from all Obedience to it.
Our corrupt Hearts are very ready to embrace such Doctrines of Libertinisme and
Licentiousness, as the Apostle shows by adding in the very next Words, v. 15.
What then shall we sin, because we are not under the Law, but under Grace? God
forbid. It is very pleasing to our carnal fleshly part to hear that Grace does
discharge us from all Obligation to the Law; that it has no directing,
regulating Power over a Believer. But this is a gross abuse of Grace; for when
the Apostle says that we are not under the Law; it is true in several Senses,
but it is manifestly false in this Sense, that we are under no obligation by it
as a rule of life. The true sense how we are not under the law is this.

1. We, that is Believers, are not under the condemning Power of the Law; but
are by Grace freed from the Curse and Condemnation of it, 2. We are not under
the Law as a Covenant of life and salvation: We are not under the Law as to the
rigid exaction of perfect, sinless obedience, as the only Term or Condition of
Salvation. No, though perfect Obedience is still a Duty; yet through Christ and
for his sake, sincere Obedience is accepted.

But now, because we are not under the Law, in these respects it does by no
means follow that we are not under it as a Rule, or because it has no
condemning Power, that therefore it has no regulating Power, over us; you
shall see, that this Apostle, that says, we are not under the Law, yet says,
that in other respects, He is under the Law. 1 Cor. 9. 21. Being not without
Law to God, but under the Law to Christ not (...) but (...); and the Apostle
James says, If any break the Law in one point, he is guilty of all, Jam. 2.
which plainly shows that all are under the Moral Law as a Rule of Life, nay
this Apostle when he had said We are not under the Law, but under Grace; the
very next words show, that he means it in a restained Sense; and that he did
not mean that we are from under the Law as a Rule of Duty, Romans 6. 15. What
then, says he, shall we Sin because we are not under the Law, but under Grace?
God forbid; as if he should say, you must not so understand it, as if we were
discharged from all Obligation of Duty by the Law; for if so, the Caution had
been needless, for where there is no Law there* is no Transgression.

Again, to say that we are not under the Law as a Rule of Duty, is an high
abuse of Grace, because this is contrary to, nay, does destroy the essential
relation of the Creature, as a Creature, to God; for our State and Condition as
Creatures, is necessarily a State of Subjection to God; God is essentially
related to us as our Governor, and we to him as his Subjects; but he is no
Governor, if he have no Law to govern us by; nay, he has no Creature, no not
the highest Angels, that are under no law. The Angels, they have many
Immunities end Privileges above us, yet they are not exempt from Duty, or from
a Law. Psalm 103. 20. -- Ye his Angels that do his Commandments hearkening to
the voice of his Word.

2. Grace is abused when it is pretended to the excluding of a cautious fear of
sinning, or an awful reverential fear of the Divine Majesty. This abuse may
arise from a misunderstanding that Scripture 1 John. 4. 18. there is no fear in
love, for perfect love casts out fear, which the Apoctle plainly means of a
servile slavish Fear, a distracting, tormenting, dispairing Fear; but not of an
awful Fear of God; nor of a cautious Fear of offending him, as is manifest by a
multitude of other Scriptures both in the Old and New Testament. For though we
have, through Grace, freedom and boldness of aoeess to God, yet it is still
with reverence, and godly Fear. Nay, the more Grace, the greater Reverence of
God, and the greater Fear of sinning against him. Heb. 11. 28. let us have
grace -- Psalm. 130. 4. there is mercy with thee that thou may be feared,
Hos. 3. 5. they shall fear the Lord and his goodness, which is a Prophecy of
Gospel times; the Grace and Goodness of God, is so far from making men
presumptuous, that it is greater matter of reverence, and holy trembling; nay,
this fear of reverence is so far from being abolished by the Gospel, that it
continues even in Heaven amongst the Angels and blessed Spirits, it being an
essential and necessary respect of the Creature as such, to his Creator.

3. Grace is abused when it is pleaded to make Repentance and Sorrow for Sin
needless, as if Humiliation and sorrow for sin was a legal duty; whereas
Repentance and all the acts of it are purely Gospel. For the Law knows no such
thing; it neither did require it, as a means of Pardon and Life, nor admits it;
and the Apostle speaks of it as a Duty, especially appropriated to the Gospel;
and more evidently known and discerned to be a Duty, and to be practiced, as
the Gospellight shone clearer and brighter, Acts 17. 30. But now -- now since
the Preaching of the Gospel, in a special manner, he commands all men every
where to repent. Nay, the most genuine Repentance and Sorrow arises from a
sense of the Love and Mercy of God in Christ, Zachary, 12. 10.

4. Grace is abused, When thereupon Men take encouragement to be more careless
and remiss in Duty; more slight and negligent in the use of God's Ordinances,
and all appointed Means in order to Salvation: When, because we are saved by
Grace, Men thence conclude, that their Care and Diligence in Praying, Hearing,
Seeking, and Waiting upon GOD in the use of his appointed Means of Salvation,
is vain, and to little purpose. This is a most horrid abuse of Grace, when it
is used to make void God's own Ordinances and Institutions; and to teach and
imbolden Men to slight and neglect them.

For wherefore did GOD institute the Ordinances of Worship, and command all a
diligent Attendance upon him, in the Duties of Hearing, Reading, Praying, and
such like, if He did not intend that his Grace should be communicated this way
to Sinners, and ordinarily, not without them: As he gives His Grace freely, so
he appoints the Way and Means, in which he will communicate it, and that is in
the serious and diligent use of His Own Ordinances, Isa. 55. 2, 3. Incline your
ear and come unto me, hear and your soul shall live. Prove. 1. 23. and 8. 34
Blessed is the man that hears me, watching daily at my Gates, waiting at the
Posts of my Doors. GOD will be met with in his own way; and ordinarily he
communicates his Grace according to our Diligence in the Use of Means; and to
plead the efficacy of Grace for the slackening and abating our Diligence in the
Use of Means, is to turn God's Grace against himself, against his own Honor
and Worship; and the making void his own Institutions, as vain and needless
things.

5. But Grace is worse abused still, When, because our Salvation is of Grace,
Men therefore think that there is nothing at all for them to do, no Duty
incumbent upon them, for the putting themselves in the way of it; no obligation
to make use of their natural Faculties, with such external Means of Salvation
as God affords them, in order to the obtaining Salvation; this is such an
abuse, that in effect, it discharges a Carnal Man of his obligations to his
Maker, and strips God of his Authority and Dominion over his Creatures; and
denies all that Duty and Homage that the Rational Creature, as such, do owe to
God; for if Man have no Duty that he ought, and is bound to do, then it will
follow, either that God has no Right to command him any; or at least, that he
has appointed him no Duty wherein he should endeavor the glorifying of God,
and the Salvation of his own Soul; and if so, then God does not Govern him
according to his Nature. It is a very great abuse of Grace, to plead it to the
lessening of our Duty, but much more when it is pleaded for the utter
abolishing of it; and sure all Men must needs see the absurdity of this, that a
Man should be obliged in point of Duty, to use his Rational Faculties in the
lower Affairs of the World, and to act like a Man in buying and selling, and
all the Concernments of the Bodily Life, and yet be under no obligation to use
his thinking, reasoning, reflecting, considering Power in that which is the
great and main end of his Being, the glorifying of God, and the saving of his
own Soul.

Now, that all these forementioned, and such like, are gross abuses of the
Grace of God, will be further manifest, from this one Consideration, That Grace
does not discharge us from, no, nor lessen any obligation to Duty and Obedience
to God, that Man was under before; but instead of that, it lays us under
greater obligations than ever; for it superinduces or superadds this very great
obligation to love, fear, serve, honor and obey God, to all the rest that we
were under before: GOD is essentially related to us, as our Maker, Owner, Ruler
and Benefactor; and the obligations that arise from hence, are un-alterable,
can never cease or be lessened; (though some positive Duties may be changed or
abolished, as God pleases.) Grace does discharge no Man from any obligation
that these relations and benefits lays him under; but it superadds one more to
all the rest, which in some sense is greater than all the rest, and that is a
free and gracious Redemption, and recovery from a self-procured Misery and
Ruin; now there cannot be a greater absurdity, nor wickedness sure, than for
Men to imagine, and plead that their obligations to Duty are less, when they
are manifestly greater than before; that the addition of a greater Benefit
should make void or lessen our former obligations; which is as wise and as just
reasoning, as if a Man should say, That the casting of more weight into the
Scale, does make that, and all that was in before, to stand for nothing; as if
Absolon, when he Rebelled against David, should plead, That his free favor in
pardoning him the Murder of his Brother Amnon, did discharge him from his
obligations that he was under to David, as he was his natural Father, a loving
and indulgent Father, and his rightful Ruler and Sovereign.

Third Use. If it be by Grace that we are saved, then let us see what direction
and instruction this Doctrine affords to those that are yet in a graceless
State, in order to their getting into it.

1. You that have yet had no experience of the saving fruits and effects of
this Grace in your selves; labor to be sensible of, and affected with the
sadness of your Case. Is it not a sad Case, that of the Showers of Grace that
fall so plentifully in the dispensation of the Gospel, that none has yet dropped
into your Souls? That you should be like Gideon's Fleece, wholly dry, when the
Ground round about you is moistened, and refreshed with the Dews of Heaven;
that many are saved, while you are yet in your sins; many that sit under the
same Ministry, hear the same Sermons, are made partakers of those things that
accompany Salvation, while you have felt no such Influences and Operations by
the same Word. I am confident you would think it a sad Case, if the Meat and
Drink which nourishes and refreshes others, should neither nourish nor refresh
you at all, but you should starve and pine away, and die for want of
nourishment in the midst of Plenty: But it is a much more sad Case, if that
Word that is through Grace effectual to the Salvation of others, has no such
effects upon you; that many round about you, are of darkness made light in the
Lord, while you are in darkness still, though in the midst of light; that while
others are reconciled to God, and brought nigh to him, you that enjoy the same
Word and Means of Grace, are as far off from God as ever, and still in your
Enmity against him.

O! Labor to get your hearts deeply affected with the sadness of your Case,
and this would be a good step toward the mending and bettering of it.
Methinks, your own thoughts should suggest to you many things that might make
you groan and lament the sadness of your Case, while you are utter strangers to
the saving effects of Grace.

2. If it be by Grace that we are saved, then consider, that your Case, though
it be sad, yet it is not hopeless and remediless; though it be dangerous, it is
not yet altogether desperate: Think thus with your selves, if all that are
saved are saved by Grace, then why may not I hope that it may, one time or
other, cast its Skirt over my nakedness, and shed its benign influence over my
soul; since Grace saves all that are saved, it saves freely, and none for any
Merit or Desert in them, none for any worth or worthiness that it sees in them
more than in others; think with your selves, Grace has saved Thousands and
Millions of Sinners that were as bad as I, as great sinners, and as old sinners
as I; that had as much neglected and slighted, and sinned against it, and
abused it as I have done. Why, as it is really a humbling and affecting
Consideration, to see many and many saved, while you are yet in your sins; so
there is really, in this very thing some ground of hope and encouragement too:
Is it not some ground of Hope to think that such and such were dead to sin as I
am, but at last were made alive; were in a lost State and Condition, but at
last were found by Grace; they were sometimes carnal, worldly and disobedient,
(as I am) but at last, Grace did renew and change them; and therefore I will
wait and hope that Grace may sometime shed its benign influences upon me.

3. If it be by Grace that we are saved, then you hence see where it is that
you are to seek for Salvation; You see you must go to GOD for it, and cry to
him, and pray and beg of him for it. Whoever is saved, it is the Gift of God to
them, and a Gift of his Free Grace and Favor, yet not so as to exclude our
seeking or begging of it; nay, it so much the more strongly obliges and engages
us to seek it, and pray to him for it. When GOD promises Israel, that he would
give them a new heart, yet, says he, for all this will I be enquired of, by
the House of Israel to do it for them, Ezekiel. 36. 37. and our Savior says, ask
and ye shall have, seek and ye shall find, and though Grace gives all freely,
yet it will be sought unto, and inquired after, and as it is elsewhere, ask of
me, and I will give thee; so God will have his Grace asked, entreated and
sought for; now, have you not either neglected this crying unto God, and
entreating of his Grace? or else have you not done it in a careless, slighty
and customary manner? You have, it may be, used other Means, such as Reading
and Hearing the Word, but have you not neglected to Pray, and cry unto God for
his Grace to bless it, and make it effectual to you? Saving Benefits are
principally to be obtained upon your Knees, in earnest Prayers and Cries to the
GOD of all Grace.

Oh! That you would try this Course, every day to solicit the Throne of Grace,
and never give over your Suit till God give you an Answer of Peace; If you want
necessary Food for your Bodies, and can no otherwise get it, you will ask it of
those that have it to give; yea, and will not easily take a Denial for such
things; and should you not much more ask of God saving Grace for your Souls,
for he only has it to bestow upon you.

4. If it be by Grace that we are saved, then as this directs you where to seek
it, even of the God of all Grace; so it directs what is your chief Argument and
Plea that you must make use of with him, viz. his own rich Mercy and Free
Grace; you must beg of God Mercy for Mercies sake, and Grace for Grace's sake:
This is the Principal Argument that Sinners have to plead with GOD, His own
Grace and Mercy: but this contains many Arguments under it, all which are
ultimately and reductively a pleading of Grace.

And as I do here put all Graceless Persons upon praying and crying to God for
his Grace, as their undoubted Duty, and as a Means appointed by GOD, in order
to their obtaining of Grace; so I will show you what Arguments all may use,
yea, and ought to use with God in seeking his saving Grace.

1. You may plead with God, That you are his Creatures, he made you, his Power
gave you these Beings that you have. This is a good Argument, or else we should
never find it so often made use of in Scripture. When we cannot plead a special
Interest and Relation to him, as our reconciled God and Father in Christ, yet
we may plead our general Relation to him as his Creatures, and he our Maker;
thus Job 10. 3. Is it good unto thee that thou should oppress, that thou
should despise the work of thy hands? And ver. 8. Thy hands have made me and
fashioned me, and Ps. 119. 73. Thy hands have made me and fashioned me, give me
understanding that I may learn thy Commandments. Job 14. 15. Thou shall call,
and I will answer thee, thou will have a desire to the work of thine hands.
Isa. 64. 9. But now O Lord -- We are the Clay, and thou art the Potter, we are
all the work of thy hands, be not wroth, very sore, etc. though it be no good
Argument with Men, to ask one gift because they have given us another, yet it
is with God. Go to him and say, behold Lord, I am thy Creature, thy Power has
made me, and thy Grace only can new make me, destroy not the work of thy own
Hands etc.

2. You may plead the end of your Creation, which was that you might serve him
your Maker in a pleasing and acceptable manner; go to him then and plead this;
Can you not say, Lord thou have showed me, that the very end of my Being is
that I might please and serve thee which in this corrupt and depraved state I
am in, I can never do, without thy renewing and sanctifying Grace. O, that as
thou have magnified thy Power in making of me out of nothing; so let thy Grace
be magnified in recovering a lost and undone Creature, in reconciling an
apostate Creature to thy self; deny not the help of thy Grace to recover a
depraved, corrupted Creature, that would fain answer the end of his Being, that
would fain be capable of that Work and Service thou made him for. Lord I
would fain fill up the place in thy Creation that thou have set me in, and not
be an unprofitable Drone or a useless Burden in it.

3. Your may plead your own Misery, as Ps. 79. 8. Let thy tender Mercy prevent
us, for we are brought very low. While Persons are under the Means of Grace and
Salvation, Misery is a good Argument to plead with a gracious and merciful God;
plead then your Misery with God: say, Lord, I am a lost Creature, an undone
Creature, laiden with Guilt and Sin, and like to be lost and undone for ever,
if thy Mercy pity not, if thy Grace do not help and save me in time; my Misery
is such, that none can help or save me but thou; and if thou save not I must
perish for ever. Say, tho as I am an Apostate sinner, I am a most deserving
object of thy Wrath, yet as I am a miserable lost creature, here is a fit
object for thee to glorify thy Grace and Mercy upon. Will it not be the Glory
of thy Mercy to Pity and Help the miserable? and will it not be the Glory of
thy Grace to save such as deserve thy Wrath?

4. You may plead your own weakness and inability to help or save your selves;
that you can do nothing without him; nothing that will be to any purpose, or
that will be of any avail to Salvation, without his special Grace. Say, Lord I
have destroyed my self, I confess: but in thy Grace alone, is all my Hope and
Help; thou know, that I have such an hard Heart that none but thou can
soften; such an Iron Sinew in my Will that none but thou can bend; such a
carnal, corrupt, earthly Temper, and Disposition, that none but thou can renew
and change it. O, let thy Mercy Pity, and thy own Grace move thee to help a
miserable lost Creature, that has no help in himself or in any other besides
thee.

5. You may plead the very End and Design of Redemption; which was the Glory of
his free Grace and Mercy, in the recovery and Salvation of miserable and lost
Sinners. Say, Lord did not thou contrive the Work of Redemption, and send thy
Son into the World, and deliver him up to Death, for this very End and Design,
that thy Grace, together with other of thy Perfections, might be glorious in
pardoning, justifying sanctifying and saving of depraved, guilty, and lost
Sinners. Now behold here a miserable lost Child of Adam, did thou not send
thy Son that thy Grace might be glorified in the Salvation of such, and will
not thy Grace be as glorious in saving of me, as of any other? O, be not Angry
with the Prayer, stop not thine Ears against the cries of thy poor lost
Creature, that begs but for such things, as are suitable and agreeable to thy
own gracious Design. Thus you see what Arguments all may use with God.

5. If it be by Grace that we are saved, then if you would partake of it is
saving Influences, this directs you to lie in the way of it; that is, exhibit
the greatest Seriousness, Diligence, Earnestness in the Use of Gods appointed
Means that possibly you can; for as Grace gives all freely, and chooses it is
own Objects upon whom it will bestow it is Gifts: so it chooses and appoints
it is own Way and Means, wherein and whereby it will communitate it is saving
fruits and Effects to Men, and these are the Word and Ordinances, and Duties of
Holiness and Worship. Hence the Gospel is called, the Gospel of the Grace of
God; and the Ordinances of Worship are called, the Means of Grace; not only
because, the Grace of God, is therein revealed and made known; but also
because, it is thereby, in the serious diligent and reverend Use of them,
communicated and bestowed upon carnal, blind, and dead Sinners, for the
inlightening, sanctifying and saving them; therefore here you must lie and wait
for it, as the impotent Man did at the Pool of Bethesda, waiting for the Motion
of the Waters: There was a healing Virtue communicated, but it was by those
Waters and no others.

So Grace does communicate it is healing, sanctifying, and saving Virtue; but it
is by it is own chosen and appointed Means, and no other. As it is the influence
and blessing of Heaven, that give us the Fruits of the Earth; but this only by
blessing Man's Labor and Industry in Plowing and Sowing, and never without it,
so it is here.

Carnal Hearts are apt to draw a quite contrary Conclusion from hence; and to
say, if it be Grace that saves us, then we have the less, if any thing, to do
our selves. But you see the contray Inference to this of theirs is clear viz.
that we should not do the less our selves, but rather the more, because Grace
saves us, as the Apostle says, Work out your Salvation with Fear and
Trembling, for it is God that Works in you both to will and to do. A strange
Inference! some would think, and yet it is very clear, as you may see in other
things, the Husbandman, when the season fits him does bestir himself the more,
in plowing, and sowing, and gathering in the Fruits of the Earth; because he
knows he has not the Season in his own Power; and all his Labor and Industry
without that, will signify nothing at all; so here, if it be Grace that must
save us, if ever we be saved: Then you have great Reason, to bestir your selves
in using the Means wherein Grace communicates it self.

6. If Grace saves us, then as you must use the Means that are of it is
appointing, so you must use then dependently, with an Eye to Grace for its
Blessing upon them, to make them successful. Grace is too little eyed, too
little sought unto, too little depended on in the Use of Means, and therefore
the Success is for the most part accordingly. Persons in hearing the Word eye
Men that are Instruments, but eye not God and his Grace which is the Life and
Soul of all Ordinances. Persons eye Men and not God, depend more upon Men's
Parts and Abilities, than upon Gods Grace and Blessing, and therefore they find
in Ordinances, what a Man can do, and no more: And what is that? Why, a sound
in their Ears, but no powerful Effects and Operations upon their Hearts; a
little pleasing of the Fancy, with some light, superficial touches upon the
Affections but no renewing, sanctifying Change of the Soul. But was Gods Grace
more eyed, and more depended on, in the use of his Ordinances, we should
doubtless see its saving Fruits and Effects, more plentifully, and more
ordinarily communicated than now they are.

Men speak but to the Senses, it is God only that can speak to the Heart; Men
may argue with the Will, but it is the Grace of God only, that can incline and
persuade it; and therefore, as those that built the Wall of Jerusalem, wrought
with the Trowel in one hand, and the Sword in the other; so you must, as it
were, work in the diligent use of Gods appointed Means and Ordinances, with the
one hand; and with the other lift up to Heaven, for his Grace to bless them to
you: Thus if Grace saves us, then you must be sure to eye Grace, and depend
upon it for Success in the use of Means.

7. If it be by Grace that we are saved, then here is great encouragement,
against the difficulties that attend the Conversion and Salvation of a Sinner;
the difficulties are great, both from the Malice and Power of Satan, the
Opposition of an alluring and insnaring World, and especially from the carnal
and corrupt Temper and Disposition of our own Hearts: all these together, do
cast such Impediments and Rubs in our Way, that it were enough, utterly to
discourage all Attempts and to make us to sit down in Despair, if we had no
greater Power than our own to trust to, or depend upon; but here is your
Encouragement, that it is Grace that saves us, and therefore those things that
are Difficulties with us, are none with God; those things that are impossible
to be overcome by your own Strength, are easily superable by an Almighty Grace.
When our Savior told his Disciples that is was easier for a Cammel to go
through the eye of a Needle, than for a rich man to be saved; they were amazed
at it, and said, who then can be saved? why? says our savior those things
that are impossible with Men, are easy with God.

Most Men, while they are in Ignorance and Carnal Security; Strangers to God
and themselves too; they think it an easy thing to be saved, but when once
their Eyes come to be opened, and their Consciences convinced of their dead,
lost, and undone State; how dead their Hearts are to God and Holiness; how
powerful Corruption is, and how weak and unable they are to conquer it, then
they are ready to say, alas! who can be saved? Why, here is great
encouragement for you, that though Conversion-work be above your own power, and
the power of any mere Creature, yet Grace can inlighten your darkness, quicken
your deadness and overcome your resistance.

As for instance, when the Soul considers its own earthly, carnal Temper and
Disposition; how disinclined and averse it is to God and Holiness, and all
Spiritual and Divine things; it is ready to say, how shall this heart of mine
ever be made to love God above all, and to delight in Him and his Service? why,
here is Encouragement, God that made the heart, can Master it; can renew and
change it; he can of stones raise up Children to Abraham; he can make dry and
dead bones live, he can breath Life into a dead Soul; he can make a Temple for
himself, of the most filthy and unclean Heart that is; he that made Heaven and
Earth of nothing, can turn a heart of Stone into flesh; he can turn the most
earthly, carnal, sensual temper that is, into a holy, heavenly Disposition; he
can stamp his own Image and Likeness upon a slave of Sin and Satan.

Thus since it is by Grace that we are saved; then notwithstanding all
Difficulties, here is great Encouragement to use his appointed Means; to pray,
and wait, and strive in hopes of Success, and a good Issue; for were the
difficulties more, and greater than they are, yet they are not insuperable to
an Almighty Grace.

4. If it be by Grace that we are saved, than what use should those make of
this Doctrine that have already tasted and experienced, the saving Fruits and
Effects of Grace in themselves? it will afford much for their furtherance and
increase in Grace and Holiness.

1. If we are saved by Grace; And have you experienced the saving Effects of
it, in your Selves, then you have Reason to be humbled; Pride,
self-conceitedness, and over-weaning Thoughts of our selves, is a thing most
hateful in the Eyes of God, most contrary to his Nature, and his Law. God
resists the Proud; and he is said to know the Proud afar off. But Humility, is
a thing of great Price and Value in his Eyes, 1 Pet. 3. 4. Yea the humble
Spirit, is a Habitation that he makes choice of, as a Seat of his special
Residence: Isa. 57. 15. And therefore, God has contrived, the whole business
of our recovery and Salvation by Christ, in such a Way and Method, as shall
most effectually hide Pride from Man; Salvation is of Grace from first to last,
that the loftiness of Men may be humbled, and the Lord alone exalted. It is
true, if Gods Grace has taken hold on your Hearts, and begun a sanctifying,
saving Work upon you; if he has begun to Form you after the Divine Image and
likeness, he has highly exalted you indeed; he has lifted you up from the
Dunghill, and set you with Princes, yea higher than the Princes of the Earth in
true Worth and Dignity. But yet, though God has thus highly exalted you, there
is no Reason or Cause in all this why you should exalt your selves, or be
puffed up with high Thoughts or Conceits of your selves, for it is Grace that
has done all this for you, and not you your selves; it is Gods free Gift to
you, and not any worth or desert of yours. Therefore often reflect upon the
Apostles Question, What have thou that thou did not receive? 1 Cor. 4. 7. O!
therefore walk humbly, be low in your own Eyes, and this will be pleasing in
the sight of God. This will be to Answer the very Design of Grace in its great
Gifts to you; this will make you more fit for Communion with God; this will
make your Souls a Temple that he will Delight to dwell and walk in; and this
will dispose you to receive more, and more Grace from him; He resists the
Proud, but gives Grace to the Humble.

2. If it be so, that we are saved by Grace, then let Grace have the Glory of
all that it has wrought in you, and done for you. Gods own Glory is his great
End and Design in all his Works; it is that which above all things else, he is
most tender and Jealous of. He freely communicates his choicest and greatest
Gifts to Men; but his Glory, he will give to none; that the reserves wholly and
solely to himself; and the Glory of his Grace is the great Aim and Design of
his redeeming and recovering Work, Ephesians. 1. 6. To the Praise of the Glory of his
Grace, etc. Take heed then, that you do not rob Grace of any of its Glory.

We are very prone to ascribe to our selves, as it is said of the Atheist, though
he does not speak out with his Tongue, yet he says in his Heart, there is no
God; So though we speak not out, yet we are apt to have such Thoughts in our
Hearts; as if God did see something more or better in us than in others, as if
we were better disposed and prepared for Grace than others; or that we were
more serious, diligent and industrious in the use of Means than others; or that
God did foresee that we would bring more Glory to him than others; that we are
prone to such self ascribing Thoughts, does appear by that Caution that is
given to Israel, Deuteronomy. 9. 4. speak not in thine Heart saying -- for my
righteousness, the Lord has brought me in to possess this land etc. It is
likely, before your Conversion, you was more serious, diligent and industrious
in the use of Means than many others; but it was a more common Grace, that made
you so; that brought you to that: Grace gave you that first, in order to his
bestowing of his more special. and excellent Gifts upon you. O! therefore see
to it that you rub every filing of this Gold, off from your own Fingers; and
let Grace have the Glory of all, that it has wrought in you; say, not I, but
the Grace of God that was with me, and therefore not unto us, not unto us, but
to thy Name be the Praise.

As the Moon shines not by its own, but a borrowed Light; so there is nothing
excellent in you above others; no holy, heavenly Inclination or Disposition in
you, but what is a Gift of Grace to you: Your breathing after God is an Effect
of his breathing upon you first. Say then, with the Apostle 1 Cor. 15. 9. 10. I
am not worthy to be called an Apostle, because I persecuted the the Church, but
by the Grace of God, I am, what I am. So say you, I was a carnal, dead Sinner,
but by the Grace of God, I am alive; I was a lover of Pleasures more than a
Lover of God; but by the Grace of God, my carnal, earthly Heart, is in some
measure sanctified, and changed, and turned toward God, and Holiness, and
Heaven. I was foolish and disobedient, and slighted Christ, and his saving
Benefits, as much as any others; but by the Grace of God my hard Heart is
somewhat softened, my Stuborness and Resistance over come, my Enmity taken
away, my aversness to Christ, in some measure turned, into a desiring, loving,
and seeking of him.

3. Are we saved by Grace; and has Grace begun a saving Work upon you, then
walk thankfully too. Every Benefit calls for thankfulness; and then much more,
saving Benefits; which are the greatest of all others. Has Grace made you to
differ from others that are still in the Gaul of Bitterness, and the Bond of
Iniquity. Nay, has Grace made you to differ, so much from your Selves; from
what you sometime were; and should you not be thankful for it? Has Grace
brought you out of Darkness into a marvelous Light, brought you out of a state
of Bondage, and Slavery to the Devil and Sin; into the glorious Liberty of the
Sons of God? Of Dead, has made you alive; of strangers, has made you nigh to
God; of Enemies, has reconciled you to him, and made you his adopted Children;
of cursed, condemned ones, has brought you into a state of Pardon and
Justification? Oh! what Reason have you to be thankful? Let your Tongues, and
your Lives to, continually speak your thankfulness, for such, and so great
Mercy. Say then with the Psalmist, Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and forget not
all his Benefits, etc. Psalm 103. 1, 2, 3, 4.

And that you may be excited to Thankfulness, consider these Things.

1. Consider the greatness of this Mercy, of all the Mercies that God bestows
upon the Children of Men, saving Mercies are the greatest, and the best; if
Grace has saved you, or given you such Things as do accompany Salvation, that
is more than all other Blessings laid together. Indeed all Gods Mercies are
great, considering how undeserving we are of them; but saving Mercy, is like
the Sun among the other Planets, that outshines all the rest, and darkens their
Glory when it comes into view.

1. When Grace saves us, that is a greater Benefit than Creation it self; as
the Redemption of the World by Christ, is a greater Work, and does discover
more of the Wisdom, Power, Love, and goodness of God to Mankind, than the
Creation of the World. And the making of any Soul, actually a Partaker of
saving Benefits, is a greater Gift, than the giving of it a Being in Creation.
Now consider, do you not think your selves greatly obliged to bless God for
your Beings; that he made you something, that were nothing? That he made you
Men and Women, and not Toads or Serpents? Surely, if you Love your selves, if
you value your Lives and Beings; or any of your Creature Comforts and
Enjoyments; Then you must needs bless God that made you what you are, out of
nothing. Ah! but how much more, should you bless God, that of his special Grace
and Love, has translated you from Darkness to Light? from Death to Life; from
Slavery to Liberty; from Wrath and Curses to Favor and Blessedness? for to be
under these evils, was worse than to be nothing; and these Blessings are
better, than mere natural Life and Being without them. Alas! What good would
your Creation have done you, since the Fall, without sanctifying and saving
Grace; it would but make you capable of greater Misery. Better a thousand
Times, never to have been Born, than to be a Vessel of Gods Wrath; and a
Companion of Devils and damned Fiends in Everlasting Burnings.

2. When Grace saves you it does unspeakably more for you than the bestowing of
all the outward Blessings of this Life upon you; Health, Riches, Honor and
Friends, with other Enjoyments and Comforts of this Life, are great Mercies;
but they are unspeakably short of renewing and saving Grace; you that have
healthful, and comely Bodies, when you look upon any decriped, maimed,
deformed, monstrous Persons, do you not admire the goodness of God that has
not made you such; but is it not worse to have blind, deformed, monstrous
Souls, than to have such Bodies? and is it not a greater Mercy, to have your
deformed Souls beautified and made comely with the Divine Image, than to have
comely Bodies? The same may be said of Riches, and all other worldly Enjoyments*

All external and worldly Enjoyments, are but for a while, and alas! How little
a while too? When you come to Dye, what becomes of bodily Strength, and Beauty?
of worldly Honors, Riches, and Friends? Alas! when you are going into another
World, if you look back upon these Things, you will see them all shrinking away
from you; and leave you to go alone, as to any Comfort you are like to have of
them. Of how short a continuance is the difference betwixt the Rich and the
Poor; the honorable and the bafe, the healthful and sickly? But sanctifying
and saving Grace, will stick by you when every Thing else will leave you; that
is Beauty will never decay, that is Riches you can never loose; that is an
Everlasting Foundation, upon which shall be built an immortal undecaying, never
ending Glory and Happiness; saving Mercy is such as Death it self can not
separate or divide you from.

3. Saving Mercy is unspeakable Mercy indeed, if you consider the greatness of
the Misery it secures and delivers you from. It is impossible to know, how
great a Mercy saving Grace is, unless you know what direful Misery all that are
yet unsaved, are under and liable to; and alas! the Misery of those that are
yet unsaved, is such as no Tongue can express. For the present, they are
hateful to God, have a fearful Load of Guilt upon their Souls; a numberless
number of Sins upon the score, which must all be accounted for. And they are
every Moment, in danger of droping into the bottomless Gulf of Misery; alas!
those that are yet altogether unsaved, are not sure to be one Day or Hour out
of Everlasting Burnings; when they close their Eyes at Night, they are not
sure, but they may open them in Hell flames; they are condemned already, there
wants nothing but the executing stroke to make them extremely and remedilessly
miserable; why, this was once your Case, but saving Grace has now put you into
a happier and securer State; and should not such a Mercy as this affect your
Hearts, and excite you to thankfulness for it.

4. Saving Grace will appear to be a great Mercy indeed, if you consider how
great Happiness it further disposes and prepares you for. And what is that?
Why, for the Possession of Heaven, for the Society of Angels and blessed
Spirits in Glory; yea, for Fellowship with God and Christ, and a perfect
Everlasting Enjoyment of him, for the being ever with the Lord, and seeing of
him Face to Face. And will you not be thankful for such a Mercy as this?

2. To excite you to Thankfulness, consider the freeness of this Grace that has
saved you. What Motive or Inducement did Grace see in you more than in others,
that it should pick you out as a Vessel of Mercy, while it has left others, so
many others, still under Wrath and the Curse? Why, it saw nothing more in you
to move and incline its kindness, and Love toward you than in thousands of
others, that are still left to ripen themselves for Destruction; no Reason can
be given of Gods Love and Kindness to you more than to any others; but that
Romans 9. I will have Mercy upon whom I will have Mercy; and that which our
Savior says, Thou have hid these Things from the Wise and Prudent, and have
revealed them to Babes; and why, the only Reason is, because it so pleased
thee; if such free Grace as this will not Provoke you to Thankfulness, what
will? Look upon others, that are still in the Gall of Bitterness and Bond of
Iniquity; that slight Christ and his Grace, that delight themselves in the high
Road to Perdition, that sport themselves with Sin and Damnation; that hear
Sermons, but are little more moved with them than the Seats they sit on. And
say, I was once as they are, and had been so to this Day, had not Grace been
more kind and merciful to me than to them.

3. To excite your Thankfulness, consider what Pains and Patience Grace was at
with you, before your carnal, backward, and perverse Hearts were prevailed
with. How long did the Spirit of God strive with you in vain! How often did he go
away grieved because you slighted and resisted his Holy Motions! How long did
Christ knock at the Door of your Hearts, before you would open to him! How long
did he follow you and woe you by the offers and Promises of his Word, and the
Motions of his Spirit, before he could gain your Consent! How often did you
shut your Eyes against Light, and stifle Convictions, and quench the Beams of
the Spirit; and break one Band and Cord after another, that Grace had fastened
upon your Consciences, like resolute Soldiers, that are beaten from one Fort,
fly to another, and will never yield, till they have none left to fly to. Ay,
did not you deal thus with God? Did not Grace meet with all this and more
Resistance from you, in turning your perverse Hearts from Creatures to God,
from Sin to Holiness, and from Self to Christ? And yet Grace bore all patiently
at your Hands, and continued to follow you still, and would never leave you,
till it had overcome your Resistance and Opposition, and with an Almighty Arm
plucked you as a Brand out of the Burning. O, how free and rich was Gods Grace
toward you, that would not leave you, notwithstanding your long and obstinate
Resistance, and striving against it: That would not suffer you to be miserable,
when you your self was so loath and backward to be saved.

4. Consider, saving Mercy is vouchsafed but to a very few comparatively; alas!
But to few of those, that enjoy the Means of Grace and Salvation; nay, many
that have had the very same Means, and heard the very same Sermons that you
have done, and yet the Spirit of Life from God has quickened you, while those
that sat by you remain dry and dead Bones still: Nay, that very Sermon that
Grace made effectual to quicken and save you; others were no more moved with
it, than the Earth they trod upon.

So much for the Third Inference, walk Thankfully.

4. If you are saved by Grace, then Walk fruitfully; let it be your Care and
Endeavor to Honor Grace in your Lives and Conversations; Paul when he had
said, By the Grace of God, I am what I am; he presently adds, And his Grace
bestowed upon me was not vain, for I labored more abundantly than they all, 1
Cor. 15. 10. Thus, do you labor to Honor Grace, by the Holiness, Purity, and
Heavenliness of your Lives and Conversations; let it be seen, by your whole
Practice, by your Converse and Dealing with all Men, what a great, what a
wonderful, what an excellent Change Grace has made in you? Alas! you will
greatly dishonor Grace, if you profess to be partakers of it, and yet appear
to be no better Men than you were before.

And Honor the Gospel, that is the Channel in which Grace does run by
esteeming and loving of it; and in your Place by encouraging the Preaching of
it, and Sinners Attendance upon it all you can; invite others to those Waters
where you have found healing for your own Souls.

5. And Lastly, If you are saved by Grace, then continue in a close Attendance
upon Grace, and a diligent waiting for its further Influences, in the use of
its appointed Means for the completing of the Work that it has begun upon you.

You are yet but begun to be saved, there is a great deal more to be done upon
you before the Work be completed. Most of you are yet got but a little way out
of Egypt, and have many Stages to go before you come to the Land of Promise.
And Grace has not yet put its last Hand to the greatest Saint, that is yet on
this side Heaven; therefore let all continue seeking, and waiting diligently
for its further Influences in his own appointed Way; Till he that has begun a
good Work in you, has finished and completed it according to his own Promise,
Phil. 1. 6.

FINIS.
Books written by the Late Reverend Mr. Nath. Vincent, are Sold by Tho.
Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns at the lower end of Cheapside, near
Mercers-Chappel.
WOrthy Walking: Pressed upon all that have heard the Call of the Gospel: From
Ephesians. 4. 1. I therefore the Prisoner of the Lord beseech you, that ye walk
worthy of the Vocation wherewith ye are called.

The Spirit of Prayer: Or, a Discourse, wherein the Nature of Prayer is opened,
the Kinds of Prayer are handled, and the right manner of Praying discovered:
Several Cases about this Duty are Resolved: From Ephesians. 6. 18. Praying always
with all Prayer and Supplication in the Spirit, etc. Unto which is added, a
Direction for the Attaining the Gift of Prayer: That Family-Duty may not be
omitted, nor Secret Duty discouraged through Inability of Utterance and
Expression.

A Heaven or Hell upon Earth: Or, a Discourse concerning Conscience; on Acts
24. 16. Herein do I exercise my self to have a Conscience, etc.

The True Touchstone; which shows both Grace and Nature: Or, a Discourse
concerning Self-Examination, by which both Saints and Sinners may come to know
themselves. Whereunto are added sundry Meditations relating to the Lords Supper.

The more Excellent Way to Edify the Church of Christ: Or, a Discourse
concerning Love: The Design of which is to Revive that Grace (now under such
decaies) among Protestants of ALL Persuasions.

The Conversion of the Soul: Or, a Discourse Explaining the Nature of that
Conversion which is sincere; and Directing and Persuading all to cease their
Loving Sin and Death, and to Turn to God and Live.

A Warning given to Sinners to prepare for Judgment, to flee from Wrath to
come, and turn from All Sin; but especially the Sin which does most easily
beset them.

The Little Child's Catechism: In which the Principles of the Christian Religion
are in plain Words and short Answers laid down, and suited to the Memories and
Understandings of Little Children. Whereunto are added several short Histories,
which may both please and profit them, as also Directions how to Pray.

The Principles of the Doctrine of Christ: Or, a Catechism, in which is
contained the Sum of the Christian Religion; or what is necessary to be
believed and done in order to Salvation. The Answers being but Seventeen in
number; and in very plain words, easy to be understood. Unto which is added, a
Catechism for Conscience; wherein the Consciences of the Ignorant, the grossly
Profane, the Young, the merely Moral, and the Hypocrites, are examined, in
order to their Instruction and Awakening; and the Consciences of the sincere
Christians are tried in order to their Peace and Comfort.

The Saints Triumph over the Last Enemy: In a Sermon Preached at the Funeral of
that Zealous and Painful Minister of Christ, Mr. James Janeway. Unto which is
added, His Character. His sore Conflict before he died: And afterward, His
Triumphant manner of departing from Earth, to the Heavenly Inheritance. On 1
Cor. 15. 55. O Death, where is thy sting? --

Isreal's Lamentation at the Death of a Prophet. In a Sermon Prophet at the
Funeral of that Holy, Learned, and Painful Minister of Christ, Mr. Thomas
Cawton. And now published at the earnest Desire of the Hearers. On 1 Samuel 25.
1. And Samuel died, and all the Israelites were gathered together, and lamented
him. --

A Funeral Sermon: Occasioned by the Death of Mr. George Baker. First Preached,
and then Published, at the earnest Desire of his Relations. On 1 Pet. 1. 17. --
Pass the Time of your Sojourning here in Fear.

The Great Change: Discoursed of in a Funeral Sermon, occasioned by the Death
of Mrs. Martha Thompson, late Wife of Captain William Thompson in Wapping. On
Job 14. 14. -- All the Days of my appointed Time will I wait till my change
come.

A Present for such as have been Sick and are Recovered; Or, a Discourse
concerning the Good which comes out of the Evil of Affliction. Being several
Sermons, Preached after his being raised from a Bed of Languishing.


