THE Voice of one Crying IN A WILDERNESS.

OR The business of a Christian, both Antecedaneous to, Concomitant of, and
Consequent upon, a sore and heavy Visitation; Represented in several Sermons.

First, Preached to his own Family, lying under such Visitation; And now made
Public as a Thank-offering to the Lord his healer.

By S. S. A Servant of God in the Gospel of his Son.

All the Paths of the Lord are mercy and truth, unto such as keep his covenant
and his testimonies, Psalm. 25. 10. Mala poenalia non sunt vere mala, quia
fluunt a summo Bono, nimirum Deo; ducunt ad summum Bonum, nimirum fruitionem
Dei; and erant in summo bono, nimirum Christo. Biel. The evils of Punishment
are not truly evils; for they flow from the chiefest good, even God; they lead
to the chiefest good, the enjoyment of God; and are found in the chiefest good,
even Christ Jesus. LONDON, Printed, Anno Dom. 1666.

TO THE READER.
Christian Readers,
IT is now more than seven months, since it pleased the holy and wise God,
(together with some dear and Christian friends from London,) to visit my house
with the Plague; whereby he gently touched and gave warning to my self and whole
family, (consisting then of eight souls) but called away b^nce only three
members of it, viz. two t^nder babes, and one servant; besides my beloved
sister, and a child of my precious friend, that man of God, Mr. G. C. (since
also translated) who were of those Citizens that visited me; You will easily
believe that I can have no pleasure to rake into the ashes of the dead, nor to
revive the taste of that wormwood and gall, which was then given me to drink;
and yet I see no reason, but that I ought to take pleasure in the pure and holy
will of God, (which always proceeds by the eternal rules of Almighty love and
goodness;) though the same be executed upon my dearest creature comforts, and
grate never so much upon my sweetest earthly-interest: yea and I see all reason
in the world Why I should give God the glory of his Attributes and works before
all the world, and endeavor that some instruction may accompany that
astonishment, which from me and my house has gone out and spread it self far
and near. I will not undertake to make any Physical observations upon this
unaccountable disease; nor to vindicate my self either from that great guilt
that is charged upon me, as if I were a sinner above all that dwell in this
country; or from those many false and senseless aspersions, that have been
cast upon my behavior (during this visitation) much like that we read of Mat.
28. 13. but do freely commit my self to him that judges righteously, and pray
with the Psalmist (Psalm. 69. ^.) Let not them that wait on thee O Lord God of
Hosts be ashamed for my sake; let not those that seek thee be confounded for my
sake, O God of Israel! Neither do I purposely undertake in this Preface to
reconcile the providence of the most wise God to his promises, or to salve
that seeming difference between the words of his mouth, and the language of his
hands; between which I have only suspected some kind of jarr, but have
experienced an excellent harmony -- In very faithfulness have thou afflicted
me. Whence arise all those uncharitable censures, with which the afflicted soul
is apt to charge both himself and his God too? Spring they not certainly from
these two grand causes, viz. A misapprehension of the nature of God, and of the
nature of Good and Evil? let the studious and pious Reader, search and judge.
If ever therefore you would be established in your minds in a day of affliction;
(1.) Labor to be rightly informed concerning the nature of God. Away with
those low and gross apprehensions of God, whereby your carnal fancies do
ascribe unto God such a kind of indulgence toward his children as you bear
toward yours; which indeed no way agrees to his nature. His good will toward
his children is a solia, wise, and holy disposition, infinitely unlike to our
humane affections* Soli Deo competit, Amare and Sapere. (^.) Labor to be
rightly informed concerning the nature of good and evil. Judge not the goodness
or evilness of things by their agreeableness or disagretableness to your flesh,
palate, or carnal interest; but by the relation that they have to the supreme
good. The greatest prosperity in the world is no further good, than as it tends
to make us partakers of God; and the greatest affliction may thus be really
good also. But that by the By. My design is to justify and glorify Infinite
Wisdom, Righteousness, Goodness and Holiness before all men. Oh blessed God!
who makes a seeming Dungeon to be indeed a Wine-celler; who brings his poor
people into a Wilderness on set purpose there to speak comfortably to them! ^s.
2. 14.
Be of good cheer, O my soul! He has taken away nothing but what he gave; and,
in ^b. 1 21.
lieu of it, has given thee that which shall never be taken away; the first
fruits of li^e, ^k. 10. ^2.
instead of those whom the first born of death has devoured. But why do I say
devoured. Does not that truly live at this day, which was truly lovely in those
darlings? Did thou, O my fond heart love Beauty, Sweetness, Ingenuity
incarnate? And can thou not love it still in the fountain, and enjoy it in a
more immediate and compendious way? Thy body indeed cannot taste sweetness in
the abstract, nor see beauty except it be subjected in matter: but can not
thou (O my soul) taste the Uncreated goodness and sweetness, except it be
embodyed, and have some material thing to commend it to thy palate? Be sh^med,
that thou being a spirit as to thy constitution art no more spiritual in thy
affections and operations. Do thou with sadness reflect upon those sweet
Smiles, and that broken Rhetoric with which those Babes were went to entertain
thee? (1) Consider duly what of real contentment thou have lost in losing
those. For what were those things to thy real happiness? Thou have lost
nothing* but what it was no solid pleasure nor true felicity to enjoy; nothing
but what the most sensual and brutish souls do enjoy as much as thou. (2.) Be
ashamed rather that thou did enjoy them in such a gross and unspiritual
manner. Art thou troubled because any earthly interest is violated? Rather be
ashamed that thou had and cherishedst any such interest.

But pardon me (Courteous Readers) this digressive Soliloquy; and now suffer me
patiently, whilst I speak something by way of Admiration, something by way of
Observation, and something by way of Exhortation.

1. Let me call upon Men and Angels to help me in celebrating the Infinite and
almighty grace and goodness of the Eternal and blessed God,

Who enabled me to abide the day of ^l. 3. 2.
his coming, to stand when he appeared: and made me willing to suffer him to
sit as a Refiner of silver in my house!

Who carried me above all murmurings against, I had almost said, all
remembrance of those instruments that conveyed the infection to me!

Who reconciled my heart to this Disease, so that it seemed no more grievous,
noisome, or scandalous than any other!

Who subdued me to, I had almost said, brought me in love with this passage of
the Divine Will! I can remember, (alas, that I can say little more, but that I
do remember!) how my soul was overpowred, yea and almost ravished with the
goodness, holiness and perfection of the will of God: and verily judged it my
happiness and perfection (as well as my duty) to comply cheerfully with it, and
be molded into it.

Who gave me a most powerful and quick sense of the Plague of a carnal heart,
selfwill, and inordinate creature-loves, convincing me that those were
infinitely worse than the Plague in the flesh: so that I did more pity, than I
could be pitied by my ordinary visiters!

Who wonderfully preserved me from the assaults of the Devil, never le^t him
loose so much as to try his strength upon my integrity, to drive me to a
despondency, or to any uncharitable conclusions concerning my state!

Who enabled me to converse with his love and mercy in the midst of his
chastenings, to see his shining and smiling face through this dark cloud: yea,
kept up clear and steady persuasions in my soul that I was beloved of him,
though afflicted by him!

Who knew my soul in adversity, visited Psalm. 3
me when I was sick and in prison, refreshed, strengthened, comforted my inner
man in a marvelous manner and measure, and made me appear to my self, never
less Nunqu^ minus lus, q^ cum s^ Scip.
shut up, then when shut up! Oh would to God, I might be never worse than when
I was shut up of the Plague! The not removing of that affliction-frame, I shall
count a greater blessing, and a more proper mercy, than the removing of that
afflicted state.

Who cleared up my interest in his son, strengthened my evidences of his love,
satisfied and assured my soul of its happy state, more than at any time, more
then at all times, formerly! I had clearer and surer evidences of Divine grace
in that patient, self denying, self submitting frame of spirit, than in all the
duties that ever I performed: The valley of tears brought me more sight of my
God, more insight into my self, then ever the valley of visions, all duties and
ordinances had done. When the Sun of righteousness arose upon my soul, and
chased away all the mists and foggs of self-will, and creature loves, then also
did all black and dismal fears, all gloomy doubtings most sensibly flee before
him.

Who supplied my Family from compassionate friends, with all things needful for
Food, Physic, etc. The Lord return it sevenfold into their bosoms!

Who maintained my health in the midst of sickness, in the midst of so great a
death! I do not remember that either sorrow of mind, or sickness of body ever
prevailed so much upon me, during three months seclusion* as to hinder me of my
ordinary study, repast, devotions, or my necessary attendance upon my several
infected rooms, and administering to the necessities of my sick. These ensuing
Discourses were then composed; which does (at least) argue, that (through
grace) this mind was not altogether discomposed, nor body neither.

Who preserved me and gave me not up to death! For I judge that I was
personally visited with the Plague, though not with the Sickness.

Who has given me a sincere and settled resolution, and vehement desire to live
entirely on and to Himself; which I account to be the only life of a soul, and
only worthy to be called a living! Grant me this prayer, O most blessed and
gracious God, for the sake of my only and dear Redeemer!

Thou O Lord God, who art witness to all my thoughts, and words, and works,
know that in truth and soberness I publish these things to the world, not to
advance the reputation of my own silly name, or to be admired of my fellow
creatures, but for the glory of thy holy name, to beget a good liking of so
gracious a Creator in all thy poor creatures, who are prejudiced against thee
and thy holy Service; and to strengthen the hearts of thy servants to a most
firm and lasting adherence to thee even in the great^st extremities: that thou
may be admired in thy Saints, and glorified for g^ving such power* and
grace, and comfort ^. 9. 8.
unto men. And, oh tha^ men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his
wonderful ^l. 107. 8.
works in and to the children of men*

2. Suffer me to make a short Observation of some few memorable Passages, out
of many* possibly they may be for the future, though they should not be for
your present advantage; The Lord direct you to make a right application of
them, according to the ^mergencies of life!

First, I do thankfully record the gracious design of the holy, and wise God,
in that he had secretly prepared my heart, though at that time I knew not
particularly for what. I remember that for some few weeks before, I had found a
more than ordinary largeness and readiness of soul; particularly, that I had
been studying the exce^lent mystery, and s^^king out the streng thning marrow
of that famous Text (1 John 4. 8.) God is love; from whence I had im^ortunately
prist upon my self the reasonableness of ^^ complying sweetly* cheerfully,
universally with the will of God; little dreaming then of the Plague, which was
almost an hundred miles off me. Oh blessed and merciful God, who of old did
make Abraham, and yet make his and thy children Heb. 1^
to follow thee, though they know not well whither!

In the next place, I count it most worthy of my observation, (not unworthy of
your consideration) that it pleased God to seize upon my Family in the
beginning of harvest; a harvest which I had too earnestly expected, too
carefully provided for, and promised my self too liberally from which folly and
vanity of mind, this Visitation thus timed, did as clearly convince me of (me
thought) as if I had seen an handwriting upon the wall. I am ashamed, yet I
will not stick to confess before all the world (God grant it may be for the
seasonable and effectual warning of any!) that my vainer mind was
over-pleasantly (not to say eagerly) drawn out toward secular and worlaly
(however necessary) employments and concernments: And thus I was rebuked.

Upon examination, I find that verily I have been guilty concerning my
Children. I do not remember that ever any man reproved me for immoderate loving
of them, or could for any indulgence that could be by humane eyes discerned;
But oh I see and feel it as a sword at my heart, that I loved them not so
purely spiritually, and properly in God, as I ought to have done. Philosophy
will easily prove it to be a more tolerable vanity to ^^te upon a Child, than
upon a Kingdom: But Christian Divinity does abundantly demonstrate all
creaturefondness unreasonable and intolerable.

The next thing that I will record shall be, the d^fficult ta^k that I found,
to maintain a right humble, and a right cheerful frame at the same time: oh how
often, and how long did I labor under this difficulty! That sense of sin which
was called in to promote tenderness of heart, being overmuch indulged, was
ready at length ^o destroy that largeness and cheerfulness of soul which was so
much my duty and interest to maint^in: and on the other hand, the sense of
Divine Wisdom, Grace, and Love in Christ Jesus being called in to keep up the
soul from sinking, was ready to bear it up so high, as that it almost forgot
that it was in the waters. Beware, Christians, and watch diligently, that Godly
sorrow do not settle into an ungodly despondency and inconsolable heaviness;
the soul not being able to bear up under its own burden; and that a holy
cheerfulness and seren^ty do not evaporate into an unholy frot^^ness and
fargetfulness of your infi^mities, the soul not being able to manage its own
metal and motions.

I know, you would willingly understand something of the frame of my heart at
that day, respective to my departure out of this world: you will best read my
heart in the ensu^ng discourse (upon 2 Cor. 5. 6.) which I think was fetched
from thence. I shall therefore say no more as to this matter* only acquaint you
with one eminent Experience, relating hereunto. My mind, or fancy, or appetite
(I know not w^ll what to call it) was som^times en^ting in me some desires to
live yet longer, I ^ntred the lists with this temptation, and when I had fairly
and calmly debated the ground and reason of such inclination, after many shifts
and pretenses it came to this I would fain persuade my self, I was not yet holy
enough this I did immediately consent to knewing it to be ^ certain truth: But
that therefore I should desire to prolong my days upon earth, this was a
fallacious Inferenc^* Me thought I pleased my self a while, whilst I could say,
I desired only to live to be better: But after a time I apprehended a fallacy
in this pretense; for the way to be perfected in holiness, is, not living, but
indeed dying. Christians, if indeed your souls be sincerely and powerfully
affected toward perfect holiness, then sing not so much with David, Spare me
that I may recover, Psa. 39. 13.
etc. as with good old Simeon, who having seen God in the flesh, desired to go
out of the flesh, that he might see him more fully and beatifically -- Now Luke
2. 29.
le^test thou thy servant depart, etc. I cannot enlarge upon this Observation;
I suppose I have hinted enough to show those pretenses of many men, viz. that
they would fain live to be more fit to dye, to be, for the most part, but a
kind of mockery, and self dec^it.

Lastly, (that I be not over-tedious) I do solemnly and sincerely profess
before God, and Angels, and Men, that I was never so much as inclined to think
hardly of God or his good and holy ways, because of this dispensation; but did
then constantly and freely proclaim to all that came to visit me, that sin,
particularly self will, and sensual loves, are the worst of plagues, and
holiness the only happiness of man; yea ^ff^^cted holiness infinitely to be
preferred before prosperous wi^kedness.

3. Suffer me, as a conclusion of this Preface, and as a result from all that I
have seen and suffered, to commend unto you a few excellent and necessary
duties. I have much ad^^ to forbear being large here; but I have already
transgrest therefore I will wave those common Themes, of remembering your
Creator b^times, of hear kening to the voice of his Word before his Rod speak,
of living in continual preparation for death, of repenting and renewing
repentance, etc. and only commend two or three things, which seem to me of most
excellent and necessary impor^ance, -- petimu^que da^u^que vic^ssim.

1. Love and e^joy all things in God. Admire Divine Goodne^s in every created
excellency, and taste a Divine Sweetness in every created comfort. O how is the
noble soul of man debased, pin^hed, confined by low and sensual loves, whilst
many men love the creature in opposition to the Creator; most men in
competition with him, and almost all men in a way of separation from him! Oh
base and degenerate affections! Let God be All things in your eye, so that you
shall see, nor know, nor love, nor taste nothing but him in the world. D^liver
your selves (oh immortal souls, to whom I write) from all those and straitning,
and st^rving creatureloves, and long and labor to be filled with pure, and
holy, and spiritual delights, such as the ^ngel^ of God have, such as the Son
of God had, when he made it his meat and drink to do the Joh. 4. 34.
will of his Father. But this you will find more largely prosecuted and pressed
in the last of these following Discourses. Therefore,

2. Live purely at the pleasure of God, and maintain an universal and hearty
compliance with his holy and perfect will. Believe it, you will never enjoy a
firm and steady peace, till you have committed all your w^lls and ways to him,
and wrapped up all your interests and ends in him, till your hearts be conformed
to the heart of God, and your wills molded into his will. It is a difference of
wills and ends, and a distinction of interests that beget all those ragings and
stormings in the hearts of men against God: Mine and Thine do not only divide
the world amongst men, but divide men against God, Earth against Heaven. Take
this for a certain and undoubted Aphorism, that the grand inter^st of a soul is
to comply with, and be one with God: Communion of hearts, and wills, and
interests, and ends, is that glorious fellowship which a creature has with its
Creator; it is indeed the interest and bonour, the duty and dignity, yea the
Heaven and h^p iness of the reasonable creature: But something to this purpose
you will find in the first Discourse.

3. I beseech you Christians, be not content to say, you have chosen God for
your chiefest good, but puriue after him as luch, without grudging, and without
ceasing, longing to be as much one with him in a participation of divine
perfections, as our created natures are capable. Maintain a holy and secret
striving of soul toward this blessed object continually, as a thing moves
toward its center, as a soul ought to endeavor to accomplish its own
perfections: stand not gazing upon a Heaven to come, but labor to draw d^wn
all that peace, joy, love, purity, which Heaven is, into your own souls, by
growing up into the life of God daily. R^^kon that you are never in a right
temper, except you be in David's temper, when he waited for God more than they
that watch for the morning, Psa. 130. 6 Ps. 119. 20.
when his soul broke for the longing that it had unto him at all times. I say
not* that you should prepare for death* that seems too low, both word and
thing; look and live beyond death and the grave, be lifting up your heads to
discover the dawnings of the day of your Redemption be laying hold upon
immortality and eternal life. Something to this purpose you will find in the
second Discourse, with^r I refer you.

And now accept, I pray you, these poor labors, which for the glory of my God,
I mak^ public, that since, with Hezek^^h, I may not go up ^o the House of the
2 King 20. 8.
Lord, to declare the goodness of the Lord; ^et I may leave some monument of it
in w^i^^ng, as he did, when he had been sick, Isa. 3^. 9.
and was recovered of his sickness. I will add no more, but entreat all serious
and devout Readors to magnify the holy name of God on my behalf, adding
thereunto their earnest prayers to God for me, viz. that the same fire that
burnt up the standing Corn of my creature comforts, may also happily consume
all the stubble of my creature* delights and loves, that my God would give me a
name better than of Sons and of Daughters, the blessed Isa 56* 5.
fruits of his Spirit instead of the Beloved fruits of the womb, that I may for
ever live under the most powerful influences of this dispensation, and that the
glory of the Lord may never depart out of the Temple of my soul, as it departed
out of the Temple made with hands. Now to the God of all grace and peace, be
all praise and glory! To him I commit you all, and rest

Your friend and servant in Christ Jesus, S. S.
Feb. 27. 1665.
Quod sani quaesivimus* hoc invenimus aegri:
Quae nequiit vallis visus, tulit haec lachrymarum.

Courteous Reader,
THere being through some ill circumstances, such a mistake happened in the
Printing of these Papers, which caused a confusion not to be afterward helped by
the placing of them: thou art desired to take notice, that after those words,
Curse God and Die, page 31. should have followed the second Reason, which is
now to be found in the midst of page 43. and so the sense is continued to page
102. after which comes in the Application, page 31. to page 43. where the first
Discourse is concluded with those words, Whosoever sins, has not seen him,
nor known him. I shall suppose thy candor such as to excuse this trouble thou
art unhappily put to, which I have done what I could to lessen by this Notice
and Direction; and should but increase it by any farther Apology for a fault,
which now admits not of a remedy.

Other slighter Errata's correct thus:
^ Page 13 line 19 for the, read a: l. 20 for a, r. the: p* 15 l. 4. for so, r*
to: p. 46 l. 8. put in hold of: and l. 9. blot out here: p. 68. l. 7. for had,
r. has: p. 81. l. 2 for act, read art; and l. ult. for promises, r. premises:
p. 85. l. 4. for on, r. up: p. 125. l. 4 for more, r. mere: p. 136. l. 9. blot
our it: p 157. l. 22. for it, r. Christ: p. 193. l. 15. for the, r. your: p.
214. l. 12. for them, r. him.

Place this after the Epistle to the Reader.

A VVelcome TO THE PLAGUE.
AMOS 4. 12. -- Prepare to meet thy God O Israel.
IN this Sermon of the Prophet, the Lord reckons up the many fearful Plagues
wherewith from time to time he had assayed to reclaim this perverse people, the
ten Tribes of Israel, beginning at the 6th. verse: But still concludes the
relation, with a doleful Epiphonema, yet have ye not returned unto me. It is
not my business to enquire into the several Plagues, either the clear meaning
of them, or the particular time when they took place or ended; nor into the
impenitence and stubborness of the people; though many useful things might be
observed from hence. But in the conclusion, because none of these judgments had
prevailed upon them, God resolves to trouble himself with them no longer, but
to destroy them utterly. All that he had done to them in the Land, had not
prevailed; therefore now he will cast them and carry them out of the Land, by
the overflowing scourge of an Assyrian captivity: This threatening he denounces
in the second and third verses, I will take you away with hooks, and your
posterity with fish-hooks, etc. And after he had reckoned up the many
calamities whereby he had sought to bring them to repentance, but they repented
not, and so had demonstrated the equitableness of this final judgment, he
reassumes the same threatening, and persists in his former resolution, verse. 12.
Therefore thus will I do unto thee; And then adds, Because I will do thus unto
thee, therefore prepare to meet thy God O Israel*

Which words may either be understood Ironically, by way of derision of all
their vain confidences and refuges; and then the Doctrine is, That there is no
standing before, nor striving against, nor flying from God when he comes to
execute vengeance: Which is an excellent truth, and of great use. Or else the
words may be understood seriously by way of exhortation. The doubt seems to
arise from the ambiguous meaning of the word [ Meet] The word (...) signifies
both to meet in a hostile manner, to assault, invade or grapple with, as a man
meets his enemy; so it is used concerning David addressing himself to fight
with Goliath, 1 Samuel 17. 48. He ran to meet the Phillstin: And also to meet in a
friendly, amicable manner, by way of communication, collocution, salutation or
converse. So it is used concerning Isaac going to meet Rebekah, Genesis 24. 65.
and concerning Gods meeting of Balaam to speak with him, and impart his mind to
him. Numb. 23. 4. If we take the word in the first sense, then it is spoken by
way of Irony or derision, and so the meaning of the words is contained in the
Proposition that I have laid down. If we take the words in the latter sense,
then it is spoken seriously by way of exhortation, and so the meaning of them
may be wrapped up into this.

Doct. That it is the duty of Gods people to study a right behavior toward
him, and to converse with him aright in the way of his judgments, in the time
of their afflictions. And in this sense I shall take them, and prosecute them.
Besides that general, unalterable godly frame and behavior which Gods people
owe to him as a standing duty and indispensable homage; there are some more
especial behaviors and tempers which they owe to him in special cases, and are
duties pro hic and nunc, as the season requires. Particularly, there are some
special behaviors required at our hands in the time of our affliction: And
these both 1. Toward ourselves, as self-examination, self-judging, renewing of
repentance, etc. 2. Toward men, meekness, compassion, instructing, warning,
comforting, etc. 3. Toward God, as we shall see anon. An afflicted condition
does call for some more especial tempers and behaviors toward our selves and
others: But these I am not to speak unto from this Text. It is the souls
meeting God, behavior toward him, conversing with him, that my Text leads me
to treat of, and I shall not vary from it. In handling of which Position, I
shall take this Method. 1. Premise some things needful to be known, concerning
the souls conversing with God: For I shall retain the word [ conversing]
throughout my discourse, as being a single, yet a large and significant word.
2. Show what it is for a soul to converse with God; and how it comes to
converse with him. 3. Prove the doctrine, That it is our duty to converse with
God in the way of his judgments. 4. Show particularly, how we are to converse
with God in the time of afflictions. 5. Apply it.

1. I shall premise some things needful to be known, that tend to clear up my
way to the following discourse.

1. I premise, That it is the great duty of man to converse with God. I have
read that it was a common precept that the Jewish Doctors were wont to give to
the people, that they should single out some one Commandment, and exercise
themselves very diligently in the observation of it, that therein they might
make God their friend, and make him a kind of amends for the breach of many
others. I doubt it is a Rule that too many Professors live by, who not having
the genuine and generous spirit of true Religion, do parcel out their obedience
into some little shreds of homage and devotion; and instead of consecrating
their whole lives to God, do content themselves with some circumstantial and
light obedience, and think themselves people of great seize, if they do
but severely tie up themselves to hearing twice a week, and prayer twice a day,
and a few other acts of more solemn Worship. Certainly this is a penurious and
needy spirit, much unlike the generous ample, and freeborn spirit of true
Religion. The duty, the whole duty, the constant duty of man is to converse
with God; commended in Enoch by the name of walking with God, Genesis 5. 22. Where
you may observe of him, that he did not only set out fairly with God, or take a
turn or two with him, but he walked with him three hundred years together. The
same God calls for from Abraham, under the same name, Genesis 17. 1. Walk before
me, and be perfect. But it is not only the command of God that makes this a
duty: If there had been no express commandment concerning it, yet were it the
duty of every man, necessarily flowing from his relation of a reasonable
creature. As man is a creature, so he must needs live upon God; and as a
reasonable creature, so he ought to live with him and unto him. Therefore has
God given unto man a noble rational soul, not only that he might talk and work,
manage the creatures, and converse with the world; but that he might converse
with the God of the world; that Infinite, blessed and glorious Being. This is
the very end of man's Creation, as man, as a reasonable creature: This was the
end of his being created in the Image of God; and when he was fallen from this
Image, this was the end of his Redemption by Christ Jesus, that Heaven and
Earth might be reconciled, and those that were far off might be brought ^igh;
sin is a sinking of the soul down to self and the creature: And redemption from
sin is nothing else but a recovery of the soul into a state of favor and
fellowship with God. So that whatever is expressed by Faith and Repentance, is
contained in this one word, Converse with God. It is the great, the necessary,
and as I may say, the natural duty of the Reasonable Soul.

2. It is the highest privilege of man. The Prerogative of man above the
beasts is his Reason; and the Glory of reason is, that it is capable of
knowing, loving, enjoying, and conversing with the Supreme and Infinite Good.
The privilege of Reason is not (as too many think) that it is capable of
understanding Arts and Sciences; that it is capable of climbing up into the
nature and course of the Heavens, and diving into the secret depths of the
Earth, and Sea, and the creatures therein contained; but in conversing with the
Infinite and Glorious God. How miserably do vulgar souls abuse this noble
faculty, who exercise it only in discoursing, numbering, and ordering the poor
con^^^^ cernments of the world and the body! Yea, certainly those wise men,
those Scribes, those Disputers of this world, as the Apostle calls them, who
cry up this faculty and glory so much in it, and yet do not exercise it about
that high and eternal Being, do not converse with God in pure affections, and
God* like dispositions and conversations, but expend those vast treasures of
reason upon secrets in Nature, secrets in Art, secrets in State, or any other
created Being, do enthrall their own souls, which they say are so freeborn, and
captivate and confine that noble principle, which they themselves do so much
magnify: For sin is certainly the great and only shame and reproach of an
immortal soul: And indeed these men, though they put their souls to somewhat a
more noble drudgery, yet are really no more happy than the vulgar sort, who
spend the strength of their souls about eating and drinking, plowing or sowing,
or keeping of Cattle. What difference, I pray you, in point of true happiness
is there, between Boys playing with Pins and Points, and old men's hugging of
Baggs and Lands? The noblest Sciences, the greatest Commands, the most
enriching Traffiques are as very toys in comparison of true happiness, as the
poor dunghil-possessions of vulgar men: And the wise, the rich, the learned,
the honorable of the world, that take up with an employment in this world, and
with a happiness in themselves, or in any creature, do as much disgrace their
own souls, and as truly live below their own faculties, as he does that knows
no higher good than food and raiment; no higher employment than to toil all his
days in a ditch. For indeed, as to all things but conversing with God, man
seems to be but equal, perhaps inferior to the beasts that perish. Does man
eat, drink, sleep, work? so do they. Does man find any sensual pleasure, which
the beasts do not sensate as well as he? Nay, the Gormand^z^ng Emperor envyed
the Cranes long neck; and others have envyed the more able and permanent lusts
of the brute beasts, because themselves have been inferior to them therein,
and have enjoyed less sensual pleasure than they. If any glory in their
knowledge of natural and political things; I could instance in the strong
memory, great sag^city, quick fancy, wonderful perceptions of many beasts, and
their strange knowledge of many secrets which they never learnt by Books; no
nor gathered gradually by Observations. And as for man's communications of his
notions by words and phrases, I doubt not to affirm, that there is something
like to be found in Beasts and Birds: yea, that very beauty and flower of
sound, even Music (which some men magnify so much) is more fairly and sweetly
uttered by the filly Bird that sits solitary upon a bough, than by the
Quiristers of the Popes Cathedral. What solid Prerogative worth naming remains
to man above his fellowcreatures, but his conversing with God, which we call
Religion, and is indeed Reason rectified, sanctified, exalted, and boiled up
into its pure and primitive perfection! In so mnch that I have sometimes
thought, that I never heard a more reproachful word spoken concerning
degenerate man, neither do I think that any thing can be spoken of him more
shameful and dishonorable, than what the Apostle says of the Heathen, Ephesians.
2. 12. -- Without God in the world. By conversing with God in the world, is man
truly raised above the beasts, and the godly man above all other men. Nay,
hereby is the godly soul advanced to the dignity and glory of the Holy Angels,
or at least to a parity of happiness: For it is this that is their perfection
and glory, as we find it described in Mat. 18. 10. -- They always behold the
face of God. And therefore our blessed Savior does affirm, that the Saints in
the Resurrection, who shall be raised above all creature-communion, to live
upon God singly and entirely, shall be (...), equal to the Angels of God, Luke
20. 36. In a word, this is the most real Heaven, setting aside all
circumstances of place, etc. the perfect and proper happiness of a soul, to see
God, Mar. 5. 8. to be like unto him, 1 John 3. 2. to converse with the Father
by the Son, as our Savior bath told us, who ^est knew it, John 17. 3. This is
life eternal, to know thee the only true God and Jesus Christ whom thou have
sent. By this it is that God dwells in the soul, and the soul in God (as we
shall see hereafter) and the Kingdom of Heaven does really enter into every
Believer.

3. The natural man is utterly unwilling and unable to converse with God. An
earthly Mountain may as soon rise up to Heaven by its own power and good will,
as an earthly mind: And such minds are all natural and unregenerate. Sin, as I
hinted before, is a falling from God, a sinking of the soul into self, whether
sensual self, or spiritual self, and a shriv^lling of it up into the creature,
and the sinful soul is always (like a shadow) moving upon the surface of the
Earth, and higher it cannot get, Romans 8. 5. Would you know what is the
principal object of a natural man's admiraration, inclination, and ambition? The
Psalmist will tell you, It is some created good, Psalm. 4. 6, 7. Will you know
what is the disposition of the natural man toward the supreme and uncreated
good? The Apostle will tell you, It is Ignorance and Enmity, 1 Cor. 2. 14. Romans
8. 7. The carnal mind is enmity against God. This high duty of conversing with
God in a right manner is besides the temper of the wicked man: never any such
man did perform it. It is a contradiction: A wicked man conversing with God, is
as if one should say, An ungodly man that is godly. But that is not all; This
duty is not only out of the hands of a wicked man, but out of his reach too, --
Neither can he know him, says the Apostle to the Corinthians; and again to the
Romans, -- Neither can he be subject to him. Can two walk together, except they
be agreed? says the Prophet. Can man walk with God, converse with God, except
he be reconciled to him? And what agreement, but by a Mediator? What Mediator
between God and man but Christ Jesus, who (...) a Mediator, as the Logicians
call a medium participationis, who is God man? In the word, some converse with
one thing in a world, and some with another, as I noted before; but all
converse principally and mainly with the creature, that are not regenerated by
Grace, reconciled by Christ.

4. It is the duty of man in all ages of life, at all times, and in all places,
and conditions, to converse with God. It is a necessary, natural, certain,
constant duty, springing up out of the very nature and natural will of God, and
out of the very nature and relation and capacity of the reasonable soul,
binding semper and ad semper, as the Schoolmen speak, and admitting of no
dispensation nor diminution. There is no time wherein it is not a duty, or
wherein it is less a duty than at another time; however, we are apt to give to
our selves many relaxations from it. The first fruits, nay, the very early buds
of the tender soul, and of the springing faculties; these are due to God, and
ought to be dedicated to him, Eccles. 12. 1. Remember now thy Creator in the
days of thy youth. Manhood is not allowed so to attend unto cares and
exploits, nor old age to pains and griefs, as to neglect converse with God: But
whether young men build or plant, fight or study, or work, or marry, or manage
the affairs of the house or of the field, all should be undertaken and carried
on in away of converse and fellowship with God: or whether old men sit and muse
and meditate, or lie under the pains and grievances of decrepit age, still it
ought to be in the Lord. Neither does this duty admit of interruption, no more
than of cessation: There is no dispensation given us from this duty, as in no
age, so in no hour of our life. As we cannot live a moment out of God, so
neither ought we to live a moment without, God in the world. We ought
continually so endeavor to walk in subservience to and converse with God, yea
and as far as may be in a feeling converse with him too. Holy David witnesses
of himself that the fear of God was continually before his eyes, and that he
did continually converse with God; for so those words may be understood, Psalm.
73. 23. I am continually with thee. The like is recorded of many other Saints
both in the Old and New Testaments; concerning whom one may well say as the
Queen of Sheba concerning the servants of Solomon, and with much better reason
(1 King. 10. 8.) Happy are these thy servants (O Lord) which stand continually
before thee! Neither is it the duty of some few men, that have the greatest
knowledge or the most leisure. For it springs up out of the relation of a
creature, and out of the very nature of the rational soul; so that no soul of
man is exempted from it, however many ignorant and profane persons live rather
in a professed independance upon God. Neither is it a duty only upon
supposition of leisure and freedom from worldly business, as some other things
are, but is equally incumbent upon Prince and Peasant, upon him that sits in
his closet, and upon him that ploughs in the field; yea they that go down unto
the Sea in ships, ought to go up unto heaven in their hearts; and not only to
converse with the clouds (which they often do,) but above them too. A hand full
of earth, and a heart full of heaven may well stand together: For as this duty
justles out no honest business, so neither should it self be justled out by
any. And as this high and excellent duty agrees to all ages and times and
persons, so it agrees to all conditions too: poor men do think that rich men
may well do it, and rich men think that poor men had need to do it: prosperity
thinks it has better things to mind than a God; and adversity knows it has
worse things, but it must mind them: plenty is too full to entertain him, and
poverty has enough to do to bear up under its own burden: learning knows how,
but will not; ignorance says it would, but knows not how; but notwithstanding
all this shuffling, the obligation to this duty ceases not: None so high as to
be above it, none so mean as to be below it: For rich and poor, high and low,
learned and unlearned, Prince and peasant, though they are divided amongst
themselves by punctilioes and lesser differences, yet they are united in one
universal Being, meet in one and the same center, agree in the common capacity
of reasonable creatures. As religion has an interest and a concernment in the
whole of the conversation, (according to that of the Apostle, Phi. 3. 20. our
conversation is in heaven) so also has it a room in the conversation of every
man in every capacity: No Relation, Condition, Action, Change is exempted from
the powerful influence thereof: so the Apostle describes himself, by his living
in all good conscience before God all along, Act. 23. 1. and by his exercising
himself in this thing, to have always a conscience void of offense toward God
and toward men, Act. 24. 16.

Now the fifth step in order, would be, that It is more especially the duty of
Gods people to study to converse with him aright in the way of his judgments,
which is the Doctrine it self, which I must not come to confirm, till I have
showed according to my promise in the second place, what it is for the soul to
converse with God, and how it comes to converse with him.

Not to name those too low and improper notions that men ordinarily have of
this high and spiritual matter, conversing with God, to speak properly of it,
is a compiex Act of the soul, whereby it entertains God into it self, and
renders it self back again to him; receives impressions from him, and gives up
it self again to him; is first filled with him, and then empties it self into
him* You may conceive of it after the similitude of a Plant, that is influenc't
by the benign beams of the Sun; and in those beams spreads it self, and in the
virtue and power of them grows up toward Heaven: or after the similitude of a
River, that is continually filled with the Ocean, and is continually emptying
it self into the same, (...). This seems to be our Saviors elegant allusion,
Job. 4. 14. where he compares a divine and godly principle in the soul, to a
well of water springing out from God, and continually boiling and bubling up
toward him -- springing up into eternal life. Or you may conceive of it after
the similitude of a Glass, which receives the image of him that looks into it,
and reflects the self same image that it receives. For indeed the brightness
and beanty of holiness wherewith a godly soul does shine as a light in the
world, is nothing but a reflection of that light and brightness wherewith the
Father of lights shines into it. And so the best of men have nothing of their
own to glory in; for they behold God, but it is in his own light; they love him
with a love which he has shed abroad in their hearts; they are therefore like
him, because he has stamped his own image upon them: And so they must needs
acknowledge concerning all their acts of love, and communion, and delight; as
David did in another case, Of thine own we offer unto thee. This is indeed the
true and noble converse and communion with God, wherein the life of a godly man
is infinitely advanced above the life of all other men, and indeed does nearly
resemble the life of Angels: Their life is described in the Holy Scriptures, by
a seeing of God, a beholding of him face to face; which we must not understand
of a naked idle speculation, but of a real assimilation arising from the divine
impressions made upon them; a beholding of him so as to be changed into his
image. And such is a godly man's life, spiritual life, his life of converse with
God, consisting in a participation of God, and of his Grace, and a holy
recip^ocation or reflection of affections to him; which are indeed two distinct
acts, though originally springing from the same fountain; for the love
wherewith the soul loves God, is it self an efflux from him: For by loving us,
he inspires a love into us; and by influences from God we become God-like. But
this converse with God is not only by the impressions of goodness from God, and
the reflections of love and delight toward him; but is also seen in the
various acts of the soul, according to the various impressions which God makes
upon the soul, and suitable to the various occasions of life; so we converse
with God by acts of fear, reverence, joy, confidence, self-resignation, and the
like.

Now, because we are in the body, and so cannot converse with God so purely,
spiritually and immediately, as the Angels in Heaven do, therefore it has
pleased God to appoint unto man ways and means of conversing with him, wherein
he ha^h promised to communicate himself to the soul, and so to draw forth
reciprocal acts of communion, acts of love, fear, reverence, confidence,
resignation, dependence, and delight out of the same soul toward himself, Now
these ways or means may be reduced to three heads. Duties, Ordinances, and
Providence; though indeed the two first might be contracted into one. First, I
will speak a word or two of Ordinances, such as the Word and Sacraments; for I
shall name no more but those two. The Preaching of the Word is a way in which
God does usually meet the soul, to communicate Life, 1 Pet. 1. 23. Light. Psalm.
19. 8. Warmth, Luke 23. 32. Growth, 1 Pet. 2. 2. And the soul does answer these
impressions, as in the water face answers face, by the acts of the acts of
Faith, Love, Joy, Meekness, and holy Resolution. So also the administration of
the Sacraments is a way wherein God meetech the soul, and communicates his
Love, Sweetness, Fuln^ss, Goodness, Strength and Vigor to the soul: and it
reflects upon him in the acts of holy complacency and delight, cheerfulness,
thankfulness and dependence.

Secondly, Duties, these are also ways of converse with God; such as
Confession, Petition, Thankigiving, Conference, Singing, Meditation,
Observation, In all which God impresseth something of himself upon the soul,
and draws answerable affections of the soul unto himself, as might appear in
the particular explication of them; but that would be too much a digression.
Only I will here note by the way, the mistake of many low-spirited Christians,
who know no other converse with God, than the bare performance of these things;
this they count the very top-stone of a Christians perfections, the very flower
of the spiritual life. But alas, this is a gross mistake! There is sure
something more sweet, savoury, satisfactory in the spiritual life, than the dry
duty: there is marrow in the bone, or else a holy soul could not cover it with
so much servour. Converse with God in duties, is a spiritual, favoury, filling
enjoyment, distinct from the duties themselves: This must needs be, except we
will allow to wicked and hypocritical men the same dainties, that the most
sanctified souls do feed upon; and say, That the childrens bread is common to
the Dogs, as well as them. The soul does not converse with God in duties barely
when it prays, or meditates; for even godly souls themselves do many times
find little converse with God in these, viz. when he suspends the influences of
his graces, or their hearts are ^logg'd or cloyed with earthly objects, or
otherwise indisposed and shut up against him: It is not speaking to God that
brings the soul really nigh unto him, nor bare thinking of God that advances
the soul into the excellent state of feeling converse with him. Even prayer it
self may prove many times an empty sound, vox and praeterea ^ihil; and
meditation, that most excellent and genuine offspring of the soul, may prove a
poor dry and sapless speculation. It is not enough to set up the sayls, but
there must also be wind to fill them. But then does the soul converse with God
in duties, when the dark places thereof become filled with his divine light,
and the empty places thereof filled with his divine love, and the low and
languishing affections thereof are ravished and revived with the powerful
insinuations of his Almighty Grace: when God draws, and the soul runs; he puts
in his finger by the hole of the door, and the very bowels of the soul are
moved for him, as it is described, Cant. 5. 4. Then does the soul converse with
God in meditation and prayer, when the Spirit of God moves upon the face of the
waters, when he kisses it with the kisses of his mouth; and the shaking soul
finds it self marvelously settled, the doubting soul established, the frozen
heart thawed, the benumbed affections warmed, the scant and contracted capacity
of it enlarged, and wonderfully widened, and its slow and sluggish motions
quickened into a lively and cheerful compliance with, and pursuit of the
supreme and self sufficient good: when the soul finds its legs to run after
that glorious object which is presented to it, lifts up its hands to lay hold
upon the strength, the fullness, the faithfulness, the Christ of God; and
bearing up it self upon the wings of faith and love, flies out to seek its rest
and happiness; and no longer envyes the birds of the Altar, for it self enters
into the Holy of Holies, and thorough the arms of its Mediator, throws it self
into the very heart of God. In a word, and that shall be the Word of God, then
does a soul converse with God in duties, when with open face beholding the
glory of God, it does not only admire it, but it self is changed into the same
image from glory to glory, i. e. from grace to grace, 2 Cor. 3. ult.

Thirdly, Providence: These are another way wherein the soul converses with
God. Now by Providence, we mean in general, the whole work of God in governing
the world, and all things therein. And so indeed a religious enlarged soul, a
mind freed from particular pinching Cares, low and selfish ends, converses with
God in beholding and observing Gods settled course of governing the world. The
whole Heavens, Earth, and Sea, and the admirable order kept up in them, do
teach the knowledge of God, and draw up the contemplative soul into an
observation and admiration of him in them; and the pious soul longs to find
some impressions made upon it self by all these, and to be affected with God
therein: It is not content with a bare speculation, but its meditation of God
in these is sweet to it, as David's were, Psalm. 104. 34. Particularly, Gods
Providence toward mankind, as it does most livelily express his infinite love,
justice and wisdom, so we ought to converse with him therein, and in all the
changes of any kind that befall man in the world, that befall all the Kingdoms
of the world, the four great Monarchies of it, and all other subordinate
Dominions; more especially in all the mutations that befall the Church of God
in the world, and all men of all sects and sorts therein, but most especially
our selves. Labor to conver^e with that infinite mind, wisdom and
understanding that ordains and orders all the changes that befall your selves.
N^w our conve^sing with God in the several changes that befall us in the world,
is in general by endeavoring to serve the Providence of God in every change.
The Providence of God serves it self even upon wicked men, and upon all
creatures that do least understand it; but a godly man only knows how to serve
the Providence of God in the things that befall him: He has no private selfish
interest of his own, but counts it his interest cheerfully and faithfully to
serve the will of God, to be what God would have him be, to be without that
which God would have him to want, and to do what God would have him do. Every
wicked soul in the world sets up some trade for himself, and drives on some
particular self-interest distinct from God: But a godly soul counts it his
greatest honor and happiness to be nothing in himself, nor for himself, but is
wholly at the beck of his Creator; and looking upon all his interest as being
bound up in God, is sollicitous for nothing else but to serve the will of God
in his generation: So the life of holy David is described, Act. 13. 36. David
in his generation having served the will of God, i. e. the Providence of God,
say the Dutch Annotat. translating the words in this order. A good man eying
nothing but the great and blessed God in the world, and knowing that he was not
made for himself, but for a higher good* is only ambitious to be subservient to
that Infinite and Sovereign Being; herein imitating his Blessed Savior, who
lived not to do his own will, but the will of him that sent him, Joh. 6. 38.
and again, to seek the glory of him that sent him, John 7. 18. In a word, he
looks upon himself, not as in himself, but in God, and labors to become (...),
wholly Gods, and to live in the world only as an instrument in the hands of him
that works all things according to the counsel of his own will. That in
general, for the conversing with God in all kind of changes in general. Now
these changes are reduced to two heads, Prosperity and Adversity. In the first
of these it is our duty to converse with God, and not with the creature
comforts which we do enjoy from him, as one might show at large. But I am to
speak of the latter, and to show how we ought to converse with God in that: But
first I must demonstrate, that it is our duty to do it, which was the third
thing I promised, viz. To show that it is the duty of Gods people to study to
converse with him aright in the way of his Judgments, in a time of affliction.
And here, I hope, I need not be at pains to prove by Scripture, that besides
the general business of a Christians life, some particular and more especial
behaviors are required of him in an afflicted state; all will grant it sure:
Besides, by that time I shall have declared what they are, I shall not need to
prove that they are. Therefore for the present I shall content my self to give
in three or four Reasons of it, and so pass on. It is especially the duty of
Gods people to study to converse with him aright in the time of afflictions.

1. Because then especially it is hard to do it: We are then very apt to be
taken off from it, therefore we should then especially labor to pursue it, and
perform it: We are then in eminent danger to be taken off from it; and that by
these means.

1. Our senses do set us on work to converse with outward means, which, whilst
we attend upon too eagerly, we neglect and forget God. This might appear by an
induction of particular afflictions; but that would be too long. I will only
instance in one or two for explication. The sickness and painedness of the
body, calls out the mind to seek after, and converse with Physicians; bodily
wants call us to seek after bodily supplies, and so all kind of distresses call
out the soul to seek creature-relief. Call upon the sick and languishing
Patient to call upon, and hang upon divine help, to converse with God: alas, he
has enough to do to attend upon his pains and pangs; tell him of ease, of
recovery, and he can hearken to you, for that is the news that he longs to hear.
Call upon the poor pined beggar to seek relief of God, to converse with him:
Alas, he finds such a faintness in his limbs, such a gnawing of hunger, such a
restless appetite within himself, that he can groan out nothing, but Oh that
one would give me bread to eat! In a word, the soul is more naturally addicted
to mind its body to which it is joined, than the God that joined it to that
body. Hence you may observe two things by the way, viz 1. The reason why so few
persons repent in time of sickness; the sense of sickness drowns the sense of
sin. 2. The reason why so few poor people who are ever more conflicting with
the necessities of the body, do not at all mind the concernments of their
souls: The exigencies and straits of the body, do cry louder in their hearts
than all the words and works of God. So that as health is the best time for
repentance, so it seems that the best way to teach the poor, is to relieve
them.

2. The corruptions of the heart are then most apt to make war against Heaven.
This is the opinion of him who knows the temper of man too well, Job. 1. 11.
Put forth thine hand against him, and he will curse thee to thy face. And I am
persuaded that the Devil acts much by this observation; which makes him
endeavor all he can to make many good men poor, thinking thereby to make them
less good: though the wise and merciful God do wonderfully prevent him. For
indeed the soul is so naturally tender of the body, that its loath God himself
should touch it; if he do, it is ready to fret and storm, and fly in his face.
Converse with God! says the wicked King, Why this evil is from the Lord; what
should I wait upon the Lord any longer! 2 King. 6. 33. There are many
corruptions of the soul that are most ready to clamor against God in a time of
affliction, as Fear, Anger, Unbelief, yea and sinful Self-love and
Creature-love, an affection than can never be taught to converse with God, yet
will go crying after him, when he takes away any darling from it, as Phaltiel
went crying after his Wife, or rather, crying against him; as Micah cried
against the men of Dan, saying, Ye have taken away my Gods, and are gone away,
and what have I more? Judge. 18. 24.

3. Temptations do then come strongest from without. Then it is the Devils time
to play his game: What, put up this reproach! what, will you sit down with this
loss! up and revenge thy self. He that knows so well the temper of man's heart
so ready to curse God when he touches him, Job 2. 5. will not fail to touch the
heart, and tempt it to curse him indeed, Job 2. 9. -- Curse God and dye.

I have gone through the Doctrinal part of my discourse upon these words, which
was the thing I mainly intended. Many Inferences might be drawn from it. But I
shall content my self to forbid, and so as it were to remove out of the way,
some things that hinder this great duty; and so shut up all with one word of
Exhortation.

1. Converse not with creature comforts, the poor, low, and scant enjoyments of
this world: For so I may well call them, though they be never so high in the
opinion of them that have them, and never so large as to the proportion that
any one has of them: They are low in comparison of that high and sup^eme good
for which the soul was made; and scant as to any real happiness or satisfaction
that they can possibly give. For indeed those sinful and sensual souls that
take up their rest and happiness most in them, are not properly satisfied, but
surfeited; not filled, but for the present glutted with them. There are many
unlawful, and hurtful ways of the souls conversing with created comforts: I
will not run through them all, as not intending any large discourse upon these
heads. Converse not with them, fondly delighting in them, and doting upon
them: especially take heed of this when God is shaking his Rod over any of
them. Does God arise and begin to plead with you in judgment, laying his hand
upon any of these, and threatening to take them from you? Oh then hands off!
touch them not. What an unseemly, and indeed monstrous fight is it to see a
creature pulling and tugging against his Creator and maintaining his supposed
right against Heaven its self! Is it for a Heaven-born soul to stand gazing and
doting upon, or passionately weeping over created friends, carnal liberty,
corporal health, houses made with hands, things below God, yea and below its
self too! Pore not too much upon them; value them only in God, and refer them
freely to him. If you can say, you have any thing of your own, make much of it,
and spare not: But give unto God the things that are Gods; and by that time you
have done so, I think you need not dote upon what is left. We ought indeed at
all times to enjoy all our creature comforts with hearts loosened from them:
but if formerly our hearts have been too much joined to them, it is time now to
loosen them.

2. Converse not with creature causes in a time of Affliction. This is a
strange kind of Atheistical temper, into which we are very prone to fall: I
speak properly, when I say [Fall;] for it is indeed a falling down from God in
our hearts, in whose Infinite Essence all creature-causes are lapt up; and in
whose hand the several successes and events of them all do lie. Let a beast
that judges by sense, kick at the poor thorn that pricks him: But let rational
souls fix upon the highest and supreme Agent, who in an infinite, powerful and
skilful manner, uses what creature he will, for what end he will, and sends it
of an errand which it self knows not. Why do we run hunting Poor Partridge
instruments upon the mountains of contemplation? Shall the noble faculties of
an immortal soul spend themselves upon such an inquisition? or is it just to
pursue an innocent creature out of breath for being an instrument in the hand
of God; to quarrel with the Sword, because it suffered its self to be drawn; or
beat the Air, because it is infected? This were indeed to go out with the King
of Israel, with much warlike preparation, to catch Fleas. I deny not but that
wise men may look into second causes, and make many profitable Observations
from them, both for present, and future; and all men may and ought to learn
many wholesome lessons even from the instrument that afflicts them: But sure I
am, a godly man will not dwell upon these; he will not fix here, but readily
resolve all into an higher cause, and so falls to converse with that: Much less
will he blame or murmr at a poor harmless Arrow, that flew no further than it
was shot, nor pierced no deeper than it was bidden. Yea, though the second
cause were a sinful cause, a rational Agent, and so consequently acted by
malicious and evil principles; yet a godly soul knows how to distinguish upon
him, and his action: he hates him as a sinner; but comports well enough with
him as Gods instrument: and though he condemns his action as it varies from
Gods command, yet he approves of it as being ordered by Gods hand and counsel.
David hated cursing, as much as any man; yet did he so eye the hand of God in
every thing, and comply with it too, that there was a time when he said
concerning Shimei, So let him curse. Concerning this I hinted something before
under another head. Therefore

3. Converse not with creature-cures, creature-relief. These may indeed be
looked out after, and safely made use of when they are found: Nay, I will add
further, that they are to be sought diligently, and used carefully. They that
know the Infinite Sovereignty, Power and Wisdom of God, will not tie him to
means, much less to these or those particular means: But on the other hand,
they that understand Gods usual and ordinate way of acting and governing, and
upholding the world, will not tie him up from means; no, nor expect that he
should appear for their relief immediately and miraculously. Though if any one
have a miraculous faith truly grounded upon some special and particular
promise, I will not contend with him: only I would desire to see his miraculous
faith justified by some miraculous works, which I conceive do always attend
it. But the converse with creature-cures which I forbid, is the immoderate
seeking of them, or the inordinate using of them. To seek after means in
themselves unlawful, can never become lawful: But I speak not of these. For,
although some are come to that height of Atheism and abjuration of God, as to
retain the Devil himself for counself in a time of straits, as Saul did, and
contract with the Prince of death for the preservation of life in time of
sickness, as Ahaziah did: And I doubt very many do fall into acquaintance with
that evil spirit, and receive assistance from him before they be well aware, by
meddling with unphysical, unscriptural, unwarrantable cures: yet the greatest
danger is not in these: in licit is perimus omnes, the greatest danger is of
miscarrying about things in themselves lawful. And that is chiefly by those two
ways which I named but now. Take heed therefore of immoderate seeking after
created helps. Be not anxious, perplexed, tormented in mind by a passionate
desire of any of these. Oh what a raging and unquenchable thirst have many men
after creature cures! They will move Heaven and Earth, and almost Hell too
(with her in the Poet) but they will find out relief. Give me a Physician, or I
dye, says one; Give me trading, good Markets, a plentiful Crop, or I am
undone, says another. What man, is thy life lapt up in a pill, or incorporated
into a potion? Is thy main happiness in the abundance of these things here
below? or will thou say to the wind, Blow here in this quarter, and nowhere
else; tie up the supreme and free Agent to a form and method of working? Let
not such a profane disposition be found amongst us. Again, if you have found
out hopeful creaturecures, take heed of using them in an inordinate manner,
laying stress upon them, looking earnestly on them, as though they by their own
power and proper virtue could make the lame to walk, or the sick to recover.
Eye not, much less depend upon the virtue of any created means as distinct from
God. But acknowledge the power, and virtue, and goodness of every created
Being* to be the power, and virtue, and goodness of God in that creature; and
so consequently use it in subordination and subserviency to the supreme cause,
who can at pleasure let loose or suspend the influences and virtues of every
such means.

4. Converse not with creature-losses in a time of affliction. The sinful soul
that has straggled off from God, and centred upon the creature, is always
intemperate and restless: If it be disappointed in its converse with
creature-cures, and sees that for all these, his comforts are ^ut off, health,
liberty, friends, are perished; then he falls to converse with his losses, and
spends the powers of his soul in discontents, complaints, and many dismal
passions. Oh then, alas, I am undone! What shall I do for the hundred talents!
I am the only man that has seen affliction; no sorrow like unto my sorrow: I
shall go softly all my days, for the joy of my heart is perished, the delight
of my eyes is cut off. Thus Rachel wee^^ for her children, and will not be
comforted: Rizpah attends the carcasses of her Sons, and will not be parted
from them, 2 Samuel 21. It is a strange thing that a soul should live upon its
losses: And yet how many do so! Their very soul cleaves to the dust, where
their creature comforts are interred; whose souls are so much bound up in the
creature, that they will needs live and dye together with them. If God smite
the Gourd, and make it to wither, Jonah droops, and will needs dye too, Jonah
4. 8, 9. If Joseph be missing a while, Jacob will not be comforted; no, he will
go down into the grave unto his Son mourning, Genesis 37. 35. Who would have
thought to have heard such words, from such wise men, as a Prophet and a
Patriach! Oh, the strange and unbounded power which this unseemly creature love
has obtained over the best of men! which makes me call him a happy man, almost
more than a man, a compeer of Angels, who has learnt to converse with God
alone. Well, converse not with creaturelosses; let not your soul take up its
lodging by the carcasses of your created-comforts, with Riz^ah; dwell not upon
the lowest round of the ladder, but climb up by it to the meaning of God, and
to some higher good, and more excellent attainment. They live to their loss,
who live upon their losses; who dwell upon the dark side of the dispensation:
For every dark Providence has one bright side, wherein a godly soul may take
comfort, if he be not wanting to himself.

5. Converse not with flesh and blood. By flesh and blood, I suppose the
Apostle means no more than men, Gal. 1. 16. And indeed, if we confer with men
only for counsel, and repair to men only for comfort in a time of affliction,
we shoot short of the mark. But by flesh and blood the Scripture elsewhere
often means, man in this his animal state, as he is in his corruptible, mortal
body; as 1 Cor. 15. 50. and many other places. And in this sense I speak, when
I say, Converse not with flesh and blood. Judge not according to your senses;
let not your own sensual appetite determine what is good or evil, sweet or
bitter: Consult with rectified Reason, and not with brutish appetite; confer
with Faith, and not with Fancy. Rectified Reason will judge that to be really
good, which our sensual appetite distasts: An enlightened mind will judge that
to make for the interest of the soul, and its eternal happy state, which sense
judges hurtful to the interest of the body, and its animal state. It is not
possible there should be any order, nor consequently any peace or rest in that
soul, where the inferior faculties domineer over the superior, and sensitive
powers Lord it over the intellectual; and where raging appetite, and
extravagant fancy must clamber up into the throne to determine cases, and right
Reason must stoop and bow before it.

Be admonished to fly converse with all these, if you would converse rightly,
purely, properly, comfortably with God, which is the highest office and
attainment of created nature. Consider what I have said concerning this
excellent and high employment; and awaken your souls, and all the powers of
them to m^et the Lord God, and converse with him aright in the way of his
judgments. Converse with God, with God in Christ, with God in his promises,
with God in his attributes, and labor to do it not speculatively, notionally,
but really, practically, according as I have directed in the foregoing
discourse. Religion is not an empty, airy, notional thing; it is not a matter
of thinking, nor of talking; but it has a real existence in the soul, and does
as really distinguish, though not specifically, one man from another, as Rea on
distinguishes all men from beasts: Converse with God is set out in Scripture,
by living, and walking, and the like. Let me inculcate this thing therefore
again, and press it upon you, and I shall finish all. As the way of glorifying
God in the world, is not by a mere thinking of him, or entertaining some notion
of his glory into our heads, but consists in a real participation of his image,
in a God-like disposition, and holy conversation, according to that of our
Savior, Joh. 15. 8. Herein is my Father glorified, etc. So the way of
conversing with God in his several attributes, is not a thinking often with our
selves, and telling one another that God is just, wise, merciful, etc. though
this be good: But it is a drinking in the virtue and value of these divine
perfections, a working of them into the soul; and on the other hand, the souls
rendering of it self up to God in those acts of Grace which do suit with such
attributes, as in water, face answers face. I do not call bare performance of
duties a conversing with God: Prayer and Meditation; etc. are excellent means
in and by which our soul converses with God; but communion with God is properly
somewhat more spiritual, real, powerful and divine, according as I described it
just now. As for example; The soul receives the impressions of divine
Sovereignty into it, and gives up it self unto God in the Grace of Self-denial,
and humble subjection. The soul receives the communications of divine Fullness
and Perfection, and entertains the same with Delight and Complacency; and, as
it were, grows full in it. Even as the communications of the virtues of the Sun
are answered with life, and warmth, and growth in the plants of the earth: So a
souls conversing with the attributes of God, is not an empty notion of them, or
a dry discourse concerning them, but a Reception of Impressions from them, and
a Reciprocation to them: The effluxes of these from God, are such as do beget
reflections in man toward God. This is to know Christ, to grow up in him into
all things according to that in 1 John 3. 6. Whosoever sins, has not seen
him, neither known him.

The second Reason why we ought especially to study to converse with God in the
time of afflictions is because that is a time wherein we are most apt to think
our selves excused from this duty, as if it were allowed us in our extremity to
forget God, and mind our selves only. And that not only in respect of those
bodily straits and distresses, which I named under the last head, but in
respect of our own passions. When the afflicting hand of God is upon us,
pressing and grieving of us, and taking our beloved comforts from us, we are
apt to indulge our own private and selfish passions, care, fear, sorrow,
complainings, etc. Yea, to think we are in some sense allowed to indulge them.
How willingly do we suffer our selves to be drawn into a converse with our
selves, to be contracted as it were into our selves, and suffer our selves to
be carried down the stream of our own passions, which at other times we should
think it were our duty to resist! Even as the heart in naturals draws home to
it in a time of danger, the blood that was dispersed abroad in the body, as it
were to defend it self: so the heart in morals gathers home its powers and
affections which were formerly bestowed here and there, to employ them all
about it self in a time of sore affliction. And we are apt to think our selves
excusable too in so doing: So that if God himself should ask a distressed soul,
as he did Jonah, Do thou well to be careful, fearful, sorrowful, querulous,
because of these afflictions, losses, distresses that are upon thee? it would
go nigh to give him the same answer, I do well to be sorrowful; yea, and to
refuse to be comforted. There seems to be allowed us some natural affections in
case of extreme affliction; which, how far they are lawful, I will not now
dispute. But sure I am, that if such be allowed us, they must not be wild
extravagants, wandering without the bounds of Religion, and Conscience, as if
God had laid the reins upon the neck of the soul, and given it leave to indulge
it self in what passions it would for a certain time, as the Daughter of
Jephtha was allowed to go whither she would, wailing upon the mountains for two
months. We are never allowed any passions or affections sure, that do not
comply with the will of God, and consist with our submission thereunto. But
whatever they are, I find, that under the pretense of those, some men are apt
to be carried unto strange inordinacies, and commit many passionate outrages;
and indeed the best of men are too prone to suspend and interrupt that lively
and feeling converse with God, which they ought to maintain even when they
smart most.

3. Because th^n is a time when there is more especial use for, and need of
such converse with God. And that (1) To give rest to the soul. In prosperity
men longer God, and yet make a shift to find some kind of rest in their
pleasures, friends, employments; some take comfort in their cups and
companions; and indeed all are apt to fancy a contentment in
creatureenjoyments. But in a time of great affliction, all these are gone, or
at least have no favor in them; and where shall the weary soul find rest then?
Then there is no show of rest but in God alone. When all other props fail, then
either catch God here, or fall. There is now nothing left to give any
settlement or contentment to the soul but God alone: And in him there is ease
to the sick, rest to the weary, settlement to the shaking, contentment to the
troubled Christian. Therefore converse with God in the day of greatest
affliction; which is the same counsel in effect with that of our Savior, Mat.
11. 28. Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give
you rest. (2) There is need of it, to give relief to the body also.

And so conversing with God in a right manner, is the best policy, the surest
way to recovery, and relief. See what a speedy cure there is in it, Psalm. 34.
5, 6. They looked unto him and were lightened, and their faces were not ashamed.
This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of all his
troubles. In vain is conversing with Friends, Physicians, Counselors; in vain
is all creature-converse without this: No rest to the soul, no ease to the body
in a time of affliction, without converse with God; so that a man in affliction
estranged from God, straggling off from God, is altogether miserable. In a word,
separate a soul from God, and in prosperity his enjoyments are low, and in
adversity the want of them is very bitter: so that there is good reason why a
Christian should study to converse with God in the way of his Judgments. -- But
the great Art is to know how. This therefore I now come to in the

Fourth place, to show particularly, how we are to converse with God in
afflictions. Now there are two ways of explaining this.

1. By showing with what Attributes of God we are to converse.

2. By what acts of the soul. But I shall bring both these into one.

1. We ought to converse with the absolute and unlimited Sovereignty of God,
whereby he, as a free and supreme Agent, does what he will, and none can say
unto him, What do thou? Dan. 4. 35. This Job often eyes and owns:
Particularly, Job 9. 12. He takes away, none can hinder him, and who can say
unto him, What do thou? This we must also eye often, and own heartily. This
we may well argue from Gods creating of us: He that made us thus without any
constraint, can he not, may he not make us otherwise, and alter us without
restraint? So Job argues, chap. 1. 21. We may also argue it from the
subordinate Sovereignty, and inferior Supremacy of men: Even a Monarch among
men does whatsoever he pleases, and who may say unto him, What do thou?
Eccles. 8. 3, 4. Yea, a very Centurion has a kind of Sovereignty in his
sphere, over as many as are under him; he says unto one man Go, and he goes;
and to another, Do this, and he does it, Man. 8. 9. And shall we not then
acknowledge a Sovereign Power, and independent absolute Authority in the great
and blessed God, over the whole Creation, the workmanship of his own hands? So
the good Centurion argues, and infers, in the place last quoted. N^y, as the
Apostle says in one place, We have Fathers of our flesh who use us at their
pleasure and we do not gainsay their Authority; we do not say to our Father,
What begettest thou? nor to our Mother, What have thou brought forth? Isa. 45.
10. Nay, if these similitudes will not teach you, I will say to you, as God to
the Prophet, Arise, go down to the Potters house, there I will cause you to
learn this lesson: He makes and marreth his vessels of Clay, as often as he
pleases; And, are not ye in the hand of the Lord, as the Clay is in the hand
of the Potter? Jer. 18. 6. I speak the more to this, in as much as I find, that
however men give God good words, and confess his Dominion over them and theirs,
yet when it comes to it, that he touches them in any of their darling comforts,
they are ready to clamor against him in their hearts, as if he did them some
wrong; if not to curse him to his face. Certainly there is some Atheistical
opinion of propriety, that in some degree or other is apt to steal into the
most devout minds: And sure I am, we do not only barely offend, but we do our
selves much hurt; we wound our own peace; we shake the settledness of our own
hearts; we put our selves into briars: In a word, we both lessen our creature
comforts, and multiply our griefs, and aggravate our sorrows, by calling things
our own: If we had not taken them to be our own, it would not have troubled us
to part with them.

Be sure therefore to eye and own the absolute and unlimited Sovereignty of
God: But ^hat's not all; it is not enough to believe it; we must converse with
it otherwise than by thinking of it or assenting to it. Then do we converse
with the Sovereignty of God,

1. When the powerful sense of it does silence quarrelling, yea murmurings, yea
even disputings in the soul. We may indeed modestly contend with men concerning
their dealings with us; the Potsheard may strive with the Potsheard of the
earth; but it must not say to the Potter, Why have thou made me thus? A pacate
and quiet frame of heart, is a real conversing with the Sovereignty of God. So
did Aaron when he held his peace, Levit. 10. 3. and Job, when he attributed
nothing unseemly to God, Job 1. ult.

2. When the sense of it does suppress selfwill. This is an unruly lust in the
soul, (...) a Giant-like spirit warring against Heaven, and breeding bate
continually. This is that which maintains a Meum and Tuum even with God
himself, that ^ets up interests (as the Jews set up Princes, Hosea 8. 4.) but
not by God, yea indeed in opposition to him. This is the seditious party in the
soul, that is always crying out, We will not have this man to rule over us:
And when that darling interest which this proud rival has set up, is touched
of God, and smitten and blasted from Heaven, it is ready to fret and storm,
yea, and to think it has reason to be angry. If this Son of the bondwoman were
cast out, Abraham's Family would be all of a piece, all in order, and at rest.
If this undisciplined and perverse spirit were quite banished; Oh what a calm
day would it be in the soul! what fair and sweet correspondence would there be
between God and his creature! for certainly this is the Jonah that raises the
storm, and makes the great deeps of the soul that they cannot rest, but do
perpetually roll and toss, yea and cast out mire and dirt continually. But
alas, I doubt this spirit is not quite laid, no not in the most spiritual man:
the best of men are ready to nourish and hatch up some darling, some private
interest or other of their own, dinstinct from God, and the grand interest of
their souls, which God himself must not touch; some Gourd or other that the
cold wind must not blow upon. He is a blessed man indeed, who does so
understand that he lives and moves in God alone; and is so overpowered with the
sense of the infinite goodness and holiness of God, and the absolute perfection
of his divine will, as that he reckons it his greatest perfection to be nothing
in himself, nor have nothing of his own distinct from God, but only studyes to
be great in God, to be filled with God, to live to him, and for him; to enjoy
all things as in and under him; who counts it his only interest to quit all
self interest, and particular ends, and to be freely at the disposal of the
highest mind, conformable to the highest good, cheerfully compliant with the
uncreated will. Potiphar had so committed all to Joseph, in the sense of his
great faithfulness, that he knew not ought he had, save the bread that he did
eat, Genesis 39. 6. But this similitude is too low: A godly soul should commit all
its interest, its life and livelihood, and all to God in the sense of his
Sovereignty, and not know ought that he has, no not his own life, but despise
it in comparison of uncreated life; as Job speaks, Job 9. 21. Methinks the
Sovereignty of God speaks such language to the soul, and in it, as Eli to
Samuel, My Son, hide nothing from me, keep nothing back of all that thou have,
and the pious soul should not, with foolish Rachel, conceal any selfish
interest, so as not to be willing to part with it, when its Sovereign Lord and
Father comes to search the tent; but (with allusion to Amos 6. 10.) when God
comes to ferret out all self-interests, and shall ask, Is there any such yet
with thee? should be able to answer boldly, No, there is none. Blessed is the
man that is in such a case; blessed is the man whose only interest it is to
serve the will of the Lord! Well, improve the infinite Sovereignty of God to
this end, and work it upon, and into your own hearts, that all self-will may
stoop to it: and let the main interest of your souls, be so planted and
established in your souls, that no other interest may be able to grow by it:
Charm your own self-will with such severe reproofs, as this is; Either deny thy
self, O my soul, or deny thy self to be a creature: either be wholly at Gods
command, or call him not thy Sovereign.

3. When the sense of it does beget Revevence in the soul toward God. We ought
not only to be subject to the Rod of God, but even to reverence him when he
corrects with it: and so not only to accept of the Rod, but to kiss it too.
And surely i^ the Fathers of our flesh correct us, and we give them Reverence,
Heb. 12. 9. much more ought we to reverence the Sovereign Father both of flesh
and spirit. This is a devout act of the soul, whereby it, looks up and adores
the Infinite and Sovereign Majesty, and thinks equitable and honorable
thoughts of him, even when he is in the way of his Judgments. And these are the
proper acts of a soul conversing with Gods Sovereignty in the time of
afflictions. When we are silent before him, subject unto him, and reverencing
of him; then do we really and truly converse with him as our Almighty and
absolute Sovereign. But Gods Authority and Prerogative, though it may silence,
will scarce satisfy: such a corrupt and rebellious pass are our natures grown
to. Therefore

2. Converse with the perfect and infinite Righteousness of God in the time of
afflictions; that divine perfection whereby he renders to every man what is
just and due, and no more. This we are to eye and own, and sincerely to
acknowledge, even in the time of our greatest extremity, after the example of
Daniel, chap. 9. 14. The Lordour God is righteous in all his works; and of the
godly Levites, Neh. 9. 33. Thou art just in all that is brought upon us, thou
have done right. Argue with Abraham, Genesis 18. 25. Shall not the Judge of all
the Earth do right? Can Righteousness it self err in Judgment? Shall the
Timber say unto the Rule, Why have thou measured me thu; or to the Line, thou
art crooked? Are not my ways equul? says the Lord; Ezekiel. 18. 25. Are not the
Lords ways equal? let your souls say too. Be ye sirmly persuaded of the
infinite and incorruptible Righteousness and Equity of God; but that is not all;
we do not then converse with the Righteousness of God, when we do believe it,
or acknowledge it: a very Pharaoh may be brought to make such a confession,
Exodus 9. 27. The Lord is righteous, and I and my people are wicked. But then do
we converse with the Righteousness of God, in general, when the sense of it
does give a rational satisfaction to the soul. And indeed, whereas the
Sovereignty of God is, enough to silence, yet his Righteonsness had need to be
called in to administer satisfaction: The former is sufficient to stop the
mouth; but there is need of the latter to settle the heart. And indeed methinks
it is a heart-settling consideration. For, how can the interest of the creature
be better secured than in the hands of a righteous God? Where can we venture
all we have, better than in such a cettain and steady bottom? How can we better
trust our selves, than on such firm and even ground? We will trust our selves
far with an upright and righteous man: and if we hear of the miscarriage of any
interest of ours at any time, it does mightily calm and satisfy our hearts, if
we are assured that it was in the hands of a just and upright person: Much more
rational and steady satisfaction may the Infinite Righteousness of God
administer even in the time of the greatest affliction, if it be duly wrought
into the heart. But more particularly,

1. The powerful sense of the Reghteousness of God should make us sensible and
serious. It becomes us seriously to ponder, duly to weigh, and in good earnest
to lay to heart, all that is done to us by a righteous God. We use slightly to
pass by, and slightly to esteem the words or actions of vain man: But it is not
for nothing that the righteous God afflicts any man, in any measure, at any
time. The voice of God, though it be not always articulate, yet is always
significant. Will a Lion roar for nothing? Surely every action of the righteous
God has a meaning in it. A hair falls not from our head, nor a Sparrow to the
ground without him: Much less sure do greater changes befall us withcut him.
And in all things he is infinitely righteous. Oh how does this call us to
sensibleness and seriousness! How ought all the powers of the soul to be
awakened to attention, when the righteous God utters his dreadful voice! and
the whole frame of the heart and life to be composed under his heavy hand! Now
if ever, one would say of Laughter, It is mad: one would reckon trifling to be
a kind of profaneness, and judge that foolish jestings do almost border upon
blasphemy, formerly not convenient, now not lawful. For indeed a vain frothy,
light, trifling spirit, in the day of affliction, is in a sense a blaspheming
of the Righteousness of God. As a consequent of this,

2. It should put us upon self examination. Nature it self had taught the
Heathenish Mariners to enquire where the fault was in a storm. Jonah 1. 7. Much
more may the knowledge of Gods Infinite Righteousness teach us: so may the holy
Word too, that word in Lam. 3. 40. Let us search and try our ways, etc. and
many others. Now do the faculties of the godly soul, being awakened, begin to
cast lots upon themselves, to find out the guilty party: And certainly God has
a great hand in ordering these lots; he does ordinarily show unto man his sin,
even by the verdict of his own heart. Conscience, I mean, is Gods Vicegerent in
the soul; and though its true, this Judge is oft-times corrup^ed and bribed, or
at least overruled in prosperity; yet God instructs it to speak good sense,
and to speak out, and speak the truth in the time of affliction. I believe they
hit the nayl upon the head, who cried out one to another, Verily we are guilty
concerning our Brother, Genesis 42. 21. Another cries, Verily I am guilty
concerning my Minister, concerning my People; guilty concerning my Wife,
concerning my Children, concerning my Estate, my Time, my Talents; and it may
be all true. I believe the Heathen was in the right, who looked upon his hands
and feet, and cried out, Judge. 1. 7. As I have done, so God has requited me:
and the Babylonish Monarch harpt upon a right string after he was come to his
right wits again, Dan. 4. ult. -- Those that walk in pride, he is able to
abase. God has not given to our faculties any infallibility indeed, but he
inables them to make good guesses; and I am verify persuaded, does many times
lay the hand upon the right sore, and order this secret Lottery from Heaven: So
that that faculty, or that frame, or that action which stands convicted in the
Court of Conscience, is seldom held guiltless in the Court of Heaven.

3. It should work us to Humiliation and Reformation; an heart broken, and a
conversation healed of its breaches. By Humiliation, I mean, a heart broken
purely, properly, and spiritually for sin. I do not mean by it, an heart broken
for losses and afflictions, and bowing down it self heavily under the burden of
its distresses: no, nor a heart broken for sin, as viewing it only in the
calamitous effects, and bitter fruits of it; which I doubt is the Humiliation
of most. Many may say concerning their Humiliation, (to use the Prophets words
in a different sense, Zach. 13. 6.) These are the wounds with which I was
wounded in the house of my friends, by the loss of my friends, the loss of my
health, the loss of my goods; these tears that you see, these groans that you
hear, are nothing but the scarr which the soar has left behind it, and the
wales which the Rod has made. I doubt our very sorrow for sin, in a time of
affliction, admits of a mixture of carnal self and passion, and so of sin too.
But I mean, a pure, spiritual, proper sorrow, and hatred of sin; which I know
may be broached by sharp afflictions, and have vent given to it by piercing the
vessel; but that is not the proper cause and ground of it. Moses in his joy,
had an eye to the recompense of reward, Heb. 11. 26. And so a Christian in his
sorrow may have respect to the recompense of his sin, I mean, his afflictions;
but it is not primarily and principally caused by these: For though these
dreadful showers from Heaven should cease, yet the stream of his eyes, or at
least the fountain of his heart would not cease issuing forth bitter waters.
Though the Righteousness of God do serve to give vent to godly sorrow, yet it
is the goodness and holiness of God that gives it. Do we sorrow for sin,
because it spoiled us of our comforts, stripped us of our ornaments? Then sure we
think there is something in the world worse than sin, for which we should
bewail it, and hate it; and so consequently, that there is something better
than God, for which we should love him. Alas, how apt are we to run into a
practical blasphemy before we be aware! In a word then to decide this
controversy, Our afflictions, losses, distresses in the world, may possibly be
as a Bucket to draw up this water of godly sorrow; but they must not be the
Cistern to receive and hold it. Serious and spiritual Humiliation is a real
conversing with the Righteousness of God. To meet God, is indeed to fall down
before him; and to converse with him, is to lie down under him. The truth of
which temper is best evidenced by that excellent Commentator, the Life of a
Christian: This does best declare the nature, and interpret the meaning of
heart-Humiliation. He that breaks off his sins, does best make it appear that
his heart is broken for them. If you would know whether there have been Rain in
the night, look upon the ground, and that will discover. Oh my friends, if the
dust be laid; if all earthly joys, contentments, pleasures, concernments, be
laid, you may conclude your sorrow was a shower sent into your souls from
Heaven.

If you see a Boy both sobbing and minding his Book, you may conclude he has
some right sense of his Masters severity. Conversion to God, is the most proper
and real conversing with him in the way of his Judgments: so he himself
interprets in that complaint made, Isa. 9. 13. The people turns not to him
that smites them, etc. That which happened to Moses when he had been in the
Mount with God, Exodus 34. 29. should also be the condition of every good
Israelite, when he has been with God in the valley, the vale of tears, an
afflicted state; his face should shine, his conversation should witness that he
has been with God; the smell of this fire should pass upon his garments, his
whole outward man. The spirit of mourning should be demonstrated by the spirit
of burning. If God from Heaven set fire on the standing Corn of our worldly
comforts, we must answer him from within, and set fire on the stubble of our
worldly lusts, and corruptions. Let me change our Saviors words therefore a
little, Mat. 6. 18. and exhort you earnestly; Thou Christian, when thou
fastest, when thou humblest thy soul for sin, wash thy face also, cleanse thy
outward conversation from all sinful pollution, that thou may appear to be
humbled indeed. And this shall be accounted as a true and real conversing with
the Righteousness of God in the time of affliction.

3. Converse with the Faithfulness of God. This attribute of God has respect
to his promises; and therefore it may be you will think strange that I should
speak of this in a discourse of afflictions, as not having place there at all.
Every one will readily acknowledge that Gods Sovereignty and Righteousness do
clearly appear in his Judgments; but how his Faithfulness can be exercised
therein, they see not. What, faithful in punishing, in plaguing, in visiting,
in afflicting, distressing his creature, how can that be? Many will be ready to
think rather, that God is not faithful at such a time, when he denies what he
had promised to give, takes away what he had promised to continue; when he
plagues David every morning, when he had promised him that the Plague should
not come nigh his dwelling; when he brings Abijah to the grave, whom he had
promised, that his days should be long upon the Land; and Job to the dunghill,
to whom all the promises were made both of the life that now is, and of that
which is to come. Is this faithfulness? Does God fulfill his promises by
frustrating them? Notwithstanding all this, it seems that the faithfulness of
God has place in the afflictions of his people: For so says David expressly,
Psalm. 119.75. I know that in faithfulness thou have afflicted me: if indeed
faithfulness be taken properly in that place: Neither indeed need it seem so
strange as some men make it; for God has promised his vovenant people, to
visit their iniquity with a Rod, Psalm. 89. 32. The Rod The Rod of a man; a
fatherly chastisement, as it is explained, 2 Samuel 7. 14. where this seems to be
made a branch of the Covenant, and is understood by many as a promise. But if
that be not a plain promise, I am sure there is one in Psalm. 84. 11. No good
thing will he with hold from them that walk uprightly: And if no good thing,
then no correction neither; for that is often good and profitable for the
people of God in this world for many excellent ends; which (considering the
nature of man) cannot well be accomplished without it; as might appear in many
particulars; but it is not needful to run out into them. God will take more
care of his own people, than of the rest of the world; and will rather correct
them, than not reduce them. It is their main bappiness that he takes care for,
and he will in kindness take out of the way whatever hinders it, and give
whatever may promote it. Gods thoughts are not as our thoughts: he judges
otherwise of health, riches, liberty, friends, etc. than we do, We are apt to
measure God by ourselves, and our own affections, which is the ground of our
mistake in this business. We mind the things that please our flesh, our senses,
our appetite, our fancy; but God minds the things that concern our souls, and
their true happiness. The Saints are much dearer to God, and much more beloved
of him, than they are to themselves; and therefore he will not give them what is
sweet, but what is meet; he will give them what makes for their real and eternal
happiness, whether they would have it or no. He loves them with a strong and
powerful love, and will not deny them any thing that is truly good for them,
though they cry out under it; nor allow them any thing that is really hurtful,
though they cry after it. So will a wise Father upon Earth do by his children,
to the best of his skill and power; much more will God then, qui plusquam
patrium amorem gerit in suos, whose bowels are infinitely larger and stronger
than those of a Father. Now then, labor to converse with the Faithfulness of
God in the time of afflictions, which is by studying the Covenant and the
promises of it, and your present condition, and comparing them together, and
observing how consonant and agreeable they are, each interpreting other. As
also by persuading your hearts of the consistency of afflictions with divine
love and favor; and by studying to reconcile the hand and heart of God
together. But especially converse with it practically, by a holy establishment
and settlement of heart under all afflictions. For, whereas afflictions in
themselves are apt to beget a fearfulness, despondency, or at least fluctuation
in the soul, the lively sense of Gods Faithfulness in inflicting them, will
settle and sustain it: It is a firm and consistent thing, upon which the
shaking soul may settle safely, and center it self boldly.

4. Converse with the Holiness and unspotted Purity of God. He is angry, and
sins not; he corects for sin, without sin. Fury is not in me, says the Lord,
Isa. 27. 4. There is no passionate malicious temper in the pure and holy God;
no revengeful appetite to feed upon the blood of his creature. He is of purer
eyes than to behold the least iniquity; and of a purer nature, than any way to
miscarry in any of his dealings or dispensations. Converse then with this
Infinite Holiness of God: Keep up pure, equitable, honorable thoughts of him
in your hearts. Take heed of fancying to your selves a God guilty of passion of
partiality, or carried away with such weak and mixed affections as we our
selves are. But more practically, converse with Gods Holiness in the time of
afflictions, by laying even little sins greatly to heart: little sins, compared
with Infinite Holiness and Purity, ought to be matter of great and serious
sorrow to a sensible soul. Again, take heed of the least miscarriages under
affliction, of departing from God in the least. This I know is the great duty
and care of every tenderhearted Christian at all times. But I conceive we
ought more especially to press it upon our hearts in the time of affliction,
because we are then most apt to indulge some kind of humane passions, which we
call natural affections; as if we had a license to care and fear, and grieve,
and complain, not only in an extraordinary, but even in an irregular manner. Oh
let the sense of Gods Infinite Purity, and perefect Holiness, check and awe
those very natural affections, be they what they will, if they offer to exceed
their bounds, and overflow their banks. But this I touched upon before under
another head, amongst the Reasons of the Doctrine. Therefore

5. Converse with the Almighty Power of God. That God is Infinite and Almighty
in Power, I need not undertake to demonstrate. No man had read a leaf in
Scripture, nor indeed turned over one leaf in the book of the creatures, that
has not learnt this. I need not sure turn you to any particular mighty work of
God: They that instance in his letting loose the virtues of the creatures, in
the case of the universal deluge, or binding up of their influences, as in the
case of the three captive Jews, Daniel and Jonah, when he kept the fire from
burning, and forbade the Lions to eat one, and the fish to digest another
Prophet whom he had eaten, do make but a poor guess at Almightiness, but a
faint essay to describe it. The Creation of the least creature out of nothing,
is an higher argument of Divine Power, than the command of the greatest that is
already created. Eye God duly in the notion of a Creator; yea, of a Creator of
your own souls and bodies, and you have enough to fill you with everlasting
admiration, as David was filled, Psalm. 139. 14. I am fearfully and wonderfully
made. But it is not enough to eye or acknowledge, or admire; we must yet do
more, if we will rightly converse with the Almightiness of God, viz. by the
acts of Reverence and Dependence.

1. Reverence that Almighty and glorious God in your hearts, who can bring
quidlibet ex quolibet, any thing out of any thing; yea, out of nothing; yea,
any thing to nothing in a moment. Reverence that power of God, that can pour
contempt upon Princes; that can bring Job the greatest of all the men of the
East, to lie in the Ashes, and make his Bed in the Dunghill; that can send home
Naomi empty, who went out full and flourishing. Has he done so by you, debased
you when you were high, tumbled you down from the clouds, and rolled you in the
dust, emptied you when you were full, withered you when you were fresh and
flourishing? Let not God lose the glory of his Almighty Power; reverence that
glorious hand of God.

2. Rest upon the same Almighty God, who can also bring up the same Job from
the dunghill, and set him with Princes, and fill empty Naomi with a famous off
spring, throwing into her lap one of the Ancestors of the Messiah, according to
the flesh. The same Power that caused your Sun to go down at midday, when you
least suspected, can also cause it to rise at midnight, when you least hope.
Dwell not upon creatureprobabilities, or improbabilities: but lift up thy self
believing soul, and be assured, that God can do what he will, and he will do
what is good for them that love him, according to the dictates of unsearchable
wisdom and goodness. Thou that art rolled in the dust, yet arise and roll thy
self upon those Almighty Arms that brought thee thither, and are able to
advance thee: As I have seen a child thrown by his Father off, and thrown down
to the ground in a seeming displeasure, yet clinging to the same hand, and will
not let it go, till at length he rise up again by it: a fit emblem of a child
of God, whom his heavenly Father seems as if he had cast off. The wounding hand
of God is apt to amaze indeed, and to beget consternation and astonishment. But
remember, the same hand that wounds, can also heal; he that breaks us, can also
make up all our breaches: let this beget confidence and dependence. God never
wounds deeper, than that he can easily bind up the wound again; never throws
his people so low, as that they should be out of his reach, Take heed therefore
of unseemly despondencies; cast not away your confidence, which shall have a
recompense, if ye maintain it: A recompense I say; for that God that can
recover the setting Sun, and exalt it in its beauty and brightness, and does so
every morning; that can cloth the forlorn and naked trees with leaves, and
fruits; that can recoves the verdure of the withering grass, and does so every
year; he can also cause light to arise to them that sit in darkness, and in the
shadow of death, Isa. 9. 2.

He that could give unto Amaziah much more than that which he parted with at
his command, 2 Chronicles. 25. 9. that could turn again the captivity of Job, and
give him double for what he had taken from him, Job ult. 10. he can surely make
his people glad according to the days wherein he has afflicted them, and the
years whenein they have seen evil, Psalm. 90. 15. He can redompence and restore
to his penitent people the fruits which the Locusts and the Caterpillars have
consumed, according to his promise, Joel 2. 25. He can recompense to his people
the comforts of health and liberty, which sickness has consumed; the comforts
of friends and relations, which the grave has devoured. He that has made the
Springs dry. (Jer. 51. 36.) can as easily make the parched ground to become a
pool, and the thirsty land, springs of water, Isa. 35 7. as you find both
elegantly joined together, Psalm. 107. 33, 35. He turns water springs into dry
grounds, and sic vicissim. Say not therefore with the captive Jews, Ezekiel. 37.
11. Our bones are dried, and our bope is lost, etc. For God can cause even
those dry bones to live. Say not with that low-spirited Courtier, 2 King. 7.
19. If the Lord should make windows in Heaven, might such plenty be in a
Samaria? For he did accomplish it, and yet not rain it from Heaven neither. But
say with Job rather, Though he kill me, yet will I trust in him, Job 13. 15.
And with the three Worthies, Our God whom me serve is able to deliver us out of
thine hand O King, Dan. 3. 17. So; he is able to deliver us out of thine band,
O Enemy, O Prison, O Sickness; yea out of thine hand O grave. If we despond,
and be dejected both in mind and body at the same time, then is our condition
indeed sad and shameful: Nay, we do more reproach God by such a temper in our
affliction, than be reproacheth us in afflicting us. Make it appear Christians,
that though God have cast you down, yet you do believe that he has not cast
you off; and that you, although you be sorely shaken by him, yet are not shaken
off from him. Thus you shall g^orifie the Almighty Power of God in the day of
your Visitation.

6. Converse with the Infinite and unsearchable Wisdom of God: especially with
the Wisdom of God in reserence to his Judgments, and our affections. He is
infinitely wise in reference to our affiictions. For, 1. He knows what, and what
manner, and what measure of correction we stand in need of. 2. When, and how
best to deliver us. 3. How to make the best use of all for our good.

First, He knows what, and what manner, and what measure of correction we stand
in need of. He is that wise Physician, that k^ows what humor is most
predominant in the souls of his servan^s, and what is the most proper Medicine
to purge it out: where the most corrupt blood is set led, and at what vein to
let it out. He is infinitely knowing of the various tempers and distempers of
his servants, and can apply himself suitably to them all. And as to the measure
and degree, he is also infinitely wise, and exact. He does weigh out the
affl^ctions of his people to a grain for quantity, and measure them to a day
and hour for duration. He did not miss of his time, no not one day in four
hundred and thirty years, Exodus 12. 41. So many years of bondage were
determined upon the people, and after those years were expired, the very next
day, the hosts of the Lord went up out of Egypt. And as for measure, he
observes a certain proportion, as you may see in that full Tex, Isa. 28. 27,
28. As the Husbandman uses dissering ways of purging and cleansing different
sorts of grain, beating the Fitches with a Staff, and Cummin with a Rod,
because they are a weaker sort of grain, and will not endure hard usage; but
bruising the Bread Corn, because threshing will not susfice, and he is loath to
break it all to pieces with turning his Cart-wheels upon it. An elegant
similitude, whereby God insinuates his different ways of correcting his
people, and observing a suitableness to their strength and temper, when less
would not do, and more would overdo. He must correct so far as to bruise; but
will be sure not to break and spoil. He that says unto the proud waves of the
swelling Sea, Hitherto shall ye come, and no further, Job 38. 11. has the same
command over these Me^aphorical waves, those floods of affl^ction, which he
lets loose upon his people, and they cannot go an such further th^n he has
appointed: He says, Hitherto shall this Sickness, this Mortality, this
Persecution go, and no further; and even these storms, and this Sea obey him.
Now we converse with this Instance of Divine Wisdom, not only when we observe
it, and acknowledge it; but

1. When it begets in us a friendly and charitable temper toward second
causes: When we are at peace with the whole Creation, even with enemies
themselves, and in perfect charity with those very. Plagues and Sicknesses that
do arrest us; rather admiring and del^ghting in their subserviency to God, than
at all maligning their severe influences upon us. A good man is so much in love
with the pure and holy, and perfect will of God, that he desnes also to fall in
love with, at least he is at peace with every thing that executes it, that
serves the will of his heavenly Father. He sees no reason in the world to fall
out with, and fret against any, man, or any thing that is a mea^s to afflict
him; but views them all as instruments in the hand of God, readily serving his
will, and doing his pleasure, and under this notion is charitably affected
toward them all. Observe a little, and admire, how David was reconciled to the
Rod, because it was in the hand of his Father, and seems to kiss it for the
relation that it had to the Divine Will, 2 Samuel 16. 11. Let him alone, and let
him curse, for the Lord has bidden him. This gracious soul is so wonderfully
in love with the Will of God, that he could almost find in his heart to be
reconciled to sin it self, if it do accomplish it, and to be friends with the
wrath of man; if it work the righteousness of God. And if Dvvid can be so
charitably affected toward a cursing Shimei, viewing him as an instrument in
the hand of God; methinks we may be almost in love with any thing under that
notion, and much rather say concerning a poor harmless Sickness, Let it alone,
so let it put us to pain, for God has sent it. To this sense may a devout soul
draw the words of his Savior concerning the Woman in Mat. 26. 10 Why trouble
ye the Woman? she has wrought a good work upon me: Why do ye interrupt and
disturb this disease? Why do ye fret against this Persecutor? Why do ye repine
at this Prison? it executes the will of my God upon me. What though these men
pour out their venom in such ahundance? What though this disease spend its
influences upon my body so plentifully? There Is no waste in all this: there is
need of just so much; God does not lavish out his Arrows in vain, nor shoot at
rove^s, as Jonathan did, who couzened his Lad, making him believe he shot at a
mark, when he shot at none. A soul over powered with the sense of Gods Infinite
Wisdom in appointing, measuring, timing all afflictions, will easily be
reconciled to a poor harmless creature, which is set on, and taken off at his
pleasure.

2. When it begets in us a holy Acquiescency and resting in God, which is
opposed to a larger and disorderly hastening toward deliverance. Then do we
indeed own and honor the skill of our Surgeon, when we do quietly suffer
the cor^o^ive plasters to lie on, and do not offer to pluck them off,
notwithstanding the smart they put us to. And surely he that believes the
Infinite Wisdom of God, who knows what, and what manner and measure of
correction we stand in need of, will not make haste to be delivered from under
his hand; but composeth himself quietly; as young Samuel laid himself down, and
when he was called, answered cheerfully, Speak Lord, for thy servant hears.

A soul sensible of Gods Infinite Wisdom in this particular, argues thus, Who
am I poor worm, shallow creature, that I should contend with Infinite Wisdom
about the time, or manner of my being in the world? Why did I not also
undertake to appoint him the time and place of my being born? Shall I say it is
too much, when Infinite Wisdom thinks it is not enough? Cease wrangling, soul,
and be at rest, for the Lord deals wisely with thee. Such a soul so conversing
with the all-wise God, dare freely refer all to him, venture all with him; if
he smite him on the one cheek, he dare turn to him the other; if he take away
his Coat, he dare offer him his Cloak also; if he take away his liberty, he
dare trust him with his life too; if he smite him in some of his comforts, he
dare turn to him the rest also; for he knows that Infinite Wisdom cannot err
in Judgment, nor miscarry in his dispensations.

Secondly, God knows when, and how best to deliver us. This necessarily
follows upon the former. To him all times, and all things past, present, and to
come, are equally present: In one single act of understanding, he does
wonderfully comprehend both causes and events, sicknesses and cures,
afflictions and deliverances. Let the Atheistical world cry, These are they
that are forsaken, whom no man cares for; there is no hope for them in their
God, as their manner is to blaspheme. Still the promise stands unrepealed in
both Testaments, I will never leave you, nor forsake you: though the case be
never so extreme and desperate, still the Apostles word holds good, 2 Pet. 2.
9. The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temprations. If all
passages be blockt up, he will rather make a gap in the Sea, than his people
shall not escape, Exodus 14. And this way and time of Gods delivering, is the
most excellent, suitable, and certain, as might abundantly appear in many
particulars: But that would be a digression. In the general, be assured that
Gods way is the best way of deliverance, and his time is also the best time. He
that sits as a R^finer of Silver, knows how, and when to take out the metal,
that it be purified, and not hurt. Here I might enter into a large discourse,
and show you how the judgment of man is ordinarily deceived, and his
expectations disappointed, which he had built upon creature-probabilities, when
in the mean time the purpose of God takes place in a far better and more
comfortable deliverance of his servants. But it may suffice to have hinted it
only.

Our duty is to converse with this Instance of Divine Wisdom by the exercises
of Patience and Hope. If God seem to tarry long, yet wait patiently for his
appearance; for he will appear in the most acceptable time, and in the end ye
shall consider it, and acknowledge it. Take heed of limiting the Holy One of
Israel, as that murmuring generation did, Psalm. 78. 41. Take heed of fixing of
your deliverance to such or such a train and series of causes which you have
laid in your own heads, and of engaging God to act by your Method: If God be a
wise Agent, its fit he should be a free Agent too. Bear up Christian soul,
faint not when thou art rebuked of him; Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he
will in due time, find out a way either of lessening it, or removing it. You
have heard of the patience of Job, and you have seen the end of the Lord, James
5. 11. Be you patient, and you shall see it too; a better end than ever you
could have accomplished by your own act or industry. In the mean time, cherish
in your hearts a lively hope of an happy issue: For your lives and comforts are
all hid in him, in whom also are bid all the treasures of wildom and knowledge.
As the consideration of Infinite Wisdom, in knowing how, and when best to
deliver us, may settle our hearts that they do not rise up as a soam upon the
waters through impatience; so it may bear up our hearts, that they do not sink
within us, as a stone in the waters, through desperation.

Thirdly, God knows how to make the best use of all for our good. I say, of
all, both of the affliction, the manner and measure of it, of his delay, and of
the season which he chooses to redeem us in. He can make Paul's imprisonment
turn to his advantage, Phil. 1. 19. Job's captivity to redound to his far
greater state, Job ult. Joseph's banishment, to make him great; and Manasseh's,
to make him good. This is a large Theme, and therefore I dare not rifle into it
particularly. Take all in one word from-the Apostle, Romans 8. 28. All things do
work together for good to them that love God. Whatever the promises be, the
only wise God knows how to draw a happy conclusion from them. G^t a firm belief
of this radica^ed in your hearts, and converse with the Wisdom of God in this
Instance of it by the great Grace of Selfresignation. The Sovereignty of God
may well work us into a resignation of our interests, and comforts, and
concernments to him: But this Infinite Wisdom of God ought in reason to work us
into a resignation even of our very wills unto him. Oh this debasing of
self-will, this self-resignation is a noble and ingenuous act of a pious soul
(for so I dare call him in whom it is found) whereby it honors God greatly in
all that comes upon it. A godly soul, considering it self ignorant of many
things, burdened with many corruptions, and clogged with an animal body,
senses, appetite, fancy, which are always calling for things inconvenient, if
not unlawful, does conclude it would not be good for it to be at its own
finding, or caring, or carving: and duly eying that infinite mind and
understanding, who in a wonderful, unaccountable manner, orders all things, and
all events to the best and certain issue, is so mastered by, and indeed
enamoured with the sense of it, that he renounces his own wisdom, and throws
out his own clamorous w^ll, and complyes readily with the all-wise God. This is
truly to converse with the Wisdom of God, when we do out of choice refer our
selves to it, and roll our selves upon it. Every bare acknowledgment of Divine
Wisdom is not a proper conversing with it; but when the same is wrought into
the soul, and the lively sense of it does so overpower the heart, that the
will is prepared to close readily with such Methods as God shall please to use
to accomplish his own ends; then do we properly, and feeling^y converse with
God, under the notion of the Allwise God. But this of Self-resignation I spoke
something to under the first head; and much of that which is spoken there, may
be indifferently applied hither. Therefore

7. Converse with the unbounded Goodness, Love, and Mercy of God. God is
infinitely and unchangeably loving and merciful to his people: he is good,
says the Psalmist; and he is Love, says the Apostle, 1 John 4. 8. Those
dreadful and terrifying apprehensions which men have of the blessed and good
God, as if he were some austere and surly Majesty, given to passion and
revenge, are apt to destroy that cheerful and ingenuous converse with him,
which the creature should maintain with its Creator at all times: But then are
we most prone to entertain those apprehensions, and to harbor such unseemly
notions of him, when he appears in the way of his judgments, when we take a
view of him in the ruins of our comforts, the blood of our friends, the spoil
of our goods, and in the distresses of our lives. We are apt to frame notions
of God according to what we find in our own disposition, to fancy a God like
unto our selves; and therefore we cannot eye an afflicting God, but we
presently conclude an angry God; as though the Eternal and Pure Being, were
subject to passions and changes, as we are. These apprehensions being once
drunk into the soul, it becomes unhinged presently, and almost afraid to behold
the face of love it self, but flies and hides it self, as Adam in the Garden:
or if the soul do converse with God at all, it is as a City that is besieged
converses with the enemy without, viz. sending out to seek peace, and to obtain
a cessation of Arms. And so a soul may bestow much upon God, surrender up the
Castle, give him all that he has almost, not for any love that he bears to
him; but as Joash gave Hazael a present of gold and precious things, to hire
him to depart from him, 2 King. 12. 18. Oh then they will on and do any thing;
yea, circumcise their lives, as Zipporah circumcised her Son, Exodus 4 25. to
escape the hands of an angry God. Every one will converse with God as an enemy
in time of extremity; hang out a flag sor peace, send presents, pay a homage,
send Ambassadors to entreat his face: But few know how to converse with the
Goodness and Mercy of God, with him as their dear and only friend in a time of
affl^ct^on, freely and cheerfully. Now there seems to be a double account to be
given of men's not conversing with the Goodness and Mercy of God in the time of
afflictions.

1. Many cannot believe the Mercy and Kindness of God, when he is in the way of
his Judgments. If it be so, why am I thus? cries the poor soul, struggling under
its burden, and traveling in pangs to be delivered of its griefs. Thus
unbelievingly argues Gideon (who was otherwise famous for says) in the time of
his bitter bondage under the Midianites, Judge. 6. 13. when an Angel from Heaven
was sent to assure him of the good will of God toward him, he could not
entertain the news, nor believe the report, because of the anguish of his soul,
but cries out, Oh my Lord, if the Lord be with us, why is all this evil
befallen us? No, the Lord has fors^ken us; for he has delivered us into the
hands of the Midianites. The sad soul is ready to cry concerning Christ's
gracious presence, as the two Sisters concerning his personal presence, John
11. 21, 32. Lord, if thou had been here, my Brother had not dyed: Lord, if
thou had been here, if thou had loved me, if thou had had any delight in
me, my Brother had not dyed, my Husband, my Wife, my Children had not dyed; I
had not been thus plagued, afflicted, wounded, tormented as I am. Hence we have
those many complaints of the afflicted soul, up and down the Psalms; Has the
Lord forgotten to be gracious? Is his Mercy clean gone? Has he shut up his
tender Mercies in anger? and many such like. The smart of our senses, is apt to
pervert the judgment of our minds; and the sense of bodily evils, is ready to
destroy all sense of the Infinite and Unchangeable Goodness and Love of God.
Now this great evil seems to arise from these two causes, viz. our measuring of
God and his Divine Dispositions, by our selves and humane passions and
affections, as I hinted before: And our measuring the Love of God too much by
the proportion that he gives us of worldly prosperity. Woe to him in a day of
distress, that was wont to judge of Divine Love by the things that are before
him, as Solomon calls the things of this world, Eccles. 9 1. This, I say, is
the temper, the infirmity of many in the time of afflictions: though indeed
there be no reason for it. For why should we conclude harshly concerning Job
upon the dunghill, any more than we would conclude charitably concerning Ahab
on the Throne? Besides, the Scripture teache^h expressly, that the Love of God
does stand with correction, Psalm. 89. 33. I will visit his iniquity, but my
loving kindness w^ll I not take from him: Nay, it seems as if it could not well
stand without it, Heb. 12. 6. Whom the Lord loves, be chasteneth, and
scourges every Son whom he receives.

2. Others do indeed believe the Goodness and Mercy of God to them in a time of
affliction, but either they cannot, or dare not, or will not converse with it,
nor take comfort in it. They remember God with the Psalmist, Psalm. 77. 3. i. e.
the Goodness, Bounty, Mercy of God (says Mollevus) and yet at the same time
are troubled; their hearts are unquiet, fluctuating, tumultuous within them.
The soul is so impressed with the sense of sin which it has contracted from the
consideration of its sufferings, that it dare not presume to meddle with Mercy;
but though this Mercy of God be its own, yet is ready to think that it is a
duty to forsake its own Mercies, as though it heard God chiding it in the words
of Jehu to Jorams scout, 2 King. 9. 18. What have thou to do with peace? What
have thou to do with Mercy? turn ye behind me. An afflicted soul has much ado
to believe it to be a duty to converse with the Goodness and Love of God in a
time of affliction. It easily agrees to converse with the Justice, Holiness,
and Power of God indeed; but thinks it very improper, and unseasonable, if not
unsafe, to converse with his Mercy. It is ready to cry with Solomon presently,
In the day of prosperity rejoice, but in the day of adversity consider: or with
the Apostle, If any be afflicted, let him pray; if he be merry, let him sing
Psalms. Conversing with the Goodness of God seems not to be a duty of this
season. I confess this is a high and hard duty. Every smatterer in Religion
will cry out in his affliction, Thou art just and righteous, O Lord: But, Thou
art good and mercisul: Blessed be the name of the Lord, is the voice of a Job
only, Job 1. 21. But it is a duty, though a hard one; and affording much
pleasure and contentment to them that are exercised therein. That the kindness
and benignity of God does not fail, that his Love is not broken off from his
people; no, nor suspended neither, when he afflicts them most, is most certain.
For, though he works changes, in and upon us, yet himself is eternally and
unchangeably the same, Jer. 1. 17. And, though some of his dealings toward his
people seem to be rough and severe, yet if we judge rightly of them, they are
all Mercy and Truth toward them that keep his Covenant, Psalm. 25. 10. And that
the people of God ought to converse with this Divine Love and Mercy even in
their greatest afflictions, is as clear: To this purpose I might allege the
forequoted example of holy Job; and might enforce this Doctrine from the
Apostles words, Phil. 4. 4. and Jam. 1. 2. Count it all joy when ye fall into
diverse temptations; and from many good Reasons too, if it were needful. I know
indeed that it is a hard thing to keep up a right frame toward, and converse
rightly with the Righteousness, and Goodness of God at the same time; the one
frame is ready to justle out the other. Sorrow is apt to contract the heart,
and destroy the large and cheerful temper of it: And joy does dilate and
enlarge it, and is ready to make it forget its grief: But, though it be hard,
yet it is possible: These two may well consist in the same soul, according to
that in Psalm 2. 11. -- Rejoice with trembling.

But how must we converse with the Love and Mercy of God in the time of
affl^ct^ons? I have partly prevented my self in this already; but I shall speak
a little more distinctly of it. We do not then converse with the Goodness and
Mercy of God, when we barely think of it, or acknowledge it: But

1. When we believe and apply it, and take to our selves the comforts of it.
When we look through the clouds that are round about us, and quite cover us,
and by the eye of faith behold the Fountain and Father of Light: when we can
look beyond the frowns that are ^n his face, and the Rod that is in h^s hand,
and see the good will that dwells in the heart of God toward us. More
especia^ly

2. When we do not only see and bel^eve it, but also draw vircue and influences
down from it into our sou^s, to establish, settle, and sa^isfie them. Not so
much when we see it, as when we taste it, when we feel the Sun of Righteousness
warm us, though it do not dazzle us; and though we cannot perceive it to shine
upon us, yet we find it to shine in us. We do then converse with the Love and
Mercy of God in an afflicted state, when the same does bear us up, not only
from utter sicking, but even from inordinate sorrowing; when we draw a virtue
from it in^o our souls to sustain them, yea and to cherish them too. Thus Job
comforts himself in his living Redeemer, Job 19. 25 and the Psalmist in the
Mercy of God, even when he was ready to slip, Psalm. 94. 18. 19. In the
multitude of my thoughts within me, thy comforts delight my soul. In a word, we
converse with Divine Goodness, when we are really warmed with it; and with
Almighty Love, when we rejoice in it, and can with holy venturousness, and
humble confidence, throw our selves into the very bosom of it: when we receive
impressions of it from the Spirit of God, and are thereby molded into a temper
fuitable to it, and becoming it. For then indeed do we most happily converse
with the Love and Goodness of God, when we for our part do live upon it; when
we being assured of an interest in a loving and good God, do render up our
selves also unto him, in the most beautiful and becoming affections of Love,
Joy, Confidence, and holy Delight. This is an excellent frame; and, sure I am,
it is much for our interest, thus to converse with God in the time of our
afflictions. It is a high way of glorifying God, and bringing much credit to
Religion: And indeed he that keeps up this frame, can be afflicted but in part;
he scapes the greater half of the evil: For though it be never so stormy a time
without him, a storm upon his house, upon his goods, upon his relations, yea
upon his own body; yet it is a calm day within; in the soul there is peace and
tranquillity.

Lastly (and indeed everlastingly too) we are to converse with the Infinite,
selfsufficient Fullness of God in a day of the greatest extremity: that is, as
if I should say, not with any one single Attribute, but with the very godhead
of God, the immense perfection of God, the Allness of the Deity. Oh how
seasonably does this blessed object present its self to the soul in a time of
afflictions, losses, mortalities, persecutions, when we are most emptied of
creature-enjoyments, and the emptiness of them does most appear! for upon these
two does our conversing with God much depend. I need not tell you how apt we
are to live beside God, when we have our fill of creature-delights; whilst we
can entertain our hearts with a created sweetness, we soolishly forget and
neglect the supreme good. And so fond and unreasonable is this affection, that
no warnings, no precepts will serve the turn; God is forced to break that off
from us, from which we would not be broken. Sure I am, the blessed and
bountiful God envyes not his servants any of their creature comforts or
delights; but he loves them (as I said before) with a strong and powerful love,
and will not suffer them to live so much to their losses, as they do, when they
spend noble affections upon transitory things, in the everlasting enjoyment of
which they could never be happy. Now afflictions are a negative, if we speak
properly, even as sin is; and whenever we are affl^cted in any kind, we are
emp^ied os some created good, as poverty is nothing but the absence of riches;
sickness the want of ease, of order, of health in the consti^u^ion; restraint
is the loss of liberty, etc. So then it appears, that in a time of affliction,
God is emptying of c^eature enjoyment; for indeed affl^ction it self is little
or nothing else but such an emptying or deprivation. And that then the
emptiness of the creature does most appear, I suppose all will grant. The sick
person looks upon his decayed strength, and withering members, and is feelingly
convinced of the truth of the Scripture, -- All flesh is grass. Another casts
about h^s eyes with Sampson, and sees heaps upon heaps, and cries out like one
that feels the weight of his own words, Childhood and youth are vanity: or alas
how soon is the desire of ones eyes taken away with a stroke! Another sees his
goods carried away before his face; and his house on fire before his eyes, and
then cries out, that he has a real proof of the yanity of those things, which
Solomon had long ago observed, Prove. 23. 5. Riches take themselves wings and
fly away as an Eagle toward Heaven. Whilst we see the creatures stand, we will
not believe but they are stable; whilst we see them fair and flourishing, we
cannot rightly lay to heart the withering nature of them: but when we see them
cut down, we do then conclude they were but flowers; when we see them flitting,
we conclude they are shadows: when God pours them our upon the ground, we are
then convinced that they were unstable as waters: To show us what the best of
our creature enjoyments are, God is forced to take them quite away, that they
be no more.

Now then in such a case, at such a time, converse with the Infinite,
self-sufficient Fullness of God. Oh now it is seasonable; now it is your duty;
nay now it will be your greatest policy! If that chanel, that creature-chanel
be stopped, in which your affections were wont to run too freely; turn the stream
of them into their proper chanel in which they may run freely, and neither ever
meet with obstruction, nor ever overflow. Let your soul grow up into
acquaintance and union with God by creature-breaches and disappointments. More
particularly, converse with the selfsufficient Fullness of God,

1. By the act of Creature-denyal. The eying of an infinite, absolute,
uncreated Fullness in a right manner* takes off the soul from all created
objects, earthly things: even as the beholding of the Sun in its glory, dazles
the eye to all things below. God becomes so great in the eye of the soul, that
it cannot see the poor motes of worldly comforts. Give a soul a feeling taste
of the infinite sweetness and fullness of the fountain, and its thirst after the
poor puddles of the world is presently abated, if not perfectly quenched;
according to that of our Savior, Joh. 4. 14. Whosoever shall drink of the
water that I shall give him, shall never thirst; that is, not after any other
thing. Like unto which is that Gospel promise, Isa. 49. 10. they shall not
thirst, who do enjoy these springs of water. When this fountain is opened in
the eye of the soul, and the soul begins to taste of it, it longs to drink
deeper of that indeed; but as for all other waters, waters of the Cistern, the
soul looks upon them as not being, or at least as being bitter, waters of Marah
in comparison; we do then truly converse with the infinite, selfsufficient
Fullness of God, when we look upon all created good with a noble disdain, are
content to part with it; or if we do still enjoy it, are resolved to enjoy it
only in God, and so look upon it, and love it, only as a beam from the F^^her
of Lights; as a drop of the infinite Fountain of all Perfections. Tell me, Is
it not a poor and low thing that many Professors do, who acknowledge and
magnify the uncreated Goodness, the Fullness of God; and yet at the same time
do covet and court the creature with all eagerness; and their worldliness is
apparently too hard for their Religion? Methinks I hear God speaking to such
seeming friends, as Dalilah to Sampson, Judge. 16. 15. How can ye say, you love
me, when your heart is not with me? To these men's hearts, methinks our Saviors
Doctrine should strike cold, Mat. 6. 21. Where your treasure is, there will
your heart be also: And those words of his beloved Apostle, 1 John 2. 15. If
any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. Let a man pretend
and profess what he will; and in words magnify the Fullness and Sufficiency of
God as much as he will; if in the mean time his soul be bound up in the
creature, such a man's Religion is vain: nay, indeed his profession of God
becomes a real reproaching of him, and a blasphemy against Reason it self. Let
your low estem of all created good in comparison of the supreme good, your
readiness to quit your title to every creature comfort, and in the mean time
your care to live beside it, witness the true and honorable esteem, the true
and feeling sense that you have in your hearts of the infinite and
self-sufficient Fullness of God. For, however men may make a shift to cheat
themselves, God is not truly great in the soul, till all other things become as
nothing; neither does the soul rightly converse with his Infinite Fullness, so
long as any thing stands in opposition to it, or competition with it.

2. Converse with the self-sufficient Fullness of God by the grace of Faith: I
mean by that act of it, whereby we do interest our selves, and as it were wrap
up our own souls in this Fullness, and make it our own. And herein there is no
danger of a humble souls being too bold or venturous: For the Proclamation is
full, and the Invitation free, Isa. 55. 1. Joh. 7. 37. Rev. 22. 17. --
Whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely. What Seneca says of the
soul in regard of the divine original of it, may sure be better said of a godly
soul, in respect of the Divine Nature, and qualities of it, illum divina
delectant, nec ut alienis interest sed ut suis; it does not converse with
things divine, as with an others, but as its own. And indeed we cannot truly
and comfortably converse with the Infinite Perfection and Fullness of God, if we
have no title to it: but then we converse with God, when we converse with our
own God, not another: when the soul is able to say; All this Fullness of Power,
Wisdom, Goodness, is all mine in my head Christ Jesus; for in him all this
Fullness dwells, Col. 2. 9. and he dwells in me; in him are hid all these
treasures, Col. 2. 3. and my life also is hid with Christ in God, as theirs was
in Col. 3. 3. You see then, that a soul cannot converse with the Infinite
Fullness and Self-sufficiency of God, but by Christ; for it is in and by him
that we receive of Divine Fullness, Joh. 1. 16. Hence was that of the devout
Father, Toll meum* toll Deum; to which I may add, Toll Jesum, and tollis
meum. The fullness of a fountain is nothing to me, except it be mine. There is
bread enough in my Fathers house, says the poor Prodigal, but for all that I
perish with hunger: so is there living waters evermore in this uncreated life,
this infinite Spring of all Perfection; yet many souls are choakt with thirst,
because the fountain is not theirs; it is a fountain sealed, as Solomon speaks
in another case; The Well is deep, and they have nothing to draw with, as the
Woman said concerning another Well, Joh. 4. Therefore be sure you get an
interest in the Fullness and Sufficiency of God; or as Solomon speaks in another
case ( Prove. 5. 15.) Drink waters out of thine own Well.

3. Converse with the Self-sufficient Fullness of God, by delighting your selves
in it. Drink of this Fountain, yea drink abundantly ye beloved of God, Cant. 5.
1. yea, lie down by it, Psalm. 23. 2. yea bathe you selves wholly in it; Enter
into the Joy of your Lord, lie down in his bosom, spread your selves in his
Love and Fullness. The Beloved Disciple leaning upon the breast of his Lord at
Supper, was but a dark shadow, a poor scant resemblance of a beloved soul,
which by the lovely acts of Joy and Confidence, and Delight, lays it self down
in the bosom of Jesus, and does not feed with him, but feed upon him, and his
Alsufficiency. Then do we converse indeed feelingly and comfortably with the
Infinite Fullness, when the soul is swallowed up in it, does rest in it, is
filled with it, and centred upon it. Oh the noble and freeborn spirit of true
Religion, that disdaining the pursuit of low and created things, is carried out
with delight to feed, and dwell, and live upon uncreated Fullness! Then is a
soul raised to its just altitude, to the very height of its Being, when it can
spend all its powers upon the supreme and self-sufficient good, spreading and
stretching it self upon God with full contentment, and wrapping up it self
entirely in him. This is the souls way of living above losses; and he that so
lives, though he may often be a loser, yet shall never be at a loss. He who
feeds upon created Goodness or Sweetness, may soon eat himself out of all; the
stock will be spent, and (which is worse) the soul will be dried up, that has
nothing else to nourish it. But he that lives upon uncreated Fullness, is never
at a loss, though he lose never so much of the creature: For who will value the
spilling of a dish of water, that has a well of living water at his door, from
whence he had that, and can have more as good, though not the same. Nay, to
speak properly, this is the only way to lose nothing. For how can he be
properly said to lose any thing, who possesses all things? And so does he, I am
sure, who is filled with the Fullness of God. Be sure therefore, that in the
want, in the loss of all things, you live upon the Fountain-fulness, delight
your self in the Lord, after the example of the Prophet Habakkuk, cap. 3. 17,
18.

A Farewell to Life.
2 COR. 5. 6. -- (...). Whilst we are at home in the body, we are absent from
the Lord.
THE holy Apostle having in the first verse of this Chapter laid down the
Doctrine of Eternal Glory, which shall follow upon this transitory life of
Believers, shows in the following verses how he himself longed within himself,
and groaned after that happy state: And then Proceeds to give a double ground
of this his confident expectation; one in verse. 5. therefore is the Apostle
confident concerning the putting off of this mortal body, because God had
wrought and formed him for this state of glory, and already given him an
earnest of it, even his holy Spirit: The other ground of the confidence and
settledness of his mind as to his desires of a change, is taken from his
present state in the body, which was but poor and uncomfortable in comparison
of that glorious state: This in the words of the Text, Therefore we are always
confident, knowing that whilst we are at home in the body, we are absent from
the Lord. For I do not take the words [we are confident] concerning the
Apostles resolvedness with a quiet and sober mind to suffer any kind of
persecution or affliction whatever; but we are always confident, i. e. we do
with confidence expect, or at least we are always well satisfied, contented,
well resolved in our minds concerning our departure out of this life: For the
Apostle was speaking, not of afflictions or persecutions in the former verses,
but indeed of death; which he calls a dissolving of the earthly house of this
tabernacle, verse. 1. and a being clothed upon with our house which is from
Heaven, verse. 2. 4. Yea and thus the Apostle explains himself, verse. 8. where
he tells you what he means by this his confidence, we are confident and willing
rather to be absent from the body; where the latter words are exegetical to the
former, q. d. It is better to be with the Lord, than in this mortal body; but
we cannot be with the Lord whilst we are in this body; it keeps us from him,
therefore we have the confidence to part with it. It is the reason of the
Apostles confidence and willingness to part with the body, that I am to speak
of; and the reason is, because this body keeps him from his Lord, -- whilst we
are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord. The words are a Metaphor,
and are to be translated thus, we indwelling in the body, do dwell out from the
Lord; which our Translation renders well, taking little notice of the Metaphor,
whilst we are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord. Though indeed
if they had left out that word [ at home] it would have been as well, and so
have neglected the Metaphor altogether, as we may happily hint hereafter. The
words are a reason of the Apostles willingness to be dissolved, and do contain
a kind of an accusat on of the body, and so seem to lay a blame upon it, and
upon this animal life; which must be remembered. Now for the former phrase of
being at home in the body, it is easily understood, and generally (I think)
agreed upon, to be no more than whilst we carry about with us this corruptible
flesh, whilst we live this na^ural animal life. It only signifies man in his
compounded animal state, (...), and does not at all allude to his sinful,
unregenerate or carnal state. But the latter phrase [ Absent from the Lord] is
capable of a double sense, both good and true; and I think both fit enough to
the context and drift of the Apostle. I shall speak to both, but insist most
upon the latter.

1. Whilst we are in the body, we are absent from the Lord, i. e. from the
bodily presence of the Lord in Heaven, absent from Christ Jesus and his glory*
And so the words are the same in sense with 1 Cor. 15. 50. Flesh and blood
cannot inherit the Kingdom of God: for by flesh and blood there, must needs be
meant man in this animal corruptible state. And so the Apostle accuses this
kind of life in the body, and, as it were, blames it for standing between him
and his glorified Lord; and so consequently between him and the glory of his
Lord. And this sense does well agree with what went before, and with what
follows. The Apostle has a great mind to depart; for whilst he is in the body,
he is absent from his perfect happiness: For this is the consummation of a
Christians happiness, to be with the Lord, to be admitted to a beholding of his
infinite glory; as appears by our Saviors earnest prayer for this, Joh. 17.
24. Father, I will that they also whom thou have given me, be with me where I
am, that they may behold my glory. Besides, if we shall see him as he is, we
must also needs be made l^ke unto him, 1 John 3. 2. else how can we be fit to
live for ever in his presence. Now we are kept from this seeing and beholding
of the Lord in glory, by this animal life: It stands between us and the Crown,
between us and our Masters Joy, between us and the perfect enjoyment of God. To
be with the Lord, is a state of perfect freedom from sin. No unclean thing
shall, or can enter into Heaven, Rev. 21. 27. A perfect freedom from all manner
of affl^ctions, Rev. 21. 4. There shall be no more sorrow, nor crying, nor
pain, and (...), all tears shall be wiped away from their eyes: A state of
freedom from all temptations to sin: For a tempting Devil, and all tempting
lusts shall be cast out for ever: A state of perfect peace without the least
disturbance from within, or from without: of perfect joy, that shall neither
have end nor abatement; and of perfect holiness, when the whole soul shall be
enlarged and raised to know, and love, and enjoy the blessed God as much as
created nature is capable. This is the happy state of seeing God, of being with
the Lo^d: And it is thy corruptible body, this animal life that interposes
between us and it; so that the Apostle is confident, and rather willing to
depart and be with the Lord, than stay here and be without him.

2. Whilst we are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord, without any
reference to the world to come; and so it may be fitly translated distant from
the Lord, estranged from God: This agrees well with the context, and scope of
the Apostle also. And thus the words are also a good ground of the Apostles
resolution and willingness to dye, q. d. I am willing to be absent from this
body; for whilst I am in it, I find my self to be at a great distance from God.
And indeed the word (...) signifies properly to be at a distance, or to be
estranged: So I find it interpreted by a learned Critic, without any mystery,
(as he speaks) of the distance that even Believers themselves stand at from God
in this life. And in th^s sense I shall choose to prosecute the words. In which
sense the Apostle blames this body and animal life, because it keeps us at a
distance from God; is a clog, a snare, a fetter, a pinion to the soul. And so
the words do agree in sense with those of our Savior, Mat. 26. 41. The spirit
is willing, but the flesh is weak; where by the [ flesh] must needs be
understood the body, if we consider the contex^, viz. the occasion upon which
the words were spoken, the sleepiness of the Apostles; or if we consider the
propriety of speech according to the style of the New Testament: True indeed,
the corruption of nature is sometimes called Flesh; but according to that way
of speaking, our Savior would rather have said, That the spirit was willing,
but the flesh was strong; as he says elsewhere, That the strong man armed kept
the house. Now to explain this Doctrine a little; That even the godly
themselves, whilst they are in this body, are at a distance from the Lord: It
must be granted, that the godly soul is nigh unto God, even whilst it so journs
in this mortal body, and tottering flesh. All souls are involved in the
Apostasy of Adam, and are fallen down from God, have alike st^agled from their
God, and are sunk into self and the creature: God opened a way for their return
by the blood of Jesus: for we owe it unto Christ's death, not only that God is
reconciled to us, pardoning our sins, but that any of our natures become
reconciled to God, by accepting of him as our God, and loving him as the
chiefest good. Now there is a double being brought nigh to God by Christ. The
first is more general, external, and, as I may say, relational: Thus the
partitionwall being broken down, the Gentiles that were converted from their
Idolatry, to a profession of God and Christ, and adm^tted to a communion with
the Visible Church, are upon that account said to be Brethren to the rest of
Gods Children, 1 Cor. 5. 11. and as to the Church, they are said to be within
it, verse. 12. though at the same tim^ they were Fornicators, Covetous,
Drunkards: And as to God, they are said to be made nigh, Ephesians. 2. 13. A
prosessing of God is said to be a being nigh to him; and even an external
performance is said to be a drawing nigh to him; and so Nadab and Abihu, even
in the offering of strange fire, are said to have drawn nigh to God, Levit. 10.
3. And this, though it be a privilege, yet it is not that honorable
privilege of the truly godly souls, who are by Christ Jesus raised up to God
in their hearts, and reconciled to him in their natures, and united to him in
their affections; and so are made nigh unto him in a more especial and
spiritual manner. Thus all sinful and wicked souls, notwithstanding all their
profession and performances, are far from God, estranged from the life of God.
Enmity and dissimilitude are the most real distance from God: And truly
God-like souls only are nigh unto him; they dwell in him, and he dwells in
them as in his most proper Temple. As to any kind of Apposition, no man can
draw nigh to God, nor by any local accession; for so all men are alike nigh to
him who is everywhere, and the worst as well as the best of men do live and
move in him: But they are really nigh unto God, who do enjoy him; and they only
enjoy him, whose natures are conformable to him in a way of love, goodness, and
God-like perfections. We do not enjoy God by any gross and external conjunction
with him, but we enjoy him, and are nigh unto him by an internal union; when a
Divine Spirit informs and acts our souls, and derives a Divine Life into
them, and through them: And so a godly soul only is really and happily nigh unto
God. Thus the Apostle Paul, I believe, was as nigh unto God as any man in the
world, who did not only live and move in God, as all men do (though few
understand it) but God did even live, and, as it were breathe in him; the very
life that he (...) was by faith in the Son of God, Gal. 2. 20. For though he
walked in the flesh, yet he did not walk after the flesh, 2 Cor. 10. 3. And yet
this gracious soul, even as all other believers, was at a distance from God and
that not so much by reason of his creatureship; for of that he does no speak
(so the very Angels of God are at a^ infinite distance from God) but by reason
of this mortal body, and animal life, which hindered him from being so nigh to
God as his soul was capable to be, -- Whilst w^ are in the body, we are absent
from the Lord i. e. at a great distance from God.

1. We are distant from God as to that Knowledge which we shall have of him.
Philosophical Divines speak of a threefold Knowledge, 1. (...), an essential
Knowledge of God. This is that unspeakable light, whereby the Divine Nature
comprehends its own essence, wherein God sees himself. 2. (...), by Science.
This man is capable of in this life. But this kind of knowing of God by way of
Science, is but a low and dry thing, common to good and bad, men and Devils;
and is indeed the perfection of the learned, more than of the godly. And this
kind of Knowledge of God, the glorified soul will reckon but like a Fable, or a
Parable, when it shall be once swallowed up in God, feasting upon truth it
self, and seeing God in the pure rays of his own divinity. 3. (...), or by
Intuition: this man cannot attain to in this life, in its perfection, because
it arises from a blissful union with God himself, which is in this animal state
imperfect. This in the Platonic phrase is (...), a contact of God, and in
Scripture language, a beholding of God face to face, which we are not capable
of in this animal concrete state. So may the answer of God to Moses be
understood, when he besought God to show him his glory, Exodus 33. 18. i. e. to
imprint a distinct Idea of his Divine Essence upon his mind, Verse. 20. No man
can see me and live; i. e. no man in this corruptible state and animal life is
capable of seeing me as I am, to apprehend my Divine Essence, to see my face.
The Vision of God is not in this life, but in the other; so that a man must dye
before he can thus know God. This is the exposition of Jewish Doctors, and our
learned Countrymen do approve it also. This blessed Knowledge of God we are at
a distance from whilst we are in this body: so the Apostle plainly, 1 Cor. 13.
12. Now we see darkly as through a glass, but the time will come when we shall
see as we are seen, and know as we are known. Now our body principally hinders
the operation of our minds, when they do exercise themselves about the nature
of God, whilst it presents its fancies, and gross imaginations to the soul; so
it becomes, as it were, a vail upon the face of the soul, draws a cloud, and
casts a mist over its eyes, that it cannot discern distinctly, nor judge
properly and spiritually. And with allusion to this, that passage of the
Apostle is proper and significant, we see as through a glass, which gla^s is
indeed continually sullied and darkened whilst we look into it by the breathing
of our animal fancies and imaginations upon it. Not only those stinking foggs
of pride and self love, and other sinful corruptions that do arise out of the
soul it self, do hinder our right perceptions of God, (as the earth sends out
vapors out of it self, which arise and interpose between it self and the Sun)
but even the animal fancy casts in its phantasms and imaginations as a mist
before the eye of the soul, which through Divine Grace has been somewhat
enlightened, and cleared from its inbred sinful humors. Though corruption in
the mind be as a rheum in its eye, so that it cannot well see; yet that does
not hinder, but that the fancy by presenting its unspiritual imaginations, does
also cast a mist before it, that it cannot see well, nor judge rightly; and so
it is either held in gross ignorance, or lapses into error. But in the
Regeneration this sense either shall not be, or shall be pure and spiritual.

2. Whilst we are in the body, we are distant from God, as to that service
which we ought to perform to him in the world. And herein it were endless to
run through all those outward duties which we owe unto God in the body; and to
show how the body becomes a hinderance either to them, or in them. Though the
soul be made willing and forward, by a divine principle implanted in it, yet
the body remains a body, a weak and sluggish instrument; and so it will be
whilst it is animal; it will go down into the dust a weak body, 1 Cor. 15. 43.
What man ever had a more willing and cheerful heart than Moses the friend of
God? Yet his hands were heavy, and ready to hang down, Exodus 17. 12. Shall I
instance in the excellent duty of Preaching and Hearing? wherein the spirits of
the most spiritual Preacher are soon exhausted; the tongne of the learned is
ready to cleave to the roof of his mouth; the head is seized with dizziness;
the heart with pantings; the organs of speech with weariness; and the knees
with trembling; and the ears of the most devour hearers with heaviness; the
eyes with sleepiness; and the whole body in a short time with weakness. Shall I
instance in the noble duty of Prayer? wherein the pious soul goes out to God,
but can scarce get its body to accompany it; and there the fancy distracts, the
senses divert; and indeed all the members are ready to play the Truants, if not
the Traitors too: especially the brain, where the soul sits enthroned, is
suddenly environed with a rude rout of sluggish vapors arising from the
stomach, and being no longer able to defend it self against them, falls down
dead in the midst of them: Insomuch that the poor soul is ready to wish
sometimes with the sorrowful Prophet, Oh that I had in the wilderness a lodging
place, that I might leave my members, and go from them, for they are all an
assembly of treacherous servants: or wish that it were like its Savior, who
could leave his raw Disciples asleep, and go and pray apart, and come again
unto them. Shall I instance in that high duty of sustaining Martydom, bearing
persecutions for God? Come on my body, cries the holy soul, come on to the
stake; come my head, lay down thy self upon this block; come my body, compose
thy self in th^s dark dungeon; come my feet, fit your selves into these stocks;
come my hands, draw on these fetters, these Iron bracelets; come, come drink
the cup that my Father gives thee. But oh how it sollows to the st^ke! what
shaking, shivering, trembling, and reluctance may you see in the whole
structure of it* The head hangs down, the eyes run over, the lips quaver, the
shoulders pull back, the hands tremble, the knees knock together, and the whole
fabric is ready to tumble down, for fear of falling. Either to this (as some
inter pret) or to that duty of Prayer (as others) does that of our Savior
refer, Mark 14. 38. The spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak. It
seems the spirit of the weakest Christian is strong, though the body (as we
have seen) of the strongest Saint is weak: Though indeed it is not properly the
weakness that is in the body, that I am to speak to, but the influence that the
body has upon the soul to weaken that: for, whilst the soul sympathizes with
the body, attends to it, spares it, pities it, self becomes almost ill affected
to the service of God. I am not so much blaming the body, because it had need
by reason of its slothfulness to be drawn on to duty; but because by its
influences, it draws off the soul also from them: for so we find it by woeful
experience, that if the body do sleep, the soul cannot wake; it cannot hear
without the ear, nor see without the eyes; so that the bodies weariness at leng
hends in the souls unwillingness; and the weakness of the one, grows to be the
sin of the other.

3. Whilst we are in the body, we are at a distance from God, as to communion
with him: we are estranged from fellowship with him; and this is indeed to be
absent from the Lord. Oh how many weary and uncomfortable days do poor Saints
live at a great distance from their God, their Life, their Happiness, whilst
they are in their worldly Pilgrimage, in their Cage of flesh! Oh how many days
do they forget God, and are apt to think that God has forgotten them too! How
do they live sometimes, as it were, without God in the world, their souls being
surfeited with carnal pleasures, benumbed with fears, frozen with self-love,
choked with cares, stifled with griefs, and seem to have no more feeling of
God their life, than a body in the dust has of the soul its life! Oh what a
heavy yoke does the poor soul draw under, when it plows and harrows to the
flesh, and cannot lift up its head to Heaven! Oh how is our intercouse with God
obstructed, our beholding of him obscured, our entertaining of him prevented,
our enjoyment of him disturbed and viol^ted, our love to him to him deadned,
and his love to us damped; ours rendered i^firm, and his rendered insensible, and
all by this make bare mortal flesh! Alas what uncertainties, and vicissitudes,
what changing and tossings, turnings and windings are our poor pilgrim souls
here exercised with! What breakings and piecings, reconciliations and fallings
out, closing and parting, rising and falling; what ups and downs; what forwards
and backwards does the poor distressed soul experience in this animal state!
The flourishing soul withers; the lofty soul languishes; the vigorous soul
faints; the nimble soul flaggeth; the devout soul swooneth; the lively soul
sickeneth, and is ready to give up the Ghost; and she that was a while ago
resting and glorying in the arms of her Lord, anon lies embracing a dunghill,
and has almost forgotten that ever she was happy: Her peace is violated, her
rest is disturbed, her converse with Heaven interrupted, her incomes from God
are few and insensible, her outgoings to him are few and lazy, and the rivers
of her divine pleasures are almost dried up. And all this, whilst she is in
this body; and indeed a great part of it by reason of this body in which she
is: The animal body keeps us distant from the Lord, that we cannot converse
with him, mind him, enjoy him, live upon him, and unto him. The body being
fitted only for this animal sta^e, is ever drawing down the soul, when it would
raise up it self in contemplation of, and communion with the blessed God. And so

1. The Necessities of the body do hinder the souls communion with the Lord.
Not that the necessities of the body are simply in themselves to be blamed, but
the caring for these does so exercise the soul in this state, that it cannot
attend upon God without distraction. Oh how much does the necessary caring for
meat and drink, food and physic; yea, the ordering of temporal affairs,
estrange from communion and converse with God! so that the soul, like poor
Martha, is cumbred with many cares, and busied with much serving in this house,
and cannot attend so devoutly and entirely as it ought; upon the Lord. If the
body be pinched with pain, the soul cannot be at rest, but must needs look out
for relief: If the body be pinched with hunger and thirst, the soul can take no
rest, till it have found out a supply for it: If the one be sick, the other is
sad; if the one be hungry or thirsty, the other seems to languish; like
Hippocrates his Twins that laughed and cried, lived and dyed together.

It is a wonderful mystery, and a rare secret, how the soul comes to sympathize
with the body, and to have not only a knowledge, but, as it were, a feeling of
its necessities; how these come to be conveyed to the soul, and how it comes to
be thus affected with them. But we find it so: And indeed, to speak truth, it
seems necessary for the maintaining of this animal state, that it should be so,
that the soul should be, as it were, hungry, weary, sick, and sleep too
together with the body: for if our soul should not know what it is to be
hungry, thirsty, cold, or sick, or weary, but by a bare ratiocination, or a dry
syllogistical inference, without any more especial feeling of these
necessities, it would soon suffer the body to languish and decay, and commit it
wholly to all changes and casualties: neither would our own body be any more to
us, than the body of a plant or of a starr, which we do many times view with as
much clearness, and contemplate with as much contentment as we do our own. But
in the mean time, the soul is diverted from its main employment, turned aside
from its communion with God; not so much by providing somewhat for our bodies
to eat, and drink, and put on, which is lawful and needful, as our Savior
implies, Mat. 6. 32. as by sinking it self into the body, being passionately
and inordinately affected with its wants, and so being sinfully thoughtful, as
our Savior intimates in the same chapter, verse. 31.

2. The Passions of the body do hinder the souls communion with the Lord. So
powerful is the interest and influence that this body has in and over the
soul, that it fills it with desires, pleasures, griefs, joys, fears, angers,
and sundry passions. The body calls out the soul to attend upon its several
passions, which I dare not say are sinful in themselves, as they first affect
our souls, no more than it is our sin that we are men: our blessed Savior
seems not to have been free from them, as grief, Isa 53. 3. fear, Heb. 5 7. who
yet was free from all sin, 1 Pet. 2. 22. Nay, it seems necessary (as I said
before) considering the nature of this animal life, that the soul should have
the corporeal passions and impressions feelingly and powerfully conveyed to it,
without which it could not express a due benevolence to the body that belongs
to it; and indeed, were it not so, we could not properly be said (in the
Apostles phrase here) to be at home in the body; the soul would rather dwell in
domo aliena quam sua. But the soul being called out to attend upon these
passions, is easily ensnared by them; for it can hardly exercise it self about
them, but it st^ps insensibly into a sinful inordinacy. As for example: The
animal spirits nimbly playing in the brain, and swiftly flying from thence
through the nerves up and down the whole body, do raise the fancy with mirth and
cheerfulness, which we must not presently mistake for the power of grace, nor
condemn for the working of corruption: So also when the Gall empties its bitter
juice into the liver, and that mingles it self with the blood there, it begets
fiery spirits, which presently fly up into the brain, and cause impressions of
anger. Now, though I dare not say, that the souls first sensating and
entertaining of these passions is sinful, yet it is sadly evident that our
souls being once moved by these undisciplined animal spirits, are very apt to
fit upon, and cherish those passions of grief, fear, mirth, anger, and, as it
were, to work them into it self, in an inordinate manner, and contrary to the
dictates of reason, and so the will presently makes those sinful, which before
were but merely humane, or as one calls them, (...), the more blossomings or
shoo^ings forth of animal life within us. We see then in these particulars,
that not only the depraved dispositions of the soul do keep us at a distance
from God, but even this body also is a great hinderance to that knowledge of
God which we shall attain to, that service of God which we might perform, and
that sweet communion with him, which we shall enjoy. It is a clog to the soul
that would run; a mist to the soul that would see clearly; a manacle to the
soul that would work; a snare to the soul that would be free; a fetter to chain
it to earthly and material things, and, as it were, a pinion to the wings of
contemplation: More particularly, it is a hinderance to it, as to those three
things which I have ^^amed: As to the souls knowledge of God, the body is an
occasion of ignorance and error: As to its serving of God, an occasion of
distract on and weariness; lightness and triflingness; and as to its communion
with God, an occasion of earthliness and sensuality. Now this distance which
this body keeps the soul at from God might more particularly appear in another
way of explication, by observing the especial grievances that do arise to the
soul from those three great animal faculties (if I may so speak.) The Senses,
the Appetite, the Fancy.

1. The Senses, I mean the external senses of the body; seeing, hearing etc.
These convey passions to the soul, upon which it insists and feeds with a
sinful fondness and eagerness. Set open the eye, and it will set hard to convey
some species to the soul of earthly objects, that shall justle the Ideas of God
out of it. Set open the ear, and it will fill the soul with such a noise, and
earthly tumult, that the secret whispers of the divine spirit cannot be heard.
The like I may say of the rest: Oh how easily do these discompose the fixed
soul, distract the devout soul, cast a mist before the contemplative soul, and
hale down the raised soul from communion with Heaven to converse with earthly
objects! Vt vidi ut perii! is the complaint of many a Christian; as well as it
was of the Heathen. The souls of most men are quite sunk into their senses, and
do nothing, but, as it were, lacky to them all their lives, and so the servants
are on horseback, and Princes go on foot. Though the eye will never be
satisfied with seeing, nor the ear with hearing; yet forsooth, these
importunate suitors must be gratified: the eye must see what it will see, and
the ear must hear what it will hear: nothing must be with held from them, that
these childish senses do whine after. These men's souls are indeed incarnate,
swallowed up in their eyes, ears and mouths. But not only these, but even godly
souls are often charmed and ensnared by their senses; even they converse not
only in the body, but too much with it also; and it becomes as a Dalilah, to
lull them asleep, and bind them too. Good Job found his senses so treacherous,
that he was fain to make a covenant with them, Job 31. 1. And well if he could
escape so too. The words are a Metaphor; for indeed the worst of it is, that
these senses are not capable of any discipline; one cannot bring them into any
covenant-terms: so that whilst we have senses, they will be treacherous; whilst
our eyes are in our heads, they will be wandering after forbidden objects.

2. The Appetite, the sensitive appetite, which is a faculty of the sensitive
soul, whereby this animal man is stirred up to desire and lust after the things
which his senses have dictated to him. This bodily lust following upon the neck
of the former, becomes a greater snare to the soul: This restless suitor comes
whining ever and anon to the soul for every tr^fle that the eye has seen, or
the ear heard, or the mouth has tasted; and by it continual coming, and
importunate crying, wearies her into an observance of it: As the fond child
comes crying to the Mother for every knack and gaw that it has seen upon the
stalls, and she, though she cannot in judgment approve of the request, yet
either in fond indulgence, or for peace sake, will condescend to purchase it.
This is the Daughter of the Horsleech, that cries continually, Give, Give: Why,
what would it have? even any thing that it has seen, or heard, or touched, or
tasted; any thing that it sees a fellow creature to be possessed of: And so
indeed the Appetite does not only ensnare the soul unto drunkenness and
glut^ony, but voluptuousness, lascivousness, and all manner of sensuality. The
evil of the sensual appetite appears in wantonness and lasciviousness (whether
real, verbal, or mental) in immoderate and inordinate trading. engrossing,
sporting, building, attiring, sleeping, visiting, as well as in eating and
drinking. I will determine nothing concerning the first motions of the
appetite, whereby it sollicits the will to fulfill it; only this, that if it
solicit to any thing simply and morally evil, it is sinful in that first act;
and that at all times it ought carefully to be watched, lest it seduce to
intemperance in things lawful. But concerning the gratifying of the appetite,
seeing there must be in us a sensitive appetite, whilst we are in this animal
state, it is to be endeavored, as far as may be, that we gratify the
appetite, not as it is a sensitive appetite, but under this notion, as the
thing that it desires makes for our real good, and tends to the enjoyment of
the supreme good: to eat and drink, not because we are hungry or thirsty,
because the appetite desires it; but with reference to the main end, with
respect to the highest good, that the body may be enabled, strengthened and
quickened to wait upon the soul cheerfully in the actions of a holy life. But
this, man in his animal state cannot perfectly attain to, which shows, that the
appetite does keep us at a distance from God.

3. The Fancy; this also keeps a man at a distance from God, and hinders us in
the knowledge and service of God, and interrupts the souls communion with God.
This is a busy and petulant faculty, or inward sense, and the soul does
readily sensate the passions of it, so that it does frequently hinder its
mental operations, and becomes a great snare. A working fancy (how much soever
it is magnified by the wisdom of this world) is a mighty snare to the soul,
except it work in a fellowship with right reason, and a sanctified heart: I am
persuaded there is no greater burden in the world to a serious soul; especially
in hot and dry constitutions, where it is commonly most pregnant, and most
impatient of discipline. And, I confess, I have often wondered at the souls
readiness to be so speedily affected with the fantasms and imaginations of it,
and fondness to hug them so dearly. This indeed, if it be so far refined, as to
present sober and solid imaginations to the mind, and to act in subservience to
sanctified reason, is an excellent handmaid to the soul in many of her
functions: But otherwise is a snare; as we have partly observed already, and
may observe more, if we study the secrets of our own souls, and the mighty
mysteries that are within us. And this does not only ordinarily disturb,
distract and hinder in ordinary duties, but even when the soul is at the
highest pitch of communion and contemplation, it assayes to pull it down to
attend to its vain fantasms; and indeed gives it many a grievous fall. I doubt
not to affirm, that this is the most pernicious enemy of the three that I named
to the souls happiness, as might appear in many respects; I will only name one:
It has an advantage against us, which neither of the other two has: It
infests us, and annoyes us sleeping as well as waking. In sleep, the senses are
locked up, and the appetite is, for the most part, silent from its begging; but
then the fancy is as busy and tumultuous as ever, forming and gathering
imaginations, and those are commonly wild and senseless, if not worse. The
mind, in way of kindness and benevolence to the body, suspends its own actings,
whilst the body takes its rest in the night, and then the rude fancy takes its
opportunity to wander at liberty, as being without its keeper, and acts to the
disturbance of the body; but that's not the worst, for it becomes so tumultuous
and impetuous sometimes, as that it awakens the mind to attend upon its
imaginations; and this the soul does condescend to in an inordinate manner, and
sets the stamp of sinfulness upon them, to its own wounding. And now that I am
speaking of sleep as a Mantissa to this discourse, I cannot but observe, how
this very thing also keeps us at a distance from God, in this animal state. How
is our communion with God interrupted by this! For herein we cease, not only
from the actions of an animal life, but commonly from the actions of a
spiritual life too. What a great breach, what a sad intercision is there made
in our converse with God by this means! Such a poor happiness it is, that we
have in this world, that it is cut off, and seems, as it were, not to be one
fourth part of our time: For indeed a happiness that is not felt, deserves not
the name of happiness. Some learned and active men have been ashamed that they
have slept away so much of their time, which was all too little for their
studyes and exploits: Ah poor Christian, that, as it were, sleeps away so much
of his God, being as much estranged from him in the night, as though he had
never conversed with him in the day; and in the morning when he awakes, cannot
always find himself with him neither: which is enough to make a poor Saint
wish, either that he might have no need of sleep, or that with the amorous
Spouse, Cant. 5. 2. Though he sleep, his heart might wake perpetually.

We have seen in what sense this mortal body keeps Believers absent from the
Lord, and in what respects it keeps them at a distance from God, even in this
life, from the Knowledge of God, the Service of God, and Communion with him.
Here then by way of Application;

1. We may see that it was for good reason that the blessed Apostle is
confident, and willing to depart; nay, groans within himself, desiring that
mortality might be swallowed up of life, as he speaks, v. 4. I told you before,
that these words did contain the reason or ground thereof; and by this time I
hopw you see that the reason is good, and the ground is sufficient. What will
the men of this world say? Will you persuade us out of our life? Should any
thing in the world make a man weary of his life? Proestat miserum esse quam non
esse: The Apostle was sure besides himself, or he would never have fallen out
with h^s own life: or else he was in a passion, and knew not what he said: or
else his life was bitter to him, by reason of the poor, afflicted, persecuted
condition that he lived in, and so he was become desperate, and cared not what
became of him. No, none of these: The Apostle was in his right wits, and in a
sober mind too. It was not a passion, or a fit of melancholy, but his
judgment and choice upon good deliberation; and therefore you find him in the
same mind elsewhere, Phil. 1. 23. I desire to depart, and to be with Christ,
which is far better. Besides, he gives a reason for what he desires; now we
know that passion is unruly and unreasonable. Neither was the Apostle besides
himself; for he gives a good, solid and wise reason, -- Whilst we are at home
in the body, etc. He will part with his life, rather than not be perfectly
happy. For, whereas worldlings put such a high price upon life, and think that
nothing should persuade men out of their lives: Its true indeed, if we speak
properly, life is the perfection of the creature: The happiness of every thing
is its life: A living Dog is better than a dead Lion, Eccles. 9. 4. But I may
say to these, even as our Savior said to that woman, in Joh. 4. 18. concerning
her Husband; The life that we live here, is not our life. The union of the
sensitive soul with the body, is indeed truly and properly the life of a beast,
and its greatest happiness; for it is capable of no higher perfection: But the
union of the rational soul with God, is the noblest perfection of man, and his
highest life: so that the life of a believing soul is not destroyed at death,
but perfected. Neither was the Apostle weary of his life, because of the
adversities of it. The Apostle was of a braver spirit sure than any Stoic; he
durst live, though he rather desired to dye. All the conflicts he endured with
the world, never wrung such a sigh from him, as the conflict that he had with
his own corruptions did, Romans 7. 24. O wretched man, etc. All the perfecutions
in the world never made him groan so much, as the burden of his flesh does
here, and his great distance from the Lord. A godly soul can converse with
persecuting men, and a tempting Devil, can handle briars and thorns, can
grapple with any kind of oppressions and adversities in the flesh without
despondency, so long as it finds it self in the bosom of God, and in the arms
of Omnipotence. But when it begins to consider where it is, how far it is from
its God, its life, and the happy state that God has prepared it for, then it
cannot but groan within it self, and be ready with Peter, to cast it self out
of the ship, to get to its God; to land it self in eternity. Neither indeed (to
speak truly) is it only the sense of sin against God, which se^s the godly soul
a going: For, though it must be confessed, that this is a heavy burden upon the
soul, yet the Apostle makes no complaint of this here, but only of his distance
from God, that necessary distance from God that the body kept him it at.

2. See here the excellent spirit of true Religion. Godly souls do groan after
an unbodyed estate, not only because of their sins in the body, but even
because of the necessary distance at which the body keeps them from God. We may
suppose a godly soul at some time to have no manner of affliction in the world
to grieve him, no sin unpardoned, unrepented of to trouble him; yet for all
this he is not at perfect rest; he is burdened and groans within himself,
because he is at such a distance from that absolute good, whom he longs to know
more familiarly, and enjoy more ^ully than he does yet, or than is allowed to
mortal men: And though nothing else ayl him, yet the consideration of this
distance makes him cry out, Oh when shall I come and appear before God! be
wholly swallowed up in him, see him as he is, and converse with him face to
face. Bare innocence, or freedom from sin, cannot satisfy that noble and large
spirit that is in a truly and Godlike soul; but that spirit of true goodness
(being nothing else but an efflux from God himself) carries the soul out after
a more intimate union with that Being from whence it came: God dwelling in the
soul, does by a secret mighty power draw the soul more and more to himself. In
a word, a godly soul, that is really touched with the sense of divine sweetness
and ^ulness, and impressed with divine goodness and holiness, as the wax is with
the stamp of the seal, could not be content to dwell for ever in this kind of
animal body, nor take up an eternal rest in this imperfect mixed state, though
it could converse with the world without a sinful sullying of it self; but must
needs endeavor still a closer conjunction with God; and leaving the chase of
all other objects, pant and breath not only after God alone, but after more and
more of him; and not only when it is under the sense of sin, but most of all
when it is under the most powerful influences of divine grace and love, cry out
with Paul, Oh, who will deliver me out of this body?

3. Suffer me from hence to expostulate a little, to expostulate with Christian
souls about their unseemly temper. Does this animal life, and mortal body, keep
us at such a distance from our God, our happiness? Why are we then so fond of
this life and mixed state? Why do we so pamper this body? Why so anxiously
studious to keep it up, so dreadfully afraid of the ruins of it? If we take
the Apostles words in the first sense that I named, then I may ask with him in
the first verse; Know we not, that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were
dissolved, we had a building of God, a house not made with hands, eternal in
the Heavens? or verse. 8. Why are we not willing rather to be absent from the
body, and to be present with the Lord? If we take them in the latter sense, as
this animal body is an hinderance to the souls knowledge of, and communion with
God, then I ask concerning this, as the Apostle does concerning rich men, James
2. 6. Why do ye pamper, prize, honor, dote upon this body? Does not this body
oppress you, distract you, burden you, clog you, hinder you? Does not this body
interpose between the Sun of Righteousness, between the Father of Lights, and
your souls that should shine with a light and glory borrowed from him; even as
the dark body of the earth interposes between the Sun and Moon, to eclipse its
light? Why are we not rather weary, that we are in the body? Surely there are
some objections, some impediments to the souls longing after its happy state,
which I shall come to anon: But I doubt also, that there is something that
chains the soul to this animal life; some cords in this earthly tabernacle,
that tie up the soul in it: but I cannot well imagine what they should be. Say
not, There is something of God to be enjoyed in this life, which makes it
pleasant: For, although this be true, yet, I am sure, God gives nothing of
himself to a soul, thereby to clog it or cloy it. Did Moses send for some
Clusters of the Land of Canaan into the wilderness, think ye, that the people
might see and taste the fruits, and sit still, and be satisfied, and say, Oh it
is enough; we see that there are pleasant things in that Land, we will never
come at it? or, did he not do it rather that they might make the more haste to
possess themselves of it? Will any man say, Away, I will have no more land, no
more money, I have some already? Can a godly soul say, God has given me an
earnest, I desire no more? No, no; but the report that a Christian hears of a
rest remaining, a happy life remaining for it, and the chariots of divine
graces that he sees God has sent out into his soul to convey it thither, make
him cry out, not with Jacob, Genesis 45. 28. It is enough, Joseph my Son is yet
alive, I will go and see him before I dye: But oh this is not enough, this
report is not enough; it is not enough that I taste some of the good things of
the Land; it is not enough that I see these carriages sent out for me; it is
not enough that my soul has an happy and honorable life prepared for it; I
see it indeed before I dye, but I will also dye, that I may see it better, and
enjoy it more. But I doubt there is some earthly tie, even upon the heavenly
soul that chains it to this present animal body: But, sure I am, that
whatsoever it is, it is but a weak one. Is there any worldly accommodation, any
creature-toy, that should in reason step between a soul and its God? Is this
life sweet, because there are creature comforts to be enjoyed? And will it not
be a better life, when creature comforts shall not be needed? And are the
pleasures of this body, the comforts of this life, the flattering smiles, or
fawning embraces of the creature, such a mighty contentment to a soul, to a
soul acquainted with the highest good? Have thou, O my soul, any such full and
satisfying entertainment in thy Pilgrimage, as to make thee loath to go home?
Will thou hide thy self with Saul among the stuff, among the lumber of the
world, when thou art sought for to be crowned? Are the empty sounds of popular
applause, the breaking bubbles of secular greatness, the shallow streams of
sensual pleasures, the smiling dalliance, and lisping eloquence of wives and
children, the flying shadows of creature-refreshments, the momentany flourishes
of worldly beauty and bravery, Are these meat for a soul? Are these the proper
object, or the main happiness of such a divine thing, as an immortal soul? Why
are we not rather weary of this body, that makes us so weary of heavenly
employment? Why do we not rather long to part with that life, that parts us
from our life? And instead of the young Apostles It is good to be here, cry out
with the sweet singer, Oh that one would give me the wings of a Dove, that I
might fly away and be at rest!

And now methinks, by this time, I might be somewhat bold, and form my
remaining discourse into an Exhortation. But, it may be, you will not bear it
all at once; therefore I will first begin with a Dehortation, to dissuade from
two evils concerning your body, viz. Fear and Fondness.

1. Take heed of Fear for the body. I speak not so much of those first
impressions which our fancyes and animal spirits do make upon our minds (though
it were to be wished, that the mind not so much as once sensate or entertain
these) but o^ those acts of the will, whereby it does receive, allow, cherish
these impressions, until the Cockatrice egg be hatched into a Viper. I speak
not against care and circumspection; no nor against that kind of suspicion,
whereby wise and prudent persons are jealous of circumstances and events and so
do watch to prevent, remove, or manage bodily evils, which is called Fear
though even in these there may be an extreme, a fear where no fear is, Psalm.
53. 5 which is there ascribed to the wicked, an^ elsewhere threatened as a
judgment Levit. 26 36. The sound of a shaken lea^ shall chase them, Deuteronomy. 28.
65. The Lord shall give thee a trembling heart: There is a prudent man who
foreseeth the evil and hides himself, Prove. 22. 3. But there are also many
fools that hide themselves though they see no evil. But I am not speaking of
these: There is a vast diffe^^^ce between Care and Fear. By Fear, I mean that
trembling, fluctuating, tormenting passion, that does not suffer the heart to
be at rest, but does, as it were, unhinge it, and loosen the joints of the
soul, whether it break out into ^xpressions or no: It clouds the understanding,
unsettles the will, disordereth the affections, confounds the memory, and is
like an Earthquake in the soul, taking it off from i^s own basis, destroying
the consistency of it, and hurling all the faculties into confusion: This,
whether it break out into any unseemly acts or ^o (which commonly it does) is
it self an unseemly temper for a wise man, much more for a godly. I might speak
as a Philosopher, and show how unbecoming a man, and how destructive to him
this passion is; so much, that whilst it does predominate, it almost robs him
of that which is his greatest glory, even reason it self. But, to say no worse
of it, is very opposite, if not contrary to that noble grace of Faith, whereby
the steady soul rests and lodges in the arms of God, as in its center. But
to speak to the thing in hand, what an unseemly passion is this? we would have
the world to believe that we have laid up our happiness in God, and that we are
troubled that we are so far from him; and yet we are afraid lest that should be
taken out of the way that keeps us at a distance from him: We flatter our
selves that we are in haste for Heaven, and yet we are dreadfully afraid lest
our rubs should be taken out of the way. How do these things hang together? Are
we persuaded, that if this earthly house of our tabernacle were taken down, we
have a building not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens? If not, Why do we
yet call our selves Christians? But I think I may take it for granted, we are
all so persuaded: And if so, Why are we so afraid it should be taken down? I am
loath to speak what I think; yet methinks the entire and ardent love which we
either do bear, or ought to bear to the Blessed God, and union and communion
with him, should cast out this fear: This is suitable to Scripture, 1 John 4.
18. I will not dispute how far sinful fear for the body may carry a godly soul;
the further, the worse I am sure: But if any will needs be so indulgent to his
own passions, and so much an enemy to his own peace, as to encourage himself to
fear (which is a strange thing) from the example of Abraham, denying his wife;
or Peter, denying his Lord; let him compare the issue, and then let me see
whether he dare go and do likewise: But if that will not fright you from fear,
chew upon these two Considerations.

1. I pray you seriously dispute the matter with your selves, how far fear of
sickness and death may consist with that ardent thirst after union and perfect
communion with the Blessed God, with which we ought to be possessed.

2. Dispute seriously how far it can stand with the sincerity of a Christian.
God has not left us in the dark, as to this matter. I will turn you to a Text
or two, which, methinks, should strike cold to all slavish trembling
Professors, Prove. 28. 1. Job 15. 20, 21. The wicked travelleth with pain all
his days, a dreadful sound is in his ears: They are the words of Eliphaz
indeed, but they do agree with the words of God himself, Isa. 33. 14. The
sinners in Sion are afraid, fearfulness has surprised the hypocrites: When I
read over these Texts, I cannot but pray, and cry, O my soul, come not you into
the number of the wicked, and be not united into the assembly of Hypocrites!

2. Take heed of fondness of the body: of a double act of it, priding,
pampering.

1. Take heed you pride not your selves in any excellencies of the body. Does
this mortal body keep us at a distance from our God? Do we well then to love
that which keeps us from that which is most lovely? Why do we stand fondly
gazing upon that which keeps us from the blessed sight of God? If you ask me,
Did ever any man hate his own flesh? I will ask you again, Did ever any wise
man love his own flesh above him that made it? Did ever any godly soul love his
body in opposition to his God? Oh, but it is a comely body! And what is a
beautiful body, but a fair prison? A silver twist, or a clog of gold, do as
really hinder the flight of a Bird, and forestall her liberty, as a stone tied
at her heels. Nay, those very excellencies which you so much admire, are so
much the greater hindrances. If we had learned that excellent lesson indeed,
of enjoying all things only in God, then the several beauties and braveries of
the body, would be a help to our devotion, they would carry us up to an
admiration and contemplation of that glorious and most excellent Being, from
whom they were communicated: so we might (in some sense) look into a glass, and
behold the beauty of God. But (alas!) these commonly prove the greater snares:
Many had been more beautiful within, had they been less beautiful without; more
chaste, if less comely; many had been more peaceable, and more at peace too, if
they had been less able to have quarrelled and fought. It was said of Galba,
who was an ingenious man, but deformed, that his soul dwelt ill: but, sure I
am, it might better have been so said of beautiful Absalom, or Jezabel, whose
bodies became a snare to their souls. On the other hand, they that want a
beauty in their bodies, will perhaps labor to find an excellency in their
minds far beyond it; as the Philosopher advised to look often into a glass, ut
si deformis sis, corrigas formositate morum, etc.

2. Take heed of pampering the body, of treating it too gently and delicately.
Deny it nothing that may fit it for the service of God and your souls, and
allow it no more than may do that. Thy pampering is 1. Unseemly: What, make a
darling of that which keeps us from our Lord! carry it gently, and delicately,
and tenderly toward that, which whilst we carry about with us we cannot be
happy! 2. Injurious: If you bring up this servant delicately from a child, you
shall have him become your Son at length, yea, your Master. If you do by your
bodies, as the fond King did by his Son Adonijah, 1 King. 1. 6. never displease
it, never reprove it, never deny it; it will do with you in time as he did,
raise seditions in your soul. Go on and please, and pamper, and cocker your
bodies, and it will come to this at length, that you must deny them nothing;
you must give whatsoever a whining appetite will crave, go whither your gadding
senses will carry you, and speak whatsoever wanton fancy will suggest. Does not
the body it self set us at a sufficient distance from God; but we must estrange
our selves more from him by pleasuring it, spend the time that should be for
God, in decking, trimming, adorning it? When you cram this, you feed a Bird
that will pick out your eyes; you nourish a Traitor, when you gratify this
Adonijah. In a word, Is it not enough that we do all carry fire in our bosoms,
but we must also blow it up into a flame; Nay, my Brethren, do not so foolishly.

And now, methinks, by this time, I may venture upon an Exhortation; by degrees
at least.

1. Watch against the Body. You have heard how the senses, appetite and fancy
become a snare to the souls ^^ing unto, and conversing with God: Now then, if
you seriously design communion with Heaven, if you placed your happiness in the
knowledge and enjoyment of that supreme and eternal good, it becomes you to
watch against all things that may distract or divert you from it, or make you
fall short of the glory of God. Men that live upon earthly designs, whose great
ambition it is to be great in the world, do not only use the most effectual
means, and take the most direct courses to accomplish those designs, and attain
those ends, but do continually suspect, and diligently watch against all the
moths that would corrupt, the rust that would consume, the thieves that would
plunder their treasures; and, in a word, against all possible hindrances,
defraudations, and disappointments: So will we suspect and watch sure against
all enemies and traitors to our souls, if we live here upon eternal designs, if
our ambition be to be great in God alone. And the more eminent the danger is,
the more will we watch. Have you not found by experience, which of these three
have been most prejudicial to your communion with God? If not, you have not
been so studious to know the state, nor pursue the happiness of your own souls
as you might: If so, then watch against that most of all, which you have found
to be most injurious. For it ordinarily comes to pass, either by the difference
of constitutions, or difference of temptations, or different ways of living,
or some other thing, that Gods children are more ensnared by some one of these
than other. Well, be sure to watch and pray, and strive more especially against
the more especial enemies of your souls.

2. Live above the body: above bodily enjoyments, ornaments, excellencies.
Though these bodily enjoyments be never so sweet, these bodily ornaments never
so glorious, yet is not your happiness in these. Certainly they live to their
loss, who live upon the excellencies of their own souls, whether natural or
supernatural; they deprive themselves of the infinite glory, fullness and
sufficiency that is in the Blessed God, who take up their happiness in these:
Much more do they pinch and impoverish their own souls, who live upon bodily
ornaments, or excellencies; wherein many inferior creatures do excel them; the
Rose in beauty, the Sun in brightness, the Lion in strength, the Stagg in
swiftness, etc. If a woman were as lovely as the morning, fair as the Moon,
clear as the Sun: if a man were full of personal grace and majesty, terrible as
an Army with banners; yet were not their happiness in these accomplishments.
Nay, which is worse, these ornaments stand between us and our happiness. When
you begin therefore at any time fondly to admire any of these bodily
excellencies, then think with your selves, Oh but all these do not make my soul
happy: Nay, this beautiful outside must stink, and be deformed; these fair and
flourishing members must wither in the dust; this active, strong and graceful
body, must be buried in disgrace and weakness, before I can attain to entire
and perfect happiness. This consideration will advance us to live above the
body.

3. Be content to be unbodyed for a time. Is it true, that we can no otherwise
be happy, no otherwise be present with God, know him familiarly, enjoy him
perfectly and entirely? cannot we get to him, except we go through the dust? Be
it so then; be content to be unbodyed for a time. Occidat modo imperet, could
the Heathen say concerning her Son; much rather may a Christian say concerning
his Father, Let him slay me, so my soul may but reign with him, which is by his
reigning in it; Let him kill me, so he will but fill me; Let him draw me through
the dust of the earth, so he will but draw me out of this dust of the world, so
he will but draw me nigh unto himself, and bring me into a full and inseparable
conjunction with my Lord! Methinks I need not use many arguments to persuade a
soul that is feelingly overpowered, mastered, ravished with the infinite
beauty, goodness, glory and fullness of his God, to be willing to quit a dusty
tabernacle for a time, wherein it is almost swallowed up, to depart, and to be
entirely swallowed up in him. Nay, suppose a Christian in the lowest form, who
has but chosen God for his highest good and only happiness (as every sincere
Christian has) methinks he should have learnt this lesson, to comply with that
infinite, perfect will, that governs both him and the whole world: I cannot
conceive a godly soul without the subduing of self-will; nor suppose a sincere
Saint void at least of the habit of self-resignation. Therefore I will add no
more concerning this, but rise a step higher.

4. Long after an unbodyed state, desire to depart, and to be with the Lord,
groan within your selves to have morality swallowed up of life; in which temper
you find the holy Apostle. To be content to dye, is a good temper, a temper
scarce to be found (I think) in any wicked man; not from a right principle, I
am sure: But, methinks, its no very great thing in comparison of what we should
labor to attain to. Think on it a little; what a strange kind of cold uncouth
phrase it is, Such a man is content to be happy! Men are not said to be content
to be rich, but covetous; not willing to be honored, but ambitious: And why
should it only be content to be with God? I am persuaded there is no show nor
semblance of satisfactory bliss and happiness for a soul, a noble immortal
nature, but only in the supreme essential, perfect, absolute good, the blessed
and eternal good: And, should not this noble active Being be carried out with
vehement longings after its proper and full happiness, as well as this earthly
sluggish body is carried with restless appetite after health, and safety, and
liberty? Why should a soul alone be content to be happy, when all other things
in the world, do so ardently court, and vehemently pursue their respective
ends, and several perfections? Certainly if the blessed and glorious God should
display himself in all his beauty, and open all his infinite treasures of
goodness, and sweetness and fullness within the view of a soul, it could not but
be ravished with the object, earnestly press into his presence, ruere in
amplexus, and with a holy impatience throw it self into his arms: There would
be need of setting bounds to the Mount, to keep it from breaking through unto
the Lord: what is said of the Queen of the South, when she had heard the
wisdom, and seen the glory of Solomon, 2 Chronicles. 9. 4. would be more true of a
Christian, there would be no more spirit left in him. Some have therefore
observed the wisdom of God in engaging the soul in so dear a union with the
body, that it might care for it, and not quit it: Yea, the Heathen observed the
wisdom of God in concealing the happy state of a separated soul, that so men
might be content to live out their time, victurosque Dii celant, ut vivere
durent, Foelix esse mori. But alas, we see but darkly as through a glass, and
our affections toward God are proportionable to our apprehensions of him;
these are dark, and therefore those are dull. And oh would to God they were but
indeed proportionable! for then we should love him only, if not earnestly; and
desire him entirely, if not sufficiently. Consider what I have hinted,
concerning the happiness of the soul in the enjoyment of God, and what I have
more fully demonstrated concerning the bodies hindering of it, and keeping it
at a distance; and then argue, Is happiness the main end of every Being? Must
not this soul then, being a noble and immortal nature, needs look out for some
high and noble happiness, suitable to its excellent self? Can that be any
where, but in the enjoyment of the highest and uncreated good? And can this
never be attained whilst we are in this animal state, in this mortal body, that
keeps at such a distance? Oh why then do we not look out after so much
enjoyment of this blessed God, as we are now capable of, and long after a
departure hence, that we may enjoy him freely and fully, and be eternally happy
in him! oh be not only content, but even covetous.

But what, shall the soul break the cage that she may take her flight? God
forbid! How can he pretend to be a lover of God, who is not formed into his
will, subject to his ordination, content to abide in the station that he has
allotted him? But if we may not break it to escape, yet methinks it may be safe
enough, with submission to wish it were broken: If we may not with Saul,
dissolve our selves, yet with Paul, we may desire to be dissolved. The
perfection that the most Christians attain to, is but to desire to live, and be
content to dye: Oh, consider what I have said in this matter, and invert the
order of those words in your hearts, Be content to live, desire to dye.

But what, would you have us pray for death? Answer, I speak not of a formal
praying either for one or other. What the Apostle speaks of the greatest of
sins, 1 John 5. 16. I am ready to say of this state of freedom from all sin, I
do not say that ye should pray for it. You will tell me that David and Hez^kiah
prayed for life: And I could tell you that Elijah prayed for death, 1 King. 19
4. he was indeed a man subject to passions, James 5. 17. but I believe this was
none of them. But I will not enveigle my self in any controversy: Methinks the
sad consideration laid before your eyes, whilst we are in the body we are
absent, distant from the Lord, should wring out an O wretched man that I am,
etc. or an I desire to be dssiolved; or if not words, yet at least a groan
after immortality, with our Apostle here -- We groan within our selves that
mortality may be swallowed up of life.

But can a soul possibly long for the destruction of the body? Philosophy
indeed tells us that it cannot. Be it so: yet I Am sure Divinity teaches, that a
soul may long after the redemption of the body; the redemption of it from this
kind of a^i^al, corruptible ensnaring condition that it is now in, Romans 8. 23.
-- We groan within our selves, waiting for the redemption of our body. If we
cannot wish to be unclothed, yet we may long to be clothed upon, verse 4. of
this chapter: At least, methinks, the Heathen should not outdo us, who could
say, Morinolo, sed me mortuum esse nihil curo.

But, will all cry, Oh if we were sure of interest in it, of pardon of sin, of
truth, of grace, of eternal life, then we could freely leave all. Answ.

1. That is, you would live to be more holy before you dye: you are not yet
holy enough. No, nor never shall be till you dye. If you long after holiness
long to be with God then; for that is a state of perfect holiness. To desire to
live, upon pretense of being more holy, is a mere fallacy, a contradiction.
But, it may be, this is not the meaning of the Objection: Theresore

2. A not having of what we would have, is not an excuse for not doing what we
should do. It is our duty to rejoice in the Lord, Phil. 4. 4. which our not
having of assurance, does not exempt us from; though, if we have assurance, we
might indeed rejoice the more. But to take off this plea at once.

3. Our earnest longings after a full and perfect enjoyment of God, and so our
breathings after an immortal state does not depend upon our assurance; but
indeed assurance rather depends upon that. I doubt we are commonly mistaken in
the nature of assurance; and, it may be, are in a wrong manner curious about
the signs of Christ's appearing in our souls. For, certainly a well grounded
assurance of the love of God, does most discover and unfold it self in the
growth of true godliness in the soul: Now the love of God, and an earnest
desire to be like unto him, and to be with him, is the better half of all
religion, Mat. 22. 37, 38. so that it rather seems that assurance springs up
from this frame of soul, than that this arises out of assurance. If assurance
be the thing that you desire, get your souls joined to God in a union of
affections, will, and ends, and then labor and long to be closer to him, liker
to him, perfectly holy and happy in him, and be ye assured that Christ is in
you of a truth: For these mighty works which he has wrought, these divine
breathings, these holy pantings after him do bear witness of him.

4. Whether ever you come to that feeling knowledge, that powerful sense of
your state or no, which you call assurance, yet know, that it is your duty to
long after immortality. We are wont to call assurance the privilege of some
few; but the Scripture makes this temper that I am speaking of, the duty of all
Believers, which I do the rather name, because I find few Professors of this
temper; and indeed but few that are willing to believe that they ought to be.
Our Savior calls all Believers to as much in effect as I do, Luke 21. 28. Look
up and lift up your heads, for the day of your redemption draws nigh: whereby
is not meant a bare posture and speculation, but joy and longing are required
by that phrase, say the Dutch Annotat. See also Rev. 22. 17. Consider further
(which, methinks, should strike cold to the hearts of cold-hearted Professors)
that this very temper is made one of the greatest characters of true and
sincere Saints: I do not know of any one oftener named; See Romans 8. 23. We groan
within our selves, waiting for the redemption of our body, 2 Timothy 4. 8. The
Lord shall give the Crown to them that love his appearing, Tit. 2. 13. We
should live godly in this present world, looking for that blessed hope, and the
glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 3.
12. What manner of persons ought we to be in all holy conversation and
godliness, looking for, and hastening to the coming of the day of God! Jude 21.
Keep your selves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus
Christ unto eternal life. Do all these plain and pathetical Scriptures stand
for ciphers in your eye? Methinks they should not. But not to stand upon the
proof of it to be a duty, it matters not whether there be an express command
for it or no: This that I am speaking of, is not so much the duty of godly
persons, as the very nature, genius and spirit indeed of godliness i^ self.
Methinks a godly soul, that is truly touched with divine goodness, influenc't by
it, and impressed with it, as the Needle is with the Loadstone, must needs strive
powerfully within it self to be in conjunction with it: A holy soul, that after
all its wearisome defeats, and shameful disappointments in the creature, finds
its self perfectly matched with this infinite, full, and perfect object, must
certainly and necessarily be carried, without any other argument, with fervent
longings after union to it, and communion with it. The Spouse might say
concerning Christ, as he concerning her. Cant. 6. 12. Or ever I was aware, my
soul made me like the chariots of Aminadab. And every godly soul may in some
degree say with that Spouse, Cant. 5. 4, 5. My Beloved put in his hand by the
hole of the door, and my bowels were moved for him: I rose up, etc. Tell me,
friends, How can Divine Grace, that Well of living water in the soul, choose but
spring up into eternal life? John 4 14. I doubt not to affirm, that that which
is of God in the soul, must needs carry the soul after God; as it belongs to
Heaven, so it will belonging toward Heaven. That which is of a divine
original, must needs have a divine tendency; that which is of divine
extraction, will have in it a divine attraction, and pursue a divine
perfection, Col. 3. 1. That divine life and spirit that runs through godly
souls, does awaken and exalt in some measure all the powers of them into an
active and cheerful sympathy with that absolute good that renders them
completely blessed. Holiness and purity of heart will be attracting God more
and more to it self; and the more pure our souls are, and the more separate
from earthly things, the more earnestly will they endeavor the nearest union
that may be with God: and so by consequence, methinks they must needs in some
sense desire the removal of that animal life, and dark body that stands in
their way: for they know that that which now lets, will let (such is the
unchangeable nature of it, till it be laid in the dust) till it be taken out of
the way. The thirsty King did but cry for water of the Well of Bethlehem, and
his Champions broke through the Host of the Philistines, and fetched it, 2 Samuel
23. 15. And will ye not allow the thirsty soul, if not to break through to fetch
it, yet at least to break out into an Oh that one would give me to drink of the
living water, of the fountain of grace, and peace, and love? Will ye allow
hunger to break down stone-walls? and will ye neither allow the hungry soul to
break down these mud-walls, nor to wish within it self that they were broken
down? In a word then, give me leave earnestly to press you to an earnest
pressing after perfect fruition of, and eternal converse with God, and to
change the Apostles words, Heb. 12. 1. Seeing we are compassed about with so
great a divine light, and glory, and brightness, let us be willing and desirous
to lay aside this weight of flesh, and this body that so easily resists us with
sins and snares, and run with eagerness to the object that is set before us.
Amen, Amen.

Draw me, we will run after thee.
THE Angelical Life.
MAT. 22. 30. -- Are as the Angels of God in Heaven.
THE Doctrine of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the great things of Christian
Religion, as they were accounted a strange thing by all the world, when they
were first published and preached: so indeed by none less entertained, or rather
more opposed, than by the wisest of men living in that age, viz. Scribes,
Pharisees, Sadduces; who were the disputers of this world, as the Apostles
phrase is, 1 Cor. 1. 20. A thing of wonderful observation, not only to us in
our day, but even to our blessed Lord himself in the days of his flesh, who
fetches the cause of it from Heaven, and adores the infinite Wisdom of God in
it, Mat. 11. 25. Amongst other set Disputations that the Sadd^ces held with our
Savior, this in this chapter is very famous; where they dispute against the
Resurrection of the dead, by an argument fetched ab absurdo, verse. 25. grounded
upon an instance of a woman that had been married to seven Husbands
successively: Now, say they, if there be a Resurrection, whose Wise shall she
be then? our Savior answers by destroying the ground of their argument, and
showing that they disputed upon a false supposition: for, says he, In the
Resurrection there shall be no marrying, but men shall be as the Angels of God.
In which words this Doctrine is plainly laid down (for I shall not meddle with
the Controversy.)

Doct. That the glorified Saints shall be as the Angels of God in Heaven. The
other Evangelists do lay down the same truth, as you may find, Mark 12. 25.
Luke 20. 36. In the explication of which point, I will show 1. Negatively,
wherein the Saints shall not be like the Angels. 2. Affirmatively, wherein they
shall be like unto them; or, as St. Luke has it, equal to them.

1. Negatively, The glorified Saints shall not be like the Angels in essence:
The Angelical essence, and the rational soul are, and shall be different. Souls
shall remain souls still, keep their own essence: The essence shall not be
changed; souls shall not be changed into Angelical essences.

2. They shall not be wholly spirits, without bodies, as the Angels: The spirit
of just men now made perfect, are more line to the Angels in this sense, than
they shall be after the Resurrection: For now they are spirits without bodies;
but the Saints shall have bodies; not such as now (so corruptible, so crazy)
not in any thing defective, not needing creature supplies; But incorruptible,
glorious bodies, in some sense spiritual bodies; which are described by three
characters, 1 Cor. 15. 42, 43. Incorruptible (somewhat more than immortal)
glorious, powerful. Neither does their having bodies any whit abate of their
perfection or glory, nor render them inferior to the Angels: for even the
glorious Redeemer of the world, has a body, who is yet superior to the Angels;
and he shall change the vile bodies of the Saints, and make them like unto his
glorious body, Phil. 3. ult.

3. Neither have we any ground to believe, that the Saints shall be altogether
equal to the Angels in dignity and glory: But rather, that as man was at first
made a little lower than the Angels; so that he shall never come to be exalted
altogether so high as they: for it seems, that the natural capacity of an
Angel, is greater than of a (...); and so shall continue; for they are distinct
kinds of creatures. As a beast cannot become so wise and intelligent as a man;
for then he would cease to be a beast: so neither can a man become so large and
capable as an Angel; for then he would cease to be a man.

2. Affirmatively, The glorified Saints shall be like the Angels of God in
Heaven; first, In their qualities; that is,

1. In being pure and holy; whether they shall be equal to them in positive
holiness, or no, I know not: whether they shall understand, and know, and love
God, in all degrees, as much as the Angels: It seems rather that they shall
not; because, as I said before, their capacity shall not be so large. But if in
this they be not altogether equal to the Angels, yet it implies no
imperfection: for they shall be positively holy as far as their nature is
capable; and so shall be perfect in their kind, Heb. 12. 23. The spirits of
Just men made perfect: They shall in this be like unto the Angels, if not equal
to them; yea like unto God himself in it; Be ye holy as I am holy, 1 Pet. 1.
15. Mat. 5. ult. But as to negative holiness, the Saints shall be even equal to
the Angels of God in Heaven, i. e. they shall have no more sin, no more
corruption than they have. They shall be as perfectly freed from all
iniquities, imperfections, and infirmities, as the Angels. What can be cleaner
than that which has no uncleanness at all in it? Why, so clean shall all the
Saints be, Rev. 21. 27. No unclean thing shall enter into Heaven. They shall be
without all kind of spot or blemish, Ephesians. 5. 27. which is a perfect negative
holiness: more cannot be said of the Angels in this respect. As branches of
this,

2. As the holy Angles do reverence the Divine Majesty, Isa. 6. 2, 3. they
cover their faces with their wings, crying, Holy, Holy, Holy Lord of Hosts; so
shall the glorified Saints. You may see what sweet harmony they make,
consenting together to give all the glory of all to God, Rev. 7. 9, 11, 12. The
Saints stood and cried, Salvation to our God who sits upon the Throne, and
to the Lamb: The Angels stood round about saying Amen, Amen.

3. In their readiness to do the will of God, and execute his commands;
therefore the Angels are described to have wings, Isa. 6. 2. with twain they
did fly. How God shall please to employ Angels or Saints in the world to come,
is not for us to enquire: But they shall be alike ready to do his will, and
serve his pleasure, whatever it shall be. Even whilst the Saints are imperfect
on earth, they can cry, Here am I, send me, Isa. 6. 8. How much more ready
shall they be then, when all their fetters are knocked off!

4. They shall be as the Angels in their cheerful and unwearied execution of
the will of God: So the Angels are, and so shall the Saints be. The spirit
shall be then more willing, and the Flesh shall be no more weak, as it is now;
for when it is raised again, it shall be in power, 1 Cor. 15. 43. More things
of this nature might be added: but I pass lightly over them, because although
they be true, yet they are not principally looked at in this Text: therefore I
come to the second thing wherein the glorified Saints shall be like unto the
Angels, and that is;

2. In their way of living. They shall be like the Angels, i. e. says one
truly, (...), living like the Angels: How is that? our Savior tells us,
Neither marrying, nor being given in marriage: it is added presently in Luke
20. 36. For neither can they dye any more: If there be no dying, there will be
no need of propagation; if no need of propagation, then why should they marry?
The Angels are single, and know no other conjunction, but with God in a
spiritual manner: no more shall the Saints. But what great matter is that to be
like the Angels in? what perfection is that? Many Saints, yea and sinners too
upon earth, are so like the Angels; nay, and the Devils too. Therefore you must
know that our Savior under this phrase of not marrying, etc. does comprehend
all manner of creature-converse, all kind of living upon, and delighting in the
creature, by a Synecdoche of the part, as is ordinary in Scripture; I have not
given upon usury, says the Prophet, yet the people curse me, Jer. 15. 10. i.
e. I have had no dealing in the world, no negotiation: By one kind he
understands the whole, Ezekiel. 25. 41. where, by eating their fruits, and
drinking their milk, is understood the possessing of all that was theirs: And
in many other places, the Spirit of God uses this Tropical way of speaking.

The Angels of God neither marry, nor are given in marriage, i. e. they live
not upon any created good, delight not in any created comfort; but live
entirely upon God, converse with him, are everlastingly beholding his glory,
and delighting themselves in him: Thus shall the glorified Saints live for
ever. Their bodies shall not need nor use created supplies, food, physic,
raiment, etc. which things in this animal state they stand in need of, Mat. 6.
32. But that is not all; for their souls shall not any longer desire, nor hanker
after any created thing; but (as the Angels) shall be possessed of God, filled
with the fullness of God; all the powers and faculties of them perfectly refined
and spiritualized, abstracted from all created things, eternally rejoicing and
delighting themselves in the contemplation and participation of the supreme and
infinite good: For during this earthly and imperfect state, not only the bodies
of good men feed upon, and are sustained by the creatures in common with other
men, but even their souls do taste too much of worldly contentments, and drink
too deep of earthly pleasures, and creature comforts: Even the most refined
souls upon earth, though they do not properly feed upon any thing below God,
yet do ost dip the end of their Rod in this honey that lies upon the earth (with
Jonathan) do cast an unchaste eye upon their earthly enjoyments, and delight in
them in a way too gross and unspiritual, having abstracted them from God, and
loving them with a distinct love. But in the Resurrection it shall not be so:
for the holy souls shall be perfectly conformed to the holy God, shall feed
upon him singly, live upon him entirely, be wrapped up in him wholly, and be
satisfied in him solely and everlastingly: and so shall they be (...), equal to
the Angels. The creature, although it do not fill any truly sanctified soul
upon earth, yet it has some room there; but then it shall be perfectly cast
out, and the soul shall be filled with all the fullness of God: the creature is
now much in some godly souls, and something in all of them; but then it shall
be nothing at all to them, or in them; but God shall be all in all; all things
in all of them; as the way of the Saints living, and their glorified state is
described, 1 Cor. 15. 28. (...), that God may be all in all. They shall inherit
all things: but how is that? why, see the explication of it in the following
words, God will be their God, Rev. 21. 7. He that overcomes shall inherit all
things, and I will be his God. God shall be unto them instead of all things. In
that state there shall be no need of Sun or Moon, Rev. 21. 23. by which
excellent and useful creatures, the whole Creation seems to be understood; for
they that shall live above the Sun and Moon, shall certainly live above all
things that are below these: But how then? why it follows, The glory of God
shall enlighten them; and the Lamb shall be their light: so Rev. 22. 5. And
there shall be no night there, and they need no Candle, neither light of the
Sun; for the Lord gives them light: All happiness is derived into them from
God; and therefore there shall be no night; no want of any creature-comfort to
them; neither shall they desire any thing more of the creature, whether small
or great, whether Candle or Sun. For explication of this their blessed life,
let me allude to that of our Savior, Luke 12. 24. The Fowls of the Heaven
neither sow nor reap, yet God feeds them: so the Saints of Heaven neither
want nor desire any created good; for they feed upon God the supreme and
infinite good: And again, verse. 27. The Lillies neither toil nor spin, and yet
Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these: These blessed souls
have no respect at all to things terrene and created; yet are they so filled
and adorned with the glory of the infinite Majesty, that Solomon in all his
glory was a filthy and ragged thing in comparison of them. In a word, the state
of the glorified Saints and Angels is set out by our Savior in the same
manner, by one and the same description, and that is the seeing of God: The
life of Angels, is called a continual beholding of the face of God, Mat. 18.
10. and the state of the Saints glory and happiness is also a seeing of God,
Mat. 5. 8. Heb. 12. 14. Rev. 22. 4. They shall see his face, and his name shall
be in their foreheads. Now this phrase, the seeing of God, applied both to the
Saints and Angels, does place their happiness in God alone, excluding the
creature; and it does import the fullness, and clearness, and certainty of that
their bliss.

Thus I have showed you in what sense (though I am not able to show you in what
degree) the glorified Saints shall be like the Angels of God in Heaven: Their
way of living, viz. upon the blessed God alone, shall be the same with that of
the holy Angels. Application.

From the discovery of the future state of the Saints, I find my self filled
with indignation.

1. Reproof: Against the carnal conceits that many Christians have of Heaven.
Christians do I call them! Nay, herein they seem rather Mahumetans, who place
Heaven in the full and lasting enjoyment of all creature comforts; nay indeed
of sinful and abominable pleasures, as one may read in their Alcoran. It may be
few Christians are altogether so sensual; but, sure I am, the far greater sort
of Christians (so called) are very gross and carnal; at least very low in their
conceits of the state of future happiness; Heaven is a word as little
understood as Holiness; and that, I am sure, is the greatest mystery in the
world; it would be tedious to run through the particular various apprehensions
of men in this matter, and indeed impossible to know them. The common sort of
people understand either just nothing by Heaven but a glorious name; or at
best, but a freeness from bodily torment: As, nothing of Hell affects them, but
that dreadful word fire; so nothing of Heaven, but the comfortable word, Rest
or safety. Others, it may be, think there is something positive in Heaven, and
they dream of an honorable, easic, pleasant life, free from such kind of
toyls, labors, pains, persecutions, reproaches, penuries which men are subject
to in this life: This is a true notion, but much below the nature of that happy
state; others are yet more highly affected with the words of Glory and
Glorious, and seem to be much ravished with them; but are like men in a maze or
wonderment, that admire something that they understand not, and are altogether
confounded in their own apprehensions of it: As if a man should be mightily
taken with such a fine name as Arabia the happy, and by a blind fervor of mind
should desire to go and visit it. Others rise higher yet in their apprehensions
of Heaven, and look upon it as a holy state; but that holiness is negative,
viz. a perfect freedom from sin, and all temptations to it: And indeed this is
a precious consideration, and that wherein many a weary soul finds much rest.
But yet this amounts not to the life of Angels; it is a lower consideration of
Heaven, than what our Savior here presents us with. The state of the glorified
Saints, shall not only be a state of freedom from temporal pains, or eternal
pains, or a freedom from spiritual pains and imperfections; but a state of
perfect positive holiness, pure light, ardent love, spiritual liberty, holy
delights; when all created good shall perfectly vanish, all created love shall
be swallowed up, the soul shall become of a most God-like disposition, shining
forth in the glory that he shall put upon it glorying in nothing but the
blessed God, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, in his divine Image and perfections,
and wrapped up entirely into his infinite fullness to all eternity: Which has
made me oft-times to nauseat, and indeed to blame the poor low descriptions of
the Kingdom of Heaven which I have found in Books and Sermons, for too dry,
yea and gross; which do describe Heaven principally as a place, and give it
such circumstances of beauty, firmness, security, light and splendour, pleasant
society, good neighborhood, as they think will most commend an earthly
habitation. True indeed, the Holy Ghost in Scripture is pleased to condescend
so far to our weak capacities, as to describe that glorious state to us by such
things as we do best understand, and are apt to be most taken with, and do most
gratify our senses in this world; as a Kingdom, Paradise, a glorious City, a
Crown, an Inheritance, etc. But yet it is not the will of God that his
enlightened people should rest in such low notions of eternal life: For in
other places God speaks of the state of glory, according to the nature and
excellency of it, and not according to the weakness of our understanding; and
describes it at another rate, calling it the Life of Angels; as here, the
beholding of God (Mat. 5. 8.) a coming unto the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 13. Gods being All things in us, 1 Cor. 15. 28. It
is called a Knowing of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ, Joh. 17. 3. In a word,
which is as high as can be spoke, higher indeed than can be perfectly
understood, it is called a Being like unto God, 1 John 3. 21. We shall be like
unto him. But this Use is not so much for Reproof, as it is for Information.

2. Here is matter of Roproof, yea and of just indignation against the gross,
low, sensual, earthly life of Professors, who yet hope to be the children of
the Resurrection, and to be as the Angels of God in Heaven. What, hope to be
like them then, and yet altogether unlike them now! I speak not in a passion,
but out of a just indignation that I have conceived against my self, and
against the generality even of Saints themselves. I am not going to speak of
Covetousness commonly so called; there is a sin much like to it, which is not
indeed a single sin, but an evil and unseemly temper, which is
earthly-mindedness, or minding of earthly things; or if you will, because I
would not be misunderstood, a living upon the creature, or a loving of the
creature with a distinct love. Oh the insensible secrecy, and insuperable power
of this creature-love! I cannot sufficiently exclaim against it. Why do we
spend noble affections upon such low and empty nothings! Are we called with
such a high Calling, think you, that our conversation should be so low? Is the
fullness of the fountain yours, and do ye yet delight to sit down by, and bathe
your selves in the shallow streams? Is your life hid with Christ in God? Why
then do you converse, as if your life were bound up in the creature? Have you
laid up your treasure in the blessed God? what do your hearts then so far from
it? Is your happiness in Heaven? why then is not your conversation there too?
Do ye count it your bliss to see God? what then mean those fond and wanton
glances, that ye cast upon created-comforts, and that unchaste love which you
bestow upon things below? I mean, not only the bleatings of the Sheep, and the
lowings of the Oxen: I speak not of the grosser sort of earthly-mindedness,
sensuality, or covetousness; but of that more refined and hidden creature-love;
a loving of friends, relations, health, liberty, life, and that not in God, but
with a love distinct from that love wherewith we love God. To love all these in
God, and for his sake, and as flowing from him, and partaking of him, and with
the same love wherewith we love God himself, is allowed us: But to love them
with a particular love, as things distinct from God, to delight in them merely
as creatures; and to follow them as if some good, or happiness, or pleasure
were to be found in them distinct from what is in God; this is a branch of
spiritual Adultery, I had almost said Idolatry. To taste a sweetness in the
creature, and to see a beauty and goodness in it is our duty; but then it must
be the sweetness of God in it, and the goodness of God which we ought alone to
taste and see in it. As we say, Vxor splende^ radiis mariti, the wise shines
with the rays of her husband: so more truly, every creature shines but by a
borrowed light, and commends unto us the goodness, and sweetness, and ^ulness
of the blessed Creator. You have heard that the glorified souls shall live upon
God alone entirely, wholly, eternally; and should not the less glorious souls,
I mean gracious souls, do so too, in some degree? yea even we who are upon
earth, and do yet use creatures, should behold all the scattered beams of
goodness, sweetness, perfection that are in these creatures, all united and
gathered up in God, and so feed upon them only in God, and upon God in all
them. It is the character of wicked and godless men, that they set up, and
drive a trade for themselves; live in a way distinct from God, as though they
had no dependence upon him; they love the world with a predominant love; they
enjoy creature comforts in a gross, unspiritual manner, they dwell upon the
dark side of their mercies, they treasure up riches, not only in their chests,
but in their hearts; they feed upon the creature, not only with their bodies,
but their very souls do feed upon them; and thus, in a word, they live without
God in the world: All this is no wonder; for that which is of the earth, must
needs be earthly, Joh. 3. 31. is it not a monstrous thing, that a heavenly soul
should feed upon earthly trash? I speak without any Hyperbole; the famous King
of Babylon forsaking the society of men, and herding himself with the beasts of
the earth, and eating grass with the Oxen, was not so absurd a thing, nor half
so monstrous or unseemly, as the children of the Most High God, forsaking the
true bread of souls, and feeding upon the low fare of carnal men, even created
sweetness, worldly goods: Nay, a glorious starr falling from its own sphere,
and choking it self in the dust, would not be such an eminent piece of
baseness: For what is said of the true God in one sense, Joh. 3. 31. is true of
the truly godly in this sense; He that comes from Heaven is above all, i. e.
above all things that are below God himself.

3. Shall this life of Angels, be also the life of Saints? This may then serve
as a powerful consideration, to mortify in us the love of this animal life, to
make us weary of this low kind of living, and quicken us to long after so
blessed a change. Well might the Apostle say indeed, that to dye was gain.
Phil. 1. 21. For, is not this gain, to exchange an animal life, for an
Angelical life; a life which is in some sense common to the very beasts with
us, for that which in some sense may be called the life of God? For as the
blessed and holy God lives upon his own infinite and self-sufficient fullness,
without being beholden to any thing without himself; so shall the Saints live
upon him, and upon the self-same infinite fullness, and shall not need any
creature- contributions. The Apostle indeed says, That the last enemy to be
destroyed is death, (1 Cor. 15. 26.) which is true of enemies without us; and
it is true with respect to Christ, who shall make a general Resurrection from
the dead; for that is the proper meaning of it: But it is true also, that the
last enemy to be overcome within us, is the love of life: Therefore it is said,
That a man will part with any thing to keep his life, Job 2. 4. And we do
generally excuse the matter, and cry, Oh! life is sweet, life is precious. It
must be confessed, and it may be granted; I believe that there is an inclination
of the soul to the body (arising from that dear and unconceivable union that
God himself has made of them) which is purely natural (some say altogether
necessary for the maintaining of man in this complex state) and not in it self
sinful: Possibly there may not be found a man upon earth so holy and mortified,
in whom this is not found; certainly it is the last hinderance to be removed
out of the way of our perfect happiness. This, although in i^ it self natural,
yea necessary, and without blame, yet in the inordinateness of it, ordinarily,
if not constantly, becomes sinful. I count him the most perfect man in the
world, who loves not his own life with an inordinate, sinful love: who loves it
only in God, and not with a creature-love distinct from God. There are two
ways whereby this natural and lawful love of life becomes sinful, viz.
immoderateness, and inordinateness Immoderateness is when men love their lives
at that rate, that they are filled with unreasonable and distracting fears,
cares, and thoughts about them, when the whole business of life is almost
nothing else but a studiousness to preserve the Being of life. Inordinateness
is when men, though they do not love their lives at that excessive rate, yet do
love life as a creature-good, not in God, nor in order to him, but love it for
it self, as something out of God: Every carnal man in the world is guilty of
the latter; and I doubt but few Saints altogether free from the guilt of it.
Now that this immoderate love of life ought to be subdued in Christians, all
men almost will grant: If any will not grant it, we can easily prove it from
the command of God, Mat. 6. 25. Take no thought for your life, 1 John 2. 15.
Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world. Both which words,
in the favourablest interpretation that can be given of them, do in the
judgment of all, forbid immoderation: N^y, a mere Philosopher would enforce
this from mere moral confiderations, which I cannot now stand upon. But this
inordinate love of life, as it is a more secret, sticking evil, a more refined
corruption, is harder to be discovered, and men are loath to be convinced of
the evil of it. Now this particular distinct loving of life, not as in God, but
in it self, as a creature-good, is clearly condemned in that first and great
Commandment, Matthew. 22. verse. 37. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, q. d. God the Supreme,
Infinite, Perfect, Original, Essential, Self-sufficient Good, is to be loved in
the highest, and purest, and strongest manner, that the heart of man is capable
to love; and all other things only in him, and under him, and as being of him,
and for his sake. Let it be allowed that life is good; yet it must be added,
that it is but a created-good: let it be allowed that life is comfortable; yet
it must be acknowledged, that man's chiefest comfort and happiness does not
stand in this animal. life, So then, life it self is to be loved in God, who is
the fountain and spring of life, it is to be loved in the quality of a created
good, and no otherwise: Now created goods are to be loved only in the Creator,
as coming from him, as partaking of him, as leading to him. Argue the case a
little, thus; The soul of man is allowed to love its body with which the great
God has matched it; and to love union with this body, which union we call life:
But this body being a creature, and a creature much inferior to it self, and
much more ignoble than it self, cannot in reason be judged to be the fit and
adequate object of its strongest and best affections: That must needs be
something more excellent than it self, and that cannot be any thing in this
world (for this world has nothing so noble, so excellent in it as the soul of
man) it must indeed be the Creator himself. Well, seeing God is the supreme,
self-sufficient, perfect Good, he is to be loved with all the strength and
powers of the soul, singly and entirely: And the will of God, being God
himself, is not only to be submitted to, or rested in, but to be chosen and
loved above all created things; yea even above life it self, the best of
creatures. So then, if it be the will of God to call for our lives, we ought
readily to give them up; because we ought to love the will of God much more
than our lives. I pray you drink in that notion, viz. that the will of God
being pure, holy, perfect, should not only be submitted to, or rested in, but
even loved and chosen above all creatures: Now the will of God is not that only
whereby he teaches men, and prescribes Laws to them, but that whereby he
rules, and governs the world, and disposes of men in any condition of life, or
takes away their lives from them. The eternal fountain of goodness can send
forth nothing but what is perfectly good: and that which is perfectly good,
ought to be loved with an universal, pure, and (as far as possible) perfect
love. This you will say, perhaps, is a high and a hard saying: But, let it not
seem impossible, for a man to love his own life only in God, and in
subordination to him; for this God requires (and he requires not things
^mpossible) Luke 14 26. If any man come after me, and hate not his own life, he
cannot be my Disciple, i. e. not simply hate ^t, but in comparison of me and my
will: It is not then impossible; nay, you see it is a necessary duty, without
which we cannot be Christ's Disciples. The Saints of old found it possible. Holy
Paul gives this answer readily, Act. 21. 13. I am ready to dye at Jerusalem for
the name of the Lord Jesus; and Act. 20. 24. I count not my life dear unto me,
so that I might finish my course with joy: It is witnessed of the whole Army of
the Saints, in Rev. 12. 11. That they loved not their lives unto the death, i.
e. they did not value them in respect of God and his truth. Neither let any one
flatter himself, and say, Yea if I were called to dye for God, I would rather
do it than deny him: For the will of God is as much to be eyed in his sending
for us by a natural death, as by martyrdom; and a not giving up our lives to
him at any time, is as truly to deny him and his will, as not to give them up
at the stake, when we are called to it. Besides, how shall we imagine that he
that is unwilling to dye in his bed, should be willing to dye at a stake? Now
this duty of being mortified to the love of this animal life, being so
difficult, yet so necessary, and so noble; how does it become every Saint to
study to attain to this perfection! which, that we may, let us press upon our
selves this Consideration, this Doctrine, That the glorified Saints shall live
as the Angels of God in Heaven. We know that if this body were broken down,
this low life cut off, we should live like Angels, not being beholden any more
to poor creatures for help or comfort, but should be filled with the fullness of
God, filled with his Image and Glory, and live upon him entirely for evermore.
Yea I may add, that this very living above our own lives, merely at the will of
God, is a participation of the Angelical Life even in this world: Therefore
labor to be mortified to that love of this life which is here upon earth; yea
be weary of it, yea almost ashamed of it.

4. Shall we thus live the lives of the Angels, subsisting in God, feasting
upon him, filled with him to all eternity? This may moderate our sorrow which
we conceive for the loss of any created good, houses, lands, husband, wife,
children, etc. yet a little while, and we shall not miss them, shall not need
them, shall not desire them any more: The blessed Angels live a glorious life,
and they have none of these; but are perfectly satisfied in the enjoyment of
God alone: They have no wives nor children, yet they want none: And yet a
little while, and we shall have none neither, neither shall we want them,
having all things in the God of all things: They neither marry, nor are given
in marriage; but are in conjunction with the Father, with love, and goodness,
and truth it self; and so they have no want of any thing. If you have no
Candles left in the house, yet it is toward daybreak, and the Sun will rise
upon you, and you shall need none, and yet have light enough too. In a word,
learn to live beside them whilst you have them, and you will be the better able
to live without them, when they are removed.

5. I come now to the fifth and last Use that I shall make of this Doctrine;
and oh that you and I may make this happy use of it! Shall the Saints be as the
Angels of God in their way of living, in living upon God, and enjoying all
happiness in him alone for ever? Shall this certainly be ou^^ life in Heaven?
oh then labor to begin this life upon earth! If you cannot perfectly
transcribe, yet, at least, imitate that Angelical kind of life. Though you are
here imprisoned in a body of earth, and often cumbred and clogged with bodily
infirmities, and called to attend upon bodily necessities; yet, as far as this
animal state will permit, live upon God. Do not excuse nor vindicate that low
kind of earthly life; do not justify your living below and besides God, but
stir up your selves to behold where your happiness lies, and live not willingly
below it. Certainly a godly soul has more than bare hope in this world: God
the blessed, infinite and communicative good, has not locked up himself so far
out of fight, but that he gives his people a comfortable beholding of him even
whilst they are in their Pilgrimage: and what Soloman says of the life of the
godly, he means it of their present life, Prove. 15. 24. The way of life is
above to the wise: Their living not only shall be, but is now above; it is a
high way of living: They are certainly a puny sort of Mechanical Christians,
that think and talk only of a Heaven to come, and dream of an happiness without
them, and distinct from them: The truly godly and God-like soul cannot so
content himself, but being spirited and principled from above, is carried out
after the Infinite and Almighty Good, as a thing is carried toward its center;
and hastens into his embraces, as the Iron hastens to the Loadstone, and longs
to be in conjunction with it. If therefore ye be from Heaven, live above all,
above all earthly things: If ye be risen with Christ, seek the things that are
above, Col. 3. 1. If ye be born of God, live upon God, and suck not the breasts
of a stranger. Deny self, live besides self, i. e. live not to the lusts, live
not to the service of your senses, to the lust of the flesh, to the lust of the
eye, to the pride of life; let not your souls be servants to your sins, no nor
to your senses; that were for servants to ride on horseback, and Princes to
walk on foot, Eccles. 10. 7. Live above self, i. e. let your souls quit all
their own interest in themselves, and entirely resign themselves to God as to
all points of duty and service. But that is not all; neither is that it which I
press you to from these words; but live above the creature, and whatsoever is
in it, viz. delighting in God, conversing and communing with him alone, as the
chiefest Good: Desire not any creature any further, than as it may help you
forward to the Creator; neithet delight in it any further, than as it either
represents some of the divine perfections, witnesses something of divine love,
or leads to some divine participation or communion: Seeing we shall come to
live upon God, and delight in God alone without any creature; let us now live
upon, feed upon, love God alone in every creature: Now to give you a more
distinct knowledge of this high and noble life, I will explain it in some
particulars, negatively and affirmatively. First Negatively.

1. Live not upon Self; I speak not of living unto Self, but live not upon
Self, Self-excellencies, Self-sufficiencies, any created accomplishments; which
was the life of the Stoics, those great Philosophers, who placed happiness in
the enjoyment of themselves, which they called (...). To enjoy ones self indeed
is a high duty, a noble privilege, a duty of the Gospel, Luke 21. 19. Possess
ye your souls: But how must we enjoy our selves? why, only in God. He enjoys
himself,

1. Not who in a sullen melancholy, retires to a solitary and monastical life,
as many of the sowrer sort of Papists do.

2. Nor he that in a proud mood disdains the perfections of God shining forth
in other men; and hiding himself from them through envy, contents himself to
sit and admire his own personal accomplishments, as many humorists do.

3. Nor he who finding nothing without him, nor knowing nothing above him to
give his soul her full rest, settles upon a foundation of his own, and admires
a selfsufficiency in the temper of his own spirit a little subdued by
Philosophical precepts, as the Stoics did, and our Quakers do: But he who
enjoyes himself in God, i. e. who does not view himself in the narrow point of
his own Being, but taking a view of himself in the unbounded essence of God,
loves, and enjoyes, and values himself, and all his personal excellencies as he
is in God, and partakes of his perfections. To live in a way of self-converse,
is below the end of man's creation, who was made for a higher good: And hereby a
man shall never obtain true happiness; for it is peculiar to God alone to be
happy in himself. In a word, a soul that confines it self to its self, and
lives, and moves, and rejoices only within the narrow cell of its own
particular Being, deprives it self of that Almighty and Original Goodness and
Glory that sills the world, and shines through the whole Creation.

2. Live not upon any creature without your selves. Self indeed is a Creature;
but yet for clearness in proceeding, we shall distinguish them. Now this is the
life of the greatest sort of men, they live beside God, and move only within
the sphere of the creature: you will easily understand that I speak not of the
bodies living upon the creature; for so God has appointed that it shall live:
and yet as to this too, I say with our Savior, Man lives not by bread alone,
etc. But I speak of the soul of man living upon the creature as its highest
good, and feeding upon it as its best fare: They rise up early, and sit up
late, and God is not in all their thoughts: They are filled with domestiek and
foreign comforts, but behold not the Father of Lights from whom all these
descend: They live upon the good things of the world, yet live without God in
the world. Now by these men,

1. do not mean those Heathens that in the most Idolatrous manner, do in the
literal sense, set up the creatures for Gods.

2. Nor those Christians that in a most gross manner do makeidols of the
creatures, and place their happiness in them.

3. No nor only those earthly Professors, who follow the world too eagerly, and
have such a deep and rooted respect for it, that they can be ordinarily content
to suffer creature-employments to justle God and duties out of their hearts and
houses, whose worldliness is apparently too hard for their Religion. Who then?
Shall we come any nearer! yes;

4. Those are guilty of creature converse, who do not enjoy all creatures in
God; who love any thing in any creature with a distinct love, that do not love
it only in God; who love silver, gold, houses, lands trading, friends, with a
particular pinching love. Oh take heed of this creaturelove; of valuing any
created thing any otherwise than in God, any otherwise than as being from God,
partaking of him, and leading to him.

3. Live not upon Ordinances: These are Gods institutions; love them, cleave to
them, attend upon them, let no temptation cause you to leave them; but live not
upon them, place not your Religion, place not your hope, your happiness in
them, but love them only in God; attend upon them, yet not so much upon them,
as upon God in them; lie by the Pool, but wait for the Angel: love not, no not
a divine ordinance for its own sake: Why, who does so? Alas who almost does not?

1. Thus did they in Ezekiel. 33. 32. who delighted in the Prophets eloquence, and
in the Rhetoric of his Sermons as much as in a well tuned voice, and
harmonious music: and so do thousands in England, who read the Bible for the
style or the stories sake, and love to sit under learned and elegant
discourses, more for accomplishment, than for conversion: And swarms of Priests
who preach themselves, more than Christ Jesus even in his own ordinances; as a
proud Boy rides a horse into the Market, to set forth himself more than his
Masters goods.

2. But there are many not so gross as these, who do yet use ordinances in a
way very gross and unspiritual, placing their devotion in them, and sinking
their Religion into a settled course of hearing or praying; who will wait upon
God (as they call it) at some set and solemn times, New Moons and Sabbaths, it
may be evening and morning; but Religion must not be too busy with them, nor
intermeddle in their ordinary affairs, or worldly employments; it has no place
there; they do not count it a garment for every days wear.

3. And not only these, but even almost all men are too apt to seek rest in
duties and ordinances, or, at least, to be pretty well satisfied with the work
done, whether they have conversed with God there or no: Oh if you love your
souls, seek you happiness higher! conversing with divine ordinances, I confess,
is honorable and amiable, but it is too low a life for an immortal soul.
Affirmatively,

Let nothing satisfy you but God himself; take up with no pleasure, no
treasure, no portion, no paradise; nay, no Heaven, no happiness, below the
infinite, supreme, and self-sufficient good. Let your eye be upon him, and his
all-filling sulness; let your desire be unto him, and to the remembrance of his
name; follow hard after to know the Lord, and to enjoy the Father through his
Son Jesus Christ; let your fellowship be with the Father, and with the Son by
the spirit, 1 John 1. 3. O love the Lord all ye his Saints, Psalm. 31. 23. yea
love him with all your soul, and all your strength, Mat. 22. 37. yea and keep
your selves always in the love of God, Jude 21. persevere and increase in the
love of God; Keep your selves in the love of God. Oh sweet duty! Oh amiable
pleasant task! Oh sweet and gratesul command! Away ye crowd of creatures, I
must keep my heart for my God: Away ye gaudy suitors, away ye glittering toys,
there is no room for you: My whole soul, if its capacity were ten thousand
times larger than it is, were too scant to entertain the supreme good, to let
in infinite goodhess and fullness. Oh charge it upon your selves with the
greatest vehemence! love the Lord O my soul, keep thy self in the love of God;
let the love of God constrain you, and keep your selves under the most powerful
constraints of it. In a word, live upon God as upon uncreated life it self;
drink at the fountain, seed upon infinite fullness; depend upon Almighty Power,
refer your selves to unsearchable wisdom, and unbounded love; see nothing but
God in the creature, taste nothing but God in the world, delight your selves in
him; long for communion with him, and communications from him, to receive of
his fullness grace for grace. Then do we live most like Angels, when we live
most purely in God, and find all the powers of our souls spending themselves
upon him, and our selves, our life, and all the comforts of it flowing from
him, and again swallowed up in him. But because we are yet in the body, I shall
explain it in these following particulars.

1. Converse with God in all your Selfexcellencies. I bade you before not
converse with these; now, I say, converse with God in these. Thus do the
Angels, they know nothing that they have of their own, they enjoy nothing
distinct from God: They are excellent creaturs, excellent in knowledge, power,
holiness, etc. yet they enjoy all their excellencies in God, and ascribe them
all to him, Rev. 7. 12. And so let us labor to do.

1. View your selves, not in your own particular Beings, but in the Essence of
God; look upon your selves as being and subsisting in the midst of an Infinite
Essence, in which the whole Creation is, as it were, wrapped up, and does subsist.

2. And what ever excellency you find in your souls or bodies, look not upon it
as your own; maintain not a Meum and Tuum, a distinction of interests be^ween
God and your selves; but look upon all as Gods, and enjoy it in him.

3. When you find your selves tempted to cast a fond and unchaste look upon the
beauty, strength, activity, or temper of your own bodies, upon the ingenuity,
wisdom, constancy, courage, composedness of your own souls; take heed of
settling into a selfish admiration of any of them, but enjoy them in God, and
say, This, O my body, this, O my soul, is no other than the portraicture of the
Blessed God; these created excellencies are broken beams of the infinite,
unspotted, uncreated perfections! Jer. 9. 23, 24. Having once attained to this,
we shall no longer covet to be admired, desire to be commended, fret at being
undervalued; I mean not in a selfish manner, but rather break out in a
spiritual passion with the psalmist, Oh that men would praise the Lord for his
goodness, and for his wonderful works in the children of men! Psalm. 107. 8.

3. Nay, let me add, when you find your selves ready to put your own stamp upon
Gods best coin; to look upon supernatural gifts and graces with a sinful,
selfish admiration, remember that you have them only in Christ Jesus, and enjoy
them in your head; labor to enjoy grace it self only in Christ; as the
Apostle, Gal. 2. 20. I, yet not I but Christ in me: I labored, yet not I, but
the grace of God, 1 Cor. 15. 10. So ought we to glory; I believe, I love, I am
patient, penitent, humble; yet not I, but the grace of God that is with me,
Christ Jesus that dwells in me. And indeed a godly man who thus lives at the
very height of his own Being, yea and above it too, knows best how to reverence
himself, yea and to love himself too, and yet without any selflove: For he
loves himself in God, and his own endowments as divine ornaments.

2. Converse with God, and live upon him in the excellencies of all other
creatures, and in all your creature-enjoyments. We cannot live without
creatures, as the Angels do indeed; but let us come as near them as we can,
which is by living above creatures: place your happiness in God, and your
hearts upon him; labor to find God all things to you, and in you, and to be
filled with his fullness; labor to get your understandings filled with the
knowledge of God, your wills filled with his divine will, your hearts filled
with his infinite goodness and sweetness, your memories filled with the
remembrance of his name, your whole souls filled with his holy and pure Image,
filled with the fruits of his holy Spirit: Nay, let these very bodies be filled
not only with his good creatures; but more especially with his good will in the
creatures. It is said indeed of the sensual Epicures of the world, that their
bellyes are filled with Gods hid treasure, i. e. with rare and precious
delicacies: But how much better does God fill the bellyes of his Saints with
his hid treasures, when he feeds them with his divine favor, and dippeth his
hand with them in the dish? This is meat within meat, which the Saints eat of,
which other men, though they feed at the same Table, know not of. The glorified
Saints shall be satisfied wholly and perfectly with the Divine Image, shining
gloriously on them, and in them; to which purpose that of the Psalmist may be
accommodated, Psalm. 17. ult. When I awake, etc. Well, we cannot be so satisfied
in this life, it seems; however, though we cannot be so satisfied with it; yet
let us not be satisfied without it, nor satisfied with any thing besides it:
Resolve, holy soul, well, if I must not be fully satisfied with the Image of my
heavenly Father till I awake, I will lie down and fall asleep hungry as I am
then; for I will not fill my mouth with chaff, nor my soul with the husks that
the Swine do eat. But, in the mean time, get what you can of God out of
creature-enjoyments.

1. Enjoy all things for God: And that these two ways.

1. Use all for him: Those riches, honors, interests, friends, which are
cloggs upon the heels of others, let them be as heels to you to carry you
Heavenward; let your souls be winged with those very enjoyments, wherewith the
wings of others are pinioned; and that which is fuel to their worldly lusts,
let it be as fuel to feed and nourish your spiritual love. To use what we have
for God, is the only way of not abusing it: This is one way of enjoying all for
God, to use all for him; and yet there is something higher in that phrase of
enjoying all for God, than this, viz.

2. Value no creature-comfort any further than as it leads to God: And this in
a double sense too. First, Value things to be good only by this, by their
leading you unto God. Perfectum in suo genere ^st mensura reliquorum: Now God
being the Supreme and Infinite Good, any thing is so far good, as it leads to
the enjoyment of him: Now the enjoyment of God is only in being like to him;
Holiness is his Image: So then, every thing is good that tends to
sanctification, and to make men partakers of a Divine Nature. We are usually
mistaken in the true notion of good and evil, of mercies and judgments;
judging according to the taste, as foolish Patients do; but Gods thoughts are
not as our thoughts. Measure all things by the proportion they bear, and the
tendency they have to the Supreme Good; and call not any thing evil that brings
nearer to him, nor any thing good that draws off from him. Secondly, When you
have found a thing that is really good, tending and leading to the chief good,
and to the possession of him; labor to enjoy it, and rejoice in it only under
this notion, as such; when you love it, let it be with a pure spiritual love;
and so order your delight in it, that it may be said, you do rather rejoice in
the end of it, than in the enjoyment of it.

2. Another way of living upon God in the creature, is, To enjoy all things as
partaking of him. Every good and perfect gift is from above. Every beam of
created light flows out of the Father of light, James 1. 17. When the blessed
and glorious God framed this stately fabric of the visible world, because
there was nothing better in the world than himself, he was pleased to copy out
himself in it, and to spread his own infinite perfections over it, and through
it, Romans 1. 20. so that every particular good is a blossom of the first
goodness; every created excellency is a dark draught of God, and a broken beam
of this infinite Sun of Righteousness. Created life, beauty, wisdom, goodness,
sweetness, are nothing else but effluxes, or rather ebullitions out of the
self-sufficient fountain, scant communications made of himself, from untreated
life, essential wisdom, univers^l goodness: And under this notion we ought only
to enjoy them, and delight in them: And if we do so, we do not so much enjoy
them, as God in them. Oh labor to do so! lo^k upon the perfections which you
find here below, not so much as the perfections of this or that particular
Being, but as they are so many drops risen out of the fountain of all
perfections, in whom they all meet, and are concentred. It it well expressed by
one, In a particular Being, love the universal goodness; let the whole world be
as the Garden of God to you, where every creature is a flower, from which you
may suck something of the divine sweetness. Alas, at what a low and sensual
rate do we live, when we rejoice in creatures, either as they are excellent, or
as they are ours; whereas indeed neither of these is true: For they are not
excellent, but God is excellent in them: And how can we call any thing our own,
when God made both us and all things for himself? On how injurious is it to the
blessed God, when we rob him of his own perfections that he has imprinted upon
the creature, by loving it, and delighting in it not as in him, but as
something distinct from him! Nay, we are then injurious to our selves, as we
shall see by and by. Labor to enjoy, and to converse with God in the
creatures. O how precious are the thoughts of thee unto me, O God! cried David
when he had been meditating of the creatures excellencies, Psalm. 139. 17.
Labor to abstract your minds from terrene things even in the enjoyment of
them, and call upon your selves to love, and live, and feed upon God in them;
live not upon the dark side of your mercies, but upon the representations of
God in them. Is there any thing good? Oh this is a taste of infinite Goodness!
Is there any thing sweet? Oh how sweet is the God that made it so! Is there any
thing lovely? it is a picture of him whose name is Love. Is any thing firm,
stable, lasting? it is a shadow of that glorious essence, with whom there is no
shadow of change. Have you any thing strong? it arises out of that God with
whom is everlasting strength. Does any creature give rest, ease, refreshment?
it springs out of the All satisfying fullness of God. In a word, labor to climb
up by every created excellency, as by so many beams to the Father of lights:
let all the world be to you as Gods Temple, and be ready to say of every place,
as Jacob* How dreadful is this place; surely this is no other than the house of
God! that God who runs through all created Beings, and from himselves derives
several prints of beauty and excellency all the world over: But especially take
heed of your own created-comforts, that they do not insensibly lead a way your
hearts, and ensnare you into a sinful, particular, distinct love of them; which
is a sin soon committed, hardly discerned, and most hardly reformed. If any be
freed from these inordinate affections, sure they are but few, and those few
have come dearly by it; as he said in another case; with a great sum they have
obtained this freedom; they have paid for it. not with the foreskins of the
Philistines, but with the lives of what they so loved; there being no way to
cure this evil distemper, but cutting off the member infected with it, the part
that it fed upon. As a branch of this head, let me add, labor to live upon God
in the excellencies of other men* value them and all their accomplishments only
in God, as he that did diligere Deum habitantem in Augustino: Admire God, and
enjoy God in them: Where ever you see wisdom, goodness, ingenuity, holiness,
justice, or any other accomplishment: say, Here and there is God. And this is
the honest way of making our selves Masters of whatever is another man's, and
enjoying it, as truly as he himself does; yea, as truly as if it were our own:
when we behold all these beams, as coming from the same fountain of lights, and
do love them all in him with an universal love. This is the rare Art of having
nothing, yet possessing all things, of being rich, though one have nothing: and
of being wise, though one know nothing.

3. The last way of living upon God in the creature, is, To taste and feed upon
the love of God in them; not only his common bounty, but his special love in
Christ. The good will of God gives a sweet relish to every morsel, as I hinted
before. Even in the midst of all your delightful, pleasant, sweet enjoyments,
let your souls be more affected with this, than with them; let this be as the
Manna lying upon the top of all your outward comforts, which your spirits may
gather up, and feed upon. But this I touched upon before; therefore I shall add
no more concerning it. Thus I have showed you how you may imitate the life of
Angels in living upon God, even whilst you live in the body. To this I may add
another particular or two.

3. Converse with God, and live upon him in all his Ordinances: Let communion
with God be your drift in every duty, and the very life, and soul, and
sweetness of every ordinance. You never read of a soul more thirsty after
ordinances, than David, as might appear abundantly: yet if you look well into
the expressions, you will find that it was not so much after them, as after God
in them; not after the dead letter, but after the living God, Psa. 4. 2. 2. My
soul thirsts for God, for the living God; and Psalm. 84. 2. My heart and my
flesh cries out for the living God. Let the Word preached or read be as a voice
from Heaven talking you; let your conserence be a comment upon that Word; let
meditation be as a kind of bringing down God into your souls; and prayer as a
raising up of your souls into God; nothing but faith and love put into phrases.
And so of all the rest.

4. Converse with God in all his Providence; prosperity, adversity, plenty,
penury, health, sickness, peace and perplexity. This is a large Theme: But as
to prosperity, I have speken something a ready, under that head of conversing
with God in creature enjoyments: As for adversity, I have said much more in a
large discourse, to describe and commend the Art of conversing with God in
affictions: Briefly at this time, converse not with losses, wants, afflictions,
but with God in them; and that not only with the justice, righteousness,
severity and sovereignty of God in them, but with the goodness and mercy of God
in them: They are dark Providence, we had not need to dwell all together on
the dark side of them. If all the ways of the Lord toward his people be mercy
and truth, Psa. 25. 10 then his roughest and most uncouth ways are so 100: If
God be wholly love, 1 John 4. 8. then his very corrections proceed not from
hatred: If it be his name to be good, and to do good, Psalm. 119. 68. where have
we learnt then to call his afflicting Providence Evils, and to divide evil,
which is but one, even as God is one, into culpae and paenae, sin and
affliction? surely we speak as men: And if God call them so, he speaks after
the manner of men, as he often does. If the governing will of God be pure,
persect, and infinitely good and righteous, ought we not to converse with it in
a free and cheerful manner; yea and to love it too? In a word, pore not upon
creature-changes, nor the uncertain wheels of motion that are turning up and
down, we know not how, nor how often; but fix your souls upon that All-seeing
eye, that unbounded understanding, that unsearchable and infinite goodness that
derives it self through the whole universe, and sits in all the wheels of
motion, governing all the strange motions of the creatures in a wonderful and
powerful manner, and carrying them all in their several Orbs to one last and
blessed end.

Thus imitate the Angelical life, even whilst you are in the body; converse
with God in self-excellencies, in creature-excellences, Ordinances,
Providence: And yet labor to be more like them still, to abstract your mind
from all these, and all material and sensible things, and to converse with God
without the help of any creature, I mean in the spirit, and by a secret feeling
of his Almighty Goodness, and the energy of grace, and the communications of a
divine life, in your souls. In a word, if you would taste of Heaven whilst you
are upon Earth, labor above all things for a true conjunction of your hearts
with God, in a secret feeling of his goodness, and a reciprocation of love to
him; and to find the holy and blessed God exercising his grace and power upon
all the faculties of your souls, and rendering them like unto himself; and all
these powers of the soul mutually spending themselves upon him freely and
entirely, as upon the chiefest good, which is their proper and full object.
Seeing the Saints in glory shall be like unto the Angels of God in their way of
living in and upon God alone, receive, I pray, this Exhortation, which I have
so largely prosecuted, and labor to begin that life as far as you can, upon
Earth. Is there not reason for such an Inference? Does it not now flow
naturally from the Doctrine? If you think it do not, I will add two or three
particulars to strengthen this Inference; or at least to clear it.

1. It is highly reasonable that we begin to be that which we expect to be for
ever, to learn that way of living in which we hope to live to all eternity: So
that I infer upon as strong ground as the Apostle, 1 John 3. 3. He that has
this hope purifieth himself, etc.

2. If this be the life of Angels, then it is the highest and noblest life that
any created Being is capable of. As by the bread of Angels, and the tongue of
Angels, the most excellent food, and the most excellent language, is understood
in Scripture; so must we understand this life of Angels. Now it is very
suitable to the reasonable soul, that immortal, noble Being, to aim at the
highest and noblest life: See Mat. 16. 26. What shall a man give in exchange
for his soul?

3. This shall not only be our life in Heaven, but it self is something of
Heaven, a beginning of Heaven. This life is not a thing really distinct from
life eternal, Joh. 17. 3. this is life eternal, etc. 1 John 5. 13. Ye have
eternal life. Therefore we read of eternal life abiding in men, and not abiding
in them, 1 John 3 15. So also Joh. 6. 54. Whosoever eats my flesh, has eternal
life. A holy soul thus deified, thus living in and upon God, is as truly
glorified upon Earth in some degree, as the world is enlightened by the morning
Sun; which is as truly, though not so glorionsly, as by the Sun in its g^eatest
height. Oh low and ignoble spirits, that can be satisfied with a happiness
which shall only be in the world to come! Certainly it true and proper speech
to say that a Participation of God is an Anticipatien of Heaven; and to be like
unto him, is to be with him. You see what reason I have to make such an
Inference, and to form it into such an earnest Exhortation: Oh therefore I
beseech you before God and his holy Angels, to endeavor to be like him, and
live like them! Object. Say not, How can men on Earth live like Angels! Ans. 1.
But fall on and imitate them, though it be -- haud passibus aequis: labor to
be (...) if you cannot be altogether (...). 2. We are bidden to live the life
of God, Mat. 5. ult. Be perf^ct, etc. So 1 Pet. 1. 15. Be ye holy, etc. If I
speak high, how high speak these Texts? Obj. Say not, But how can this animal
life permit this! Ans. 1. For 1. Thus men have lived in the body. Thus lived
Enoch, Genesis 5. 22. Thus lived Paul, Phil. 1. 21. Thus lived David that man
after Gods own heart (the greatest and most divine character that can be given
of a mortal man) Psalm 73. 25. there is none upon Earth that I desire besides
thee 2. Cannot we live in the body, except we live to the body? You see Saints
upon Earth live above other men upon Earth, and yet a little more pains, take
the other flight, and you may live above your selves too, higher than you do: I
will only add a Motive or two to this duty of living upon God.

1. The last enemy to be overcome, is creature-love: This is the last enemy
that keeps the field, by which alone the greatest sort of men do perish
everlastingly; beat down this, and you win the day, and shall wear the Crown:
nay the very conquest of it is a Crown, as I said before.

2. To live upon God in the creature, is to enjoy the creature in the best
sense. You will lose nothing of the creature by this means, but shall enjoy it
more fully than ever you did. For the creature is ten thousand times sweeter in
God, than it is in it self. Yea in a word, this is the way to enjoy all the
world, and to enjoy the accomplishments of all men, and all things as much as
if they were your own.

3. is the way never to lose any thing. He that lives upon God, spends upon a
stock that cannot be wasted, drinks at a fountain that cannot be exhausted. So
much as we enjoy of God in the creature, we do not lose with it: and that which
we do not so enjoy, we deserve to lose. This then is the secure and honorable
life; in comparison of which the life of a Prince is but a wallowing in the
mire. Lord give us evermore this bread, and hearts to feed upon it! Amen.

FINIS.
Dei and Animae Consortium: SIVE Periphrasis in posterius (...)
1 JOHN 4. 16. -- (...).
O Mnia mi Deus est; idem Deus est meus omnis:
Ipse Deo totus; totus and ipse Dei.
Omnia mihi Deus est.
In Deo cujusque boni creati
Singulae vires penitissime insunt
In Deo solaminaque implicantur
O mnia vitae.
Omnis Deus est meus.
Omne quod feoit mihi dat benignus;
Omne quod prae se quia nil pependi,
Insuper menti dedit appetenti
Omne quod ipse est.
Ipse in Deo totus.
In Deo versor medio, que spiro,
In Deo grandescere concupisco,
Luceo totus radiis paterna
Luce receptis.
Ipse totus Dei.
Non m^^, non alterius creati
Sum, (Deus) sed quantus ego, tuus sum:
Vita quos a te radios recepi,
Oro, refl^ctat!
Cunctate subter (Deus alme) quae sunt,
Judico mente inferiora nostra:
Absit ut rebus studeat caducis
Men's generosa!
Fac teipsum, mi Deus, ipsiorem
Huic meae menti penitus seipsa;
Fac meipsum, mi Deus, uniorem,
Quam mihi, tecum!
GOD and the SOUL: OR A Periphrase upon
1 JOHN 4. 16. -- dwells in God, and God in him.
MY God is All things unto me;
All God is also mine:
I am, O Lord, wholly in thee;
And also wholly thine.
God is All things unto me.
The powers of each created good
In God are all contained;
In him my Comforts all do bud,
Flourish, and are maintained.
All God is mine:
He gave me all that he had made,
All which did not suffice
My larger Soul; therefore I prayed,
He gave himself likewise.
I am wholly in God.
In The midst of God I live and breath,
In him I Am only bright,
The rays with which I shine beneath,
Are borrowed from his light.
I am wholly God's.
O Lord I Am not at all mine own,
Nor for another free:
Let life be a reflection
Of beams received from thee!
All things below thee (Lord) I judge
To be below my Soul;
Oh let my nobler mind even grudge,
It self in dust to roll!
Be more my self, O God, to me
Than I my self have been;
Make me, O God, more one with thee,
than with my self! Amen.
FINIS.

