AN ESSAY ON THE Certainty and Causes OF THE Earth's Motion On its Axis, etc.

LONDON: Printed for Jacob Tonson, at the Iudge's-Head in Fleetstreet.
MDCXCVIII.

An Essay on the Certainty and Causes of the Earth's Motion on its Axis, etc.
IN an Essay so new and difficult, it may become me to begin with some Apology
to Men of Learning in Mathematical Science; wherein I profess to have never
aimed higher than to be competently furnished for Business and Practice in an
Active life. Wherefore to those Gentlemen, (for whose merits no man has a
greater value) I make this short excuse for treating my Subject in so plain and
familiar a manner: Namely, That being conscious of my insufficiency, by any
show of Learning to add to their Stature; it sorts better with my Talents and
choice to speak my mind intelligibly to common Capacities, whereby increasing
the number of my Judges, the Truth, Probabillity or Error of my Conceptions
will be better sifted and discerned; for it should be no mortification to
consider with the Wise Man, that Chance has a great hand in every thing we do
or think; which by a kind of Revelation often leads us to the retreats of Truth
through unaccountable Labyrinths and long obscurity of Causes. On which
reflection if I (who am best acquainted with my self) ascribe nothing to my own
forces of Learning, or penetration in my attempt to untie so hard a knot, may
thereby have a better claim to the candor of my Readers, and they shall but
barely allow me the privilege of having stumbled on a new and profitable
Notion, capable of Cultivation by the Learned, and of yiedling matter of
Speculation to others; I shall reap all the pleasure I look for, and as much
honor as comes to my share.

Thus bespeaking the candor of my Readers, I proceed; by first imparting a few
Articles of my Physical Creed, viz. So far as I conceive it may concern my
Subject; which till I shall be better informed, bear great sway with me, as
being gathered from the best Collections (and my Meditations thereupon) that I
have been able to make from Experiments and Observations of Matters of Fact.
Which Articles being first known, as conceiving them a necessary Introduction
toward clearing the ground whereon I am to build; I shall then proceed to my
Hypothesis for solving the Earth's Motion on its Axis etc. by Explaining the
Causes by which I conceive it may fairly and by Mechanical Laws be proved. And
lastly (in a discourse by it self) I shall come to the Proofs and thereby show
by what Clue of Deductions from natural Causes I came to be Established in the
persuasion I profess to be of touching this hard Question; Wherein I have the
rather engaged from my Observation of Late of so many unprofitable attempts in
new Theories on Philosophical Subjects; where with Ostentation of Erudition and
Elocution, Authors obtrude strange Opinions, dangerous in their consequence to
our Common Faith, and of no manner of Instruction to human Life; Neglecting the
while (as perhaps thinking it beneath them) to engage in Studies of Utility;
whereby to improve our Knowledge in Nature, which would enable us to see better
before us in our way through this darksom Vale of Mortality wherein we Sojourn;
conduct us with more pleasure and Assurance in our Passage, and bring us with
more safety to our Port, where all Speculation about doubtful Subjects will be
resolved into Certainty.

First, I believe that we neither have, nor can attain any clear Knowledge of
the Effects of Matter and Motion, otherwise than as we become enlightened by
their Operations on our Senses, which by means of the impressions made on them,
make report thereof to the Mind, which gives Sentence true or false therein.

I Hold also that the remoter the Situation of any cause is, the lighter or
weaker the action and impressions thereof must needs be on our Organs of
Sensation; and consequently the reports made by them to the Understanding are
proportionably (as I may say) doubtful and inarticulate, and the Judgment
thereupon to be made necessarily more confused and uncertain: 'till at length
by a Scale (as it were) of Cessation, the force of such cause gradually
Expiring; all Reasoning thereupon must needs there be at an End too.

I say, that this is my belief, built on a rigid Examination of my own Heart,
touching the objects of natural Knowledge and our Speculations about them; from
whence I have Determined with my self, that while I can by this rule conceive
(without much difficulty) how a period of any Action whatsoever may be
collected from such a sensible Gradation of stronger and weaker Power in the
Agent, (which our Senses enable us to distinguish) I may I think safely and
Mechanically thence infer, that such Power so working must have some certain
Boundaries which it cannot Exceed; and beyond which it is Idle and of no
Effect. Wherefore I hence conclude, that all rational Reflection must needs
there Expire, where the Powers by which those Images are stamped which furnish
the matter of our Argument determine; and that all Speculation, Refining and
Excogitation about any thing whatsoever beyond or without this Sphere of
Action, (which I shall have occasion further to Explain) is Vain and Fabulous.
This Reflection, though it may humble us by Correcting the Enthusiasm of human
Imagination, which is apt licentiously to soar and wander without Light or
Guide; yet the fruit may be profitable; for by thus containing our Inquiries
within that Circle which holds all things that are adequate to, and may yield
proper matter for our Contemplation; We shall have leisure to turn our Minds
with greater attention and effect on Subjects of Public Utility, which may at
once avail us in the Conduct of our Life, and do good in our Generation; than
which no study is more Praiseworthy, nor can we by any means better fulfill
the Ends of our Being.

Pursuant to this reflection, Let us take into our View, and thence frame an
Argument for our Meditation, some of the most remarkable Objects of the
Creation, or of this Visible Material World: Namely, such as seem to us to
share the greatest Power of Action on this our Globe. Among which, after
sorting the whole Species of Things, and as I may say, ransacking Nature over
and over, I believe I may challenge the most Skeptical man Living, to specify
or point us out to any one single Instance of a Visible Being that may claim
any Degree of Comparison with the Sun; Whether we consider it in its Beauty and
Glory, (surpasing every thing we see) or in its Situation in the Center of the
Planetary World, a Position the most proper to dispense its ruling Power and
Influence; Or in its plain and sensible Effects, as being the Visible cause of
Day and Night, Winter and Summer; of Animation, Vegetation etc. All which are
the indisputed Product of that Planet's Motion and Virtue.

From these so many shining Evidences (handed to us by our Senses) of the Sun's
force and predominancy, we are compelled or taught as by Instinct, to ascribe a
yet greater Extent of Power to its Operations, and to Collect and infer from
what we see and feel (and thereby know) that the Sun has a greater Right than
any visible Being, to be the Cause also productive of many of those other
Appearences, which being eminent Subjects of our Observation are so much the
greater Objects of our wonder, by how much they are effected more in the Dark;
namely, by means more remote, as acting on a Medium not so familiar to our
Senses; whereby the cause lies more hid and out of the reach of our Knowledge
-- Among these Phoenomena, that of the Earth's Motion on its Axis is one, which
to prove and give some Aim at the Certainty and Cause thereof, in regard it may
be of public benefit in the Consequence, I have therefore chosen it for the
Subject of this Essay.

I hold then (as being taught and confirmed by Observation, and the Proofs I
shall produce) that the Sun is both the Cause and Center of Motion and gravity
of the Earth and the rest of the Planets; whose Motions and Periods though We may
calculate and arrive at a degree of Certainty therein, yet perhaps while we
continue in the dark, touching the reason of such motion, we shall remain to
seek in our Conclusions, about many useful points of Knowledge, and by
searching and penetrating with but never so little success into the Cloud that
seems to cover the cause; such sparks may by chance be struck out, as may
suffice at least to light others quicker sighted (whose Heads are better turned
for such Subjects) to a nearer View of Truth therein.

I further hold, That by the Sun's Action and influence on the universal Fluid,
wherein that luminary presides; all the Heavenly Bodies, within the solar
System, (whose motion I take to be owing to his Virtue) are bound also to that
determined and unerring distance from him their Common Center, by such Laws of
Mechanism, as in the proofs to be produced will not I hope appear frivolous,
borrowed, or any way inconsistent with the Principles I have laid down, wherein
I shall endeavor to show that the Planets respective Rank and Positions also
in Heaven are by Mechanic Laws assigned them, and Explain not only why, and
how they move, but in what manner also the Poles of their Verticity are
obtained; and how it comes to pass that their Motions are so Regulated both on
their Axes and in their Respective Orbits, so as they cannot be thought to Err
and Wander in the Ocean of Fluid wherein they Float; fareing like a Ship
becalmed, of whose Fluctuation no Pilot can keep any Account. In which
Argument, I have some Hope, that a glimmering at least of Light may Shine forth
to show us how the Harmony of the Heavenly Motions is Established and Preserved.

I Believe also, (and Hope by intelligible means to show) that my granting the
Sun to be the Universal cause and Center of Motion and Gravity in the Planets,
(among which this our own Globe is comprised) whereby their Verticity on their
Axes and Revolutions in their Orbits are made and Governed; that this Original
Virtue of the Sun acting immediately on those Bodies, namely, the Planets, does
not gainsay or oppugn, but infer and prove the like Effects of Motion and
Gravity belonging to and producible by themselves also, as proceeding from the
same Cause in Nature by which those first greater Bodies are moved. By means of
which Motions, I conceive, that New and Bylaws of Gravity (as I may say) are
obtained and Established, to which all Matter and every Being which belongs to,
Exists, or resides within the Circle of their Jurisdiction, viz. The reach of
their Action respectively becomes liable. Which for a present Interpretation of
my meaning, I thus Exemplify, viz. The Globe of this Earth, Gravitates,
toward, or has a tendency to the Sun: Iron or a Stone Gravitate; the one
toward the Magnet, rather than toward the Earth; the other toward the Earth,
more than toward the Magnet; The like may be said also of the Moon, with
respect to our Globe, and of the other Secondaries with regard to the Planets
to which they belong; so that this Diversity of Gravitation here produced to
give an Image of my meaning, though it grows from one and the same cause, if we
respect the Original impression; yet springing from Collateral Agents, (Acting
as I may say by Subaltern Powers) becomes thus Diversified, and thence those
Bylaws of Gravity (as I term them) are begotten, as an Effect of nearer and
more Prevalent Impressions on the Fluid that Surrounds them Respectively;
caused by their Verticity on their Poles; Which Verticity acts in such manner
on the Fluid that Surrounds them, as absolves, (if I may use that form of
Speech) those lesser Bodies that are Creatures; Beings or Inhabitants of the
Planets themselves, from any Obedience to those General Laws of Gravity and
Motion, to which the Primary Bodies their Principals are subject; which I shall
elsewhere further Explain. And thus in a word I am taught to believe, That
Gravity is of manifold Production, and that there is a Devolution, Descent or
Lineage thereof from the Sun, the First cause which Acts immediately on the
Greatest and most Dignified Bodies, by a chain of Relation and Dependancy, down
to the nearest and least particle of Matter and product of Motion Existing in
this World of Matter and Motion.

Lastly, From my conjecture that the Sun has no Dominion beyond those Circles,
whereof he is the Center and cause of Motion, which we call the Planetary
Heaven wherein he presides: From this belief, I say, touching the Extent and
Boundaries of that Planets Action and Influence, (which I conceive prescribes
Limits to all sound Reasoning and Reflection about his Effects) I am taught in
like manner to Believe, that this Race of Thought, or course of Philosophizing
here with us, must needs, as it is bounded in its extent, have a Beginning too
from some certain Point or place or other; Wherefore I conceive, that the
Center of this Circle which is the Scene of Action, and contains all those
Operations which by Mediation of our Senses is revealed, more or less to the
Mind; (and which I observe to be the Sun), must necessarily assign also a
Beginning to our Meditations about them; further than which, or beyond that
Center, our chain of Thought has no Linck, but is there fastn'd and locked up
in Darkness; for as it is Impossible to conceive the Harmony of a Lute by all
that my Sight can impart to me; Which though it may plainly tell me at a
Distance, that the Fingers of the Artist move with great quickness and variety,
yet the proper Organs of Sensation not being within the reach of the Sound; all
that Action which I behold, may for ought I know, be no other than Grimace, and
playing the Fool -- So, Though we can see the fixed Stars and perhaps other
Objects, without or beyond the bounds of the Suns Action or Dominion, yet being
our selves Creatures whose Organs are Framed and Tuned to his Operations, to
whose unfluence (by the Decree of the Almighty,) we manifestly owe our Life and
Being; I say, that while we inhabit this mortal Tabernacle of Flesh and Blood,
and have no Motion, Animation or Sensation; that we cannot by fair Reasoning
derive from the Force and Impressions of this Planets Virtue, by what Clue of
Reason or Deduction, (when our Reason it self has neither Tools, nor Materials,
whereby to build any Scheme or Notion about natural Knowledge, that is not
derived from this Fountain) can we be thought to have any Radical reflection or
sound imagination beyond this Being; or in a word by what Method of thinking
can we go about (Mechanically speaking) to inquire into the cause of that Power
to whose Action alone we owe the means of thinking at all.

After this first Necessary Account of some Notions and Opinions about general
Causes that have obtained with me, as I conceive they may somewhere or other
relate to my Subject; I come now to my Argument; namely, a Mechanical Solution
of the Earths Motion on its Axis; by Explaining the causes by which I conceive
that Motion is produced.

First, By granting the Sun to be the Center of gravity of the Earth, and the
rest of the Planets; I am from thence Taught, to conclude that the Tendency or
Gravitation of this Globe toward that Center, ought to yield the like Effects
and produce the same Appearances (Mechanicaly discoursing,) that we find to be
brought to pass by any solid Body here with us by means of our Center of
Gravity: As namely, If any solid matter be framed or cast into a Sphaerical
form, whereby it Recieves perhaps a Resemblance of the Earths Globe; This
Sphere being fitted with Poles, nicely placed and exactly poised, shall by the
least Addition of Weight duly applied, or the Application of any proper degree
of Force, presently acquire a Motion on its Axis: viz. A Verticity or turning
on its Poles.

Secondly, Among the many great Effects I have observed to be produced by the
Suns Virtue on this our Globe, I have remarked that the Power of that Planets
Influence is hardly any where, or on any thing more Conspicuous than by his
Action on Fluids, on which Bodies it works so suddenly, so apparently, and with
such force, that by my frequent Meditation thereupon, I came at Length to think
it might be no unprofitable attempt, to inquire after some yet remoter than the
Common and visible Effects of its Power, acting on that matter by that Medium:
Having I thought some Hints from the Ordinary and Familiar Lights his daily
Operations afforded, that the Sun might also be the cause of manifold other
great Productions, which seem hitherto to want a clear Solution; among which,
this of the Earth's Motion on its Axis I conceived might possibly be one. I
observed, that though there might be many other causes of the Production and
Variation of Winds; yet that the Sun was manifestly the cause of all those we
call Periodical Winds, as the Trade-Winds, Munsons, etc. as also of the Sea and
Land Breezes, in warm Countries in the Summer time. That the Sun Visibly
wrought the like Effects in many parts of the Globe on the Watery Element, by
Currents in the Ocean; Spouts, etc. That what I had observed for many Years
together of the production and Force of the Levant-Winds, which will be calm in
the Morning, and by Noon, will often blow with such impetuosity as to become a
Storm; and so die away again, as the Sun withdraws; and become still and quiet
all Night, till his return to the Meridian again: For thus have I beheld the
Scene shift, and the Sun Act this part daily in those Countries about the
Summer solstice for a Month or six Weeks together. From which Observation,
(when I came to turn my Thoughts to this Subject, of the Earths Motion, and the
Causes thereof) I gathered such Materials as in the Issue of the question will
not I Trust be thought to have been Impertinently applied. But to hasten to the
most prevalent Reasons occurring to my Understanding, How the Sun might be the
cause of the Earth's Motion on its Axis? take them as follows, viz.

By my Observation and Calculation (as I have been able) of the Effects of the
Suns force in general, acting on different Subjects in diverse manners: I
conciev'd nevertheless that his power by Rarifaction was of all others the most
Remarkable, and Seemed to me not Obscurely to intimate that by that Action
alone, having so Spacious a Field as the Globe of Earth, Sea and Air, wherein
to display his Power, I could discern cause enough whereby to determine a good
deal toward the Solution of this notable Question.

And first, I considered, (and have no need at all to doubt it) that the
Hemisphere of this Globe, wheresoever the Sun chances to be in the Meridian;
(that is, where his Virtue is in greatest Force;) must needs be the most
rarifi'd part thereof, whither we considered it in the solid and Consistent
parts thereof, or in the Fluid that surrounds it; Which Fluid (namely, that
portion thereof that resides nearest the Earth, (which we call the Atmosphere)
being imbued with infinite Variety of combustible and inflamable particles
Steaming from the Earth; is as I may say the Storehouse of those Materials,
which by the Suns Action thereon produces all that Variety of Appearances which
we behold, and daily converse with on this our Globe; such as Heat and Cold,
Wind and Rain, Storms and Calms, Hail, Frost and Snow; Foggs, Vapors, Meteors,
Exhalations, Thunder and Lightning; etc. all which are Legible instances of
that Planets power working on matter furnished from this Globe; Whereof we can
have no doubt from our Knowledge of many Situations and Heights, that are above
all this Hurry and Variety of Action and Motion; as namely, some part of
Mount-Atlas; the Peak of Teneriffe, Mount Arrarat; a long Chain of Mountains in
America, called, the Andes etc. which places are known to enjoy a perpetual
Serenity; from whence Men can look down and Contemplate as in a Gallery the
whole Action and Shifting of those Scenes that by the Suns Predominancy is
produced on the Stage of the World below; from whence I gather, and make two
Remarkable Observations thereupon, viz. First, That the several Species of
things that furnish Subject matter for this Action, are for the most part of
the Earths product: Secondly, That the Effects reach not beyond a certain
Limited distance from its Surface. Which Observation of Fact may save us the
pains and words, of Philosophizing by the Laws of Gravity, about Limiting the
Action of the Surrounding Fluid, which by the Sun's rarifiing Virtue is put is
put into Motion. Wherefore having noted, that the Earth furnishes the Materials
for this Motion; and that the Action it self, is contained within Conceivable
bounds; it remains, That we determine how, and which way, this Fluid put into
Motion, may be thought to take its Flight. I say then, that the Fluid,
investing that Hemisphere wherein the Sun's Fire chances to be in its Greatest
Vigor, is directed in its course by Lines drawn or produced from the cause
that Acts thereon; Namely, the Sun, and this by the same Mechanic Laws, by
which any body is found to move, that is, impelled and driven out of its Place,
by another Body that has force enough to do it; namely, by right Angles from
the Plane of the cause that Acts: Wherefore remarking barely that a Line
Conceived to be at any time, drawn from the Body of the Sun, through the Axis
of the Earth any where betwixt the Tropicks, will not vary much from East and
West; this single note, may suffice to show, that the Course or Tendency of the
moving Matter or Fluid must be that way, namely by right Angles, or
thereabouts, from the Axis of the Globe, or (which better Expresses it) by
Circles parallel a little more or less to the Equator, and not toward the
Poles. Thus stating the Boundaries and Tendency of the Action or Course by
which the Fluid wings it is way, that Surrounds this Earth, I mean that Portion
thereof which we call the Atmosphere: I come Lastly to make a short necessary
note or two, touching the Effects of Rarifaction, and Condensation, ( viz.
According to common acceptance) where I observe that the same Body or Quantity
of Matter, when it is Rarifi'd becomes bigger, or is Extended in all its
Dimensions, and so comes to require more space, wherein to be contained than it
did before; and (on the contrary) when the same Body comes to be Condensed or
Compressed, it needs Consequently a less Space to contain it; by which means
any Body so altered, becomes Lighter, or Heavier, with Respect to the Fluid or
Medium, wherein it has its Residence. But this Alteration by Extension or
Contraction, can by no means come to pass but by being the cause of some
certain Motion; for whatsoever Thing requires a greater Space to contain it,
than it did the Instant before; must needs in the same Moment remove some other
thing to obtain such new space; and whatsoever Thing becomes on the Sudden
lessened or contracted, must occasion the Motion of something or other, at the
same time, to Replenish the Space it deserted, by such contraction or shrinking
into narrower bounds.

Having in some degree, cleared the way, and conducted the Reader by those
steps, and that train of Reflection, by which I became Established in my
Opinion touching the Certainty and Causes (as they seem to me to be) of the
Earth's Motion, on its Axis, etc. I come now to interpret that Motion as I
conceive it to be an Effect of those Causes.

First, Then I take for Granted, (and hope in due place to give probable Proof
thereof) that the Sun is the Center of the Earth's Gravity, toward which it
tends.

Secondly, I have observed that the Fluid which Invirons the Earth's Globe, by
the Concurrence of proper admixtures of Matter, furnished from thence, is
disposed for Motion, and by a Posture of Obedience to proper Causes, cannot but
be deemed to be Actually ever in a ready State of Mobillity.

Thirdly, I have noted, that Rarifaction and Condensation are causes of Motion,
and that the same quantity of Matter, rarifi'd or condensed becomes Lighter and
Heavier as an Effect of such Causes.

Fourthly, I note that every Action of Fire (be it more or less) breaks or
alters the Aequilibrium of the Neighboring Fluid, which we see verified every
Moment, by the Fire in our Chimneys, which is the cause of that noise and
whistling of the Wind through the Crannies and Key-holes of a close shut Room,
where a good Fire is Kept; the Air tending and rushing thitherwards, by
stronger or weaker impulses, ratably to the strength or weakness of the cause
Acting thereon.

Fifthly, I am in no great doubt but the Sun is the universal Fountain of Fire,
(by whose Transcendent Masculine Force I conceive, all the Seeds or Sparks of
that Element existing every where here below, is disseminated and propagated,
through out the World) which Planet I conceive, Acts in the fame manner on this
whole Globe, and the Fluid that surrounds it, as any part or particle of its
Fire, is found to do on any Fragment of the same matter. We see and know that a
very small parcel of his Beams united or contracted by a glass, will as
certainly burn, and therefore as certainly Act in proportion by Rarifaction, as
any Body of Fire of never so much Greater dimentions can be thought to do:
Whence we may I think safely conclude from the uniformity: We find in the
Operations of Nature; that the Sun (which is an immense Body of Fire, whose
Magnitude we know to be such as to Embrace with his Heat, and Inlighten with
his Beams more than Half the Earth's Globe at once) Acts in like manner and
Proportion on the universal Mass, as a Spark of his Fire shot through a Burning
Glass, does on a drop of Water, or any other visible Fluid; which we are sure
it will Exhale and cause to disappear in a Moment. I say, that since we are
certain, that there can be no very great disparity of Proportion betwixt such
drop of Water and the least spark of the Sun's Fire, Acting thereon, and that
of this Globe of the Earth, and Fluid compared with the Collected force of his
Universal Influence, on the whole Terrestrial Mass; We can hardly withstand the
Evidence of this Truth, namely, that the entire Hemisphere which is at once
embraced, illumined and warmed, by that Planets Virtue, cannot choose but be
Affected in the same Degree, and be Liable to all those Motions, and
Alterations which we behold and know to be the Effect of the like Action, on
the like Subject in lesser Proportions.

Sixthly, We may determine from a bare Guess by what we see and observe, That
there is an unspeakable Store, or Reserve, of combustible, and proper Matter,
contained on the Surface and in the Bowels of the Earth, prepared to obey the
Sun's Action and Impression thereon, and we shall not I hope be Thought to
Resolve too boldly, if we conclude, that as far as that Planets Force
penetrates and warms, so far he may be Computed to act by Exhalation, (or
Rarifaction) call it what you please on the Universal Mass of matter. So that
by this Mighty force employed on a Sufficient Proportion of Subject matter, we
may be taught to Expect proportionable Effects. Wherefore I believe it will be
hard to gainsay but that the enlightened Hemisphere or that Face of the Globe,
which is at any time the Scene of this Action, must unquestionably Suffer a
manifest dimunition of Matter, and consequently of weight, by the
Transpiration, Extension and Motion, of the Volatile parts, which ever Wing
their way from the Light, to the Dark side of the Globe; where by the same
Laws, by which they moved, they must also cease from Motion; and there Subside
and be at rest, till actuated anew, and put on the wing again by the return of
the cause; by which means, namely this Revolution of Action, we may conceive a
constant course of Diminution, and Restitution of Matter; or an alternate
Gravitation, and Alleviation thereof on the Earth's Globe, which by plain
Mechanic Laws, urges a manifest Succession of Change in the Aequilibrium
thereof; and that in a Double Proportion, viz. By borrowing from one Scale, to
lend to the other. Whereby the Preponderancy of the dark Hemisphere, or
Alteration of the Aequilibrium of the Globe, becomes I say so much the Greater:
And thus I conceive how by the Laws and Action of Gravity, we may discern with
some Evidence, a Proclivity in the Earth's Globe toward a Motion of Verticity,
or turning round; and that from a Cause, as Familiar and Intelligible, as a
Bird's ringing the Chimes, in a Cage.

Lastly, Having produced and assigned the Causes, how I imagine the Earth's
revolving Motion, may by Mechanic Laws be obtained; I come now to inquire
after the Poles of this Motion without which, we shall be at a loss, and want a
Sound Footing of Reason, whereon to Build, and Govern this Motion; which, while
we consider its Regular and stated Periods, it cannot be thought to be
fortuitous, but founded and stated on Adequate Causes.

The Earth's Globe being as I have noted, immersed in the Great Fluid or
Ether, wherein both that and the rest of the Planets, are Granted to move:
This Fluid according to its Nature, and Property, Claspes and Embraces it
universally; pressing or Gravitating on the Surface therefore equally every
where; (I say equally because I would not engage here in any Statical
questions) but Subject and Obedient still to certain Adventitious Causes, which
may alter, and Diversify such pressure or Gravitation. Let it be permitted me
then to conceive, that this Fluid being simply Considered, and in its own
Native purity; namely, clean from all whatsoever Admixtures; I say this
Elemental Ether, (if I may so call it,) Nakedly understood, viz. stripped of
all Foreign and Heterogenius Ingredients, (which by there Inflamable and
Explosive Virtue, may be conceived to Act thereon) is of it self, a Passive
Lifeless matter; destitute of any Intrinsic Force of Action, and is no other
in short than the Vehicle of those Powers or Ingredients that swim and reside
in it; which matter or Fluid becomes Lighter and Heavier, Slow, Swift, Rappid,
and at rest, just as it is Impregnated Inspirrited, or Deserted by those
Foreign Agents; or any Heterogenius Body casually Mixing or Floating therein;
to which I say the Fluid or Ether is nothing else but the mere Vehicle. This
remark being duly weighed, we need but recurr to the cause of that Variety of
Action and Motion, which we have Observed to Exist on the Earth's Surface,
which I observe to be the Sun, by whose force (Acting on proper Matter) all
that tumult of Action is raised and begotten; in proof whereof we need not go
further, than to note that the greatest Storms and Hurrican's are ever found
where that Planets power reigns with greatest force.

From a reflection on the Power, let us go to the Situation or Position of the
Agent, with respect to the Earth's Globe, which furnishes the Materials whereon
it works: And therein may be considered, that the greatest Vigor of the Sun's
Action is contained betwixt the Tropicks; his Beams ever darting somewhere or
other within or between those two Circles, (and no where else) at right Angles
on the Earth's surface; and from or without the Tropicks, ( viz. toward the
Poles) the Angles of insidence become oblique, and ever fall with greatest
obliquity at the Poles.

The use I would make of this observation is, That since we can determine
where, and on what part of the Earth's Globe, the Sun's Beams fall with least
Obliquity, we may resolve also that it is on that part, and within those
boundaries, that his Fire acts with greatest fervor. But this force of the
Sun's Virtue is found to be greatest betwixt the Tropicks; where by his Action
on the greater Circles of the Globe, the Effect becomes so much the surer, by
how much we observe a greater Wheel, or a longer Lever, to Act more forcibly
than a lesser; which as it fortifies the Reasons already offered for the
Earth's Verticity, by assigning such a position to the Cause as may render the
Effect so much the more Probable, so it leads us not obscurely to concieve, how
the Poles of this Motion also are begotton. For if there shall appear, any
Evidence from the Causes we have assigned, for the Fluids pressing or
Gravitating less on the Earth's Globe on the greater Circles, (namely betwixt
the Tropicks) which cannot* fairly be gainsaid; the Alleviation thereof, being
greatest where the Rarifaction and Motion is granted to be Greatest; It will
not then be hard to allow, that every degree of Remission of the Power, of the
Agent ( viz. the Sun,) must produce a proportionable Diminution of the Effect.
But I have shown (or lead the Reader to conceive,) how it comes to pass, that
the surrounding Fluid presses Lightest on the Surface of that Region of the
Globe, that shall be found remotest from the Poles, and therefore there will be
no difficulty to infer, That as the Angles of incidence of the Sun's Beams (by
whose Action that Alleviation of the Fluids pressure is begotten, which we have
endeavored to explain) grow more and more Oblique, the Effect becomes more and
more diminished. So that by a Scale, as I may say of Diminution, or by the
Gradual Obliquity of the Angles of incidence, which begins at the Tropicks, and
are ever most Oblique at the Poles; we may be taught to discern how the Fluid
(by this Remission of the Sun's Action thereon) comes to press harder or
Gravitate more on the Globe at the Poles than elsewhere; or rather infer, that
by this necessary Superior pressure, the Poles of the Earth's Verticity are
begotten. For in a word the Fluid (which I have over and above, Endeavored to
show) being heaviest or pressing Hardest, when in its native purity; must needs
abide there above all other parts of the Globe, most clean and unmixed from all
such Heterogenius matter; those two points of the Earth's Surface, being the
most absent from that active and Rarifying Force by which, by means of such
matter, it is put into Motion, as I have shown how. And I am in no doubt, but
all those combustible and Inflamable Ingredients, which in other Regions of the
Globe, are the cause (cooperating with the Sun) of all that Agitation we have
observed; remain here Lazy, and Lifeless on the Surface, and in the Bowels of
the Earth, and like a Snake in Winter benumbed, and bereft of all Power of
Motion, through the Absence of that inlivening Virtue to which it owes all its
Power of Motion and Action; by which means the Fluid or Ether, which invirons
the Globe; abides there in a perfect State of Tranquillity, and (unmolested by
any Foreign force) has leave to rest, press or gravitate by its own Laws, and
according to its native Tendency; which Liberty I say it does not enjoy on
other parts of the Globe, where the Sun's Action is more in Force.

Thus then, I concieve, and have as well as I can Explained how the Poles of
the Earth's Verticity are obtained; the Surrounding Fluid leaning or
Gravitating on the Surface thereof, by a stronger Pressure in those two points
of the Globe, than it can be thought to do in any other part whatsoever: Which
pressure like two Fulciments, props, holds and sustains it in that Regular
posture wherein we find it to move; or to give a plainer similitude of my
meaning, by the stronger resting of the Fluid, in and about these two Opposite
points; whereby cliping as I may say, and embracing the Globe by a Superior
pressure there, those Two points become by that means, the Centers of the
Earth's Revolving Motion, as intellibly as a polished Ball, or Sphere, being
held and pressed betwixt the Finger, and the Thumb on the two Centers by which
it was turned, is thereby disposed to a motion of Verticity, by means of any
competent Force in a proper manner applied to produce it.

When I Entered on this Discourse, I thought to have pursued my Argument
through all the Difficulties, that seemed to occur to me and had been fairly
hitherto suggested, by others to my Hypothesis as I have here simply Explained
it. But being informed that I am to Expect farther, and more material
Objections than I may be aware of, I have therefore Consented to Publish the
First naked Draught, of my Conjectures on this Subject in a single Essay, which
containing my Principles, and the Out-lines of my Design, the Reader being
thereby Furnished with Light into the Proportions and Consistency, at least of
my Meaning, will have more room and liesure, for his Reflection and to impart
his Doubts, which I shall recieve with Gratitude, and Consider with my utmost
care -- Truth is painted Naked, because in that Simplicity of Appearance, she
is best known, and the more we beg or borrow, or are driven for Supplies to Wit
or Art, to imbelish her, the more we seem to disguise Her, and bewray the
uncertainty of our Knowledge about her -- Her abode to (as in our Case) is
often in the Clouds, so that He who attempts to show her in the greatest
undress, may be thought to do most Right to her Charms, and whosoever shall
give the best Aim at the means of Resolving distant and doubtful Causes, by the
plainest and most Familiar Methods, such as Nature by the Laws of Mechanism
seems to Approve, may be deemed to be more in the way, and to make the
Approaches to Truth more Lightsom and intelligible, than by remote and
Metaphysical Speculations, wherein we know the greatest Wits have wandered, who
according to their different Modes of thinking, have compassed to solve
Appearances so many different ways; whereby we are taught Just so much Truth as
to be sure that their Systems may be all false, because we are most certain,
there can be but one True.

In a word, Whatever may be the Destiny of this Essay, the Author trusts to
have some title to Excuse, both from the Learned and others, for his attempt:
From the One for Propounding so much a nearer, and more likely way to the
unravelling this Skain, which has been left more intangl'd and perplexed by
Dispute, and the Diversity of Learned men's Opinions about it, which
infaelicity may perhaps have sprung from their Speculating so far after distant
and obscure Causes, that they have thereby missed and overlooked the True. To
these Gentlemen, if any thing in this Theory has been started new, or of Moment
enough to be considered, I may have given an occasion of meriting from the
World, by my laying this rude Foundation whereon by their better Abilities some
useful Structure of Knowledge may perhaps be raised. From the rest who are much
the Majority, I will not doubt of Acceptance while I do my best, to shorten and
Ascertain the way to Truth, by calling in our Senses more to our Aid, which
being the surest Succors, and clearest Conduits of Knowledge, our Researches
and Reasonings, on these dark Phenomenon, will thereby stand on a Surer Basis;
and to conclude with one single Instance here, of my Method in this pursuit; I
Note,

That to obtain a Proof of my seeming at least to have Reasoned right, about
this Problem of the Earth's Motion on its Axis, I framed a Machine, with all
the accuracy possible; wherein I imitated, according to my best Knowledge, the
Earth's Globe with its Atmosphaere, etc. Which being poised very nicely, and
tenderly sustained on its Poles to adapt it for Motion, and then fairly
substituting and applying the Causes, which I conceive, by the Laws of Gravity,
are productive of the Earth's diurnal Motion: I reaped the Contentment, to
behold the Effect of such causes working on the said Matter, to give credit in
every Article to what I had thereupon before imagined: The Machine so framed
and fitted, visibly Revolving on its Axis; Each Revolution finishing in about
the space of Three Hours. Which Experiment beheld by my Friends, who were not
presently aware of the Springs of such Motion, they were no less pleased than
surpised.

FINIS.

