WINE FOR Gospel Wantons: OR, CAUTIONS AGAINST Spiritual Drunkenness.

Being the brief Notes of a SERMON Preached at Cambridge in New England, upon a
Day of Public Fasti^^ and Prayer throughout the Colony, June 25. 1645. in
reference to the sad estate of the Lords People in ENGLAND.

By that Reverend Servant of the Lord, Mr. THOMAS SHEPARD deceased Sometimes
the Pastor of the Church of Christ there.

Jer. 7.12. But go you now to my place which was in Shiloh, whe^^ I set my Name
at the first, and see what I did to it for t^^ wickedness of my p^^^le Israel.

(...) Yet let no man strive nor reprove another: for (...) they that strive
with the Priest.

^^^^imatur. Charles Chauncy. John Sherman.

(...) in the Year 1668.

Wine for Gospel Wantons.
Jerem. 13. 12, 13. Therefore thou shall speak unto them this word, Thus says
the Lord God of Israel, Every bottle shall be filled with wine: and they shall
say unto thee, Do we not certainly know that every bottle shall be filled with
wine?

Ver. 13. Then shall thou say unto them, Thus says the Lord, Behold, I will
fill all the inhabitants of this Land, even the Kings that sit upon David's
throne, and the Priests, and the Prophets, and all the Inhabitants of Jerusalem
with Drunkenness.


THis Chapter contains a Prophecy of the Captivity of Gods Church in Babylon;
which is set down (to take the deeper impression on their hearts) First, under
the type of a Girdle, which is taken from the loins of the Prophet, and put
into an hole of the Rock near Euphrates, which did lick the banks of Babel,
which after a time was so marred, that it was good for nothing: so will I mar
the glory, and the great pride of Jerusalem. When a people will not be vile in
their own eyes, God has a time to make them vile: when they will not be the
glory and praise of God, they shall be the filth and shame of the world.
Secondly, under sundry Similitudes: the first is in these Verses; where note
two things: 1. The similitude it self; wherein he compares them to bottles,
wherein wine was wont to be put: which is set down (1.) In a plain affirmation
of the thing, from Gods Command [ Every bottle shall be filled with wine] this
he was to preach, and testify. (2.) From their ignorant and disdainful
receiving of this message from God; q. d. who knows not that? what great matter
is that? what do you publish and press us to believe that? we know that every
bottle shall. Now the Lord had caught them, and made them yield thus far, he
comes in upon them with the second thing, viz. the Explication of the
Similitude. Similitudes prove nothing, but when God applies them, then there is
proof enough.

Briefly, a little to open the meaning of the Text.

By every bottle, is meant all the inhabitants of the Land, and more
particularly, the Kings, and the Priests, and the Prophets.

By Wine, is meant that spirit of Drunkenness wherewith the Lord will fill
them: and by filling of the vessels, is meant they shall be full of
drunkenness: and by bottles, is meant their weak condition; for they thought
themselves vessels of honor, that could withstand the dint of any stroke: but
says the Lord, I will dash you one against another:

I will do it, says the Lord, by filling them with a spirit of drunkenness;
and the manner how, is by dashing them one against another: I will break all
relations asunder, and will not pity, nor spare, but destroy. It would take
much time to open all these particularly. We shall only speak concerning one
particular; viz. What is meant by a spirit of drunkenness: Sometimes it is
taken for the drunkenness of men's bodies; sometimes for the Soul-calamities
that men are under, in such wise that they know not what to do: Lam. 3.15. He
has made me drunken with wormwood; that is, with sore and bitter afflictions.
Sometimes it is taken for a spiritual Judgment on the Souls of men, which is a
sin; and not so much a misery, unless it be a spiritual misery, when the Lord
does give men up unto a reprobate sense; and so it is often taken in Scripture,
Isa: 29.9, 10. They are drunken, but not with wine nor strong drink; for the
Lord has poured out upon them a spirit of deep sleep. The calamity of the
people here is expressed in those words, in being dashed one against another,
but now drunkenness it goes before, as that which prepares for this misery:
Says the Lord, I will fill all the Inhabitants of the Land with a spirit of
drunkenness, until I have destroyed them every one. From hence observe, Doct.
That spiritual Drunkenness, it is a certain forerunner of destruction
merciless unto a people.

I will show them no pity, nor spare them, but destroy them, says the Lord:
That look as it was with Belshazzar, he had been drinking overnight, and the
same night the handwriting of the Lord comes out against against: Nahum 1.10.
While they are drunken as drunkards, they shall be devoured as stubble.

For the Explication of the Point, I shall show you, 1. What are the Causes of
this spiritual drunkenness. 2. By what Effects it does manifest it self. 3.
When it is a Sign of destruction. 4. I shall give you the Reasons why it is so.


First, what are the Causes of this spiritual drunkenness. Look as it is with
bodily drunkenness, it arises from inordinate drinking of wine or strong
drink: so this drunkenness, it arises from drinking in those things which are
the causes thereof: which are principally these two:

1. When the Wills and Affections of men do inordinately drink in the pleasures
of sin, and of those things that their hearts should be weaned from, and that
should in comparison of better things, be bitter to them; when men shall give
themselves up to this. Thus ye shall find in this sense the Prophet calls the
Kings and the Priests and the People, The drunkards of Ephraim, such as did
fill and satiate themselves with sins, and the lusts of their own hearts. It is
a fearful Judgment of God, when the Lord shall give men their contentment in
this way. Ier. 25. ye shall read there of a Cup that the Lord gives, and it
must go round, and be put into the hand of all Nations. Many times the case is
thus with many sinners whom the Lord intends to destroy, they have many sad
fears; now the Lord in his just Judgment he puts his Cup into their hands, and
bids them take their pleasure in their sins, and so by this means they come to
be hardened against the fear of Death and Judgment, yea of those very
Judgments which are at their very doors.

2. When the mind and judgment of man drinks in the (...) any delusion, or
corrupt counsel, this (...) from the (...) Gods just hand, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11, 12.
Corrupt Doctrines, these make men drunk in the very understanding of men. Rev.
17.6. when Antichrist does corrupt the judgments of men with false doctrine,
it is called the Cup of the wine of fornication: by drinking these in, the
mind it is made drunk.

The Second Particular to be opened, is those effects by which this spirit of
Drunkenness does appear and manifest it self.

Drunkenness appears in staggering and reeling; so this spiritual drunkenness
appears,

1. In a spirit of Unstedfastness and Unsetledness, both in holy resolutions in
matters of Faith, and opinions in matters of Judgment.

In Faith: there is no hold of men, but unsettled and unstedfast in Doctrine,
and in matters of practice, Isai. 29.9. They are Drunken but not with wine,
they stagger, but not with strong drink, when men's hearts are grown unstedfast:
and for this the Lord he professes that he will never forgive this sin until
they come to confess it in particular: when men shall walk at peradventures in
matters of Religion, and do so stagger that the Lord knows not where to find
them but as waves of the sea: It is true, there is a staggering that arises
from weakness, as a child may, and of that I speak not; but now when men shall
stagger being drunk with their lusts, this is that spirit of Drunkenness which
goes before ruin. Drunkenness takes away the use of reason; and so this.

2. It manifests it self, in a spirit of Sottishness and Blindness, which the
Lord in his just judgment inflicts upon men for not receiving the truth in the
love of it. Isai. 29. The Lord has powered out upon them a spirit of deep
sleep, the wisdom of your wise men shall perish, and the understanding of your
prudent men shall be hid says the Lord. Isai. 28.7. but they have erred
through wine and strong drink, they err in vision, and stumble in judgment.
Look as it is with drunken men, though their reason be not taken away, yet the
use of their reason is gone from them, it befools them, and makes them sottish,
giddy, and stupifies their understandings and senses. Isai. 19.14. The Lord
has mingled a perverse spirit in the midst thereof: now reason will not move
men, they can go against common sense and reason: thus when the Lord gives men
up to a spirit of delusion, it is a spirit of Drunkenness.

3. It manifests it self in a spirit of Rage (...) against another, especially
when there is no reason for it (...) Lord shall give men up to a spirit of
rage, and division, an(...), and the Lord leaves men here, even his own dear
people that shall one day meet in Heaven, no means, no friends can persuade
them to agree, but they are given up of God unto a spirit of wrangling and
contention; this is that which goes before the calamity of a people, Mica. 7.4.
The best of them is a briar, the most upright of them is a thorn hedge, the day
of thy watchmen and visitation comes, now shall be their perplexity. Look as
you see it is often with drunken men, no counsels can persuade them to be
quiet, unless that you use violence, and they are very much gone then, when men
are in a wrangling condition; so Nabal in his Drunkenness: no counsel can be
heard, they think themselves wiser then others, though they be in their drunken
fits, and deluded frames, unless the Lord by some strong hand do bring them
down.

4. When the Lord does leave men unto a spirit of deep sleep and security; when
the Lord does give men over to such security as is a kind of dead sleep, when
the Lord does leave men to such a sleep as that no awakening providence of the
Lord can awaken them: and thus ye shall find it in sundry places, Ier. 51.39. I
will bring them, says the Lord, to such a dead sleep, that when the plagues of
God are upon them, they shall never awaken.

5. A spirit of Drunkenness appears in this, in that it causes men for to open
their Secrets, their Nakedness and Shame, as Noah; when God does leave a people
for to manifest hidden sins, that were hidden before; Isai. 28.8. all their
tables are full of Drunkenness, so that there is no place clean: So that mark
now, when the Lord does leave men unto such a spirit of Vnstedfastness in the
truth; a spirit of Sottishness and Blindness; a spirit of Rage and Fierceness,
a spirit of deep sleep and security, that now they manifest their secret
wickedness like Sodom; I say, when God leaves men to such a spirit as this is,
then it is a forerunner of destruction.

Thirdly Only here is the question, when is it thus, for every spirit of
Drunkenness is not a forerunner of destruction?

I shall answer this briefly in three things, from the text.

1. When the Lord does fill all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, for the body of
them, though some particulars it may be otherwise with them.

2. When God fills men with this; men may be drunk, but yet there may be some
room for some wholesome counsel; but now when men shall be filled full with
their delusions, that there is no room for wholesome counsel, that they are
incapable of receiving the counsels of peace and truth.

3. When the Lord does give men over to this as to a judgment, when the Lord
gives men over to a spirit of delusion, so as that the means which should do
them good, it makes them worse; when men are in the midst of contention, and
the means for their peace makes them more unquiet; when the word of God that
should awaken men, it makes them more secure, and the judgments of God abroad
in the World harden them the more.

Now in the fourth place I shall give you the Reasons why it is thus, That the
spirit of Drunkenness is a forerunner of destruction merciless.

Reas. 1. Because now a man is immediately disposed unto all wickedness; he is
filling up his measure very fast.

Reas. 2. Because when the Lord gives men over to a spirit of Drunkenness,
they cannot now understand the cause of their ruin: they are now besotted, and
blinded, the Plague of the Lord upon them is not removed, nor they know not the
cause of it.

Reas. 3. This spirit of Drunkenness it brings division among a People, and
this is a forerunner of all misery: ye need not now to doubt of a fire, for it
is begun already.

Use. 1. Hence learn, when you see any Nation, Churches or People, given over
to a spirit of Drunkenness, to bemoan and bewail their condition bitterly; for
they have the tokens of certain ruin upon them.

And for this end let us take a little pains to consider the state of Gods
People at this day in England: let us see whether the cup of this wine is not
given to the Godly party there: there is no doubt of it to the wicked, but that
it is now for the godly part, let us examine it in three things.

First* Has not the Lord given them up to a spirit of blindness in matters of
Doctrine? I will not mention the thousands of persons doubting and staggering,
and unsettled souls, not knowing what to do, nor what side to take; and
abundance among them, that any religion will serve their turn, so long as their
stakes may be settled, and may be in peace and quiet.

1. Some there be that are Antinomians, that do deny the use of the Law to any
that are in Christ, to be any Rule of Life to them: such are not under the Law,
but under Grace. And hence it follows, they will not take any comfort of their
good estate, from any conformity of their hearts to the Law of God, nor from
any Law of God written in their hearts; for what have they to do with the Law?
for they are under Grace, and they look to Grace only: and in truth are become
Patrons of free vice, under the mask of Free Grace. And hence not being under
the Law, and having nothing to do with it, their Consciences have their
liberty, and they will not take any discomfort from any sin against the Law of
God, or Rule broken; for if not under the Law, there is no sin, and why should
there be sorrow for any sin? and these sort do now abound there. You know they
are the very things that did Leaven this poor Country, for which the wrath of
God has broken out against the Patrons of it. These very Delusions they have
now their elbow-room to spread there, and they spread far and wide.

2. Others are Anabaptists, and there is such swarms of them, that they are
like the Locusts, they begin to eat up all the green grass in the Land:
Multitudes there be that are carried aside with them, whom though in former
times they had other marks whereby they were known, yet now in these days they
profess that they hold but one thing differing from the godly Orthodox, viz.
That they would not have any Children to be Baptized: and so they make the
condition of the Children of the Saints of God, (dear to God) in as miserable
an estate, as the Children of any Turk or Pagan, and but as lawful to Baptize
them, as a Cat or a Dog: Now though they say they hold but this one thing, yet
it is impossible that they should hold this, but there will be forty others
that will follow upon it: As now, they must of necessity hold, That the Baptism
of all the Churches of God, is no Baptism; and therefore must be done over
again. And again, as they hold Churches are made by Baptism, then if there be
no new Baptism, there is no true Churches, and then no true Administration of
any Ordinances of the Lord, but they are all abominations in the sight of God:
and what that reaches unto, let wise men judge. And if they deny the Seal,
they must deny the Covenant of Grace to Infants, and so by consequence do
undermine all hopes of posterity for time to come. This, wherever it has
come, it has been a Troubler.

3. Others are Rigid Separatists, that refuse to hear an holy Minister preach,
or to communicate in their Assemblies, because not altogether purified
according to the purification of the Sanctuary; hence forsaking Christ and his
Servants, before Christ forsake them: their whole course full of Confusion and
Scandal; either edifying themselves by their own Gifts only, or choosing
Unlearned Ministers, abhorred in Bishops: challenging a licentious liberty to
speak, and rule, and do, and not be ruled.

4. Some are Seekers; they deny all Churches: Some that be risen up of late,
that think there be no Churches, nor no Ministers, nor Ordinances of God in any
place of the world, but they are in a seeking, waiting condition, for Apostles
to be sent to make a Reformation: and this spreads very far.

5. There be others that think the Soul of Man is mortal, and dies with the
Body; they Print this, and speak thus, and many are deceived by them: Others
think that they are both Mortal, and that there is no Resurrection.

6. Others there be that would give Liberty and Toleration to all Religions;
their color is this, No man should be punished for his Conscience: and it is
wonderful to think how this does dazzle the eyes of many men, which for my own
part, as I believe any other Truth of God, I do believe and judge it to be the
foundation of all other Errors and Abominations in the Churches of God, if it
once be attended among any People of God. It is a sad thing, That that which
was accounted of as the heavy plague of God among the people of Israel, in the
latter end of the Book of Judges, That every man did that which was right in
his own eyes, that it should now be accounted of as a blessed way of God; which
indeed is the heaviest Judgment of God upon a People or Nation. Now is not
here matter of Mourning to God for poor England, that is left to be full of
these Delusions? If the Lord love his People, he will bring them very low, and
stock them, and whip them, till he make their spirits sober and humble; or else
mark what I say, Englands misery is near at hand.

Secondly, See if the Lord has not left them to a spirit of Division, and they
increase every year more and more, worse and worse. In former times the People
of God, when the Wolf has been abroad, they have been glad to be of one mind:
but now, when God himself is come with a drawn Sword, and stands at the door,
that now there should be such a division, methinks this should be the sobriety
of the people of God: there is Gods Hand on the one side very dreadful, and
Gods Mercy on the other side working all for them; I say, this should be their
sobriety, now to lie down and mourn at the feet of the Lord. Humiliation and
Praise should now be the work of Gods People in England: But how is it, The
Lord has filled all the Inhabitants of the Land with a spirit of drunkenness?
Sermon against Sermon, reviling one another; Head against Body: Go into the
Camps, whom can they trust? Religion it is the occasion of the breach of peace,
and look into the Parliament, Upper House against Lower House, and many
pretended Friends, but secret Enemies, and by means hereof the Enemy is
encouraged, Religion it is scoffed at: and what Religion would ye have men to
hold unto? Many godly People they are discouraged, and Gods Servants desiring
to say nothing, but rather to lie hid, and mourn for their own sins, and the
sins of the people there. And let me say this, and you will find it is
certain, At this very day the principal strength of the Land, are such as be
seeming Friends to the Parliament, but secret Enemies to the Truth, and
Ordinances, and People of God, and his Ways, and deadly ones too.

Lastly, The deep Security of England under the sins that are now laid open. I
will tell you what is their Complaint still. Their words be these: One
especially, that in former times did publish as glorious Works as any in that
Kingdom; says he, I would I could speak it with tears, never more talking of
Reformation, but never less practice of Reformation; our Churches are reformed,
but our Hearts and Houses never less reformed; our high Altars are pulled down,
but our high Minds are not brought down; the Worship of God is more pure, but
the Worshippers as impure as ever; we have less Idolatries, but more Adulteries
and Fornications; I do not say more Punishment, but never less punished, and
more committed. Is there a Law against Scandalous Ministers, and none against
Scandalous Lords and great ones? Men are not ashamed to profess their
Adulteries before the face of the Sun. We never lived in such days, wherein
there is more judging of others, and less of our selves. Never more sad days
in England, and yet never such pride in Apparel; never such Formality in Gods
Worship, never such Murmuring, never such Censuring: never more talk of
Reformation, never less reformed* never more security, then when the Ship is a
sinking; never times wherein fewer converted* and the power of godliness more
decayed, and sin abounding; never more Controversies how Churches should be
gathered, never fewer added to the Church then in these times; never such
Controversies how the Churches should be governed, and yet never less care of
the Government of Christ in our own Houses and Hearts. Godly men have not
leisure to study Faith, and Repentance, and brokenness for sin. I speak it for
this end, that the Lord may affect our hearts with the estate of England; for
this is some hope, that though they be thus, yet they are not all yet filled,
but there is some room left for counsel, Habak. 2.5.

Bend your Prayers against some persons, though you know them not, that make
others to be drunk; give the Lord no rest until he make them Examples to the
world, rather then the poor Church of God should be made drunk, and being made
drunk, should dash one against another.

Use 2. Let it be a Use of Warning to us all, to take heed of such sins for
which the Lord may give us over to a spirit of drunkenness. The time is come,
and it is the Lords great work at this day in the world, to give all the world
this same Cup, as the just and heavy Judgment of God upon men, for the
contempt of the Gospel of peace; and therefore is distraction and confusions in
all that men do. Most men in the world have seen an end of the perfection of
all Gods Ordinances and Gospel, and they begin to grow stale things to them;
therefore will the Lord put his Cup into your hands, and every bottle shall be
filled with wine, unless it be that number which the Lord does preserve in his
great mercy. This is the misery, when once the Lord leaves any man to a spirit
of Drunkenness, misery shall be at his door certainly coming upon him, and he
shall not know it.

Many inquiries are among us, What is the cause of the Lords hand against us,
dashing our Ships in pieces, that the Lord should break us in our infancy, and
tell us that he is gone in part, and that he is taking away some of our
precious ones from us? Would you know the cause of this? you will never know
it, until the Lord do take away this drunken distemper from us: So long as we
are not kept sober in the love of the Truth, we shall never know the true
reason why the Lord is thus angry with us. We cannot say the Lord has filled
all the Inhabitants of the Land with drunkenness, but yet the Cup is given us
in part: The Head it does begin to stagger in a great measure; do we not see
great staggering? Unsetledness in the Covenant of God, Walking with God at
peradventures, and such hankerings after the Whoredoms of the World at this
day: And so likewise Divisions and Distractions; little done, and time spent,
and the Country burdened with Charge; nothing done without much Division and
Contention. Certainly something is amiss, every thing threatens some sudden
blow to New England; yet blessed be the Lord he has not filled every one with
a spirit of Drunkenness. But let it be the last Motive to think of what I
speak, that the Lord should bring us hither, and give us peace in Church and
Commonwealth, and in all our Colonies; let us look upon it as a rare and
singular mercy of the Lord, that the Lord has kept us here in peace, and saved
us from being poisoned with the Delusions in the world.

You will say; How shall we be preserved from this spirit of drunkenness?

Here are many things that I should have spoken: but only think of this; has
not the Lord given us other things, and better things to take delight in: the
Lord has given us his blessed Scriptures to solace our selves in, we had else
been like herds of beasts going to the slaughter? and we have Jehovah himself
to go unto at any time; an infinite God we have to go unto.

But that ^e may be preserved from this spirit of delusion, for help herein, I
shall only name these particulars.

1. Take heed of drunken company: I would not have a godly man to go into the
company of an erroneous person: his words are infectious.

2. Let Gods People take heed of being deceived by mere colors and pretenses
of things; as now upon the color of Free Grace, they bring in Free-vice, and
under the color of liberty of Conscience, liberty in sin: and good men have
been deceived, and why not I, and the truth that I have received for truth, be
an error.

3. Love dearly the truth that you know already; such truths as discover your
sin unto you, make much of them, and certainly the Lord will make much more
known to you, and preserve you from error: I will send, says Christ, Ioh. 17.
the spirit of truth whom the World cannot receive; for you know him and he
dwells in you. Look as it is with a man, if he has taken down good drink, he
will not be apt to take poisoned wine; he will not run to the Alehouse and be
drunk, that has good beer at home. Love the truth thou know, and the Lord
will then teach the feeble in his way.

4. Drink no more then will do you good: my meaning is this, drink in those
truths that ye have known have done you good; take fast hold of them, and keep
them. I will never forget thy precepts, says David, for by them thou have
quickened me. And then likewise take no more then you have need of, you shall
find this, you need every truth of God; as now you are tempted to deny
evidencing your grace by conditional promises, by such promises wherein the
Lord does write down the names of those that he will do good unto, consider
whether there be need of that Doctrine, and do you not need the contrary? do
you not need to know that them that are pure in heart shall see God? do you not
need this in time of temptation, although for the present, some can walk with a
bold Conscience. And so for Baptism, do you not need a promise of God for your
poor children?

Lastly, When the Lord does leave you under the sense of your own weakness,
that you know not the truth, and under sense of distemper, and that the Lord is
withdrawn from you, and you know the sin of your heart wherefore the Lord is
gone: in this case take the counsel of skilful and merciful Physicians, go to
the servants of the Lord, sober and understanding men, old acquaintance with
the truth of God, go and ask their counsel: the Priests lips should preserve
knowledge; come with an humble and meek spirit, and then the Lord will teach
you his mind and will. In England, the great reason why so many are deluded,
it is because they want instruction; and our condition here is pretty sad, that
we should not have our discipline here published to the World, and to our
selves, and therefore we have cause to bless the Lord that he has put it into
the hearts of his servants to take pains herein. And there are but these three
things that can hinder you from knowing the truth of the Lord.

1. Unthankfulness. 2. Want of Prayer. 3. Contempt of their message, whom the
Lord sends to be his Ministers.
FINIS.

