ANTAPOLOGIA, Or a Discourse of EXCUSES; Setting forth the Variety and Vanity
of them, the Sin and Misery brought in by them, as being the greatest Bar in
the way to Heaven, and the ready high way to Hell, being the common snare
wherein most of the Children of Men are Entangled and Ruined.

By Jo. Sheffield. M. A. Minister of the Gospel.

(...).

In animam suam peccat, qui se Excusat, repellens proinde a se Indulgentiae
Medicinam, and sic vitam sibi proprio ore intercludens.

Bernh. Qui se accusant Excusantur, qui se Excusant recusantur.

Eccles. 7. 29. This only have I found, that God made Man upright, but he has
sought out many Inventions.

Prove. 21. 2. Every way of Man is right in his own Eyes, but the Lord pondereth
the Hearts.

Prove. 28. 13. He that covers his Sins shall not prosper, but he that
confesses and forsakes shall find mercy

Esaias 42. 22. But this is a people robbed and spoiled, they are all of them
snared in Holes, and they are hid in Prison Houses: they are for a Prey, and
none delivers; for a Spoil, and none says, Restore.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and three Crowns in
Cheapside. 1672.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
THou have in thy Hand a Discourse of (rather against) Excuses; the greatest
and most over-spreadeng Evil in the World, and the greatest Enemy to Grace and
Godliness. And take this account of my Undertaking.

I have observed among all the Arts and Engines the old Enemy has made use of,
none have proved so beneficial and expeditious, as those two mentioned Esa. 5.
20. The one to call Evil Good, the other to put Darkness for Light. By the
first he casts a mist before our Eyes, when he tempts to sin, saying, Ye shall
not die, but shall be as Gods, making Evil to appear Good, that we may sin with
less fear; and by putting Darkness for Light and Light for Darkness, when we
have by his solicitations fallen into sin, he puts a Vail upon our Consciences,
that we may either lie still more securely, or go on more boldly, when he has
furnished us with some specious Excuses to ^over our nakedness, and sins
deformity; thus leading poor Souls blind-folded as those Syrians once were, who
(supposing themselves conducted by a friend, and in a safe way) were led into
the mouth of danger, and no sooner were their Eyes opened, but they were
sensible of their gross mistake.

With these two did he begin the World, when he set up for himself, and
affected the Principality of this Lower World, having failed in his higher Aim
above, aspiring to more greatness among his fellow Angels.

And so beneficial have they proved to him, that he may (as if laughing) at his
own policy and man's simplicity, say to his Associates, what once that
Atheistical Namesake and Vicegerent of his Leo X. said to one of his
Cardinals, Q^antum nobis and nostro Coetui profuit illa fabula, etc. The cursed
Atheist spoke it of the very Gospel it self. How much have we and our
Colleagues gained by that Fable? But by the way had he said, how much have
those two Fables profited us, viz. That of Peter's Supremacy, and the Keys
delivered to him alone, and of Romes Infallibility, as succeeding Peter in all
his Apostolical privileges, he had not said much amiss; for these have been
the Popes two Keys by which he has opened the way to his Vice-Godship on Earth
(he is so styled by his Canonists and Parasites, Vice-Deus in Terris) and to
his Universal Monarchy over the blinded Christian World, trampling sometimes
upon the very Necks of Kings and Emperors. These are the two main supports of
the Antichristian Kingdom, and the Rocks on which the present Church of Rome is
founded. So those two forenamed black Arts have been the Keys by which the
Prince of Darkness has opened his way to his Conquest of the World, and has
arrived to his wished Supremacy too: to his Godship in the World (so is he
called 2 Cor. 4. 4. Deus hujus saeculi) and has attained his desired Universal
Monarchy, trampling upon high and low, and triumphing over the deluded sons of
men. So that he who shall shake these two Pillars, as Sampson did those two on
which the Philistines house was built, will throw down the strongest holds of
Satan, and make his Kingdom fall about his Ears, and will deserve his Name
should be enrolled among the Chief of Christian Heroes. And as David said once
of the Inhabitants of Jebus who had put such scorn upon him, He that shall get
up into the Gutter, and take away the lame and blind which are hated of David's
Soul, he shall be Chief, and Captain, 2 Samuel 5. 8. So may I say, whosoever
shall take away the Blind and Lame. The blind pretenses whereby Evil is called
Good: And the lame Excuses where Light is put for Darkness, deserves in my mind
the Name among the first Three, as he that has done most to the taking away
the Reproach of Israel, by disarming the strong man, and taking away his Armor
wherein he trusted, and spoiling his House.

I have laid my weak hand to this latter, and have endeavored (I will not say
Pro virili, sed pro Senili, pro Imbecilitate and tenuitate mea) for as the man
is, so is his strength, Jud. 8. 21.) to give it a shake, or may rather say,
have been as that weaker guide to Sampson, led him to the two Pillars, where he
may try his strength.

I am not ignorant of my own many Infirmities, and therefore might well put in
my Excuse (had I not professedly written against Excuses) for adventuring to
appear in public in this Critical, Learned, and Eagle-eyed Age; my Weaknesses
are many, Style homely, Method, happily not so well digested, and by some I
look to be Censured as having said too much, by others too little. I have only
this for Excuse, and some Excuses you will see are here allowed, that I have
not met with much written designedly on this Subject, which may in some sort
Excuse both Author and Matter, and Manner, and Method, and Style, and the many
other Infirmities which the whole Discourse may labor under.

I have taken notice of above an hundred Bad Excuses, and have spoken somewhat
to the Reproving, I would I could also say to the Removing of them. And another
I doubt not, of more Insight into the ways of God and wiles of Satan, may come
after and glean an hundred more (and his Gleaning better than all my Vintage)
and yet this Hydra has more Heads than can easily be cut off. Some I have
willingly pretermitted to ease my self and thee Reader in some sort, and have
only touched upon some, not thinking it necessary to enlarge upon all, then
should I have written a Volume and not so short a Treatise, the variety and
number of the particulars is so great, that to speak fully and satisfactorily
to each, would require a workman indeed, and I might have known where to begin,
but not where to end.

I have here gathered and set a many Stocks, which a more skilful Hortulane,
would have set in a better and more comely Order, and likely have graffed
better fruit upon, more pleasant to the Eye and Taste of the Reader, by a more
substantial handling, a more smooth, pithy and taking style, and a more
gracious and spiritual strain of Spirit.

But I must say I write not to Scholars ^r quaint Citizens, the Style is as the
Author Subrustick and Inurbane. I write not to you Fathers and able Learned
ones, whose Unction and Abilities teach you in a much higher way. I only say I
write to you Children, you weaker ones, who look not for the strong meat of
strong Lines and high Language, but best relish the plain and uncompounded milk
of the word, Indeed Ornari res Sancta negat contenta doceri. And without
dissembling think that Title best becomes it which Reverend Perkins prefixed to
one of his, which he Inscribed, To all Ignorant people which desire to be
instructed. And now it is gone out of my Hand, say to it as once a Wit said to
his; Vade sed Incultus, yet do I read that Samson once did great Execution with
the Jaw Bone of an Ass (and never was there a more unlikely Battle-Ax used) and
Gideon again with his Earthen Pitchers (never such weak Ordinance employed) and
David with a Sling-stone (never more contemptible Arrow shot) But it was in the
Name of the Lord that he went out: And who knows what a day of small things may
produce? The Lord saves not by Sword or Spear, not by Might or Power, Zech. 4.
6. not by Learning and Eloquence, but he can make the feeble to be as David,
Zech. 12. 8. and the (...), 1 Cor. 1. 28. the base and contemptible things, and
those which are not (just nothing accounted) to bring down the things which
are. That no part of the glory may fall to the Instrument, but the whole
redound to the praise of the glory of his Grace, who works all things
according to the Council of his own Will.

But to the matter it self. Excuses are the Subject of this Discourse, which I
can look upon as no other then Satan's Masterpiece, and can call them by no
fitter Name then that Common Black Art, wherein he does instruct the most of
the sons of men, and by this he does inveigle more and hold them almost as fast
as he does those whom he has trained up to the study and practice of that
which is so called (...), The Black Art. The Fox and Serpent have advantaged
Satan's Interest more with his Neq aquam moriemini, and his Eritis sicut Dii, ye
shall not Die at at all, but shall be as Gods, than to appear a Lion and Dragon
in his own colors, saying Cast thy self down headlong, or fall down and
worship and make a f^rmal Compact with me. We find by Experience that our
English Flocks (the Glory and Wealth of our Land) are more prejudiced by the
subtle Foxes lurking in their Dens, than by the more savage Wolves, which our
prudent Forefathers have happily rid the Land of: And our spiritual Pastors
find more prejudice done to the Souls of men, our Spiritual Flocks (otherwise
the glory of the Christian Name) by these lurking Excuses, than by those
ravenous Wolves of Rome, Jesuits and Seminaries, whom our pious Princes have
formerly chased out of the Land by their just Interdicts.

These are the great Abaddon and Apollyon the Destroyers of Souls, the Mice
that near the Land, 1 Samuel 6. 5. The Samsons, destroyers of our Country, that
lay Heaps upon Heaps, not of Philistines, but Israelites. The opprobria
Theologorum: By these is the Ministry of Gods faithful Servants baffled, and
rendered unsuccessful, not by open contradiction, but by a tacit reserve and
resolvedness aforehand how far they will go, no further. Excuses they are
Satan's Offspring, Sins great Grandmother, that came in with the Fall, begotten
between Sin and Guilt, Sin the Father, Guilt the Mother: God created Man
upright it is said, but Man (fallen) sought out many Inventions; among which,
Excuses to cloak and cover Sin were the first and are the chiefest. An
Epidemical Evil and as General almost as Original Sin, and ^ath as that
Universal Deluge, in Noah's time, overspread the face of the whole Earth.

They are the old Primitive Language learnt of Satan in Paradise, and though
other Languages have been lost, or so confounded that we hardly know what
remains of them, this remains entire and may be called the Universal Character
of the World and the Mother Language of all Nations, who as soon as born, and
learn to go and speak; learn to go astray and speak Lies. An Evil so much the
more to be lamented because Hereditary and Connatural, born with us. No Nation
so barbarous, Religion so gross, Worship so impious, Superstition so fond,
Manners so brutish, Opinion so irrational, but has borrowed somewhat from
Excuses to defend them: No Age, Sex, Nation, Condition, sort and rank of men
without them. The youngest Child, has learned one and the elder Father more,
none so simple and ignorant as to be destitute of one, and the more knowing and
cunning (the more the pity) the more store.

Take any man without Excuses and you may say Rara avis; that you have seen a
strange Sight. Peganisme and Idolatry had never been known in the World, nor
had continued, had it not been for them. Popery had never stood so long, had it
not been underpropt by them. No Wars, Murder, Rapine, Adulteries, Witchcrafts,
False Wi^^ess, Perjury, Cheating, Lying, Equivocation, Pride, Revenge, firing
Towns and Cities, Blowing up of Parliaments, Assassination of Princes,
Butchering and Massacring of People had ever been in the World, had it not been
for this great Mother of Abominations. No Heresy, Schism, Doctrine of Devils,
Corruption of Worship had ever troubled the Church; No Sedition, Treason,
Rebellion, Conspiracies, Factions, Innovations, Oppressions, Tumults, had ever
troubled the State had it not been for these the setters on, or Abetters. No
such persecutions, opposition and slighting of faithful Ministers and sound
Doctrine, no such scorn cast upon ways of Godliness where the Gospel is
professed, no such backwardness as repent, reform, believe and obey and become
true practisers of Godliness in the power, but for them. Nothing but Piety,
Charity, Peace, Love, Concord, Friendship, Faithfulness, Truth, Sincerity in
the World, were it not for them.

Take away these and you take away all that is hurtful, rid the World of them,
and what a World should we see! weed these out of the Church and it becomes a
Paradise; a Garden or Well enclosed: Yea, take these from a man and you restore
him to his Integrity and you have a real, terrene Saint.

Take a view a little and consider what is the great Propugnaculum, or Bulwark
under which all Evil shelters it self against the weapons of our Spiritual
Warfare, but Excuses? what is the Obex, the obstacle that renders the most
powerful Ministry ineffectual but these? We must therefore fetch these Kings
out of their Caves, or we do nothing. If we could st^p up these Wells and cut
down these fruitful Trees as they were commanded, 2 Kings 3. 19. Then should
Israel weaken the Enemy and the Ministers live at more hearts-ease. But while
these remain (as we say Intus Existens prohibet alienum) we do but beat the
Air. There is no entrance for truth in the power of it. This we shall find if
we take a view of most of those things wherein the Minister has to do. E. g.
First if the Minister give warning from God to avoid Sin and cry out, H^st and
escape for thy life, Cito, Long, tarde, as from the Pestilence. How ill do men
take it. Look back with Lots Wife, linger with Lot, as l^th to part with Sin as
Jacob with Benjamin, as tender of it as David of Absalom, Deal kindly I pray
you for my sak^ with the young man, spare him, hurt him not. Is it not a little
one say they, a venial Sin? may it not consist with grace? If I never do worse,
I hope I shall do well enough: Have not others done as bad or worse, yet found
mercy? I have Examples, great ones, multitude on my side, and some good men
have done the like. It is my Diana (my Livelihood) my Dalilah, (or right Eye)
allow me this only, I shall do any thing, only spare me Herodias* Entreat for
me said Pharaoh, abate me but this. I hope my Calling, Place, Quality,
Profession, and the custom and manner of the times may Excuse me; mean while I
shall live quietly, peaceably and civilly, and do what the Law requires.

2. If we deal with men to confess and acknowledge their Sins, how many shifts,
windings and turnings? how long e're we can get that hard word Peccavi out of
their mouths. And if they do not storm as the Sodomites at Lot, and look on the
Minister as Ahab did on Elias, or Micaiah; then what Excuses do they make? Bear
with me I pray, it was an Oversight I confess, but I hope my Nature, Custom,
Passion, Provocation may Excuse me: Or it was done in my Ignorance, Childhood,
or when I was not my self; but then in my Drink, Heat, Anger, Passion, Fear,
Have, and on the sudden. Another says, it was in Jest, Mirth* Merriment, I had
no ill meaning in the Earth; another, had I not reason? I was wronged, urged,
abused, and it was to an Enemy or a worthless person. Another, what I did was
in zeal and out of Conscience to make good my Vow, Promise; Oath which I had
taken; my Welfare, Credit, Honor, lay at stake, disgrace, danger and prejudice
was prevented, my Friend pleasured, much good procured: Besides I tell you
again it is the only Infirmity I am subject to; my Rimmon, herein the Lord be
merciful to me, I know not how to leave it, or live without it, and it is hard
if a man have but One Ewe Lamb in his Bosom, and the Minister would deprive
him of that. Besides the matter is not so great, I am not an Adulterer,
Murderer or perjured person, it was but once neither. I should have been
singular, unsociable, hissed at, had I done otherwise. I am civil, take pains
for my Living, pay every man his own, I trust the Lord will be more merciful,
then these Ministers tell us, or God help us; what will become of all else? and
twenty more such put-offs men have.

3. If we cannot but yield it to be a Sin, then have we other Excuses ready, If
it was Evil blame others, not me; I am a Child, did as my Parents bade me; a
Servant, and must do what my Master commands and keep his Secrets; in a low
condition, and my dependence was on such whom I must not disoblige. I am of so
good a Nature as I cannot be refractory, if I am any bodies foe, it is my own,
no man's else, if I spend, it is but my own, what my Friends left me, or I came
fairly by. I had Commands to warrant, Promises to allure, Threats to fright,
Friends and Companions to importune, Examples and multitudes to accompany me,
and could I stand against all these. If Hercules thought it hard to encounter
with two, how could I stand before so many Hercules's? Besides what some
scrupulous persons (more precise then wise) cry out against, is the custom of
the Country, the mode of the time, place and society that I converse with, and
the most men I meet with do the like, and it were hard if God should condemn
all the World, but a few who are singular, and love to please themselves,
though they please no body else.

4. If dealt with to repent and break ^ff Sin, we stand up in defense of it as
if we had taken it into our Protection as did the Benjamites those Sons of
Belial, wh^m they should have given up to the hand of Justice. And then do we
seek to stop the Ministers, and Consciences mouth too, putting far from us all
fear of danger, crying out, are we not all Sinners, have not the best their
failings? Is any man perfect in this life? Some again cast the fault on Satan,
and some are ready to charge it upon God, and say it was Gods will it should be
so, or it had never been, God denied me his Grace, then could I neither do, nor
be better than he enabled me, etc.

5. Press men to more strictness and amendment of life; then do they flatter
themselves, and reply, Is not God infinite in mercy? did not Christ die for
Sinners? The promises of the Gospel are full of Comfort, and I ground my Faith
on them, and such doctrines as are preached by our best Divines, viz. Of Free
Grace, of Justification by Faith, Remission of Sins, and Pardon upon true
Repentance; and a great observation I have made, I hope I shall never forget
it, the blessed End I have seen some make without all this ado.

6. Stir them up to a pursuit of Holiness, and a Conscientious course of Life,
how are they ready to plead the badness of the times, the disrepute Holiness is
in, the Inconveniences, Damage, Detriment, Disgrace we may meet with; He that
departs from Evil, makes himself a Prey: The Aspersions and Nicknames cast
upon the Godly, the troubles and tentations of the Righteous, the Lion in the
way, the many difficulties in the way of Salvation. The peace, and prosperity
of the wicked, the divisions among Professors, the scandalous Lives of some
Ministers, and the foul miscarriage of some Professors, and many such like.

Lastly, warn them to take heed of Security, and to work out their Salvation
with fear and trembling, they have their answer ready; Gods Decrees are
unchangeable, if I am Elected I shall be saved, if not, I shall perish
whatsoever I do, all endavours are in vain, all good works we are taught do
neither merit grace, nor glory.

So again, when we call upon men to duty, to come in and receive Christ; How do
all with one consent make Excuse? my Calling, Oxen, Farm, Merchandise, will not
permit and give me time; the work is good I confess, I speak not against it,
but the time is not yet; I am a Child, ignorant, an unlearned person, I have a
full purpose hereafter, when more at leisure, when out of debt, settled in the
world, when I have buried my aged Father, and my self my own man, and my estate
in my own hand; but let me alone till then, or till I am old, sick, dying, and
then I will do what you will have me.

So again when we persuade men to believe; how backward and slow of Heart are
many to embrace the Promises, rejecting and in as much as in them is
frustrating the grace of God, with such like put-offs; the Promise is good, and
too good for me, I too bad, altogether unworthy, neither holy, nor humble
enough, the means are unlikely, etc. or I fear it is now too late, the day of
Grace is past, the Decree is gone forth, Providence are dark, Promises
delayed, my sins, afflictions, fears, doubts, temptations great and dreadful,
Satan assaults, dogs, insults, triumphs, and which is saddest of all, God has
forsaken me, my Prayer are not heard, the Vision does not speak, my Flesh
fails, my Heart fails, and my Hope is even giving up the Ghost.

I might go on, Reader, thus to enlarge and multiply particulars, but must
crave thy pardon for this tediousness; if either thou desire more, or art not
at leisure to read the whole, let me advise thee to turn to Chap. 9, 10, 11.
and seriously consider what thou there read of the veariety, vanity,
sinfulness and danger of Excuses. But here thou see enough to convince thee
how common and frequent Excuses are, and how justly to be spoken against. All
the world is undone by them, nothing but Excuses, Excuses every where. Every
man has his Omer full. So that call for what you will, and put men upon what
you will, all you must look for, is to be put off with an Excuse. As he said
once, To will is present, to perform I find not, so to Excuse is present, to
perform I find not an inclination. To fly from, repent of, and turn from sin,
requires pains; to perform the duties of Sobriety, Righteousness and Godliness
requires pains; to exercise Faith and Patience, requires pains, and so the
whole of Real Christianity, but an Excuse is easy, cheap, and costeth little.

I shall, trouble thee no longer Reader, but desire God to give us all his
grace to avoid all sinful and destructive Excuses, and that in stead of these,
we may get our selves furnished with some of those Better Excuses recommended in
the end of this Discourse, in particular these five I would commend at present
in stead of all others.

First, that of a good Conscience; then thou need no other, of which Saint
Bernad says well, Optima C^ique Excusatio est Testimonium Conscientiae: The
best Excuse of all, is an Excusing Conscience. This was St. Paul's Excuse. Our
rejoicing is this, The testimony of our Conscience, 2 Cor. 1. 12. It is above a
thousand Witnesses we say, and I may add above ten thousand Excuses. Saint
Peter calls it the saving answer of a good Conscience, and prefers the virtue
of it above that of Baptism alone, 1 Pet. 3. 21.

2. Next to that, ready, sincere and universal obedience; then no need of any
devised Excuse, when thou can say with Jacob, My righteousness shall answer
and speak for me, Genesis 30. 33. and with the Apostle, we have renounced the
hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in craftiness (as Excuse-makers do,) 2
Cor. 4. 3.

3. Because Conscience may yet accuse, and our Obedience falls short, the next
good Excuse is Humiliation and Repentance, timely and true. Shemei after all
his foul-mouthed railing and cursing, sped better at David's hands by his
making have to humble himself and crying mercy, 2 Samuel 19. 20. then that less
guilty Amalekite, who brought a Crown coming in his confidence of good Service,
2 Samuel 1. 5. And the self-condemning Publican at Gods hands, than the
self-justifying Pharisee. Neither were any received to mercy at Josuah's hands,
but the self-humbling, mercy-begging Gibeonites, all that stood upon their
defense were cut off.

4. With humble Confession and Prostration join fervent Prayer. This was
David's Excuse or Relief, Against thee have I sinned, turn thy face from my
sins; and the Lord answered, I have taken away thy Sin. Selfaccusation and
Repentance with Prayer obtains absolution and remission. This is the Apology or
self-clearing mentioned, 2 Cor. 7. 11. If we therefore cannot come in with the
elder Brothers Apology, I have served thee these so many years, neither
transgressed at any time, then come in with the younger Brothers confession and
supplication, Father, I have sinned against Heaven and against thee and am no
more worthy to be called thy Son, etc.

5. Lastly, above all, fly to Christ by Faith, that he may make thy Excuse by
interceding for thee: His Office is to mediate, reconcile and plead for us as
our Advocate, to undertake for us our Surety, to take away Sin as our
Propitiation, then what need of Excuses wheas Sin is taken away? through him we
shall be presented unblamable and unchangeable before God, Col. 2. 22. Ar thou
therefore overwhelmed with Sin, Guilt, Fear and Dismaydness, cry to him as
Hezekiah did, Esaias 38. 14. Lord, I am oppressed, undertake for me, and with the
words of the expiring Thief, Lord remember me now thou art in thy Kingdom, Luke
23. 42.

And now I have no more to do, but to commend thee to God, and to the word of
his Grace, and to entreat thy favorable acceptance of this Discourse (such as
it is) and to pray that thou may make thy best of it. This I hope thou will
find at le^st, as St. Austin said of his Writings, while he was taken up in
writing, that he was kept from being Idle, or worse employed; so while thou art
Reading, thou art kept from spending thy time more unprofitably, unless thou
bast in thy hand some more profitable Book, of which (blessed be God) our
present age is well stored, and therein I would by no means be thy hinderance,
only desire thy Prayers for a Blessing upon this and all the Endeavors of
other Godly Men, whether Preaching or Writing, whose aim is, next to the glory
of God and the declaring his Will, to seek and further the Peace and welfare of
his Church, and to contribute their utmost to the furthering of the salvation
of Souls. In which number is

The meanest of Gods servants, Io. Sheffield.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I.
THe Text opened, and Observation raised, Page 1


CHAP. II.
Several kinds of Excuses, 1 Good. 2 Bad. 7 Evil Excuses referred to three
heads, 1 Sin. 2 Duty. 3 Faith. 8 1 Excuses as to Sin, are 1 fetched from self, 2
from others. 1 From self, 1 By denying the fact. 8 2 Telling some artificial
story. 9, 10 3 Pleading Ignorance. 10 4 It is my Nature. 11 5 A Custom I have
got. 13 6 It was in Drink. 16 7 Passion. 19 8 In my Childhood. 20 9 My good
Nature. 21 10 I was in Jest. 25 11 Against my will. 26 12 Necessity put me upon
it. 27 13 Besides my Intention. 28 14 Was surprised with fear. 29 15 It was in
a matter of moment. 30 16 To cover and prevent shame. 33 17 It was not my act,
but others. 36
Eight ways, whereby we are partakers of others Sins. 37 18 It was in pure
Zeal. 40 19 My Conscience, 2 or under a Vow, 3 Oath, 4 Curse. 42 20 It is but a
small Sin. 44 21 The first time. 45 22 It is all the fault I have. 46 23 It was
to save my life. 47 24 My Negative Goodness. 47 25 Many good Deeds done. 48 26
I have a good Heart, strong Faith. 51 27 Little did I think it. 52


CHAP. III.
Excuses from others, are taken from other Persons, 2 Things. 54 1 From other
persons, 1 Men, 2 God, 3 Satan. Men distinguished into 3 Classes, 1 Superiors,
Equals, Inferiors.
2 Men considered, as Good, Bad.
3 as Friends, Foes, Strangers.

1 Excuses taken 1 from Superiors. 54 1 Their Example. 54 2 Counsel. 55 3
Commands. 55 4 Promises, or Threats. 56
2 Excuses from Equals. 58 3 From Inferiors. 58 2 Excuses taken 1 from good
men. 60 2 from bad men. 65
Excuses taken 1 from friends. 66 2 foes. 69 3 strangers. 71





CHAP. IV.
4 Excuses taken 1 from God. 72 1 His Providence. 72 2 His Decrees. 74 3 His
Permission. 78 4 His pretended Austerity. 81 5 His Mercy. 83 6 His denegation
of Grace. 84 7 That God owed them a shame. 85 2 From Satan. 86


CHAP. V.
Excuses taken from other things.
1 Ignorance. 90 2 My Place and Office. 91 3 Example of Predecessors. 92 4 I am
not the first, nor shall be the last. 94 5 The best in the place do so. 95 6
Good Intention. 96 7 Antiquity. 96 8 Tradition. 99 9 Universality. 100 10
Singularity. 101 11 The Law of the Land. 102 12 It is my own, and I may do with
it what I will. 105 13 It is lawful in it self. 109 14 Christian Liberty. 111
15 Our Calling. 113 16 Manner of our Country, Society, etc. 116 17 The odious
names put upon Virtue. 116 18 The honorable Titles upon Vice. 117


CHAP. VI.
Excuses taken from some Doctrines and Scriptures misapplyed, and some
observations likewise. 119 1 The Doctrine of Election and Reprobation. 119, 120
2 That all are Sinners. 122 3 That Christ died to save Sinners. 124 4 That we
are saved by Grace. 126 5 That we are justified by faith. 127 6 The Saints
imperfections. 129 7 That we are not under the Law, but Grace. 132 8 That we
are to try all things. 134 9 That it is but repenting at last. 135 The Case of
the Thief on the Cross. 138 Sundry observations, 1 the peaceable End of some
wicked men. 140 2 The weak parts of the Godly. 142 3 The low estate of the
Godly. 144 4 Divisions among Christians. 145 5 Scandalous lives of some
Preachers 148


CHAP. VII.
Excuses as to Duty.
1 I am a Child. 149 2 I am unlearned 153 3 Want competent abilities. 154 4 Our
Calling. 155 5 I will hereafter. 158 6 Want of Company, 7 Sufferings. 161 8
Terms of Honor. 163 9 We are well already. 165 10 It is no part of our
Calling. 165 11 Despair of success. 166 12 Excess of Humility. 171


CHAP. VIII.
Excuses as to Faith and Believing. 173 1 From the greatness of the thing
promised. 171 2 The things promised too good. 175 3 Our selves too bad. 175 4
Sad misgivings of Heart. 177 5 The means unlikely. 179 6 Present Providence
unlike former Presidents. 181 7 Providence cross promises. 182 8 That time is
past and now too late. 183 9 It is above all reason imaginable. 185 10 I am
under so many afflictions. 186 11 Fear I have committed the Sin against the
Holy Ghost. 187 12 Relapses into Sin again. 194 13 Fear of Reprobation. 195


CHAP. IX.
The Causes and Reasons of Excuses. 198 1 Causa prima, Man's fall. 199 2 A
prima orta, Our corruption by the fall. 200 3 Causae assistentes, 1 Principal,
Satan. 200 2 Secundary -- Man. 201 4 Deficient causes, 1 Want of due
consideration of Gods omniscience, etc. 202 2 Not considering the Latitude of
Gods Law. 203 3 Not remembering the last Judgment. 204 4 Want of Conscience.
205 2 Ends of Excuses, 1 To avoid shame. 205 2 To gain a repute of
Religiousness. 207 3 To stop the Mouth of Conscience. 208 4 To spare greater
pains. 209


CHAP. X.
The sinfulness, vanity and frivolusness of Excuses. 210 1 Sinfulness, because
the greatest hinderers of good. 210 2 The greatest Nursery of Evil. 212 3 They
are oftentimes no other than flat Refusals and Denyals. 213 2 Their vanity, 1
In that they cannot stand before any approach into Gods presence. 214 2 Nor
before the light of Gods word. 215 3 Nor a strict Examen of Conscience. 215 4
Nor bear up in a day of trial. 216 5 Least of all in the day of Gods Judgment.
217


CHAP. XI.
The Application of the whole. 218 1 By way of Lamentation. 218 2 By way of
Humiliation. 229 Excuses, 1 charged with a breach of all the 10 Commandment.
231, 232 Instances in each Commandment. 2 With Sins against the Gospel. 239 3
Against Christ. 239 4 Against the Holy Ghost. 240 3 They turn all things unto
Sin. 241 4 They do harden men in Sin. 242
3 Several uses of Information 242 1 Informing what a shifting Creature Man is.
242 2 Whence so little true Piety, Faith, Obedience and Conscience in the
world. 245 3 The folly of that Proverb, Better a bad Excuse than none at all.
246 4 The sad difference of Gods care of Man's Salvation, and Man's
carelessness. 247 5 The wide difference between the sincere Christian and the
unsound in respect of Excuses. 248, 249 6 The difference between Gods Judgment
of man, and Man's concerning himself. 249 7 The difference between man in his
day of Sin, and of Gods Visitation. 249 8 The difference between Man's sense of
his Excuses now, and in the day of Judgment. 250 9 Informs that men may be
shut out of Heaven, notwithstanding much fair Carriage and good Language. 255
10 Informs, Heaven may be lost in pursuance of things in themselves Lawful.
255 11 Performing Relative Duties, is not all required of Christians. 256 4 Use
of Examination. 257 5 And last Use of Exhortation, or rather Dehortation. 261
Four Removals of Excuses. 262 1 By ready Obedience. 262 2 By Repentance. 262 3
Flying to Christ by faith. 265 4 To remove sinful Excuses by making use of
safe Excuses, whereof 267 5 Instances out of the Old Testament. 268 5 Out of
the New Testament 272 to the end.


ANTAPOLOGIA: OR, A DISCOURSE OF EXCUSES.
CHAP. I. The Common Sin of Excuses.
OUr first Parents having eaten the sour Grape, their own and their Childrens
Teeth have been set on edge, still hankering after forbidden Fruit. And as if
Sin and Excuses were Twins, as Esau and Jacob, holding each other by the heel,
we still run after the Taste of the Tree of Evil, to the Fig Tree, to borrow
some Leaves to make an Apron, and think if we get into the Thicket of Excuses,
and can say All hid, that we may say All Is well; not remembering the Voice we
shall hear in the Cool of the Day, (the Evening of our Life* Adam where art
thou? This is a great and fore Evil which has tainted our Nature, and is the
remain of that first poison wherewith the old Serpent in Paradise infected our
first parents.

Excuses have first shut us out of Paradise, and now obstruct our way to
Heaven: The great Supplanter then took away our Birthright, now our Blessing.
Excuses obstruct our way to Heaven, being still a Block or Bar in our way
thither. Whenever God calls to a Duty, Excuses are a Block to hinder
Obedience, that we cannot go forward: When God calls again from Sin, Excuses
are a Bar to hinder Repentance, that we cannot go backward. But all the way to
Hell is thick strewn with Excuses, and under covert of them most deluded Souls
(as Ahab in his Disguises once) run confidently and fearlesly upon their
certain and unavoidable ruin.

Our Bl^ssed Savior, in that Parabolical Scheme, Luke 14. 16, 17, 18, 19.
does, as in a Map. set down how all the Race of Mankind is tainted with this
Evil.

A certain man made a great Supper, and bade many; and sent his Servants at
Suppertime to ^^y to them that were bidden, Come, for all things are now ready:
But they all with one consent began to make Excuses. The first said, I have
bought a piece of Ground, and must needs go see it, I pray thee have me
excused. Another said, I have bought five yoke of Oxen, and I go to prove them,
I pray thee have me excused. And another said, I have married a Wife, therefore
I cannot come.

I pray thee have me excused, and I pray thee have me excused, is the answer of
them all in effect.

In which Scripture you may, as in a Map, see on the one side, the kindness of
God to Man; on the other, Man's unkindness to God, and to himself: In the one,
Gods rich Grace displaied; in the other, Man's vile Ingratitude described; Gods
care of Man's Salvation, Man's carelessness. What could God do more to make them
happy? He provides, invites, waits, sends out again. What could they do more to
make themselves unhappy? They put off all by evasions, and shifts, and
subterfuges. St. Matthew Mat. 22. 5.
has it, They made light of it.

Here you may see the nature of that sin we are about to discourse of, Excuses.
2. The universality of this sin, They all with one consent began to make
Excuses; as if they had laid their Heads together, and resolved there would
none of them go. 3. The particularity, yea singularity of this sin; not a man
of them to seek of his Excuse: The first had his Excuse; the second, his; the
third, a third: So many men, so many Excuses. It is the sin of all, it is the
sin of every one; whence this shall be our Observation, upon which this
Discourse shall run, viz.

" It is the General sin of the World and of those in the Church too, All and
every Man's sin, to slight and reject the Grace of God, and to endanger their
own Eternal Salvation, by a company of fair and specious in show, but indeed
slight, vain, and frivolous Excuses.

It is the sin of the World. Woe to the World because of Excuses. It is the sin
of the Church. Woe to the Church, and to many that are called to partake of rich
Gospel Grace, which they reject and make void by Excuses. It is the most common
sin of the World.

Divide the World into three parts: The first and best is the least, of such as
gladly receive the Gospel, and say with Samuel, Speak Lord, thy Servant
hears, 1 Samuel 3. 10. or with St. Paul, Lord, what will thou have me to do? A
little Flock of these, there are but few of them.

2. There is a far greater and worse number of them, that in stead of
accepting, show foul contempt of the Gospel, which breaks out in their
opposition and persecution of it, as in that Parable akin to this appears, Mat.
22. 6. The remnant took the servants, and entreated them shamefully and slew
them. A Remnant, but a vile and very great Remnant of profane Persecuters and
Opposers.

But the greatest though not the worst) part, is of our Excuse-makers. It is
not said, they all with one consent came in. All are not Accepters. Nor all
with one consent persecuted and oppos^d; but the Remnant: Too great a Remnant
too. All are not Persecuters: But all with one consent made excuse. All are
Excuse-makers; all guilty here, more or less.

A sin it is in which the most godly sometimes have been faulty, as well as the
most wicked: Abraham, Sarah, Moses, Jeremy, as well as Cain Saul Judas.

The most ancient of sins, and the First Fruits of the first sin. When Adam and
Eve had eaten that forbidden Fruit, the next thing was to frame an excuse. Have
thou Genesis 3. 10, 11, 12, 13.
eaten of that Tree, Adam? The Woman that thou gave me. Have thou eaten, Eve?
The Serpent beguiled me, said she. Do thou hide thy self from me, Adam? I saw
I was naked, said he again. Nothing but Excuses, and so sin upon sin. Cain the
first born of Adam, when he had shed his Brothers blood, thinks to put it off
with an Excuse, Am I my Brothers keeper? But Genesis 4* 9.
it is wonderful to observe what ado the Prophet had with Saul, after he had so
grossly transgressed the Commandment, to get him speak that hard word Peccavi:
But one while he pleads innocence; he had spared the Cattle indeed, some of
them; 1 Samuel 15. 13, 15, etc.
but it was for Sacrifice, and they were fat ones: Then would he cast it upon
the People, then upon his Fear. No owning, but excusing his sin; till Samuel
told him downright, he was rejected for his halting and disobedience.

Excuses are the most general and prevailing sin of the World; the Peccatum in
deliciis, the sin that is made most of by Simple and Gentle, High and Low; none
but cherish and harbor it: The greatest Persons, as Saul a King; greatest
Politicians, as Jeroboam; and the simplest Swain. The Sluggard has an excuse
to spare his pains, A Lion is in the way: And take any Prove. 26. 13.
one without his excuse, and call him a very poor Man indeed. What the Prophet
notes of the Idolater, he that is so empoverisht Isa. 4^. ^^.
that he has no Oblation, yet seeks a piece of Timber that will not rot to
make an Idol of, and then applauds himself when he has done; I may say of the
poorest and simplest: None so poor, but he seeks to get some rotten Excuse or
other, of which he makes an Idol to quiet his clamorous, and otherwise
unsatisfied Conscience. Saul had his Excuse for disobedience, 1 Samuel 15. 15.
After for his going to the Witch: Jeroboam, 1 Samuel 28. 15. 1 Kings 12. 28.
an Excuse for his Calves in Dan and Bethel; the Jews, for stoning of Christ
had an Excuse at hand, Joh. 10. 33. and another for Crucifying of him* We have
a Law, and by our Law he ought to die, Joh. 19. 7.

CHAP. II. The several Kinds of Excuses.
EXcuses are not all alike; some are good, some bad. We meet with several holy,
just, honorable Excuses in Scripture, which are for our imitation. Such was
Holy Joseph's, when solicited to uncleanness by his impudent Mistress, How can
I do Genesis 39. 9.
this great wickedness, and sin against God? That of David, when pressed to
avenge himself of his Master and Sovereign Saul, God forbid that I should do
this thing to my Master the Lords Anointed, 1 Samuel 24. 6. and again, 1 Samuel
26. 9. Such that of the three Worthies, Dan. 3. 16. We are not careful to
answer thee in this matter; our God is able to deliver us out of thy hand, and
if not, we neither can nor will worship thy Image. Such that of the Apostles,
We must obey Acts 5. 29.
God rather than Men. But our Discourse is professedly about bad Excuses, I
therefore pass those over.

Evil Excuses are of three sorts, relating 1. To Sin. 2. Duty. 3. Faith. We
begin with such as refer to Sin, and such are of two sorts. 1. Such as are
homebred, and taken from self. 2. Some extraneous, and borrowed from others.

They are very many that relate to all these Heads; I intend not an enumeration
of all (that were almost endless) but take notice of such as are most obvious.

In the first place, to begin with those 1. Denying the Fact.
that refer to Sin: The first Excuse I shall take notice of, is, to deny the
Fact. Not I, not I, is the old Put-off. Little less was that of our first
Parents, when questioned about the first Transgression; Not I, but the Woman;
Not I, but the Serpent. The like Judas his impudent Reply, Is it I? q. d. Who
will say it is? But most palpable that of Gehazi, who by one Lie told in his
Masters name, got of Naaman two great Bags of Silver, as much or more than he
could carry, and two Changes of Raiment, and reckoned with himself what
Purchases he should make of Olive-yards, Vineyards, etc. But when he came back
to his Master with another Lie in his Mouth, (as one Lie leads to another) Thy
Servant 2 Kings 5. 25.
went no whither, (as denying the Fact) he received a sad Doom, The Leprosy of
Naaman stick to thee, and to thy Seed for ever. A fit and just Brand for the
Liars Forehead. Had every Liar one such, there would be many a foul Face to be
seen in the Streets. But how ordinary is it with young and old, Servants and
Children, when done amiss, to deny the fact, thinking thereby to excuse and
extenuate the fault, which does but aggravate it, and of one fault makes two,
as our Divine Poet,

Dare to be true, nothing can need a lie; Herbert.

A fault that needs it most, grows two thereby.
He that covers his sin (by a lie, or denial) Prove. 28. 3.
shall not prosper; but he that confesses and forsakes, shall find mercy both
with God and Man.

2. A second sort will not tell you a downright Lie, but as handsomely as they
2. Artificial Story, and fair Ta^es.
can smother the Truth by an Artificial Story, and think their work is done.
Thus did Joseph's Brethren, when they had sold their Brother, come home with a
fair Tale, having stripped him of his Garment, and dipped it in Blood, showed it to
their Father; This we found, whose Garment it is we know not, Discern thou
whether it be thy Sons, I Genesis 37. 32.
or no: And thought they should never have heard more of it. But not only
Murder, but Lying, and all Deceit will out; they were afterward brought to
much shame and horror for the fact: So, true is that of the Wiseman, A lying
tongue is but Prove 12. 19.
for a moment; but the lip of truth shall be established for ever; may be
blamed, never shamed.

A third sort comes and pleads Ignorance, 3. Ignorance.
and says he knew not that it was evil. This was wicked Balaam's excuse, when
the Angel met him with a drawn Sword; I did not know, says he, that it was not
thy mind that I should not go, I will therefore return, if it displease thee,
Number. 22. 35. Yes, Balaam, yes! thou knew well enough; for the Lord had said
expressly, ver. 12. Thou shall not go, neither curse them at all: Yet go he
would, and curse them too, though not in word, yet by that more cursed and
pernicious counsel that he gave the Midianites, to entice the Israelites both
to spiritual and bodily Fornication, with their Idolatrous Feasts, and then
with their Daughters. But though he escaped for a while, he was after cut
apieces Number. 31. 8
with the Sword.

It is true, there is an Ignorance, which if it be real (not pretended)
invincible (not affected) does in some sort excuse a tanto, though not toto,
does lessen the offense: Such was Paul's, who therefore found mercy upon his
repentance, because what he had done formerly against the Church, he had done
it ignorantly, and in his state of 1 Timothy c. 13.
unbelief; yet did he never after plead his Ignorance by way of Excuse, but
every where laments it, and the sad effects of it.

4. A fourth stands up in his own defense, 4 My Nature.
and pleads his Nature, saying, It is my nature, and I cannot help it; my
nature, and I must be born with; my nature is to be hasty, choleric, etc. The
godly man's grief is the wicked man's excuse. Thou have more cause to blush and
be ashamed of the depravedness of thy nature, and to pray to be made partaker
of the Divine nature. 2 Pet. 1. 3.
We pity the Child who has casually licked Poison, who is sick, swells,
vomits, purges, sweats, etc. and dies if it be not expelled; but hate and kill
the Toad and venomous Asp whose nature it is.

Shall Cain plead, my nature is to be bloody? Nimrod, mine to be Tyrannical?
Pharaoh, mine to be obstinate? Haman, mine to be haughty? Nabal, mine to be
currish? Ishmael, mine to scoff? Jezabel, mine to be unchaste, and Belshazzar
mine to be jovial and rant? Then let the Lion, Bear, Tiger, Wolf, and Serpent
plead, our nature is to raven, devour, destroy, and poison; let us alone: The
Thorn and Briar, our nature is to prick and tear, therefore let us grow in the
Garden. This argues the height of the malignity of sin, that it has poisoned
the Vitals, as of that Infection under the Law which had taken Warp and Woofe,
and was therefore adjudged Lev. 13. 52
to the Fire. David, and other holy men, have sadly lamented the corruption of
their nature; and shall any make that an excuse? Holy St. Austin confesses of
himself, That before his Conversion he was wont to please and flatter himself
with some such excuse, and fain would have Non mihi videhatur esse nos sed
nescio quam etiam in nobi^ naturam -- Excusare me amabam, and accusare nescio
aliud quod mecum esset, and non ego essem. Conf. l. 4. c. 10.
charged his sin upon somewhat else, his nature, or any thing, (he says he
could not tell what.) But, says he, my case was the more desperate and
incurable, because I thought not my self to be such a sinner. And I went on,
says he, ad excusandas excusationes, to make excuse upon excuse: But yet this
(he said) was his practice, before he knew God; but after, sadly bewails it.

5. Another is not ashamed to plead Custom 5. Custom.
to excuse himself; It is an ill custom I have got, I am sorry for it, God
forgive me, but I know not how to help it. Thus tell the Swearer of his Oaths,
the Drunkard of his Bruitishness, the Profane of his scurrilous Language; all
excuse it with this pretense, Custom is a Tyrant, and has overmastered them.
But did ever Prisoner at the Bar plead thus for himself before the Judge? My
Lord, I beg your pardon, I was so brought up, I have long used to cut a Purse,
It has been my Trade many a day to set upon men in the Highway, I know not
how to leave it. And shall this pass for a good excuse at Gods Bar, do you
think? Our Laws do justly deny the Book to such as stand convicted of the
second Offense: And the Law of God did appoint of the dumb Beast, That if the
Ox had got a haunt of pushing with the Horn, and the Owner knew of it, and did
not keep him in, but he gored one to death, Ox and Owner Ex. 21. 29.
both should be put to death. Or if the Leprosy should break out afresh in the
House, after two or three viewings of the Priest, it was to be pulled down to
the ground. And Lev. 14. 45.
shall any be so void of Reason, as to think custom in sin may plead
Prescription, and obtain a License? The vast Ocean is made up of Drops
multiplied, and the greatest sum of multiplied Units or Ciphers, and the most
desperate Estate of a sinners reiterated and repeated Acts, which beget a
custom and habit. St. Bernard describes the steps by which a man comes to the
height of sin, saying, At first hand sin is modest, and ashamed, and heavy;
then less heavy; after, not heavy at all, but light; then sweet, at last
natural and unavoidable: So that at first what was intolerable to be done, is
impossible to be left undone. And St. Austin tells us of his Mother Monica,
Conf. l. 9.
That having once got a taste of the Wine, by now a sip and then a sip, she
grew to such pass, that she would take up her full Cups, till she got the name
of a Meribibula, and was taunted for it, as if she had been an unreasonable
Tospot, or wicked Gossip. And speaking of himself, When time was, Satan, says
he, got me into his clutches, when he had prevailed over my Will to yield, then
did he make of it an Iron Chain, Conf. l. 8. c. 7.
wherewith I was bound; and this Iron Chain was no other but my ferrea
voluntas, made of no other Matter or Metal but my Iron and stiffnecked Will.
Give not way therefore at first, and keep out of the Devils Circle: For out of
the Will, says the same Father, once beginning to yield, springs Lust, out of
which, when it has conceived arises Custom; out of Custom, not resisted,
Necessity; out of Necessity, Death: As much to this pu^pose the holy Apostle,
Jam. 1. 13.

Custom is not such a Tyrant, but if the fault were not in a Man's own perverse
Will, it might be overmastered. The Father once refuted this vain Argument of
Customs Plea, by a plain Demonstration. The Common People, says he, were wont
time out of mind to wash in such a Bath; the King sets out a Proclamation, that
none should come into it more; there is none so hardy as to attempt it. We have
seen in our time some who had been in Arms, and wont constantly to go with
Swords by their sides, when commanded to depart the City or lay by their
Swords, present obedience was yielded. So it would be, if men had the like
regard to God's Commands, as they have to Man's Precepts; this Plea of Custom
would fall to the ground.

6. Another comes, and has for his Excuse, 6. It was in Drink.
That he was not himself, he knew not what he did, he was in Drink. And is it
not good reason he should be excused, think ye; and that one sin should excuse
another? This is so far from extenuating, that it does highly aggravate the
sin. Wine indeed is a mocker, strong Drink is raging: It is a Quarreller,
Fighter, Dueller, Murderer, Adulterer; what not? any thing, every thing that is
naught: But he that is deceived thereby, is not wise, says Solomon, nor
guiltless, but double guilty. The Sword is also a bloody and mischievous
Instrument, has taken away the life of thousands; but must the Weapon or Metal
be blamed, or the Man that abused it? Drunkenness is a great and big-bellied
sin; who knows what monstrous Births it may bring forth? Eating was the Mother
of Original sin; but Drinking may go for the Mother of all Actual sins. The Cup
of Drunkenness is like the Harlots, full of all abominations, and filthiness of
Fornication; like Circe's Cup, has an enchanting Virtue to transform Men into
Swine: So that here you may see one Swine wallowing in the mire of his own
Vomit, another in the Streets, another in the Bed of Uncleanness, and another
in the Blood of his Comrade. It has a strange operation even upon the most
sober, when once tasted of. How did it expose the Holy Patriarch to the
derision of Genesis 9 22.
his wicked Son? Another mortified Saint it turned for the present into an
incestuous Sodomite. Look not therefore on the Wine Genesis 9. 35.
when it shows its color, and sparkles in the Glass; remember at last it will
bite and sting like an Adder and Serpent, and thou know not what it may make
thee see, and say, or do; Thine eye shall behold P^ov. 23. 31, 32.
strange Women, and thy mouth will speak strange words; and when Wine is in,
thou know not what strange things thou may be put upon.

Oh England, England! This is one of thy National and Crying Sins: Drunkenness,
and the Abominations that attend it, as so many Familiars, or Evil Spirits,
dancing about the Cup. We may say with the Prophet, Every Table is full of
Vomit, and every Bed full of uncleanness. Esa^ 2^ 8. H^s 4. ^1.
Whoredom, Wine, and new Wine, has taken away Englands heart and glory. This,
with other sins, has filled the Cup of our Iniquities, and caused the Lord in
his just Judgment to give us that Cup of Trembling to drink of; Pestilence,
Fire, Sword, has been the portion of our Cuo: Yet thou see it not, and say
with Solomon's Drunkard, When I awake, I will to it again. Prove. 23. ult. Joel
1. 5.
Awake ye Drunkards, weep and howl, all ye drinkers of Wine, says the Prophet.
And consider how many fearful Woes are pronounced against this beastly Sin of
Drunkenness. There is one Woe Isa. 5. 11. another Isa. 5. 22. a third Isa. 28.
1. a fourth Habak. 2. 15. Besides many in the New Testament, Matthew. 24, 49, 50,
51. 1 Cor. 6. 10. Gal. 5. 21. Woe upon Woe. The Drunkard has one Woe upon his
Face, Prove. 23. 29. Who has woe? who has sorrows, but he? Another in his
State, Prove. 23. 21. Another on his ragged back, ibid. Another all over his
Body, Diseases, Aches, Cramps, Gout, etc. bred by this Distemper. Another worse
upon his Heart and Understanding, Hos. 4. 11. And the worst of all yet behind,
1 Cor. 6. 10. Gal. 5. 21. There Is a Woe for the morning-Drunkard, Isa. 5. 11. A
Woe for the afternoon and Evening-Drunkard, Isa. 5. 11. A Woe for the merry
Drunkard, Isa. 5. 12. A Woe for the mad Drunkard, Prove. 23. 29. the quarrelling
Drunkard. A Woe for the red-faced Drunkard, ibid. A Woe for the babbling
Drunkard, ibid. A Woe for the wanton and unclean Drunkard, Prove. 23. 33. A Woe
for the fighting Drunkard, Matthew. 24. 29. A Woe for the mighty Drunkard, Isa.
5. 22. A Woe for the Master Drunkard, Habak. 2. 15, 16. Yea, a Woe for the
common Drunkard, and for all the knot of Drunkards, 1 Cor. 6. 10.

7. The like Excuse is made by the next, I was in Passion.
who says, Though I was not in Drink, yet I was not my self, I was in Passion.
I^a fu^or brevi^ est. Hor.
And indeed, what is Passion, but a dry Drunkenness, and short Madness? and
does as much disturb Reason, as Wine or Frenzy, for the time. This was all
the Plea those Sons of Jacob made for their barbarous cruelty toward the
Shechemites: They thought themselves excusable for their Passion; and their
Passion, for the Provocation: Should he deal with our Sister as Genesis 34. 30, 31.
with an Harlot? But what said their Father to it? Me have you troubled;
nothing ever so much troubled me in my life: you have made me to stink, and my
Religion too. Neither did he only testify his detestation of the Fact when it
was fresh, but thought of it the longest day of his life; and on his Deathbed,
when he called his Sons together to receive each of them a Fathers Blessing, he
bequeaths this Legacy to those two Brethren, Simeon and Levi are Brethren Genesis
49. 5, 6, 7.
in Evil, Instruments of Cruelty are in their Habitation: Cursed be their
wrath, for it was cruel; and their anger, for it was fierce, etc. And it is
recorded of Theodosius, a godly Emperor, when he had commanded Sozomen. l. 7.
c. 24.
a cruel Execution upon the Citizens of Thessalonica, for an affront given him,
that St. Ambrose would not admit him to enter into the Church doors, or come to
the Lords Table, till he had done Penance, and acknowledged the Error of his
Passion. A wise man will watch over his Passion, and learn of Socrates, who
said once to his Servant offending, Were I not angry, I should strike thee.

8. A third comes and makes the same 8 It was done ^n my Ch^ldhood.
Plea ^oo, and says, I was not my self neither, was but young, a Child in
comparison, and did as a Child: And Childhood and Youth are Vanity, and must
have a time to sow their Wild Oats. But has not God written bitter things
against many for the sins of their youth? Two and Jo^ 13. 26. 2 Kings 2. 23.
forty Children paid dear for their Childish Impiety, and deriding the Prophet,
being torn in pieces by two Bears. Job and David smarted sore for their sins in
youth: P^^l 27 7. Job 20 7.
And Zophar tells us excellently, how such sins will come home to a man in his
age, and lie down with him in his sick bed, and break his very Bones; as those
Bruises that are taken in Youth, are felt usually in Age. And he that shall
read St. Austin's Confessions, and see how often in many Chapters Conf l 2. c. 5.
6, 7, 8, 9.
he is up with a Piece of Waggery (as we would call it) robbing an Orchard of
some green Apples; and with what Circumstances he does aggravate it, and
arraign himself for it; how he does lament it, and beg pardon at the hands of
God; will, I hope, learn not to allow in himself, or in his Children, any
Childish miscarriages. I and my Companions rose in the Night (says he stole
Apples more than they could tell what to do withal, no very pleasant Apples
neither, nor did he it for want, but wantonness, nulla causa malitiae nisi
malitia, and how merry they were, and how much they laughed when they had done
all, which he does punctually set down, and particularly bewail.

9. Another begs your Excuse, for he ^. H^^ go^d N^t^^e.
has no other fault in all the world, but that he is of so good a nature. Thus
must all be excused first or last. One excused himself but even now from his
Ill Nature; and now a Good Nature is the only crime: He is of so good a
nature, that he can say n^ body nay; he is no man's foe but his own; speak him
but fair, and you may have his very heart. But I say then, 1. How comes he to
say God may? Or is he no body with him? Rehob^am and Zedekiah, the first and
last Kings of Judah, were two such good-natured men; and the one lost ten
Tribes by his good nature, the other all. Rehoboam could not find in his heart
to say the Youngsters nay, he was so tenderhearted, as he is said, 2 Chronicles.
13. 7. And the other spoke it out in plain English to his Lords and Courtiers,
desiring him to secure Jeremy, or put him to death; I leave him to you, for the
King is not he that can Jer. 38. 4.
do any thing against you. Yet both of these could say God nay. Rehoboam could
say the wise Grandees of State nay: And Zedekiah could say Jeremy the Prophet
nay, with whom he had many a Conference. 2. You may have his heart you say) if
you speak him fair; you need but to hold up your Finger, he will do what you
would have him. A mighty good nature sure! How comes it then to pass, that let
the Lord or his Ministers speak never so fair, entreat, persuade, beseech; or
let the Lord lift up his hand in way of Judgment, he yields not, -- Cereus in
vitium flecti. His evil Companions have him at a beck, they desire him, he
becomes bound, and is surety for his Friend: But Solomon calls him a fool for
his labor; A man void of understanding Prev. 17. 18.
strikes hands and becomes surety, etc.

3. Is it so small a matter to be no bodies foe but his own? Yet 1. It cannot
be said so of such. This fool pulls down his House with his great good nature
and little wit. Patrimony is sold and spent, Wife and Children undone, by this
good nature. And will any man open his mouth to plead for such? The Heathen
will rise up against him, and condemn him. If any provide not for his own,
specially those of his Household, (his own Flesh and Blood) he is worse than 1 Timothy 5. 8.
an Infidel: Yea, such have not only unchristened and unmanned themselves, but
have unnatured themselves by this good nature. Monsters you may call them, and
worse than Monsters. The Sea Monsters Lam. 4. 3.
draw out their Breasts, and have a tender care of their young; but these
sweet-natured Souls are like the Ostrich in the Wilderness, the right Emblem of
improvident and unnatural Parents; she leaves her Eggs to their chance, and is
hardened against Job 39. 15, 16.
her young ones, as if they were not hers. -- She is without fear, etc. Or, 2.
If it were granted, such were no man's foe but their own, were this so light a
matter? The whole Creation, as one Man, would rise up against such, and condemn
them; it being the common and first Principle that Nature has implanted in
every Animal, Self-preservation; and the second is like to this (the very next
Impression of Nature stamped upon the heart of every living Creature) is the
preservation of those that come of them. And from these two Principles, no
Creature but Man only (no Man but the unnatural) can be enticed, or any way
corrupted to act against them. In a word, that Man has no good nature at all,
who is not good-natured to himself. He that is wise, is wise Prove 9. 12.
for himself, says the Wiseman: And he that loves another, must first love
himself, which is to be the measure and stint of my love to another. -- Thou
shall love thy neighbor as thy self, next to thy self. Religion does not
destroy self-love, but direct it, that we love not our selves inordinately, our
selves solely. Oh that the World were more full of this true self-love than it
is! Then should we not have cause to complain of so many ill Husbands, and
worse Christians, who are neither true to God, nor themselves, nor their
nearest Friends, but injurious to all. They wrong God and Religion, which
should be honored by them; wrong their King and Country, which should be
supported by them; wrong their Families, which should be uphold and provided
for by them; and most of all injurious to their own Souls, which (after Wife
and Children undone here) are eternally undone by them. And will any
henceforward give in this for an Excuse any more?

10. I was in Jest, says another; and a little harmless Mirth is not to be
blamed. 10. I was in jest.
True, if harmless. Honest Mirth does good like a Medicine, Prove. 17. 22. Is a
continual Feast, Prove. 15. 15. The Scripture allows (yea commands)
rejoicing in the Lord. Rejoice in the Lord always, Phil. 4. 4. But there is a
Laughter which is called Madness, Eccles. 2. 2. and is the proper Cognizance of
the Fool, Eccles. 2. 6. And Solomon observes, There is a man who plays mad
reaks, casts about firebrands, arrows, Prove. 26. 18, 19.
and death, abusive Jests, and unhandsom actions, and puts off all with this,
Am not I in sport? Excellently our English Lyrick,

Make not thy sport abuses; for the Fly
That feeds on Dung, is colored thereby.
Pick out of mirth as stones out of thy grounds,
Profaneness, filthiness, abusiveness;
These are the scum with which course Wits abound, etc.
How dear did the Israelites pay for their mad holiday mirth, when they were
eating, drinking, and dancing about their new Puppet? It cost the lives of
three thousand, executed by Gods appointment. Nor Exodus 32. 28.
may we forget how those poor Children were destroyed for their scurrilous
Song, and jeering the holy Prophet. Nor had the 2 Kings 2. 24.
Philistims any cause to brag of their mirth at last, who were all gathered
together to see blind Sampson make them sport, to make them laugh; the
Playhouse fell Judges 16. 27, 30.
down upon their heads, and slew three thousand upon the place. In their heat
(says the Lord, speaking of the Chaldeans) I will make their Feast, and I will
make them drunken, that they may rejoice, and sleep a perpetual sleep, and not
awake. Jer. 51. 39.
A sad Reckoning, a sad Feast, a sad Drinking, a sad Sleep; sad all. So it fell
out to Belshazzar, so to Amnon, and so to many 2 Samuel 13. 28.
a one since, who have been cut off in the midst of their Cups and Merriment.

11. But he that can say, I did such a 11. I did against my will.
thing against my will, thinks he has said enough for his excuse. Then might
Pilate after washing his hands, been clear of the Blood of Christ, whom with
much reluctance he gave Sentence against, at the Peoples restless instigation:
And Peter might have spared his Tears, after the denial of his Master. But
awakened Conscience is not so to be stilled, or lulled asleep. In the Law it
was appointed, That he who had shed Blood unwittingly, and against his will,
was to run for it to the City of Refuge; Deuteronomy. 19. 4.
And we must to Christ, to have Ignorances and Oversights pardoned, or die. How
bitterly did Origin bewail his Lapse, Eusebius. l. 7.
though never so much against his will he had been drawn to Sacrifice. And in
our English Martyrology we read of several Mr. Thomas Whittell, James Abbes,
Thomas Benbridge.
who, against their will and Conscience, had, to save their Lives, abjured,
recanted, or promised Submission and Conformity to the then Church-Practices,
that afterward had no rest day nor night, till they had revoked those
Recantations, and submitted themselves to any kind of sufferings, rather than
so to smother Conscience.

12. Another lays the blame on Necessity, 12. Necessity.
and thinks that (as it is above all Law) so above all Exception. Ingens Telum.
Necessity justifies many acts, never sin. Otherwise the Martyrs were all out,
who to preserve their Consciences pure, gave up all, and loved not their lives
unto the death, Rev. 12. 11. But this was the Plea of the Unjust Luke 16.
Steward, What shall I do? My Master is turning me off; Dig I cannot, Beg I
will not, Staiv^ I must not; of necessity I must strike in with my Masters
Debtors, though to his prejudice, and make sure of somewhat to take to. A
necessity of his own making. There is never any necessity of sinning. Sin often
brings men into necessities, no necessity can ever bring a man out of sin.

13. Among other frivolous Excuses, 13. Besides my intention.
this is one also: It was besides my intention; little did I dream this or that
would have followed, I was drawn in. But we should remember those frequent
Items, Come not Prove. 5. 8.
near her corner: Shun occasions: Abstain from appearance of evil, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
21. Keep to thy Calling, and ways, and so keep thee off the Devils ground, (as
he said once of a Maid that he took possession of, finding her at a Stage Play)
and out of his Circle. We find by experience, the coldest Water becomes hot,
being a while over the Fire; and the hardest Ice soon begins to thaw, being
near the Heat. The beginning of many Evils (as well as Contention) is like the
letting out of Water out of the Banks, or kindling of a Fire; who knows where
either may stay? Therefore the Wise man's Counsel is, Cease before it be Prove.
17. 14.
meddled with: q. d. Make an end before thou begin. Full little did Dinah think
Genesis 34. 1 and 16, 27.
her Visit in Civility or Curiosity would have occasioned her deflowring: And
a^ little did Shechem think that deflowring would have cost so much Blood. And
it is like Aaron never thought of making the Calf, when he asked their Earings.
But undoubtedly it was the furthest end of St. Peter's thought to deny his
Master, when he entered the High Priests Palace, which he had so solemnly
protested against. But we may see we are no more our own, when once out of our
way. Yet is this observable to our present Case: This holy man never went about
to excuse his crime, by saying it was besides his intention; but he went out
and wept bitterly, Matthew. 26. 75.

14. Nor are they a few who think to come off with this; My fear betrayed me,
14. I was surprised with fear.
that I knew not what I said or did. The fear of man (as Solomon observes)
causes many a snare, Prove. 29. 25. And a cruel Tyrant it is, and too like that
false Harlot spoken of in another place, that has cast Prove. 7. 26.
down many wounded, yea many strong ones have fallen under her hands: Witness
Abraham, Isaac, David, Peter, Cranmer, etc. Saints all of the first Magnitude:
Yet this is nevertheless a sin, and to be bewailed, Nor do such Examples
excuse, but condemn us the more, if we think to have our sin Patronized by
their Example: Bis peccat, qui exemplo peccat: He sins twice, that sins by
another exampl^. We should guard our hearts against this base fear of Man,
with the awful dread of him who is able to destroy Soul and Body in Hell; and
consider whether it be not a more fearful thing to fall into the hands of the
living God, than of a Man that shall die, and the Son of Man which is but a
Worm. Then would this Divine fear quite destroy those false fears, as Aaron's
Rod devoured those false and imaginary Rods, and prevent those Storms and
Floods, or Flames of horror, which the over-prevailing fear of Man has
betrayed us unto; witness those notable Examples and Champions of Christ, Peter
and Cranmer, and many other shrinking Professors, who not till after much
bitter Repentance, flying to Christ, obtained mercy. And that of miserable
Spira is never to be forgotten, who though he so repented and bewailed this
sin, that he was swallowed up of sorrow, yet never gained peace, or so much as
the least glimpse of hope, but died in extreme despair.

15. Sometimes this is given in for Excuse; 15. It was for a matter of moment.
It was not for a trifle, but for a matter of moment; my Livelihood depends on
it, as Demetrius pleaded for his Silver Shrines. It was for a Prize, says
another, that which might make me and mine for ever. I saw (said Achan) a Wedge
of Gold, a rich Babylonish Garment, and two hundred Shekels of Silver, and none
was by to discover it, and who would not put the Curse to the venture on such
terms? But Gold may be bought too dear, as our Proverb says. It proved, as all
such Cheats do, Aurum Tholosanum, accursed Gold; it consumed Achan and all his
house. Si violandum est Jus, Regni Causa violandum est, etc. was the saying of
an elder than Machiavel: If a Kingdom lie at stake, there can be no foul play
to win it: A Crown wipes off all blots, and excuses all Crimes, tam patrata,
quam patranda, already committed, or to be committed, as Alexander thought,
when he trussed up a pedling Pyrate that took now and then a Barque, when
himself, as he was told by the same Pyrate, exercised an universal Pyracy and
Robbery by Sea and Land, and cri^d, Have at all; yet did he reckon his Name
should be recorded in the Books of Fame.

O tandem major parcas Insane minori. And of this Religion was Jeroboam, who,
to get and keep the Crown, thinks Conscience must not be too strait l^ced. Rem
si possis recte, si non quocunque modo rem, or regnum rather. Kingdoms are to
be gotten, governed, kept, by other Arts than other private States are.
Therefore to get the Crown, he waits the opportunity of a Rupture, then makes
his advantage of it, to set his Master aside: And when got the Crown, he sets
Religion to sale, erects a new Model of Worship, substitutes another sort of
Clergymen, such as should thoroughly comply; and outs all of their Ministerial
Employment, that were of Gods appointment. But it is a Golden Saying of
Solomon, and worthy of a Christian Princes Motto in his Coin, Justitia Prove.
16. 12.
firmat Thronum, The Throne is established by Righteousness. This turned to the
utter ruin of Jeroboam and his whole House. So likewise those wise
Master Builders, to make the House stand the surer, must needs pull out the
Head Cornerstone, lest the Romans should come and take away their Place,
Dignity, and Nation; all lay then at stake, as they then thought: But did they
not thereby pull an old House on their own Heads; or rather, as our Savior
said, pull a Stone upon them, which has ground them and their Nation to
Powder? This brought on those very Romans which they feared, and hastened on the
Abomination of Desolation, which they never feared.

16. Another makes this his Excuse; It was to cover his shame. This was that
16. To cover shame.
set the Son of Jesse awork, after that foul Act with Bathsheba; Vriah must be
sent for home; if that will not do, made drunk; if that, and nothing else, he
must be sent to his long home. Alas, poor Bethleemite! Thou said thou wast
once in a great strait, when of three Judgments thou must choose one; but never
in such a strait as now. Repentance had been thy only Remedy. Thou consultedst
shame to thy House; and that which thou did contrive to smother it, made it
break out at the House top, and proclaimed it in the sight of the Sun. How well
had it been with thee, if thou had knocked down the first rise of the
Tentation with thy Daughter Tamars detestation, As for me, whither shall I
cause 2 Samuel 13. 13.
my shame to go? Thou had then prevented those Tragical Calamities that after
befell thee and thy Family. Yet alas! how ordinary is it for men to seek to
cover shame with sin, and to hide a less, run into a greater sin, which will be
sure to find them out, and lay them open at last? As in case of Robbery, to
conceal the Theft, Murder is committed; and often after one Murder committed, a
second or a third follows; as if Blood could be covered with Blood. And in the
case of Bastardy, how dreadful, yet how ordinary is it for the unnatural
Parents, set on by the instigation of the Devil, to lay violent hands on their
own innocent Births! Thereby making that sin, which was bad enough before, (yet
pardonable) now a crimson sin, and unpardonable. Many Publicans and Harlots
have repented and found mercy: but Blood is a crying sin, and calls for
Vengeance. Murderer is the Devils first Title, John 8. 44. But with what
fearful aggravations is this Infanticidium, murder of Infants, overcharged
above any other almost? Murder of any kind is dreadful; but wilful and
deliberate, much more. The casual murder might, the wilful might not be
pardoned: But to murder an Innocent, Numb. 35. 31.
that could never wrong any, what barbarous Inhumanity this! And if any in the
world may be called Innocents, Infants most properly. Yet to do this with thy
own hands, who art the Father or Mother, and ought by the Law of Nature to
preserve thy Young, Tygres and Bears will rise up against thee, and condemn
thee. This is an act of so deep a dye, that no words can set it out with horror
enough: An act not only barbarous and inhumane, but an unnatural, and in a
good sense I may call it an unbruitish act. This worse than thy former sin: Thy
Fornication was a brutish, this a devilish act. Yet alas! how does Satan hurry
on these poor Creatures from sin to sin, bearing them in hand this is the only
way for security and secrecy? Whereas this is that which makes all break out,
and that with a vengeance too. The only way had been to fly to that fountain
opened for sin and uncleanness, Zach. 13. 1. and to go into the lowest Form of
humble Penitents, as did that noted sinful Creature once, who had not the
confidence to look Christ in the face, but came behind him, and, not presuming
to touch his head, washed his feet with her penitential tears, (the best
Pattern in the world for such Offenders) who had such acceptance, that her
Savior said to her, Her Luke 7. 3. 8.
sins that were many were forgiven her. This is the only way: All other ways
and deeds of darkness will be brought to light, and then the shame thou
would avoid, will come home with a double measure of guilt and horror. Oh
that all such would well consider that fearful Woe denounced against such
sin-coverings, Isa. 30. 1, 2. Woe to the rebellious Children, says the Lord,
that take counsel, but not of me, and cover with a covering, but not of my
Spirit, that they may add sin to sin. This dreadful Woe will certainly pursue
and overtake such kind of Offenders, of whose Practice it is so lively a
description. 1. After such foul sins of Murder, Whoredom, etc. there is nothing
but taking counsel and devising how to keep it close: They consult with Flesh
and Blood, consult with Sin and Satan: They take counsel, but not of me, says
the Lord. 2. They cover with a Covering.] That is all which is desired, not a
Cure but a Cover, not a Pardon, but a palliating and cloaking of Sin: This way
is thought of, and that way, and a Covering they must have, but not of my
Spirit; of the evil Spirit therefore it must needs be. So 3. They add sin to
sin, which is the third thing noted, and worst of all: They enquire not how
lawful; but, will it cover shame? That is all they look after: Sin is nothing
with them, and sin upon sin, and wrath upon wrath; their only business is how
to keep off shame. Those two Harlots, 1 Kings 3. were Saints to these
Miscreants, who both strove for the living Child, neither would own the dead
Child.

17. There be diverse others who think 17. It was not my act but others.
they need no Excuse; as first, He who says, It was not his act, but others.
But had thou no hand in it at all by Counsel, Consent, or Privity? Thou may
be the Principal, when others are the Actors. Was not he charged with the Blood
of Vriah, who was at that time many a Mile off; not slain by his hand, but by
the hand of the Children of Ammon? There be many 2 Samuel 12. 9.
ways whereby men may be guilty of other men's sins; eight, the principal, are
comprised in that old Distich,

Consulo, Praecipio, Consentio, Provoco, Laudo;
Non retego culpam, non punio, non reprehendo.
Counsel, Command, Consent, Provoke, Commend;
Not publish, punish, or not reprehend.
1. Counsel. Thus was Jonadab foully guilty of the deflowring of Tamar, when 2 Samuel 13. 5.
he gave Amnon those Instructions how to accomplish his Incestuous Lust.

2. Command. Thus Absalom guilty of Amnon's Blood, who gave Command to 2 Samuel
13. 28.
his Servants to set upon him, and assassinate him at his Table; Have not I
commanded you?

3. Consent. Thus Saul guilty of the Blood of Steven, though he cast not one
Acts 8. 1.
stone at him, only held the Garments of them who did it.

4. Provoke. Thus the Blood of Naboth is charged on Jezabel, and all the
Villainies 1 Kings ^. 25.
of Ahab, because she stirred him up, and egged him on.

5. Commend. They that forsake the Law, praise the wicked; but such as keep the
Law, contend with them, Prove. 28. 4. They who commend and approve an evil fact,
whether before or post factum, are equally guilty. Had not old Jacob showed his
detestation of his Sons cruelty and perfidiousness toward the Shechemites, he
had been as faulty as they.

6. Not to publish, or discover. The Counsel-keeper is as bad as the
Counsel-giver. If a Soul sin, and hear the voice of swearing, and is a witness
whether he have seen, or otherwise known of it, if he do not utter it, he shall
bear his iniquity, Lev. 5. 1. By this means Joseph, when a Youth of seventeen
Genesis 37. 2.
years of age, cleared himself of his Brethrens faults, by bringing to his
Father their evil report.

7. Not to punish those that do amiss, when under our Jurisdiction. Thus the
whole Tribe of Benjamin, when Justice was demanded against those Sons of Belial
in Gibeah, that committed that outrage upon the Levite and his Concubine, made
Judges 20. 48.
their sin their own, and were almost totally cut off for it. Thus those
indulgent Parents who, instead of correcting their Childrens misdemeanors, say
not so much as Why do thou so? or only, Nay my Sons, 1 Kings 1. 6. 1 Samuel 2.
24.
do no more so; soon find their Children to become Thorns in their Sides, and
Pricks in their Eyes, and are both alike sinful, the one by omission, the other
by commission; and then God first visits the sins of the Fathers upon the
Children, by their misdemeanors; and after visits the sins of the Children
upon the Fathers, by their affliction.

8. Lastly, Not to reprove, is another way making us Partakers of others sins.
A duty as often pressed as any other, Ephesians. 5. 11. Have no fellowship with
unfruitful works of darkness, but reprove them. Lev. 19. 17. Thou shall not
hate thy Brother in thy heart; thou shall in any wise rebuke him, and not
suffer sin upon him. No Duty more beneficial, none more neglected. There be
many Censurers, or Backbiters; few Reprovers: Many Flatterers, few faithful
Reprovers. Rare to find a Man that will give a Reproof, as rare to find the Man
will take it. Whereas there is no surer Evidence of true Love, than to give a
Reproof; nor surer Evidence of true Grace, than to take it. Many have had cause
to bless God for a Reproof seasonably given, Prove. 6. 13. They are the way of
life. St. Austin gives two Instances of the happy success of a Reproof: The one
given by himself to Alipius, thereby reclaimed from his haunting the Theater
and Plays: The other by Aug. Conf l. 6. and l. 9
a Taunt and Check given to his Mother Monica, thereby reclaimed from her
Tippling and Gossiping. But whosoever fails in this Duty, the Minister must not.
The chief part, I may say, of his Work lies in this, I charge thee before God,
and the Lord 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2. (...).
Jesus Christ, Be instant, Reprove, Rebuke. Two words; Do it once, do it again.
The Reproving and Convincing Ministry is commonly the most Successful Ministry.

18. And the next man thinks he needs 18. I did it in my zeal.
no Excuse, but rather Applause; for what he did was out of pure Zeal, and the
fervor of his Spirit. But what was this thy Zeal? was it in a good matter, or
against an evil? Then thy Zeal is just. But if in an ill matter, or ill manner,
or to an ill end, it loses its praise, and becomes vicious. Saul had Zeal
enough, such as it was, when in his zeal to the House of Israel he cut off the
2 Samuel 21. 2.
Gibeonites, which caused many of his House to be cut off. Jehu wanted no Zeal
against the House of Ahab; but it was for a selfish 2 Kings 10. 16.
end. Nor they who cast out their Brethren (for no crime, but) for his name
sake: For they said, God should be glorified, Es. 66. 5.
and the Church purged thereby. But most of all excessive was he, who, when
time was, thought he was bound to persecute all that called on the Name of
Christ, and compelled the Believers to abjure, Acts 24. 5.
blaspheme, or fly for it: What in one place he says of himself, I was
exceeding zealous, Gal. 1. 14. In another he says, Being more then exceeding
mad, Acts 26. 11. And this was the righter name for such intemperate zeal:
Zeal, we say, is a mixed passion, compounded of Love and Anger; but if it have
not also a mixture of Piety and Charity, of Prudence and Moderation, it becomes
a bitter Purge, and causes sad Distempers both in the Spirit and Church.
Therefore St. James calls it bitter zeal, James 3. 14. We render it Envying;
but when it is bitter, it is put among the works of the Flesh, Gal. 5. 20. and
joined Romans 13. 13. 1 Cor. 3. 3. and 13. 4. 2 Cor. 12. 20.
with Strife, Contention, Division, as in many places of Scripture; then call
it not Naomi, but Marah; for it becomes like that bitter Star called Wormwood
in the Revelations, which falling from Heaven, Iam 3. 14. Rev. 8. 10, 11.
and burning like a Lamp for a while; where it fell, it embittered all, and
turned the Waters into Wormwood, that whosoever drank of them died: This was (...),
bitter zeal indeed.

19. A third comes with like confidence, 19. It is my Conscience.
and thinks he needs no Excuse; for he acts according to his Conscience, and
that will bear him out. And there are many make this Plea: As,

1. Many will desire their harsh Censures, and harsher carriage toward others,
with whom they differ in matters of Opinion about Religion, by reason of their
different Education, Interest, Apprehension, etc. saying, They judge themselves
bound in conscience so to do: And of this we may say, -- Iliacos intra muros
peccatur and extra. Thus it is all the World over: In the Church, and out of
the Church. Thus the Jew of old hated and anathematized the Samaritan, and the
Samaritan did the like to him again: The difference was about the Mode, the
Place, and the Temple or Mountain of Worship. The Jew said, No place but
Jerusalem; the other was for Mount Girizim: but so wide the difference, that
Jew and Samaritan had nothing to do one with the other, Joh. 4. 9. And when
they called Christ Samaritan, they thought they called him by as bad a Name as
when they called him Devil. Joh. 8. 48.
The Jew now hates the Christian, and the passionate Christian him as much: The
Mahumetan both: And the Papist the Protestant. And which is saddest of all,
Fundi nostri calamitas: There are unkind differences among Protestants, and
from thence bitter Invectives, hard Censures, opprobrious Language, dreadful
Heart-burnings, and lamentable Separations, and distances one from another.

Quantum Religio potuit suadere malorum!
But alas! if Religion, Piety, Charity, Conscience, or any of them were rightly
understood, this need not be, Tros Tyriusve, etc. Let him be Jew, Turk, Papist,
Pagan, Barbarian, Scythian; I must speak ill of no Man, wrong no man, call no
man Common or Unclean; but seek the good of all, and walk inoffensively to all.
Our Savior came to take down partition Walls: It Romans 16. 17, 18.
is Satan who sets them up; neither do they serve the Lord Jesus Christ, but
their own Bellies, who cause and keep up Divisions among Christians.

2. Another pleads Conscience too, and 2. Under a Vow.
says, I am under a Vow: So pleaded those obstinate Jews against Jeremy, Jer.
44. 16.

3. After him comes another and says, I 3. An Oath.
have taken a solemn Oath: Thus reasoned Herod, when he took off John Baptist's
Mark 6. 26.
Head.

4. And after them, come others and say, 4: A Curse.
But we have bound our selves under an Oath and Curse too: So alleged those
bloody Enemies of Paul, That they would neither Eat nor Drink, till they had
killed Acts ^3. 14.
Paul: But neither the one, or other, or any thing else can bind to Sin. It is
a resolved Maxim in Divinity, Injusta vincula rumpit Justitia, Unlawful
Promises, Vows or Oaths, are lawfully broken. And David's Example is
remarkable, who having in heat of blood made an Oath, and that with an
Imprecation annexed, God do so to me, and more also, if I be not revenged on
Nabal; yet when Abigal came to persuade him* he retracted his Oath, blessed God
and her, and her good Counsel, and proceeded 1 Samuel 25. 22. and 31.
no further in his intended Self-Revenge.

20. Again, others come with this Excuse, 20. It is but a small Sin.
It was but a small Sin, a venial Peccadillo; If I never do worse, I hope I
shall do well; as to tell an officious Lie, to swear in Passion, or by Faith
and Troth, by Heaven, or by my Hand, etc. But is there any least Commandment:
Though we have a saying of humane Laws, they take no notice of many petty
Offenses, yet De minimis curat Lex Divina, He that breaks one of the least of
God's Commandments, and Mat. 5. 19.
teaches so, is least in the Kingdom of Heaven. The Law of God takes notice of
Adultery and Murder in the eye and thought, and of the idle word: The little
sins unrepented of, prove the most dangerous Sins. The Small Pox kills more
year by year, then are usually swept away with the raging Pestilence. The
gathering of a few sticks on the Sabbath might be looked Number. 15. 35.
upon as a small Offense, yet God commanded the Sabbath-Breaker should be
stoned.

And the stealing of a few Apples, when by a Child, you would think should
never trouble a man's thoughts after; yet does St. Austin more then once confess
and bewail it. And says, Qui modica spernit paulatim decidit; He that scruples
not small Sins, knows not where he shall stop.

21. It was the first time, says another: 21. The first time.
I did so but once. Answer, And too much of that. Adam offended but once, nor
Achan, nor Gehazi, nor he that gathered Sticks on the Sabbath, nor he that
cursed, Lev. 24. 14. Yet how were they punished! Judas betrayed his Master but
once, and dispaired: Cain committed one Murder* and accursed: David for one act
of Adultery, how visited!

22. I have but this one fault in all the 22. It is all the fault I have.
World: Abate me but this, and I ask no favor. I hope if the Lord would have
spared Sodom, if there lacked five of the fifty first demanded, he will not
destroy me for lack of one: But this was our Savior's answer to the young man,
One thing thou Mark 10. 21. Jam. 2. 10.
lackest. And St. James resolves the case, He that keeps the whole Law, and
fails in one point, is guilty of all: One Disease may as well kill as twenty.
Pluck out this right Eye of thine, if that be it which makes thee to offend,
our Savior Commands. One Hadad escaping, when all the males in 1 Kings 11.
15.
Edom were destroyed, created Solomon much disturbance. And one only Jehoash
escaping hid, when the whole Line was 2 Kings 11. 1, 2.
destroyed, wiped Athaliah of the Crown; so may one hid sin deprive thee of
Heaven: The right Christian must be an Vniversalist. Such is God's Command, All
or none, Deuteronomy. 11. 32. Such is the Christians engagement, Dolus latet in
particularibus, sinceritas patet in universalibus.
All and every one, Acts 10. 33. The Dolus, the Hypocrisy here lies in a
particular, when sincerity manifests it self in the general.

23. But it was to prevent a great danger, and to save my life; and who would
23. It was to save my life.
not strain hard in such a case! Life is sweet, I confess, and would be
preserved by all lawful means. This was the Plea of the Gibeonites, when, to
prevent that impending Storm, they used those Wiles, and framed those Lies, We
were afraid for our Lives, Josh. 9. 24.
say they, and have done this. Their lives they saved indeed, but escaped not
the Curse, and were adjudged to perpetual slavery for their collusion and
dissembling.

24. Another looks to be excused for his 24. Negative goodness,
Negatives, and applauds himself for his negative goodness: He is neither Whore
nor Thief, etc. And as to Religion, neither Athiest nor Papist, Anabaptist, or
other Sectary: But what art thou in the mean time, as to the practice and power
of godliness? It may be an ignorant Protestant, liveless Professor, a proud
self-conceited Laodicean, a regardless Gallio, a halting Jehu, a painted
Sepulcher. Thy state may be applauded by men, but remember that of our Savior,
Luke 16. 15. That which is highly esteemed of men, may be abomination with God.
Deest aliquid ritus, There is one thing needful, and that one thing thou
lackest: The somewhat that is positive. An hundred Ciphers make not so much as
one Figure; And two Negatives in Divinity, nay, put in twenty, make not one
Affirmative. In plain English, thy case is naught; thou art not yet one step
Heavenward, but one step from Hell: The first step from Hell is, Cease to do
evil. The first step to Heaven is, Learn to do well, Esaias 1. 16. The Scripture
joins Affirmatives and Negatives together, and they must not be parted, Romans
13. 13, 14. Not in Chambering and Wantonness, etc. But put on the Lord Jesus.
There ye have both, Tit. 2. 11, 12. The grace of God teaches us to deny
ungodliness, and wordly lusts; there is the Negative: And to live soberly,
righteously and godly; there is the Affirmative. It is very observable, That in
the last Judgment Mat. 3. 10.
described, Matthew. 25. The Venite, or absolution, Come ye blessed; Runs all
upon the Affirmative, Ye gave me Meat, Drink, Clothing, Visits, etc. And the
Sentence of Condemnation runs all upon the Negative, No Meat, no Drink, etc.
The truth is, no man goes to Hell, but for want of Positives and Affirmatives.

25. And now comes in another, and 25. Many good deeds.
takes hold of what I said last, and thinks I have made his Excuse for him: For
though, says he, I am a great Sinner; yet for the good parts God has bestowed
on me, and for the good Duties, and the many other good things I perform;
setting the one against the other, I may not only pass excusable, but gain an
Approbation. Thus Prove. 7. 14.
that vile Strumpet thought to pass with her Devotions: She had been confessed,
absolved, done her Penance, paid her Vows, therefore might sin afresh. Thus
Mat. 23. 14.
the Pharisee, when he had made a prey of a poor Widow, thinks his sin expiated
by a long Prayer, which he meant to say ere he went to Bed. And thus, I fear,
do many Professors now adays, for whom my Heart bleeds; who, like the
Innkeeper, cleanse their Rooms in the Morning, to be fouled again by all
Comers ere Night: Or like the Monks, who have their Mattins and Even-song, and
all day do what they list, only with this difference; The one mock God, in
saying what they understand not; And the other deceive themselves in plain
English, praying that which they after mind not. But as one said once, Tell me
not what the man is in Affliction, but what after: So say I, Tell me not what a
man is in Duty, but what after it.

Again, there are others who think to expiate their many Sins in their Life, by
doing some notable act of Charity at their Death, by their Goods ill gotten.
Debts are to be paid before Legacies; and Restitution is to go before Charity,
as we see in Zacheus. We speak not against good works, but would have them done
in a good manner, that they may redound to the good of the Donor. Many rich men
once cast in great Gi^^s into the Treasury, and all did not amount to one
Farthing: The poor Widow cast in no more, and all theirs was not so much. God
hates Robbery for Burnt-Offering, Esaias 61. 8. Deuteronomy. 23. 18.
and the price of a Dog, or the hire of a Harlot, was not to come into his
Offering. Remarkable is that story of Selimus he First, who, near his end, was
counseled by Pyrrhus the Bassa, to lay out a great mass of Treasure, taken
from Persian Merchants, upon a notable Hospital for the Poor; No, says he, God
forbid I should bestow those Goods so ill gotten, upon Works of Charity and
Devotion, for mine own vainglory and praise: I will never do it, but command,
that they be all restored to the right Owners. It is true indeed, wicked men
may do some magnificent acts, much cried up by men, yet nothing available to
the Doer. What a splendid Temple was that which Herod built, Josephus says,
Not much inferior, if any thing at all, to that built by Solomon; far beyond
that built by Cyrus and Darius. Tacitus calls it, Immensae opulentiae Templum;
yet he as very a Miscreant as ever breathed.

26. I may not forget the vulgar Excuse 26. Fair inside, and good heart.
of many ignorant persons, Their fair inside, and good heart. Charge them with
their gross Ignorance, neglect of God's Service in Family, or otherwise, loose
and lewd talk, etc. They are ready to answer, Though I cannot talk so well, and
have not so much knowledge; yet for a Heart to Godward, I have as good as the
best: I have so strong a Faith, as I never yet doubted; and for loving God, I
do, and ever did with all my heart. Poor Souls, thy Heart good without
knowledge, is as an Eye good without sight, Prove. 19. 2. Tell me thou have a
strong Faith, and a Heart full of love to God, when thy life and talk is loose
and vain; and persuade me thou hear Thunder, when I see it snows: The one is
not more the old man's wonder, then this the Christians, Or that the Spring is
sweet, when the water's bitter; Or that the Tree is a Pear Tree, when it
bears Bramble-Berries; Or that the man is sound, who is always Coughing in my
Ears, and spits up his Lungs and putrid matter in my sight. As is the Treasure
of the Heart, such is the Communcation and Conversation: Tell this to thy
Child, not to me. Thy Child would persuade thee, he loves thee with all his
heart, and will strike on his Breast when thou ask him, Where he loves thee;
yet let him have an Apple, ask him to give it, or a part of it; or bid him go
into the next Room, if dark, to fetch thee any thing, he shrinks and shrugs,
but will do neither. So if the Lord bid thee part with the least sin, or go
into the darks of seriousness, and mortifying any lust; thou flingest away, and
wilt do neither. And now tell me, whose Speech and Carriage is more Childish,
thine or his?

27. In the last place comes in one, who 27. Little did I think it.
says, Little did I think; and we may soon discern whose Language this is,
Insipientis est, etc. Even the greatest Fool has his after-wit, and
after-repentance: Had I been aware, or were it to do again, I would do
otherwise. Thus it is in Temporals, thus in Spirituals, thus in this Life, thus
after. Who would have thought, says the Prodidal, that I should ever come to
beg a morsel of Bread? That did I, may the provident man say. Who would have
thought, said Haman and Jezabel, that we should have come to such ends? We
never expected other, say the godly, but that so proud a Wretch should have a
shameful downfall; and that a Whore, a Witch, a Murderer should come to an
infamous end. Who would have thought, said the foolish Builder, that such a
storm should have come, and on such a sudden? And the foolish Virgins, that the
Bridegroom should surprise us, that we had not time to trim our Lamps? That did
we, say the wise Builder and wise Virgin, and we provided against both. Who
would have thought, says Dives, there had been such a place of Torments, and
that I should after all my Ease and Plenty, have come hither, and that I should
see Lazarus taken into Heaven, and my self shut out? What did Moses and the
Prophets tell thee other, says Abraham? And who would think, says the
careless Professor, at the last day, that I Mat. 8. 12.
should see Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in the Kingdom of God, and so many of the
Children of the Kingdom, so many Professors, cast into utter darkness? That did
I forewarn you of, may our Savior then Luke 13.
say. It is a remarkable passage that in Wisd. 5. 3. 4, 5. Where the profane
Atheist and Scoffer are brought in condemning themselves: We Fools counted the
life of the Godly madness, and his end without honor: And now is he reckoned
among the Sons of God, and his Inheritance is among the Saints. How have we
erred from the Truth, etc. What has all our Pride, and all our Riches and
Glory profited us, seeing they are vanished and gone, etc.

Thus have we done with the first sort of Excuses, those we called Homebred,
or from our selves; we come now to those that we call Foreign, or borrowed
from others.

CHAP. III. Excuses taken from Others.
EXcuses taken from Others, are either from, 1. Men. 2. God. 3. Satan. We shall
begin with those relating to men: And to take in all sorts of men, shall reduce
them, into three Classes. 1. All men may be considered as Superiors, Equals or
Inferiors. 2. As good or bad. 3. As Friends, Foes or Strangers.

1. The first sort of men from whom Excuses 1. From Superiors Example.
are taken, are Superiors, and from such many are often taken. As 1. From their
Example. If Parents, Masters, Ministers, or Princes, do so or so; It is
authority enough for Inferiors to do the same. Man is a Creature, much led by
Example: And Examples, before our Eves, have the same operation that Jacob's
pilled Rods had upon the Sheep, to produce a likeness in disposition and
deportment. Regis ad Exemplum, -- If Jeroboam Sin, he makes Israel to Sin. If
the Father say Sibboleth, the Son will never frame to say Schibboleth: If the
Mother be an Ashdodite, the Child Neh. 3. 24.
will never learn to speak the Language of Canaan. And challenge them for it,
Their answer is, Thus did their Fathers before them.

2. And much more if besides Example, 2. Counsel.
there be encouragement given by Counsel and Advice. The simple Vulgar made no
scruple to cry out, Crucify, Crucify, when set on by the Priests and Rulers
upon whose Sleeves they had implicitly pinned their Faith, and to whose Vote
they had captivated their assent.

3. And much more still, if the Superior 3. Command.
add a peremptory Command: Then will the Inferior run and go, and do any thing
commanded, and thinks that is his warrant. 2. Sam. 13. 28.
Then when Absalom said, Mark Amnon when his heart is merry Then set upon him,
slay him, fear not, I Command you so: It is all done accordingly. The Canonists
have said, If the Pope should command Evil, and forbid Good, and draw thousands
of Souls with him to Hell; yet all are to rest in his Determinations and
Decrees, not once saying, Domine Papa quid ita facis? Sir, why do you so?

4. And more again yet if those Commands 4. Promises. 1 Samuel 22. 7.
be backed either, 1. With Promises of Favor and Reward: When Saul spoke of
Vineyards and Olive-yards, places of Command, as Captains and Colonels, and
high Offices at his dispose; the perfidious Ziphites to curry favor with an
enraged Prince, proffer their Service, to deliver into his hand the best
Subject the King had, and the best Patriot the Kingdom had. Is not David hid
among us? Let but the King 1 Samuel 23. 20.
come down, and we are ready for our part to deliver him into the King's hand.
And bloody Doeg is ready at the very Instant, upon Command given (when no other
would execute it) to fall upon the innocent Priests (whom himself had first
informed against) and to sacrifice a whole City and Tribe of 1 Samuel 22. 18.
them to the fury and lust of the enraged King, in hope of a Reward.

2. Or threats of Punishment; Whether 2. Or threats pecuniary.
Pecuniary, and in their Estates. As when that Antichristian Beast did thunder
out his Interdicts, That none should buy or sell, hold Office in Church or
State, but he that did receive the Name, or Mark, of the Beast: Then did all
the Inhabitants of the Earth worship the Beast, save only the Lambs marked
Ones, whose Names were Rev. 13. 7, 8. and 17.
written in the Book of Life.

2. Or Corporal and Capital Punishment, at which men do most tremble: Then if a
Nebuchadnezzar make it present death not to worship his gods, and bow to his
Image, All People, Nations and Tongues fall down Dan 3. 7.
presently. And in all these cases, the Inferior is apt to flatter himself with
this, Caveant Principes, Viderint Praelati; Let the Prince, the Prelate and
Churchmen look to it, they shall answer for me. It is their sin, if they
command or lead amiss, not mine to obey: But remember what is said 1 Kings 14.
16.
so often of Jeroboam, He sinned, and made Israel to sin: There was his sin, and
their sin too; both sinned. He first in enjoining, they in obeying; yet were
there some holy Priests, Levites and People, who understood better what was
Sin, what Duty, what Obedience was due to Men, and what to God; that left their
Places in the Ministry, Livings, Benefices, Cities, Suburbs; and others after
them that left their Habitations and States, rather then they would 2 Chronicles.
11. 13, 14, 15, 16.
turn aside to Jeroboam's self-devised new Worship and Idolatry.

2. Equals, Toward whom some who 2. Equals.
know how to behave themselves with respect enough to their Superiors, are
often to blame in their carriage: And are ready to excuse it with this, I knew
with whom I had to do, I am as good a man as he, etc. Thus both Job and his
Friends seem to be blameworthy, for some unhandsome Clashes and Reflections:
They begin with him, Chap. 8. 2. and one word brought on another: He tells
them, He was not inferior to them, and knew as much as they, Job 12. 2. 3. and
13. 2. And they again to be even with him, Tell him they are his betters, Job
15. 9 10. What know thou that we know not, -- with us are the gray headed,
and very aged men, much elder then thy Father: So that ere they parted, they
were not so good Friends as when they met. How much better were it to remember
those good Directions, Be kindly affectionated one to another, In honor
preferring one another: Romans 12. 10.
Let nothing be done through strife or vainglory, provoking one another; but
in lowliness of mind let each esteem others better then Phil. 2. 3.
themselves. This wo^ld preserve Love.

3. Toward Inferiors, commonly men 3. Inferiors. Genesis 4. 23.
are most to blame: A tyrannical Lamech will insult over his poor Wife, and use
her like a Slave, not sparing to threaten her into awe and dread. And a wicked
Nabal so rugged to a Servant, and to every man 1 Samuel 25. 17.
(puffed up with his wicked Pelf) that he knows not how to give any man a good
word; nor could any man tell how speak to him. And how often do the Rich ill
entreat the Poor, who stands Cap-in-hand, and Prove. 18. 23.
uses Entreaties, when the Rich answers him roughly. And excuse themselves
with saying, I knew with whom I had to do: Should I stoop to a Thistle! Thus
did Abishai's blood rise at Shimei, and calls him Dog (dead Dog) when David
said, Let 2 Samuel 1^. 10.
him alone, I will leave him to God; It may be he will require me good for his
cursing: I will not foul my hands with him, nor let choler rise against choler.
There could not well be a worse Creature then Shimei, nor a greater or better
Person then David, nor a worse affront offered; yet he lets all fall: That is
the best flesh, that heals of it self. Yet we have a greater example then
David, having to do with a worse then Shemei, even Michael the Archangel, when
disputing with the Devil, durst not bring in railing Accusation, only said, The
Lord rebuke thee. If an Angel did not give an unbecoming word; if an Archangel
(the highest of that Order) durst not, to Satan the vilest, and most cursed
Creature, durst not: How durst thou give any reviling or opprobrious Language
to thy Fellow Servants, who bears the same Image of God with thy self?

2. Again, men may be considered as 2. From good men.
good or bad. And good, are either so Seemingly. Or, 2. Really. 3. Eminently.
1. Some are only seemingly so: And as we 1. Seeming good.
are apt oftentimes to have men's Persons in admiration, so what we see them do,
who are esteemed wise, holy, learned, we think we may safely do the same. But
we may remember our Savior's Item given of the Scribes and Pharisees, who sat
in Moses Seat, and took upon them to be the Authentic Expositors of the Law,
and were in that Repute for their seeming Sanctity, That it was a common belief
among the Vulgar, that if only two were to be saved in all the World, the one
must be a Scribe, the other a Pharisee; yet our Savior bids, Do not after
their Works. Mat. 23. 3.


2. We may be as much out in following those that are really good, if we have
no 2. Really good.
better warrant then their bare Example. Thus St. Paul shows, That if the weak
Christian see him that is stronger sitting in 1 Cor. 8. 10.
an Idols Temple, and eating what was sacrificed to the Idol, he might be
imboldened, without further enquiry to do the like. Therefore neither should
the strong lay a stumbling block before the weak; nor should the weak think we
are to live by Example, but by Precepts.

3. Some are eminently and undoubtedly 3. Eminently good, as the Saints in
Scripture.
Saints, recorded in Scripture, and their practice, we think, may warrant us.
But we must distinguish of their actions, that we may safely imitate them. 1.
Some of their Acts were High, Heroic, and extraordinary above the common Rule,
as Ehuds, Jaels, Phinehaz, Elias calling for Fire from Heaven upon the two
Captains that came to take him. 2. Some were as much below, or besides the
Rule, as David's in the matter of Vriah, Peter's behavior in the High Priests
Palace. 3. Some were exactly conformable to the Rule, as Zachary Luke 1. 6.
and Elizabeth, walking in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord
blameless. In these alone, not in the other two, are we to imitate the best
Saints.

For the first, They might have some particular warrant, as Abraham had to
Sacrifice his Son; the Israelites to borrow of Exodus 3. 22.
the Egyptians, and the like. Therefore when the Disciples alleged the example
of Elias calling for Fire from Heaven, Our Savior checked them, saying, Ye
know not Luke 9. 55.
of what spirit ye are, nor by what spirit he was in that act guided: Such
extraordinary acts are not of private interpretation, nor common imitation. For
the second, Those acts of David and Peter were fearful Violations of God's Law;
The blacks and blemishes in their stories, sad scandals to Religion; bewailed
by themselves, and not till after manifest Repentance pardoned. And with what
face can thou excuse thy self, by that for which they did both accuse and
condemn themselves? and look they should patronize and allow thee in that,
which they did disallow in themselves? The third, Are only for our imitation:
Therefore when the Saints in Scripture say to us, as Gideon to his Followers,
What you see me do, do ye the same: Walk, as ye have us Judge. 7. 17, 18.
for Examples, Phil. 3. 17. We are to follow them, observing these three Rules
or Cautions: 1. Of Election, Not to do whatsoever they did, without
discrimination: But as Jehosaphat, who walked in the 2 Chronicles. 17. 3.
first ways of David his Father; those were his best ways, and fittest to be
drawn into imitation. 2. Of Restriction, Eatenus, so far as they follow Christ,
no farther; where 1 Cor. 11. 1.
they leave Christ, we must leave them. 3. Of Addition or Conjunction, where
you see them and the Lord going together, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 6. Thus the Thessalonians
are commended, You became Followers of us and the Lord, which had been no such
great matter, if they had followed the Apostles, without or against the Lord's
Example.

2. Another case there is, wherein men are apt to plead excus^ from the godly,
viz. Least the godly should take offense.
least they should offend them. Now true it is, we should do any thing, rather
then give offense to any godly person (one of these little ones) but a great
difference there is between Scandalum datum and acceptum, an offense justly
given, and an offense unjustly taken: The one is ever a sin, the other not. But
this sometimes occ^sioneth a snare, as it fell out to Peter and Barnabas, as
Paul relates at large, Gal. 2. and occasioned a sharp Reproof from Paul, to
bring all to rights. And this it was: At Antioch Peter had conversed familiarly
with the believing Gentiles, till certain came from James at Jerusalem, then
did he withdraw Communion from the Gentiles, fearing belike the Jews would
take offense; the like did Barnabas: They were both to blame. Paul comes
thither, and foresees whither this halting and dissimulation might tend, viz.
to endanger and undermine the simplicity of the Gospel, and to confirm the Jews
in a pernicious sticking to their old Ceremonies, now antiquated and abolished:
He therefore stands up to vindicate the Truth, not caring who is offended, so
truth may be maintained, Amicus Cephas, Amicus Barnabas; Cephas is a Friend,
and Barnabas a Friend; but Truth is more then all Friends. Peter upon the
debate was convinced, and no hurt came of this Dissension, but much good: And
they parted Friends. It were to be wished all will say, That there were no
differences among Christians, no discrepancies among Preachers; but that all
did think and speak 1 Cor. 1. 10.
the same things, being perfectly joined together of the same mind, and of the
same Judgment. And that in matters of less moment we could comply one with
another, as he who was made made all things to all men in such 1 Cor. 9. 22.
cases. But in some cases we must not think it strange, again if the same Paul
dissent from Peter, and dislike his temporizing. The ceremonial, dark and
typical Worship of the Jews; and the Evangelical is not the same: I give but a
hint, more instances might be given. All compliance with the godly, is not
always godly compliance; unless Saints were either infallible at all times, or
at that time have truth on their side; otherwise they are sure as like to
miscarry, as a Peter or a Barnabas. There is therefore a necessary asserting of
Truth sometimes, though, in so doing, we have to do with great and worthy
Persons of a different Opinion or Practice. Learned Paraeus does at large
discuss the Paraeus in locum.
case, and says, Though Peter may seem excusable in seeking to avoid offense
giving to the Weak, which is a duty, he says: But seeking to shun a less, he
gave a greater; yea, a double, one to the Jewish Believers at Antioch, whom
this act of his might confirm in their Judaism, the other to the believing
Gentiles there, whom he thereby compelled to Judaise, refusing
Church Fellowship with them. So that, says he, Peter's offense was none of the
least, but was seven ways sinful, 1. Against the weak Jews, whom he confirmed
in their Error. 2. To Barnabas and the rest, whom he drew into an Error. 3.
Against the Gentiles, whom he compelled to Judaise. 4. Against Paul preaching
Liberty, whose preaching this practice did cross. 5. Against the truth of the
Gospel, from which he scandalously swerved. 6. Against himself, whom he
dishonored by this unseemly dissimulation. 7. Against God, whom he greatly
offended, by his scandal given to the Brethren. Thus far of Excuses taken from
good men.

2. From the bad, we are apt to take excuse 2. From bad men.
sometimes: But if from the good no good excuse is to be taken; much less from
the bad is any but bad to be expected. But we think (according to the Proverb)
a bad excuse is better then none at all: And what is that? why, when men have
showed much passion, and let fall much ill Language, Railing, Reviling,
Reproaches, etc. They think to excuse all by saying, I know to whom I did it, a
Dog, one whom I could not call bad enough, one without the Church, etc. I had
not done it else. But what is become of those Gospel-Rules? Give no offense to
the Jew, nor to the Gentile, nor to the Church of God, 1 Cor. 10. 33. Walk
wisely toward them that are without, Col. 4. 5. Show all meekness to all men,
Tit. 3. 2.

3. Men may be considered, 1. As Friends. 2. As Foes. 3. Strangers. 1. From
Friends. 1. Importunity.
First, Many excuses are taken from our Friends; as that we did so or so, but
it was upon the solicitation and importunity of a Friend, and such a Friend as
was to me what Jonathan's Armor-Bearer said to him, Behold, I am with thee,
according to thy own heart, and how could I deny him? But 1 Samuel 14. 7.
we should remember those excellent sayings of old. We must accommodate our
selves to our Friends, usque ad aras, so far as may consist with honesty and
good conscience. Amicus Plato, etc. Such an one is my Friend, and such another
my Friend, but Piety and Conscience much nearer Friends. Oh nimis inimica
amicitia! St. Austin cries out; Oh the bane of ill Friendship! Oh pestilent,
pernicious Friendship! Conf. l. 2, c. 9.
says he, Solus non facerem, I had never done so or so, had I been my self
alone: But when they said, Eamus, faciamus, etc. Come, let us go together; I
had not the power to resist, says he. Remember how dear Jehosaphat paid for
his familiarity, and associating with Ahab, and had this sharp Reproof, and sad
Message sent to him; 2 Chrons 19. 2.
Shoudst thou help the Ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord; therefore is
wrath upon thee from the Lord. This unhappy friendship, or good-fellowship, as
commonly called, is the great Apollyon and Abaddon, the Destoyer of thousands
and millions, and has laid heaps upon heaps. Many have, when too late, cried
out and accursed such Friends and friendship, and many more will at the last
day. Then Ahab will have no better Language for his Jezabel, by whom he was so
bewitched, then Jehu had, when he trod her under foot, You cursed woman. 2
Kings 9. 34.
Oh cursed Jezabel, it was long of thee I sold my self to work wickedness!
Unhappy I that I ever saw thy Face: Accursed am I that I ever hearkened to thy
counsel, and more accursed thou that gave it. So Amnon to Jonadab, I woe the
day that I ever knew thee, and took thee for my Friend. Judas to the Priests, I
rue the day that I ever was acquainted with you. The courtesy and love of such
Friends is like Joab's kiss to Amasa, Kiss and Stab; or like Judas to Christ,
Kiss and Betray. So that all such may complain with David of Ahithophel, his
old friend, It was not mine Enemy, -- But it was thou my Friend, my Guide, my
Acquaintance, etc. that have undone me.

2. Others will excuse themselves from a 2. To preserve a Friend.
Friend, My Friend was in danger, it was to do him good, save his Life, Estate,
etc. Thus might Lot, the Levites Host, Rahab, and the Egyptian Midwives plead,
all sought to preserve the lives of those who were under their hand. But St.
Austin resolves it as an unquestioned Maxim, No Sin is to be committed, be it
to save our own or others Lives. He highly commends Firmus a Bishop, who had
hid a Christian that was sought for, and being examined whether he had sheltred
him, or what was become of him, He did not answer (as many would not scruple to
do) I know not where he is, etc. Equivocation was not then known in De menda.
ad consent, c. 13.
the Church. He was Firmus by name, and Firmior in the Faith, said the Father:
His answer was, Mentiri nolo, prodere nolo; I may not lie, nor will I betray.
Many Torments he endured; at length the Emperor moved with his constancy, set
them both at liberty: And if any untruth, any excusatory, or officious lie
might in any case be lawful, you would allow it here. But that holy Fathers
determination is, To ask whether any lie be lawful (says he) is to ask whether
any Sin be lawful; or to ask whether that which is unjust and unlawful, be just
and lawful.

2. There are Excuses taken from our 2. From Foes.
Foes: And these we think are to be admitted; It was to my Adversary, he had
provoked, had affronted me: Flesh and Blood could not bear it. Thus pleaded
those Sons of Jacob, when they dealt so cruelly and perfidiously with the men
of Shechem, after the deflouring of Dinah, Genesis 34. ult.
Should he deal with our Sister as with an Harlot? But the old Patriarch was
none of their Council, nor could he do less then execrate the Fact. We are most
of us of the Pharisees belief, I must love my Friend, and may hate an Enemy:
But our Savior's Doctrine is to love our Enemies; Amicos Mat. 5. 44.
diligere omnium, Inimicos Christianorum. To love our Friends, says
Tertullian, is the common practice of all; of the Publican: But to love an
Enemy, is the proper Character of a Christian. Holy David would not consent to
have him touched, that sought his life. And Job took comfort in this, That he
never rejoiced in the destruction Job 31. 29, 30. Infirmi est animi exiguique
Vo^uptas, Ultio. Juven.
of him that hated him, nor did he so much as suffer his mouth to sin, to speak
or wish him ill: And this is the note of a generous and high Spirit, whereas
Revenge is an argument of a low and feeble Spirit.

2. But some will plead, I do but to him as 2. We do to them as they to us.
he did to me; and is not this warrantable? Solomon shall answer thee, No,
says he, Say not thou, I will recompense evil; but wait on the Lord, and he
shall save thee, Prove. 20. 22. And more plainly, Prove. 25. 29. Say not I will
do to him as he has done to me, I will render to the man according to his
work. We are often warned, not to avenge our Romans 12. 19. Mat. 5. 39. 1 Pet. 3.
9.
selves, or resist evil, or return railing for railing; but to overcome evil
with good. A divine Victory, and a double Victory this is; the one over thy own
passion, the other over thy Enemies fury: By this means thou may heap coals
of fire on his head (to melt him either into repentance, or self-condemnation)
as Saul seemed once to be, when 1 Samuel 24. 16, 17. and 26, 21.
malice was repayed with mercy, He lift up his Voice, and wept. This is the
(...), the singular thing wherein our Savior would his Followers should outdo
all others. And is a great degree of Perfection, To be perfect as our heavenly
Father is perfect. Mat. 5. 47, 48.
To return good for good, is Publicanish; Evil for evil, is Heathenish; Evil
for good, Devilish: But to return good for evil, is Divine; Christ like, who
forgave, and prayed for his Enemies: God like, who is kind to the unkind, and
to make the nearest approach and proximity to the life of the blessed, yea to
the Deity it self.

3. Some are Strangers to us; And we 3. Ex^uses from strangers.
are apt to think we may do what we will to them: we never saw them before, and
shall never buy or sell with them more. But the Divine Precept strictly forbids
all ill usage of Strangers in many places, and requires he should enjoy the
same Privileges with themselves: Ye shall not oppress Exodus 22. 21. and 23. 9.
Lev. 19. 33.
or vex the Stranger, says he, for thou wast a Stranger in Egypt; and thou
know the heart of a Stranger: Therefore put thy self in his case, and do as
thou would be Exodus 12. 48. 49.
done unto. One Law was both for the Home-born and the Stranger, for the
Forreigner and the Native: The same Ephah, Shekel, Weight, Measure, Price,
Truth, Equity, Behavior. How courteous were Abraham and Lot to the Strangers
that resorted to them. And Philoxeny, which properly signifies love of
Strangers, is as much pressed in the New Testament as a duty of Christians and
Ministers, as most Heb. 13. 2. 1 Timothy 3. 2.
others. As therefore it were an unworthy thing to lay a stumbling block before
the Blind, though he can never see it; an unhumane thing to curse the Deaf,
because he cannot hear it: So a most unchristian thing to deal injuriously with
the Stranger, because he may never discern it. Thus have I done with Excuses
taken from other men.

CHAP. IV. Excuses taken from God, and from Satan.
NEither are Men content to fetch Excuses Excuses taken from God.
from themselves, or others, but they will open their mouths against Heaven:
Some have been so bold as to challenge God, seeking any starting hole to creep
out at; as we have too many instances, whereof some follow.

1. Such as go about to excuse themselves, 1. From his Providence.
and fault Gods Providence: The first Excuse that ever was made, seemed to
glance this way: The woman thou gave me, gave it me, and so I did eat, q. d.
Had thou not given me that woman, I had never offended: But God gave her to
be a help, not a snare to the man. Thus the Drunkard faulteth the Wine, and
therein God's Providence. Had not the Wine such fragrancy, delicacy of taste,
and that intoxicating quality, I had not been overcome. And the riotous
Gallant, had I not had such an Estate fallen to me, I had never been so
luxurious: Thus must all be cast upon God, and every man innocent. But God gave
the Woman to be an inciter to Good* not an enticer to Evil: It was thy own
fault, Adam, not thy Makers. Thy own intemperance, Drunkard, not the Vine,
Grape, or Wine that is in fault. And thou riotous person, It is thy wicked
abuse of thy State, not the State it self which is to be condemned; that was
given for better Uses. But how ill is God dealt withal in the mean time, when
his own favors are turned against him to his dishonor! Suppose now a Prince
should advance a Servant, or a Son, to the highest degrees of Honor and
Dignity; and should as some of the Roman Emperors have done, and once a King of
England did, give him a Partnership in the Empire: If this Servant Henry 11.
or Son should afterward lift up the heel against his Sovereign, and break out
into Rebellion, and then should say, You should never have raised me to this
height of Honor, but have kept me lower; we would think he pleaded fair for
his deprivation and destruction. How justly may the Lord say, Shall I not be
avenged on such a Jer. 5. 7, 8.
Nation as this? When I fed them to the full, they assembled themselves by
troops in Harlots houses. And in another place, When I gave them Corn, and
Wine, and Oil, and multiplied their Silver and Gold, they bestowed it all on
Baal; spent it all on their Lusts: Therefore he threatens to return and take
all away again as fast as he gave it them, Hosea 2. 8, 9.

2. Some fly higher, and pick a quarrel 2. From Gods Decrees.
at Gods Decrees, as if they would charge all their Sin and Condemnation upon
God; themselves being either innocent, or inevitably destined thereunto. For
thus are such black-mouthed persons represented cavilling, Ezekiel. 33. 10. If our
Sins and our Transgressions be upon as and wepine away in them, how can we then
live? q. d. It is no fault of ours if we perish, God Almighty might have helped
all this, i^ he had pleased. But who art thou, O man, that thus disputest with
Romans 9. 30.
God? Yet let us reason the case together, and see where the fault is, in God
or thy self. First, Thou will confess it was free for the Sovereign Creator to
make his Creatures of what form, and for what use he pleased; as some Rational,
others Bruits, Plants, etc. Nor have any of them cause to say, why have thou
made me thus, not us Men, Angels; us Bruits, Men and Women. 2. That God
creating Man, should endue him with such excellent faculties of understanding
to discern Good and Evil, of Liberty of will to make Election of his own acts;
thou will not say this was evil yet. 3. To prescribe to man thus formed holy
Precepts, commanding Good, forbidding Evil; nor can this be called Evil, but
most Just; that God's Sovereignty might be owned in the World, and Man's
Subjection exercised. 4. To hedge Man in by Promises and Threats of Rewards and
Punishments, to excite Hope and Fear, as, Do this, and live; Transgress, and
die, cannot but be yielded just and reasonable. 5. As to reward Obedience, so to
punish Disobedience, cannot be accounted other then most just. Otherwise, as in
our lower States, when Kings and States have made Laws against such and such
Crimes, under such Penalties, the Offender might say, Had not such a Law been
made, I had not been an Offender or Sufferer; whereas it is not the King, or
the Law, but thy Delinquency only that makes thee a Sufferer. But hear what the
Lord answers to that Cavil himself, As I live, says the Lord, I have no
pleasure in the death of the Wicked, but that the Wicked turn from his way and
live: Ezekiel. 33. 11.
Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why will ye die, O house of Israel?
In which Answer, Observe these four particulars: 1. Here is a strong
Asseveration, by way of Negation, attested with an Oath, As I live says the
Lord, I have no pleasure in the death of the Wicked, q. d. I call Heaven and
Earth to witness, I do not make any to damn them; It is far from me to use my
absolute Sovereignty, in an arbitrary sentencing them to damnation. 2. Here is
a plain and positive Affirmation, under the same attestation (to both, as I
live.) It is a pleasure to me, that the Wicked turn from his way and live, to
which I am ready to give my assistance, if he sincerely desire it. 3. Both
those are backed with an earnest and redoubled invitation, [Turn ye, Turn ye,]
He exhorts, invites, excites, directs, knocks, calls, waits again and again,
Turn ye, Turnye. 4. A pathetical Expostulation, Why will ye die, O house of
Israel? Herein assigning the proper and immediate cause of Ruin and Perdition;
q. d. It is your own default, and that only; not my will, but yours is in
fault: Not my will not, but your will not is the bar. You will not come Joh. 5.
40.
unto me, that you may have life; I have called, and ye refused; not I have
refused you, but ye me: I would have gathered you, as the Hen gathers her
Chickens, to cherish Mat. 23. 37.
and preserve them, but ye would not. It is not God's shall not, but thy will
not; nor thy cannot, but thy care not, thou have most cause to fear. What will thou have then to plead, O Sinner, in the day of Visitation, when thou will be
forced to acknowledge not God's Decrees, but thy sins have found thee out, and
undone thee; nor art thou bound with the Chains of God's Decrees, but with the
Cords of thy own Sins, Prove. 5. 22. Therefore let none say my case is
desperate, as they cried out, Numb. 17. 13, 14. Behold, we die, we perish, we
all perish, we shall be consumed with dying: There is no necessity of thine, or
any man's destruction, how great a Sinner soever, while God says, Why will ye
die? No impossibility of any man's Salvation, while God says, Turn and live.
Therefore Sinner leave making Objections, and fall to some course, whereby thou
may secure thy Soul. Thy case, at least, is as sa^e as the Gibeonites or
Ninevites: The Gibeonites did not say, there is a Decree gone out against us
Canaanites to destroy Root and Branch; therefore are we dead men, it is in vain
to strive against Decrees and Divine Threats, or to sue for our Lives, or use
any endeavors: But they set their wits awork to save themselves, and sped.
Rahab did not say, Jericho is devoted. Nineveh did not say, The word is gone
out of God's mouth, and cannot be reversed: But who knows if God may not be
entreated? Acts 27. 20. When all hope of safety was gone, they wrought still,
and came all safe to Land: while there is life, there is hope; while endeavors,
hope, while mercy in God, reconciliation by Christ, and space of Repentance,
there is yet hope. Therefore do not thou cast away thy self through
carelessness, but set thy self to the use of the means prescribed, and say, If I
perish, I Will perish crying, praying, repenting, reforming, believing, flying to
Christ; I will die in the way to the Refuge City, I will adventure over the
deepest waters to go to Christ, as Peter did; and if I sink in my way toward
Mat. 14. 30. 3. From God's permission. 1. As to Grace.
him, I Will cry, Lord save me, or I perish.

3. A third excuses himself from God's permission; 1. As to Grace. 2. As to
his outward Estate. As to Grace, when some have been blamed for their
Ignorance, or wicked course of life: This Answer has been returned, I do as
well, and serve God as well, as he will give me leave: And no man is to be
blamed that he is no wiser or holier then God has made him; But this is with
the Sluggard, to keep his hand in his Bosom, and himself in his warm Bed, till
God send warmer Weather, and to say, I'lle not feed my self, but expect Ravens
should feed me, or Angels bring me meat: But what says the wise man, Awake
Sluggard, Prove. 20, 13.
open thine Eyes, and thou shall be satisfied with Bread. Consider man, God
has made thee neither Stock nor Bruit, given thee another Spirit, endued it
with Reason; given thee diverse helps besides, as Exhortations, Reproofs,
Promises, Threats, better Examples; besides the checks of Conscience, and
motions of his holy Spirit. Use thou thy endeavor, and see if God will not
give thee leave to be better. In other cases we use not to argue thus, I am as
rich as God has made me, and I must be content, and no fault of mine if I have
no more: Here the diligent man finds Hands, Legs, Endeavors, Head, Brains,
and what ever he can. But here is the misery of it, when every thing else
suffers Violence, the Kingdom of God must suffer none for us, but expect
rather it should offer Violence to us. No Prayers, Study, Endeavors for more
Grace; but expect, as Naaman, the Sore should be 2 Kings 5. 11.
stroked, and we cured without our washing. The Wind should come rushing upon
us, and we be filled with the Holy Ghost, as the Act. 2. 2, 4.
Apostles were once, and we not praying. Or that a fiery Chariot should coast
us to Heaven, as Elias once, though we have 2 Kings 2. 11.
none of his fiery zeal, activity and holiness in our Lives. But consider again
of this Answer, Who art thou that say? Thoudost as well as God will give
thee leave? Will he not give thee leave to be better? who commands, exhorts,
threatens, promises, affords such means; the Ministry of his Word, motions
of his Spirit, time, space, opportunity: forbear therefore to charge God so
foolishly. 2. Others there be, who excuse themselves, by God's permission, 2.
As to their outward state.
as to their outward State, ascribing that to his Providence, which he will
never own. But with this difference from the former; They impute their ill
estate to God, which he never made so bad, and these their good outward state,
which he never made so good. Thus those wicked one Zachary, who had enriched
Zach 11. ^.
themselves by oppressing the Poor, would entitle God to their wickedness: They
cry out, applauding themselves, Blessed be the Lord, for I am rich. Thus
Ephraim plays the cunning Merchant, gets an Estate by wicked means, Balances of
deceit; yet cries out, I am become Rich, I have found Hos. 12. 7, 8.
Substance; there is no Iniquity or Sin in all this. Thus the insatiable
Chaldaean, when by Rapine and Spoil he had possessed himself of all the
Kingdoms and Treasures of the Earth, he imputes all to his god, (as we Hab. 1.
9, 10, 11.
have known some have done in our days, crying out, Providence, Providence,)
yet might he be better excused for entitling his ill-gotten power and wealth to
his god (a cursed Idol) then we Christians any ill acquired state to the true
God, who loves Righteousness, and hates Iniquity, and is 1 Thessalonians. 4. 6.
an Avenger of all acts of injustice.

A fourth excuses himself, with a foul 4. From God's Austerity.
reflection upon God for his Austerity, as he will pretend. Thus the evil and
slothful Servant pleads, when he had done nothing at all in discharge of his
duty; I knew thee Mat. 25. 24.
to be an austere man, reaping where thou do not sow, etc. therefore I hid
thy Talent, q. d. I had been a better Servant, if I had had a better Master; I
thought all was a case: I had as good sit still for nothing, as work for
nothing, for it would have come to nothing. But I pray consider whose arguing
this was: The two endeavoring Servants said not thus, found not God such a
hard Master; But received an Euge of praise, and for a small measure of
faithfulness and diligence, had full measure, heaped, pressed down, and running
over, of Reward: Thou should have found the like, if thou had showed like
diligence. But observe what shifts men will use to spare their pains, There is
a Lion in the way, Prove. 26. 13.
says the Sluggard: There is difficulty, impossibility in the way. When the
Devil can once get thee to entertain an hard thought of God, he first drives
thee from thy duty, and at last drives thee into despair. Cain's, Judas's and
Spira's despair, sprang first from such a horrid thought. But it is the whole
design of Scripture, as Luther well observed, to set out God as gracious, and
merciful, and abundant in goodness, as Exodus 34. 6, 7. Psalm. 145. 9. Heb. 11.
6. 1 Cor. 15. ult. But men will not do thus in other cases; If a gangrened Leg
or Arm (Cunci^a prius tentanda) they will not presently cut it off; but try all
means first, and if no remedy, cut it off, to preserve the whole at last. But
here, as if men had made an Agreement with Death, and Covenant with Hell, they
throw off all endeavors, and think to charge their Condemnation upon God's
inflexible severity.

5. Another again destroys himself, and 5. From God's mercy.
excuses it when he has done, by a clean contrary pretense of God's mercy,
Deuteronomy. 29. 19. I shall have peace, says he, though I walk after the imagination
of my heart, and add drunkenness to thirst, q. d. though I add sin to sin, God
is so merciful, I shall do well enough; though I neither fear, nor repent. Thus
Justice abused sends some to Hell, and Mercy others; and all must be laid upon
God. When he pipes, they will not dance; when mourns, not lament: If he
command, warn, threaten; Behold severity enough to drive men to despair. Again,
if he exhort, entreat, beseech men to be reconciled, wait to be gracious, swear
he delights not in the death of the wicked; Behold mercy enough to make us
secure and lazy. The Lord may justly complain, I am Amos ^. 13.
pressed under you, as a Cart full of Sheaves. One man says, I have only
fears; had I any hope, or the lest assurance, I should have some heart to pray
and reform, but now what joy to stir or endeavor? And another says, because I
have such hopes, and so full assurance (a lying presumptuous assurance) I will
cast off all fears; sure I am, I cannot out-sin the grace and mercy of God. But
Tertullian answers such well, They who can Salvo metu and fide peccare, salva
venia in Gehennam detrudentur; They who can live in sin, and yet say, they have
never the less of Faith, and fear of God, shall be cast into Hell, and yet God
have never the less of mercy.

6. There be that would be excused, 6. For not giving Grace.
by casting an imputation upon God, for his denegation and withholding his
Grace; for thus they plead, It is not in the power of man to direct his own
way, to convert himself: Jer. 10.
The Scripture says, No man can receive any Joh. 3. 27.
thing, except it be given him from Heaven. And if God give not his Grace and
Spirit, how should I have it? or how should I be better? But give me leave to
ask, Did thou ever go and ask these, and desire them? Ye have not, says St.
James, because Jam 4. 2.
you ask not. And if Grace and the Spirit are not worth asking, thou art worthy
to go without them. Shall the Sun be faulted for not giving light, when thou
shuttest thy Windows, and drawest the Curtains? Or the Springs of
niggardliness, because they spurt not their waters into thy mouth? Or the Earth
be charged with illiberalness and unkindness, because it puts not its Corn
into our Sacks, or its Treasure into our Laps, without ploughing for the one,
searching and digging for the other? And if thou searchest for Grace as for
Silver, and Prove. 2. 4, 5.
seek for it as for hid Treasure, there is a promise thou shall have it;
Thou shall understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God. We
expect, as I said before, every thing else should ask pains, but Grace none at
all: But that it should drop into our mouths, as the Rain from Heaven; or be
brought to us, and set at our Bedshead 1 Kings 19. 5, 7.
when we are asleep, or sick, as Elias had his meat brought to him by an Angel.
We must have a short and easy way to Heaven, or we will have none.

7. The last Excuse we shall mention in 7. God did owe them a shame.
relation to God, is of such, who when they, or theirs, have fallen into some
soul sin, as Theft, Whoredom, etc. are ready to excuse themselves, and say, It
could not be helped; God ought them a shame, and has now paid it them; and
they now hope God has done with them: (Some again are so ignorant, as to say,
The Devil ought them this shame.) But know, O vain man, God owes thee no such
shame, till thou have shamefully cast him off; Non deserit nisi deserentes, The
shame sprang from Aug.
thy self. Prove. 22. 14. The mouth of the strange woman, says Solomon, is a
deep Pit, (but mark what follows) he that is abhorred of the Lord shall fall
therein. There not Satan, but God owes and pays the shame: But more plainly,
Eccles. 7. 26. where you see the cause, and what went before; Whosoever pleases
God, shall escape from her, (God will preserve his Joseph's) but the Sinner (the
old profane irreligious Sinner) shall be taken by her. So likewise ye may
read, Romans 1. 26. That the Gentiles who smothered the natural light of their
own Reason, and sinned against Conscience, not liking to retain God in their
knowledge, but became vain in their imaginations; how God left them, and as
they went on farther and farther in a way of sin, God went on in punishing.
First, verse 24. God gave them up to uncleanness, etc. verse 26. God gave them
up to vile affections, and then they fell into unnatural and prodigious lusts.
And last, verse 28. God gave them quite and clean over to a Reprobate mind, and
then he paid them home their shame with a witness; for then were they filled
with all and all manner of unrighteousness, verse 29, 30, etc.

2. Excuses taken from Satan: Some again Excuses taken from Satan.
are apt to take Excuses from Satan, casting their sin upon him; and because he
is so bad, think they may lay all their dirt at his Door: Thus was the first
sin parted between God and Satan. The woman that thou gave me, said the man;
There Is for God. The Serpent beguiled me, said the woman; There Is for Satan:
There Is nothing but excuse upon excuse, and sin upon sin: Yet did not this
avoid the just Sentence against both, for it was their own voluntary act; Satan
might persuade, did not compel. One says, the Devil as a sly Serpent deceived
me; another, as a roaring Lion affrighted me; a third, as a fell Dragon, cast a
flood of temptations out of his mouth, and overwhelmed me; a fourth, as a
restless Friend, he dogged and haunted me, I could never be quiet for him. All
this excuses not, the sin is thy own; solicit and entice he may, compel he
cannot: Thy will he has no power over, but by thy own consent. The faithful
Commander, betrusted by his Prince with keeping a Fort, thinks it not enough to
hold no Correspondence with the Enemy; but when he assaults him with his
Batteries, he manfully repels him, makes up his Breaches, prevents his
Underminings, seeks to Countermine him; prevents his nearer Approaches, Sallies
out against him, spends all his Darts and Ammunition against him, endures all
Extremities; and when he fears, and wants Supplies, sends to his Prince and is
relieved. So it is with us, not enough to say, I was tempted, enticed,
assaulted, winnowed, buffeted, dogged; but we should take the whole armor of
God, make resistance, watch, pray, take the shield of Faith, cry out, and send
to Heaven for assistance, as Hezekiah; with him is an Arm of Flesh, but with us
is the Lord of Hosts to fight our Battles; and with him it is all one to save
with strength, or with them that have no might, as Asa said, 2 Chronicles. 14. 11.
Help us, O Lord our God, for we rest on thee; Help us against this Enemy: And
in thy Name we go out against him. Resist the Devil, says St. James and St.
Peter, Jam. 4. 7. 1 Pet. 5. 9. Ephesians. 6.
and he will fly from you: Resist him manfully, steadfast in the Faith, and all
his fiery Darts are blunted: The Devil craves thy own help to destroy thee.
Those (for the most part simple and sorry Creatures) Witches and Sorcerers, the
Devil never leaves them till he gains their consent, and a compact signed and
sealed (as their own act and deed) then, and not till then (though they have
been ignorant and lewd before) does he reckon himself sure of them. And as
these Witches have confessed, they could have no power over some, till they had
gotten something of theirs: So it is with their Master. The Devil is called by
many names in Scripture, a Tempter, Deceiver, Accuser, an Enemy, Liar,
Murderer, etc. no where a Compeller: Preserve thy Will free and pure, and he
slinks. It is not in his power to work in thee to will and to do what he will
at his pleasure, that is God's peculiar Prerogative, Phil. 2. 13. As learned
Zanchy De potentia daemonum in animas.
speaking of the power of the Devil upon men's Souls, says, The Devil has
great power, may have power over the Air, Water, over men's Bodies, Goods,
Cattle, States, (as in Jobs case) may abuse our Senses, Fancy, work upon our
Affections, solicit and assault the Will: But this can he neither bend nor
bow, without our consent: That is only in the power of God to do.

CHAP. V. Excuses taken from other things.
WE have done with Excuses (as to 3. Excuses taken from other things.
sin) taken from our selves and other persons: We come now to speak of such as
are taken from other things, of which there are so many (Reader) that I do not
promise thee to enumerate all, but such as are most common and obvious. And
first, Ignorance is a great and common 1. Ignorance.
pretense; and were it really so, it might pass for a just defense: As when
Abimelech was charged to be in a Confederacy with David against Saul, he 1 Samuel
22. 15.
avowed he was altogether ignorant of any such thing, it was, or should have
been accepted as a clear purgation. But ignorance is often made a Cloak to
carelessness, and wretched neglect of duty belonging to our places. Thus Solomon
takes it for granted some do; If thou forbearest (says he) to Prove. 24. 11, 12.
deliver them that are drawn to death, and say, Behold we knew it not: Does
not he that pondereth the heart consider; and shall not he render to every man
according to his works? q. d. This is a poor shift, a mere put-off; Conscience
is not so acquitted: Thou may pretend thou wast not there, had other
business, or some indisposition of Body, but thou should have been there. If
Nicodemus had not opened his mouth on Christ's behalf, when he was traduced,
John 7. 51. And Joseph of Arimathea had not entered his Dissent at the
Council Table, Luke 23. 51.
when he was condemned: The one had never been worthy of the name of a
Disciple, nor the other of an honorable Counselor, Mark 15. 43. Thy duty is,
if thou art betrusted with an Office, to wait on thy Office, Romans 12. 7.

2. And now we have spoken of an Office; 2. Their Place and Office.
there are some ready to plead their Place and Office for excuse, that must
bear them out. Thus did Naaman plead, When the King goes into the house of
Rimmon, and 2 Kings 5. 18.
leans on my hand, (for that is my place at Court) and I bow in the house of
Rimmon as does the King, the Lord be merciful to me, and hold me excused
herein. The like also might Pilate have pleaded, if that would excuse him: My
Place is to release one at the Feast, though a Murderer, and to condemn the
most Innocent, if the people shall importune it. Thus also no question did
those persecuting Bishops in Queen Mary's days flatter themselves, when they
burnt those Innocents: We have taken an Oath to the Pope, and our Place ties us
to condemn them to the Flames, whom the Pope declares Haereticks. And when
they gave Sentence, they said, They did it ex Officio; that is, by virtue of
their Office. How much better had it been for them to have refused those
Preferments with a Nolo Episcopari in good earnest, as Nazianzen Sozom. l. 6.
c. 3. Socr. l. 3. c. 19. Bal. in vitis pont.
sometimes did: And Jovinian the Empire, crying out, Ego sum Christianus; or to
have resigned those places, as Caelestine the Fifth is said to have the Papacy,
returning to his solitariness and privacy again? Or they might all of them have
inscribed that on their Monuments, which Bishop Hall reports that Hadrian the
Sixth Ordered to be engraven on his, viz. That nothing in all his life befell
him so unhappy, as his Preferment.

3. Others allege the example of their 3. Example of their Predecessors.
Predecessors: They who have gone before them have done so and so, made so much
of their Places; but quo jure, qua injuria would be enquired. Godly Nehemiah
came after such, and might have fleeced and exhausted the people, and enricht
himself, if he could have satisfied himself with this Plea: But thus did he not
do, because of Neh. 5. 15.
the fear of the Lord: Yea, the very Servants of the former Rulers bare Rule,
and got Estates. But he considered the people over whom he was set, were now
poor, and had groaned under many Pressures and Taxes: Therefore he received not
the Perquisites of his place, nor did he eat the Bread of the Governor; but
spent his own Estate among them, and fed many at his own Charge; choosing rather
to be a poor Prince over a rich People, then Rich over a Poor. Non sibi, sed
Patriae, is a good Motto for a Prince or Patriot: Praesis ut Prosts, a good
Motto for a Prelate, as Bernard counseled Eugenius. It is a memorable story
that Luther relates of a German Luth. Coll.
Prince, at a time when many of the Princes were together, and discoursed of
their several States, Territories and Revenues; This Prince said, Though his
Territory and Revenue was not equal to theirs, yet in one thing he counted
himself as happy as any of them; that was, the Love of his Subjects: For he
said, He could venture himself to take a Nights-lodging in the house of any of
his Subjects, and sleep securely without a Guard. A rare example of clemency
and confidence in a Prince, and of Love and Loyalty in a People.

4. A fourth says, I am not the first, nor shall be the last; like enough: But
what a pitiful 4. I am not the first, nor shall be the last.
Excuse is this, to excuse thy sin by the sin of others! As Job said of the
Grave, A many are gone before, and innumerable shall Job 21. 33.
follow after; it may be said of Sin and Hell-Lamech could speak of a Murderer
before him. Jeroboam was not the first that made a golden Calf to be worshipped,
Aaron had done so before him; nor was he the last, for all, or most, of the
Kings of Israel that followed, continued in the same Idolatry: It is not safe
sinning by Example. Many Fashions are new, few new Sins; nothing new under the
Sun. This Sin that all our Discourse is about, viz. Excuse-making, had both our
first Parents deeply in it: Thus did Adam, thus did Eve; from the beginning it
has been thus, and bears the oldest date of any other Act, viz. Anno primo
Creationis, mense primo; if not Die primo too, as some conceive. Polygamy had a
President in the old World, in Lamech; Genesis 4. 19. Genesis 6. 11.
Oppression was before the Flood. Fornicators had Zimri and Cozbi put to death
Number. 25. 8.
for this Sin long before they were born. Seditious Opposers of Magistracy and
Ministry had a Corah, Dathan, and Abiram Number. 16. 3.
Predecessors. The Sabbath-Breaker reads of one stoned to death for that Sin
long ago, Numb. 15. 36. And the Blasphemer of another, Levit. 24. 23. The
wicked Witch and painted Strumpet had a Jezabel their foundress. Now these are
our Examples, and recorded not to Excuse, but admonish us.

5. And he that says, The rest and greatest 5. The rest do the same.
in the place do so, and why may not I; thinks if he have not a great deal of
reason on his side, yet he has good Company to back him: But the greatest man
in the Parish is not always the best. He who is highest in the King's Books
for matter of Subsidy, may be lowest in God's Book for matter of Piety. The
best Living and the best Liver dwell sometimes a great way asunder. In our
Savior's time, the Poor Mat. 11. 5.
were they who received the Gospel. And in the Apostles days, not many Wise,
or 1 Cor. ^. 26, 27.
Mighty, or Noble owned it, but the Poor and Simple. In aftertimes of
Apostasy, the purity of Religion was preserved among the Waldenses, and the
Poor men of Lions, as they were commonly called. And long before them, the
great Worthies of the World (of whom the World was not worthy) were clad in
Sheepskins and Goats-skins, and dwelt in Caves and Cottages, out of the Worlds
notice, unless to be persecuted, afflicted, tormented.

6. A good intention is a great Plea, and 6. A good intention.
we think nothing excuses more: But though an ill intention is enough alone to
mar a good action, yet is not a good intention enough to render an ill action
good; Bonum ex integriss malum ex quolibet defectu; There must be a concurrence
of all due circumstances to make an action good.

Vzzah doubtless had no ill intention, 2 Samuel 6. 7.
when he put forth his hand to hold the Ark, yet perished for his Error. Saul
paid 1 Samuel 15. 23.
dear, notwithstanding his good meaning, for sparing the best of the Cattle for
Sacrifice. What could they have other then a good meaning who sacrificed their
own Children to Moloch, in imitation (it is likely) of Abraham's forwardness to
Sacrifice his Son? yet never did the Sun see a greater abomination. This Weed
has pestered the Church from time to time, and has Jer. 7. 31. and 19. 5.
turned Sharon into a Forest, Bethel into Bethaven: This brought in at first
adoration of Images, Crosses, Relics; Invocation of Saints, Prayer for the
Dead. Blind Zeal the Father and good Intention the Mother, have hatched most of
the Brats of Popish Superstition.

7. Next comes Antiquity, and looks to 7. Antiquity.
be heard with some Reverence and respect. Thus it has been time out of mind;
that which has been good, is good still; our Fathers did thus before us.
Answer: Then let us to Mass again, from thence to Judaism, and thence to
Paganism, (for that is the elder Religion of the three.) Let us to our Mast and
Acorns again, for that is the elder Diet. Paganism was the Mother or Nurse of
many Popish Rites and Customs, borrowed from the Heathens, as their holy Water,
Lustrations, Lights, Images, tutelar and local Saints, etc. True it is, Popery
is ancient, so is Error, so is Sin. The fall is more ancient then the Gospel,
which was brought in upon it. Mahumetism is ancient too, can plead a thousand
years standing, breaking out much about the same time with Popery, Six hundred
years after the Incarnation. But Judaism is before both, and Paganism elder
then them all, if ancientry must carry it. But there is an Antiquity senior to
them all, Idverum Tertull.
quod primum: That which was from the beginning, says the Apostle, 1 John 1.
1. Thither we appeal, thither we provoke; To the Law, and to the Testimony; To
Christ, Esaias 8. 8^.
and to his Apostles we will refer our selves, to decide all the Points in
Controversy between us and Rome. And I think it is as equal a motion, that
which Christ and the Apostles taught shall go for the best Religion, (be it
Popish or Protestant) as that once, The God that answers by fire shall be 1
Kings 18. 24.
acknowledged the true God, (whether Jehovah or Baal) when there was such
halting between two Opinions, as there is now adays by too many. If therefore
the Papists can show us out of the Old or New Testament, their Pope's
Supremacy, Purgatory, plurality of Mediators, Pardons, Invocation of Saints,
Image Worship, praying for the Departed, their Opus operatum,
Transubstantiation, Elevation, Adoration, Circumgestation of the Host,
forbidding Marriage to Priests or Ministers, etc. We shall promise to subscribe
the Tridentine Creed, and confess our Error, and return into the lap of Rome.
But if they be not to be found there, let them cease to accuse us of Novelty,
Lutheranism or Calvinism, and accuse us of Petrinism, Paulism, Scripturism or
Christianism, if they please. So that in fine, all the great flourish that
Papists boast of Antiquity, is but like that of the Jews to Jeremy, We will be
of our Fathers Religion. Jer. 44. 16.
Thus did our Kings, Princes, and our Fathers, offering Incense to the Queen of
Heaven. It was not their ancient Fathers, in Moses's, Joshua's, Samuel's days;
or in the best Kings, David's, Solomon's; but after the Defection, in
Jeroboam's days, and under the degenerating Kings, Ahaz, Manasseh, Ammon,
Zedekiah, etc.

8. Tradition succeeds Antiquity, and 8. Tradition.
pleads for its continuance, and the observing such things as have been handed
to them by their Guides and Elders. Therefore did the Pharisees quarrel with
Christ and his Disciples, charging them with too little respect to the
Tradition of the Elders. And our Savior charge them again with too little
(or no) respect to the Commandments of God. Their traditional Corban Mat. 7. 9.
had expunged the fifth Commandment. As the Papists Image Worship, after the
II. Nicene Council has justled out the Second Commandment, and made but an and
caetera of it. The Samaritan woman Joh. 4. 20, 22.
pleaded hard with our Savior for their old Worship, Our Fathers, said she,
worshipped in this Mountain: But you Jews anathematize us, and tell us,
Jerusalem is the only place of Worship. Our Savior tells her, Ye know not what
ye worship. But we do, For salvation is of the Jews; you have Tradition, we
Scripture. We may say the like to the Papists; you have Tradition, but give us
Scripture, or we cannot expect Salvation in your Church; you have Tradition for
auricular Confession, Purgatory, extreme Unction, Invocation of the Saints, the
blessed Virgin especially, etc. But where is the Scripture all this while? Quod
non scribitur, non creditur.

9. But universality makes a great noise, 9 Universality.
and pleads next, Why should not we do as do the most? what our Forefathers,
Kings, Priests, People, all do, is safe for us to follow. Just as good
Divinity, as his was Loyalty, who said, Whom God (by his permissive providence)
and all the people choose for King, him will I follow, though they had a
rightful David for their Sovereign, 2 Samuel 16. 18.
and the other a rebellious Miscreant. The Jews might have disputed Christ out
of the World by this argument, Do any of J^h. 7. 48.
the Rulers or Pharisees believe in him? but this people that know not the Law
are accursed. The greater part is most an end the worst: Where was universality
in Noah's, Lot's, Elias's days, when each of them were left alone? The godly
have been ever almost overborn with numbers. The Ephesians Acts 19.
talked of no less then all Asia and the World besides for their Diana. Elias
was opposed by four hundred Prophets of Baal: One Athanasius against the whole
World. So Luther had Pope, Emperor, Cardinals, Bishops, Priests, all against
him: Christ's is still a little Flock, Luke 12. 32. The loose Protestant would
bear down the serious by this account; the Papist the whole Society of
Protestants; the Mahumetan the Christian; the Pagan all. Learned Brerewood
divides the World into thirty parts, and finds Christianity to have but five,
Mahumetism six, and Paganism has the other nineteen parts. The whole World was
once all Pagan, another while Arrian, since Antichristian (when all that dwelt
on the Earth worshipped the Beast) but a small Remnant whose Names were written
in the Lambs Book of Life in Red Letters, but in the Popes Registry in Black.
The World was never so happy as to be all Christian: What it may be in those
last days prophesied of Esaias 2. 1, 2. I know not, When the Mountain of the
House of the Lord shall be exalted on the top of the Mountains, and all Nations
shall flow to it.

10. To this of universality, I may subjoyn 10. Singularity.
his opposite singularity, and the excuse made thereupon; would you have me
singular? like no body? stand alone? Shall I presume that I have more wisdom,
piety, conscience then all the World. This Luther confesses was a great
stumbling block to him, when he discovered first the gross Errors of Popery;
what shall I be wiser then all the World? what is become of our Fathers? Had I
not better Cum Platone errare quam cum aliis recte sentire? Had I not better
subscribe to the received Doctrines and Opinions of Schoolmen, Universities,
Councils, then hold a private belief of my own? But Noah was content to be
singular, and though, it is likely, the World condemned him sufficiently in
their Censures, He is said to condemn the World upon a true account, Heb. 11.
7. Lot, Elias, Micaiah, Jeremy, and our Savior, were all singular in their
times. But is it not better to be saved alone, or with a few, as Noah, Lot and
Rahab? then to perish with a multitude. Was not Joash more happy that he was
preserved, 2 Kings 11. 2, 3.
when the whole Family was cut off, and rescued by a strange providence, and
reserved for a Kingdom, then if he had undergone the same lot with the whole
Royal Race?

11. There are in the next that think to 11. The Law of the Land. 1 Timothy 1. 8.
shelter themselves under the protection of the Law of the Land. And the Law is
good, as the Apostle says, if a man use it lawfully. And for our Laws we have
cause to bless God that we have so many good and wholesome Laws, and to bless
the King that we enjoy the benefit of them: But yet the legal Christian is not
the right Christian. Now there are two sorts of men that shroud themselves
under the wing of the Law: First, One says, I do what the Law of the Land
requires, living peaceably and conformably thereunto; then what has any man
to say to me? I answer, Though Man has not, God may. It is impossible, said
that learned Casuist, that Bishop Sanderson de Leg.
the Laws of Men should command whatsoever is to be done, and forbid whatsoever
Hum. Pr^lect. 6.
is to be avoided: That is the peculiar Prerogative and Perfection of the
Divine Law. Besides, the Laws of men, says he, never pretend to the government
of the Thoughts, Heart, Spirit, and inside of the man; in which lies the chief,
both of Grace and Sin, Virtue and Vice, which the Law of God does principally
take notice of. The Adequate object of the good Subjects Obedience is the Law
of the Land, but the Adequate object and measure of the good Christians
Obedience is the Law of God. And therefore though the Subjects conformity to
the Laws of men absolve him in humane Courts, and procure him the common
benefit of the King's Peace; yet it is conformity to the Law of God, which
procures spiritual peace of Conscience before God. So that if you enquire in a
civil and political sense, Vir bonis est quis? Who is the good man? The answer
is, Qui consulta patrum, qui Leges, juraque servat; He that observes the Laws
and Edicts of the King and State where he lives; but if in a religious sense,
Qui consulta Dei; He that, as Zachary and Elizabeth, walks in all the
Ordinances Luke 1. 6.
and Righteousness of the Law of God without rebuke.

2. There is another sort of men, when charged with rigor, and hard dealing
with their Neighbors, (men of a perverse and contentious spirit) are ready to
make their defense; I do but what the Law will bear me out in: who can blame me
for following the Law, and taking what advantage the Law will give me? my
Neighbor shall have Law and Justice at my hands, and what he can recover by
Law. But we have a common saying, Summum jus summa injuria, Extremity is
extreme hard; Extreme right, is extreme unrighteousness. We Christians have a
Command, That our moderation should be made known to all men: Phil. 4. 5.
We are to be a Law to our selves, above the Laws of Men, under the Law of God.
Consider Christian, if the Lord should say to thee and me, you shall have Law
and Justice, what you can claim by the Law, and no more: Both you and I were
eternally undone. Remember, with what Mat. 7. 2.
measure thou metest, it shall be measured to thee again. And he shall have
Judgment Jam. 2. 13.
without Mercy, who has showed no Mercy: And mercy both in God and all good
men should triumph over Judgment. Do not thou therefore take thy Fellow Servants
by the Throat for the hundred pence, when thou lie obnoxious to the Justice
of God for ten thousand Talents (as it is in the Parable) least he, for thy
extremity, deal in just extremity with thee, and cast thee into Mat. 18. 34.
Prison, till thou shall satisfy for the whole Debt.

12. Another sort of men make this excuse, It is my own, and I may do what I
please with that.
It is my own, and may I not do with my own what I will? what has any man to
do with me in such case? This is the excusative plea of two contrary kinds of
men.

1. The Prodigal says, If I spend high, and make all away, what is that to any
man? I may do with my own as I think good. So says the Miser, If I keep all in
my Chest, and live below my state, what is that to any man? All is Ours, say
both; I say neither; Nothing is ours: Nor are we our selves our own, says the
Apostle; 1 Cor. 6. 19.
h. e. at our own arbitrary dispose, no nor yet our States: we are Stewards and
Fiduciaries. The Silver and Gold is mine, says Hag. 2. 8. Hos. 2. 9.
the Lord: Thy Wool, Flax, Wine, Oil, mine. Nabal was as much Fool as Churl,
when he talked so much of his Bread, his Cheese, his Victuals; none must taste
of his Cheer but himself and his own Domestics. The Law of Men will question
neither the Prodigal or Miser, God will: The Lord will enquire what good thou
have done with thy State. There are two Questions that all whom God has given
Estates to, should study to make a good Answer to: 1. The one is, How came
thou by it? was it by honest labor, and conscientious diligence in thy
Calling, and God's blessing therewith: Then much good may thy State do thee,
and much good may thou do with it. But if by sycophantizing, as Zacheus
called it, by bribery, extortion, grinding the face of the Poor, false Weights
and Measures, detaining the Laborers Hire, or Servants Wages, racking Tenants,
etc. Thy State is not thy own, nor did God give it thee. Thou have Achan's
accursed wedge in thy Tent: This is aes Alienum. Thou must restore with
Zacheus, if thou would have Salvation come to thy house. The next question
is, How thou have kept or employed thy Talent: The Miser thinks he is safe
enough, he got it hardly, and keeps it charily; makes no idle expenses, nothing
spent in Taverns, Cards or Dice, or costly Entertainments: But he keeps what he
has got, and increases it daily, as if this was the only Talent that God
would call him to an account of. Thy State is not yet thine, till thou have as
well the Use as the Possession Quo mihi fortunas, si non conceditur uti. Hor.
of it. The rich Miser is not so properly said to have his Estate, as his State
possesses and enslaveth him; Habet nummos, non habet ipsum: We say, Fire and
Water are bad Masters; Gold and Silver are worse, they sink the Soul in
destruction and perdition. The Miser is the greatest monster in the World; no
Creature in the Universe that only lives to it self. The Sun communicates his
light, the Springs are free of their waters to every thirsty Passenger: God's
direction is to thee to drink the waters of thy own Cistern (to Prove. 9. 15, 16.
take part of what he has given thee thy self) and that thy Fountain should be
dispersed abroad, to the relief and benefit of others. God, the Church, State,
the Poor, thy Family and Friends challenge a share in thy State. The Prodigal
thinks he can answer it as well, or better, I have not been base or sordid,
keeping and hoarding up; I have lived on what I had, and like a man: I count
him next door to a mad man, that is too saving for his next heir, -- Parcus ob
haeredis curam, nimiumque severus, Assidet insano. -- And him to be stark mad
that Horat.
spares all his life, to die rich.

Est furor haud dubious, est and manifesta Phrenesis, Juvenal.


Vt locuples moriaris egenti vivere fato.

But how have thou spent? upon thy Lusts? what is the account thou will make to
God, to thy Ancestors, or Posterity? I had some thousands left me, some may
say; One part spent on my Back and Belly, another in Gaming, a third on
Pleasures, Hawks, Hounds, Harlots; a fourth in Taverns, Plays, Entertainments:
Thus what the Palmer-worm has left, the Locust has eaten; what the Locust,
the Caterpillar; Joel 1. 4.
what the Caterpillar, the Canker-worm has eaten. Thus, at last, all is gone;
where is Christ's part all the while? what has been laid out on pious and
charitable Uses? Here is a sad account, a State ruined, and a Soul ruined. This
man is as sad a monster as the other, and as to his House and Posterity worse:
Thou should have followed the same direction of the wise man, Drink water out
of thy own Cistern, Prove. 5. 15.
and let streams run to others, yet let them be only thy own, says he, that
is, retain the principal still. The Sun indeed gives light to others, but
withal preserves the principal, and wastes not his stock: It were prodigious,
if in a prodigal Vain it threw it self out of its Orb: The Springs water the
Earth, yet so, as to keep a stock still going. If Naboth said, God forbid I
should 1 Kings 21. 3.
sell the Inheritance of my Fathers: Let sober men say, God forbid I should
make away the Inheritance of my Fathers by Riot and Luxury: We are but
Stewards, remember that. And all good men know it is their duty to honor God
with their Purses, as well as with their Persons. A David would say, What shall
I do for the Name, and House, and Service of God? A Nehemiah, What shall I do
for the Public, and my Country? A Zacheus, What shall I do for the Poor? All
good men. How shall I give account of my Talent with joy, and not with grief?

13. Others think they make a lawful What I do, is in it self lawful.
excuse, when they say, What I do is in it self lawful: But Licitis perimus
omnes, There may be danger in the use (abuse rather) of lawful things. Poison
is often given in a golden Cup, or wholesome Dish; sometimes in a Nosegay. Be
not too bold with things lawful: there may be a snare in Company, Employments,
Mirth, Recreations, Pastimes; yea, in thy very Calling. To swear in it self is
lawful, but unnecessarily and frequently, sinful. The old World and Sodom
perished in these Licitis, (these lawfuls) They eat, they drank, bought, sold,
Luke 17. 26, 27.
built, planted: But minded nothing else. Lawful and sinful, are near
Neighbors. If we go to the utmost of lawfuls ground, we tread ere aware on
sinfuls. Our Savior gives an Item against worldly cares, which are sometimes
commanded, sometimes Luke 21. 34.
commended; yet a surfeit, and overplus of them, is as dangerous as of eating
and drinking when immoderate; though all lawful in their measure, though few
consider it. There is somewhat more necessary, which must be observed above
lawful; e. g. To rest on the Lord's day, and forbear work, lawful; but the
sanctifying the day is the necessary. To read a good Book, very lawful and
commendable that day; but, if nothing hinder, to forbear coming to the Public
Worship, is sinful and scandalous. So in many other cases, Sacrifice sometimes
best, sometimes Mercy better: In the use of things lawful therefore the Apostle
gives three good Cautions; 1. All 1 Cor. 6. 12. and 10. 23.
things are lawful (that is, things indifferent, and not sinful in their
nature,) but all things are not expedient, profitable, convenient. Here I must
have regard to my self, says learned Paraeus, how much, how far, how long
expedient. 2. All things are lawful, but all things edify not; though lawful
to me, here I must have regard to my Neighbor. The third is, All Turpe est
esse servus gulae, aut ventri. Par in locum.
things are lawful to me, but I will not be brought under the power of any: I
must see I be not enslaved to my Belly, Pleasure, Recreation, etc. but that I
can as well forbear as use them; As St. Austin said of Alipius, he having been
once at the Play, grew mad of them, Abstulit secum insaniam, quastimularetur
redire, etc. That he could not for his life keep from them, till he was
afterward changed.

14. There be many that will plead Christian liberty.
Christian liberty, and think that may excuse many things, which savor rankly
of unchristian Libertinism, rather then of Christian Liberty. They can travel
or work on the Lord's day, sit up Night by Night at Cards and Dice, frequent
Taverns and Plays day by day, drink Health after Health, go to Mass, be present
at Idolworship, and cover all with the Veil of Christian liberty, while they
understand not well what Christian liberty means. It is a precious and costly
Jewel, purchased with the blood of Christ: And as all precious Jewels are to be
charily looked to, so this as much as any. I shall therefore, 1. Briefly tell
you wherein it stands not. 2. Wherein it stands. 1. It frees us not from the
observation of the holy Laws of God. 2. Nor from Civil subjection to the just
Laws of Authority over us; or Servants to the command of their Masters, etc. as
St. Peter at large declares. 3. Nor does 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14, etc.
it set us free from the Bonds and Rules of Sobriety, Temperance, Modesty,
Chastity, etc. to give scope to Riot, Excess, Luxury, or any Misdemeanour. 1.
But it stands in freeing us from the Bondage of the old Ceremonial Law, Gal. 5.
1. 2. Frees Believers from the Curse of the Moral Law, Gal. 3. 13. 3. From our
Sins. 1. As to the Guilt, 1 John 1. 7. 2. As to the Dominion and Power, Romans 6.
14. and 8. 2. 3. As to the Condemnation of Sin, Romans 8. 1. 4. Believers are
freed from the Wrath of God, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 10. 5. From H^ll, 1 Cor. 15, 55, 57.
6. From a Spirit of slavish Fear, and servile Bondage, 2 Timothy 1. 7. But Christ
has not at all set us free from the duties and pursuance of Holiness and
Righteousness, as you may see, 1 Pet. 2. 16. As free, but not using your
Liberty for a Cloak of Maliciousness (or Naughtiness, (...).
so the word signifies) but as the Servants of God. Where you have the Sum and
Epitome of Christian Liberty in its two parts: 1. Negative, not using it as a
Cloak of any Naughtiness or Evil. 2. Positive, but as the Servants of God, q.
d. notwithstanding your Liberty, you must carry your selves as such who are not
your own, but have a Master, a God to please, whom you must eye in all your
actions, especially in the use of your Liberty. That as another Apostle says
in another place, 1 Cor. 7. He that is called, being man's Servant, need not
care for that, he is God's Freeman: So he that is called to be God's Freeman,
needs to have a care, for he is still God's Servant. Surely Christ had died to
little purpose, if he had come to set us free, so that we might do what we
please: But he sets us free from all Iniquity, to purify to himself a peculiar
people, zealous of Tit. 2. 14.
good works. And that we being delivered from our Enemies, might serve him
(without fear) in holiness and righteousness all the days of Luke 1. 74, 75.
our Lives.

15. But the grand Excuse of all is, the Our calling the grand Excuse.
Calling. This the most plausible, and under it all those in the Parable take
Sanctuary, Luke 14. 18, 19, 20. I have my Land to take possession of, and look
after; and I my Oxen to go try, says, another, and I have married a Wife,
says the third; and there are certain cares attending that condition,
especially till I am settled. Plausible and fair Excuses all, but such as they
fairly excused themselves out of Heaven by. Know, O Christian, thou have two
Callings to follow. Both must be looked after, or all is not well: Thou have
two Hands, and God gives thee, as he did Moses, Deuteronomy. 9. 15.
two Tables to hold: Thou must as well look to the first, as to the second. Thy
outward Calling is given to thee, as Eve to Adam, to be an help to thy
Spiritual Calling, and not as Michal to David, to be a snare. The 1 Samuel 18. 24.
outward Calling is to be subordinate to thy Spiritual, and so subordinata non
pugnant, as we say; they will not clash. But as David and Jonathan, each
strengthen 1 Samuel 23. 16.
one another hands in the Lord. Let every man wherein he is called, therein
abide with God: That is either an ill calling wherein thou can not abide with
God, and God with thee, or ill managed. Take heed the lean Kine devour not the
fat, and that the great Husband do not devour the good Christian: There are
store of great Husband and Huswives in Hell; but such as served Mammon more
then God; slight in God's Service, serious in the Worlds: Shimei looking after
his Servants, lost his life; take heed in looking after thy Servant the World,
thou loose not thy Soul. The good Servant knows how to take his Work, and leave
it, (as we say) that is, so to time and place every thing, that nothing be lost
by negligence and carelessness; but every thing in the fittest time and place.
And he is the good Christian that knows how to take the work of his calling and
leave it, that all things may be so contrived and forecast, that one business
do not enterfere with another, to the prejudice of either. Now tell me, thou
that have a great Trade, and art full of business; thou can contrive it so as
to have a Dining-time, and can thou not find a praying-time? Thou will spare
time to speak with a Customer, and have thou no time to speak with thy God?
Thou will be sure to take time by day or night to overlook thy Shop-Book, and
have thou no time to look into thy Soul-Book, thy Bible, or thy Book of
Conscience? It is always ominous when Lot and Abraham part; when a great Trade
or Stock draws thee from God, and the society of his People: He never did
thrive after. And remember, that all these Self-Excusers in the Text are
rejected, the Lord saying, None of these shall taste of my Supper. Luke 14. 24.


16. There be that will excuse themselves The manner of the Country, Trade, etc.
and some things not otherwise to be justified, with this; It is the manner of
the Country, or the way of their Trade, and the like. Thus did that subtle and
faithless Laban, when he had wronged Jacob in his Nuptial Contract, giving him
Leah in stead of Rachel, color over his Cheat; It is not the manner of our
Country to give Genesis 29. 26.
the Younger before the Elder, says he. But remember what a man this was that
made this evasion, a man of no Conscience, that would say and unsay, do and
undo; a man full of his shifts, that had changed Jacob's wages ten times over.
There is a mystery in all Trades we say, and if there be not a mystery of
Iniquity in some of them, it is well. Howsoever, Mos Patriae, the custom of the
place, or way, is put a poor shift, Trita frequensque licet sit via, crimen
habet; And be it never so ordinary, it is very bad. How much better would
Jacob's resolution become us, My Righteousness shall answer, Genesis 30. 33.
and speak for me in time to come. Or Abraham's, Not so much as a Thread or
Shooe-latchet; least it should be said, That fraud and dishonest dealing had
made me rich.

17. Some again are confirmed and hardened The odious Names put upon Virtue.
in their ways, by the odious and reproachful Names put upon Religion, and the
honorable Titles wherewith Vice is adorned: 1. The odious Names wherewith
Piety is branded, an old practice to smut Religion with disgrace. Thus the very
Name of Christian was once a term of disgrace: Exitiabilis superstitio, Tacitus
called Tert. Apolog. Secus vir bonus, sed Christianus.
Christian Religion. And they were wont to say in the Primitive
persecution-times, Such a man was a good man, but a Christian. Thus the Name of
Protestant is odious in Spain: In Italy, Piety is Lutheranism: In France,
Hugonotism. Civility is styled Dullness, Sobriety Unsociableness, Seriousness
Sullenness, Profession Hypocrisy. Such is the envy of Nature (said our fluent
Bishop Hall) That where she sees a better Face then her own, she is ready to
scratch it, or cast dirt on it, knowing that all Virtue has a native beauty in
it; she labors to deform it with the foulest Imputations.

2. By the honorable Titles put upon 2. The fair Titles put upon Vice.
Vice. Thus is Pride termed Neatness, Dissembling Courtship, Swaggering
Gallantry, Q^arrelling Manhood, Ribaldry Urbanity, Fallit enim vitium sptcie
virtutis and umbra. Juven.
Drunkenness Good-fellowship, etc. That as Physicians gild over their Pills, to
cover the bitterness of the Ingredients; so do these gild over their Sins, and
so they are more easily swallowed down. But though the Physician has put upon
many Diseases specious Names, and calls a Plague Sore a Carbuncle, and the
white filme, which takes away the sight of the Eye, a Pearl: Yet who can be
brought (says a late learned Doctor) by such slender Dr. Spurflow in his
Meditations.
Artifices into Opinion, That a Carbuncle is less loathsome, or mortal, then
another swelling, which has not so gay a name? or that that blindness which is
caused by the Pearl in the Eye is more comfortable, then the loss of sight by
any other accident. There is a sad Woe pronounced to both of these, Woe to them
that call Evil Good, and Good Evil, that put Esaias 5. 20.
Darkness for Light, and Light for Darkness, Sweet for Bitter, and Bitter for
Sweet.

CHAP. VI. Excuses taken from certain Doctrines and Scriptures misunderstood,
and Observations ill applied.
THere are others yet behind, and too Doctrines misapplyed.
many that think themselves safe and excusable, by many Doctrines and
Scriptures misunderstood, and misapplying sundry Observations they have made.

As first, That great and mysterious 1. That of Election.
Doctrine of Election and Reprobation, which is indeed of that altitude and
depth, that, as those waters in the Sanctuary, there is no wading through, or
passing over them, without that Reason-silencing, and abrupt admiration of the
Apostles, (...). Oh the amazing Depth, and riches of the Romans 11. 33.
Wisdom and Knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his Judgments, and his ways
past finding out! yet how do many argue from this Doctrine: If I am elected, I
am safe, though I do nothing; Election will take his effect, and I shall
obtain. On the other side, if reprobated, all endeavors are of no effect; for
God's Decrees cannot be frustrated, I shall unavoidably perish. But I Answer,
Who taught thus to reason? Thy business is not to pry into God's secret will,
but attend his revealed, and thy own duty: Secret things belong to God, things
revealed to us, Deuteronomy. 29. 29. And first, For Election, know, there is no such
absolute Election, as to be exclusive of the means, but does include and imply
all the Cum predestinatio ad finem includit media non potest hunc sperare qui
negligit ista. Prideaux.
ways and means preparing for glory, as effectual Calling, Faith, Repentance,
holy Obedience. See Ephesians. 1. 4. God has chosen us before the Foundation of
the World, that we should be holy, and without blame before him in Love. So 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. God has chosen you to Salvation, through Sanctification of the
Spirit, and belief of the Truth. As there is no such absolute Promise of
Harvest and Fruitfulness, exclusive of man's industry and endeavors in
ploughing and sowing, but the means are included in subordination to the end.

2. And as for Reprobation (not to wade Deus ordinans ad paenas propter peccata
non est magis injustus quam cum paenas infligit propter peccata. Paraeus.
into the Controversy:) It will be acknowledged to be as just in God to decree
to punish men for Sin, as to inflict the punishment, when the Sin is committed:
As it is the same justice in the Magistrate to Enact such a Penalty for such an
Offense, as to execute it after the Offense committed. God punishes none but
for Sin, nor does decree to punish any, but such in whom he finds Sin
unrepented of. 2. As for thy Reprobation, look not into this Abyss, neither
cast thy self from this Pinnacle: But study thy duty, which is to work out thy
Salvation with fear and trembling. 3. Be assured, no man can know himself, or
any other, to be a Reprobate, (though some may have assurance of their
Election;) Because, 1. God can call and change the heart of the most wicked man
at the last hour. 2. All God's Elect were sometimes Children of wrath as well
as others, Ephesians. 2. 3. 3. And some of God's own Children have fallen sometimes
into most foul sins, and sometimes layen long in sin, 1 Cor. 6. 10, 11. Tit. 3.
3. 4. Therefore it is not God's secret Decree thou should so much fear and
startle at, as thy own Sin and Disobedience, which is that which prepares the
Vessels of wrath to their destruction. As Rehoboam had no reason 1 Kings 12. 13.
to say, There is a fatal Decree, that my Kingdom shall be rent from me,
therefore all is one what course I take, or whose counsel I follow; but he
should have hearkened to the Counsel of those ancient men, and trusted God with
his Crown. Nor could Zedekiah say, There is a fatal Doom on Jerusalem, that it
shall be sacked, and burnt to ashes: But he should have hearkened to Jeremy,
who besought him to Jer. 38. 20, 23.
yield to the Caldean, assuring him, then all should be safe: Otherwise, says
he, (not God's Decree, or Sentence, denounced, but) thou will set Jerusalem on
fire.

A second Doctrine abused, is, That all Doct. 2. That all are Sinners.
are Sinners, and there is none Righteous, no not one. Both branches are true;
the first is affirmed 1 John 1. 8. The other Romans 3. 10. But what then?
therefore say thou, I may do well enough, though a vile Sinner, and be saved,
though not so righteous and religious as some seem to be. But mark, there is a
great difference between Sin and Sin: All indeed are guilty of Original Sin,
and all of years of Actual; But all are not Sinners alike, some are obstinate,
wilful, presumptuous, desperate Sinners, that make a mock of Sin, a trade of
Sin; Prove. 14. 9. Prove. 4. 17.
It is their Meat and Drink. Others are humbled, trembling, penitent, mourning,
reforming, believing, self-abhorring Sinners, who watch, pray, resist Sin, shun
the occasions of it. What is this to thee, who go on in sin? Their's are
Gnats, thine Camels: Their's Moats, thine Beams. There are certain Sins, one
may call them, the spots of God's people, and have not excluded them Salvation.
As first, 1. It is not sin remaining in the Regenerate, but sin reigning in the
Unregenerate that damns, else what had become of Paul? Romans 7. 18.

2. Not sin loathed, but loved; what else had become of the Publican? Luke 18.

3. Not sin bewailed, but cherished; what had else become of Peter?

4. Not sin fallen into, but continued in; what had else become of David?

5. Not sin resisted, as Joseph; but pursued and persisted in, as Ahab and
Jeroboam.

6. Not of Ignorance, but Presumption; else what had become of Noah?

7. Not against Resolution, as Peter's; but resolved on, as Judas's.

8. Not out of infirmity and fear, as Abraham's, but of design and premeditated
Malice, as Ananias his lie, Acts 5.

9. Not repented of, but sin unrepented of, as the two Thieves are Examples.

10. Not sin confessed, but covered and smothered, Prove. 28. 13.

Lastly, Sin forsaken, never damns; sin not forsaken, ever damns, Prove. 28. 13.
Ezekiel. 18. 21. Manasseh an example of the one, Pharaoh of the other.

1. We must distinguish of Righteousness; 1. There is a Legal and Evangelical
Righteousness. 2. A Righteousness before God and before men. Before God there
is none Righteous, according to the strictness of the Law: But Zachary,
Elizabeth, Abel and Lot, and all truly godly are called and counted righteous
by an Evangelical righteousness, while they endeavor to fulfill all
righteousness, though in many things fall short. But though they dare not plead
their righteousness before God, (in whose Eyes the Heavens are not pure) yet
can they before men say, Ye are witnesses and God also, how holily, and justly,
and unblamably 1 Thessalonians. 3. Po.
we have had our Conversation among you: Whose Ox or Ass have I taken? or
whom have I defrauded? There are sins Quotidianae Incursionis, as Tertullian
calls them, some over-sights, which the best are not free from, but bewail, and
they consist with Grace. But there are other gross sins (Vastantia
Conscientiam) which make foul work with Conscience, and denominate a man
unrighteous in a high measure; these shut out of Heaven, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10.

A third Doctrine much abused to strengthen Doct. 3. Christ died for Sinners.
men in sin, is, That Christ dyed to save Sinners, which is the most
comfortable Doctrine in all the Bible; a saying worthy of all acceptance, and
due consideration: But what use does the presumptuous Sinner make of it? Then,
says he, shall I do well enough, though I live in sin; for I cannot out-sin the
Merits of Christ's Blood, which is said to cleanse from all sin. And thus would
he make Christ the Minister and Maintainer of sin, as if he came not to destroy
the Works of the Devil, but to Patronize 1 John 3. 8.
them. But if thou will understand, know, That Jesus Christ came not to save us
in and with, but from our sins, Matthew. 1. 21. that is, from the practice, love
and dominion of sin: He gave himself for us, to redeem us from all Iniquity,
and to Tit. 2. 14.
purify to himself a peculiar people, zealous of good Works. Every word of
which Text speaks life to the Sinner, but death to his sin: Christ came indeed
to reconcile God and the Sinner, not the Sinner and Sin: He pulls down the
partition wall between God and the Believer, but sets up a partition wall
between the Believer and his Sin. But many deal with Christ, said a worthy Dr.
Hall.
Bishop, as some do with their Prince, or some great noble man, they care not
how much they take up, and how far they run in debt; and when payment should be
made, they get a Protection to elude the course of Justice: So do many fly to
Christ for his Protection, says he, and this is a common cheat.

4. There is no Doctrine more abused then Doct. 4. We are saved by grace.
that of free grace: That we are saved by Grace, not Merit. The Scripture
ascribes all to Grace, we are justified by Grace, Romans 3. 28. Saved by Grace,
not Works, Ephesians. 2. 8. Where Sin abounds, Grace superaboundeth, Romans 4. 20.
Hence the Libertine assumeth, I will rely on the Grace of God, and not doubt of
Salvation, though I am such a Sinner. The Apostle easily foresaw that such an
Antinomian and Antievangelian Inference would be made by some ungodly ones, as
Jude calls them, who would turn grace into wantonness, therefore does twice
obviate and refute it in one Chapter, Romans 6. 1. Shall we continue in Sin, that
Grace may abound? And verse 15. Shall we sin, because we are not under the Law,
but under Grace? And knocks down both with the same short answer of defiance,
(...), God forbid. Shall Grace act against it self, and destroy Grace? shall
gratia gratis data become Ingratum faciens? 1. These do quite and clean corrupt
the Doctrine of Grace, which teaches to deny Ungodliness, and worldly Lusts,
and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present World, Tit. 2. 11.
2. These do pervert the use of Grace set down Romans 6. 14. Sin shall not have
dominion over you, because ye are not under the Law, but under Grace. 3. These
frustrate the main end of Grace, which is set down Romans 5. ult. That as Sin
has reigned unto Death, Grace might reign by Righteousness to eternal life. To
abuse Grace, is the greatest Sin imaginable; and to despite the Spirit of
Grace, is the Sin unpardonable, Heb. 10. 29. And if any are ungodly (...), in
God's Black-Book, as destined to condemnation, Jude, verse 4. they are such as
turn the Grace of God into wantonness.

A fifth Doctrine much abused, is, That Doct. 5. That we are saved by Faith.
we are justified and saved by Faith alone, which is most true and consonant to
Scripture, Romans 3. 28. Gal. 2. 16. Ephesians. 2. 8. I will therefore believe, says
the careless Christian, and then hope I shall do well enough, though I have no
good works, which I hear are excluded in those forecited Scriptures, in the
matter of Justification: But know, O vain man, That Faith and Works are only
opposed in the matter of Justification, but are never separated and parted. As
the Eye and Ear are opposed in the matter of seeing; the Eye only sees, not the
Ear; but where God gives Eyes, he gives Ears also: So to whom Grace is given to
believe, it is given to obey. Faith is not an idle, but active and operative
Grace; It works by love, Gal. 5. 6. Is of a heart purifying nature, Acts 15. 9.
It unites the Soul to Christ, so that Christ is said to dwell in the Soul by
Faith, Ephesians. 3. 16. And to live in the Soul, Gal. 2. 20. The right Epithete of
true Faith, is most holy Faith, Jude, verse 20. His right property, is
sanctifying, Acts 26. 28. True Faith is never solitary, but attended and known
by her good many Companions, Virtue, 2 Pet. 1. 5. Love, Ephesians. 1. 15. Fear,
Heb. 11. 7. Repentance, Mark 1. 15. Righteousness, 2 Timothy 2. 22. Obedience,
Heb. 11. 8. Patience, Heb. 6. 12. Sanctification, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. Good Works,
Tit. 3. 8. Her Exercises are holy Duties: Therefore we read of the Prayer of
Faith, James 5. 15. Living by Faith, Heb. 11. 28. Walking by Faith, 2 Cor. 5.
7. And as to our spiritual warfare, it is of singular use; we read of the fight
of Faith, 1 Timothy 6. 22. Resisting the Devil, quenching his fiery Darts,
overcoming the World; and all by Faith. So that such know little of the nature
of Faith, who dream that Faith has nothing to do, but to look on a Promise,
and sit still: Faith has Promises, Conditions, Precepts, Threats; yea, all
God's Word to look to. It has Sins, Corruptions, Assaults, Temptations to look
after and resist: It has God, and good Works, and the life of Christ, Heaven,
and heavenly-mindedness to look after. To Faiths charge and oversight, all
Graces, Love, Repentance, Obedience, Fear, Patience, Humility, etc. all Duties,
Prayer, Praise, Thankfulness, are committed. She the Queen, they her Train; she
the Mother, they the Daughters: They all rise up, and call her blessed, and
she, as the good Mother of the Family, gives to them their appointed task of
Employment, and sees that none of them be idle.

6. The Doctrine of the Saints Imperfections Doct. 6. Of the Saints
Imperfections.
goes a great way with many, and themselves will make the use to excuse their
Enormities. Every one, the very best, have their failings, none is perfect; all
the Saints had their Imperfections. But thou may read much of their
Perfections also, if thou have a mind to it; Noah, Abraham, Job, Asa, and many
others were perfect, the Scripture witnesses. Paul says, All true Christians
must endeavor after it, Phil. 3. It is commended, Matthew. 5. 48. Exhorted too,
2 Cor. 13. 11. Prayed for, Heb. 13. 21. 1 Pet. 8. 10. We must therefore
distinguish of Perfection; 1. There was an Original Perfection, Eccles. 7. 29.
God made man perfect: This was, but is not. 2. There will be a future
perfection, when we shall come to be among the Spirits of the just made
perfect, Heb. 12. 23. This is not, but shall be. 3. There is a legal
Perfection, such as the Law requires: This was in Christ, Heb. 5. 9. But is not
to be found in any since the Fall, Heb. 7. 19. 4. There is an imaginary
Perfection (self-reputed) such was in Tyrus, Ezekiel. 27. 3. and 28. 12. 15. And
in Laodicea, Rev. 3. Of this there is too much. But 5. There is an Evangelical
Perfection; and this is that which we should seek after. And this is 1.
Imputative, as there is an imputed Righteousness, whereby Believers are made
perfect by Christ's Righteousness imputed to them, Ezekiel. 16. 14. Thy Beauty was
perfect, through my Comeliness which I had put upon thee: This is our best
Perfection, and properly so called; thus every one that is perfect, shall be as
his Master and Savior, Luke 6. 40. By this Job, and other godly persons, were
reputed perfect, Job 1. 1. 2. There is a Comparative Perfection; Thus Noah,
Genesis 6. 9. was perfect in his Generations, thou he had no absolute perfection;
yet compare him with other men, he might go for a perfect man: He did so
outshine them, as the Stars compared with the Sun are no Lights at all, but
compared with the other parts of Heaven, and much more with the clods of the
Earth are glorious Lights. 3. There is a perfection of parts (an Inchoative
Perfection) which is yet incomplete, but in a way to a complete perfection, and
shall come to be perfected, Phil. 1. 5. Col. 1. 28. Ephesians. 4. 12, 13. 4. As
there is a perfection of Parts, so of Hearts, which next to that imputed is our
best, and we may take greatest comfort in, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. Thus was David and
Asa perfect, 1 Kings 11. 4. 2 Chronicles. 15. 17. 5. There is a perfection of way,
that wherein the godly set themselves to walk; though sometimes they slack
their pace, and walk not so evenly in it, Psalm. 119. 7. and 101. 2. 6. 6. There
is a Perfection of Desires and Endeavors, a restless pursuit of perfection,
forgetting what is behind, and pressing forward to the mark, Phil. 3. 12, 13.
And herein stands the best of our perfection here below. Now to apply this to
thee, who pleadest the Saints Imperfections, to justify thy sinful and lazy
courses. See here are many Perfections, and thou have never a one of them
(unless the Laodicean self-conceited perfection) therefore no Saint sure.
Excuse not thy self by their Imperfections any more, except thou do strive to
out-go them, at least to equal them.

7. Another Doctrine grounded on the Doct. 7. We are not under the Law, but
under Grace.
Scripture, Romans 6. 14. That we are not under the Law, but under Grace; is much
abused: If not under the Law, says the Libertine, why should I trouble my self
to keep it, or be troubled if I break it? Understand therefore what that means,
we are not under the Law: 1. It is understood of Believers, and such as are
true Converts, that they are not under the Law, that is, the irritation of the
Law, so as to be more irritated and incited by the curb and restraint which the
Law lays upon us not to lust, to lust the rather; as we are apt to desire what
is forbidden, as the Apostle is supposed to speak of himself while
unregenerate, Romans 7. 7, 8. But we are under Grace, which checketh and stops
that rebellious inclination, and the irritation of the Law. 2. That we are not
under the Curse of the Law, Gal. 3. 13. but under Grace, which has translated
the Curse from us to Christ, who was made a Curse for us. 3. Nor under the
justification of the Law (as well as the Curse or Condemnation) as sometimes
Adam was before his Fall, who was to look for his justification and acceptance,
from his observation of the Law, he being then under the Covenant of Works (the
Covenant of Grace not being spoken of till after the Fall.) In which respect
Believers are now said to be dead to the Law, that they might Romans 7.
live unto God. 4. Nor are Believers under the rigor of the Law, so as that
they cannot Gal. 2. 19.
stand right in God's sight, if they come not up to the strict terms of the Law
(when through infirmity they fail) but we are under a more easy Yoke, Grace
does mitigate and dispense with the summum jus, the rigor and severity of it,
Romans 3. 20. Gal. 2. 16. 5. Nor are Believers under the Coaction of the Law; the
Law is not made for the Righteous in this sense, so as either to condemn, or
compel him; but he is under Grace, which prompts and puts him on, out of a
spirit of love, and a willing mind to a cheerful Obedience. But because the
Apostle says, We are not under the Law, but under Grace; would you make the
Law and Grace to jar? And the Doctrine of Grace and Practice of Sin to agree.
The Apostle bids defiance to such an impious Inference, and, in a sort,
disdains to give an Answer to this Objection; Romans 6. 14, 15.
but with abhorrence cries out, God forbid. And elsewhere positively affirms,
That he never intended his Doctrine of Grace should make void the Law, but
establish it, to make it abide in ^ull force and virtue.

Another Doctrine and Scripture abused, Doct. 8. That we are to try all things.
is, That we are to try all things, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. Hence says the vain
u^stable man, I may go into all Companies, any Meeting, be present at any
Idolatrous Service without scruple. But observe what follows, and you need no
other Answer, Hold fast that which is good, abstain from all appearance of
Evil: Therefore it is no more but this* Try all Doctrines, believe not every
Spirit; but try all by the Word: So prove all things that are probable (or
dubious) but lawful, and likely to be good, not such as have an appearance of
Evil. So that this universal Particle (All) as in many other places, is to be
taken with a limitation. 1. As to Piety,] All things consistent with it, but
such are not the Doctrines of the Arrians, Socinians, the Worship of the
Mahumetans, Papists, Quakers, etc. The Ephesine Church was commended for Rev.
2. 2.
trying such as said they were Apostles, but found them to be Liars; but then
could not bear them, or give allowance to hear them. And further is commended,
that she did (not try) but perfectly hate and detest the Doctrine of the
Nicolaitans, a Verse 6.
Pestilent and Licentious Sect. 2. To Morality,] All things consistent with
Morality and good Manners, not such as are apparently Evil by the light of
Nature; as the way of Cain, the courses of the Ranter, Adulterer, Libertine,
etc. 3. As to thy outward good,] civil or natural; otherwise thou might try
all Poisons, to see what is the force and operation of them, or try all
Callings and Professions, and so be to day a Tradesman, to morrow a Divine,
next day a Lawyer or Physician; to day a Tailor, to morrow a Carpenter, and so
in infinitum, as well as take that liberty to taste and make trial of all Sects,
and different modes of Religion and Worship.

And in the last place (to name no more) 9. Repent and be saved.
It is but repenting, if all fail, and all is safe; for Christ has joined
Repentance and Remission of Sins together, Luke 24. 47. So that if Repentance
go before, Pardon follows of course: The Lord has promised, if we repent of
the Evil we have done, he will repent of the Evil he has threatened: Jer. 18. 8.
And I purpose to repent at last, and then God will pardon. Oh that men should
so dally with God's Promises and Threats, and Play with the Cockatrice,
adventuring so near the brink of Hell, and think to come off safe. Such as
these do presumptuously promise themselves two things, which God does no where
promise. 1. The one is, that they will repent, as if it were in 2 Timothy 2. 26.
their own power, which is the pure and peculiar gift of God. Repentance is not
Acts 11. 18.
the work of nature or free will; not in the power of all Purposes, Vows,
Resolutions; not in the power of Pain, Sickness, Death or Hell to work; not in
the power of Creatures, Men or Angels to give; not in the power of all
Ordinances, Fasting, Praying, Sermons or Sacraments to work. 2. The other is,
they promise themselves to repent at Death, and that shall serve their turn, as
well as if they had repented all their life. But God has made no such promise
to late Repentance, but threatened the contrary, Prove. 1. 26, 27, 28. Hos. 5. 6.
There is a memorable Story of St. Austin Lib. 3. De poenitentia quae putatur
esse ipsius.
to this purpose, which I have read; being once asked, What he thought of a man
that had lived wickedly, but at his Death penitent, confessing and bewayling
his sins, absolved, etc. What would you have me say (said he) That he is saved?
No, I will not, because I would not deceive thee: What then? That he is damned?
No, neither, because I dare not Judge him: What then shall I say? O Brother, if
thou will be free from doubting, repent whiles thou art in health. If thou will
repent when thou can not sin, thy sins have left thee, and not thou thy Sins.
In another place again, it is not to be said how many this vain hope of late
Repentance has deceived and undone. Again, says he, I have read the Scripture
over and over, and I find not so much as one in the space of two thousand years
saved by his Repentance at his end, except the Thief on the Cross. To St.
Austin, I shall join a remarkable passage, or two of the learned Bishop
Andrews, who Preaching at Court of Repentance, fell to discourse of late
Repentance and seeking God, and has these words, That that may be said about
this, is this, and it is nothing, some one or two of a thousand, or ten
thousands have; how then? shall not we therefore seek God before? Again, this
time is the time when all Hypocrites, Atheists, Tag and Rag come in to seek him
in a sort* and shall not we be confounded to see our selves in their number?
Again, what is our seeking then? Is it not to lie still in our Beds, and suffer
a few words to be spoken in our Ears, and have a little Opiate Divinity
ministered to our Souls, and so sent away? and much more to this purpose. To
these two so eminent Persons, I may add a third of Mr. Greenham (St. Greenham
Bishop Hall somewhere calls him) my Sentence is, says that judicious Divine,
that a man now lying at the point of death, having the fears and terrors of
death now upon him, in that state of fear and pain, may have a sorrow for his
life past; but because the weakness of the Flesh and the bitterness of Death
does most commonly procure it, we ought to suspect, etc.

There is no Promise, I said, that such Repentance shall be accepted; But I
know what will be Replied, Though I have no Promise, I have an Example, The
Thief on the Cross: And why may not I as well as he? Answer, This Example, as
some other passages of Scripture concerning the falls and miscarriage of the
Saints, is set for the fall and rising again of many, and is like some of those
Scriptures which the unlearned and inconsiderate persons do wrest to their own
destruction. But 1. Consider there is but one such Example in all the Bible,
and this related but once, and by one only of the Evangelists (all four
mentioning the dying of Christ between two Thieves) only St. Luke sets Luke 23.
40.
down this passage, the rest being silent: The Holy Ghost easily foresaw how
apt we are to surfeit, even of a little of this Honey: One, we say, that none
might depair; But one, least any should presume. 2. Consider at the same time
you have an Example of another that died without Repentance; therefore I may
with much more reason retort this Argument. The one Thief did not, nay could
not repent; for God gave him not Repentance, but as he cast off God in his
life, God cast him off at death: As he lived, he dyed, reviling, cursing,
deriding, desparing; thou have therefore more cause to fear to be left with the
one, then to hope to be taken with the other. There was then a Concurrence of a
many the most stupendous Prodigies that the World ever beheld, the Sun at
Noonday loosing his light, the Air darkened, the Earth quaking, the Rocks
rent, the Sun of God crying out Eloi, Eloi, etc. his fellow Thief now
recanting* of an old Malefactor, and late scoffing Blasphemer, while upon the
Cross, of a sudden a Penitent, a Convert, a Believer, a Confessor, a Preacher,
a Prayer, preaching to him Repentance, praying to his Savior for forgiveness;
yet all this wrought not upon him: The hard Rocks rent and cleft, but his more
then rocky heart rent not; His Bones, Arms and Legs, were broken, his heart
unbroken. We may as well almost expect a second Crucifying of Christ, said one,
as a second Thief; Mr. Dike.
nay, I may say, if there could be a second Crucifying, there might also be
found a second Impenitent Thief. Some man (said that great Andrews) going a
Journey, has found a Purse of money by the way; were it not madness, in hope
of like hap to us to leave our money behind us? hear Mr. Greenbam again:
Besides this one, there is not one more in all the Bible; and for this one that
sped, a thousand thousands have missed; and what folly is it to put our selves
in a way, where so many have miscarried: It is as if one should spur his Ass
till he spoke, because Balaam's Ass did once speak; so grossly does Satan abuse
us, and our own folly blind us.

The remaining part of this Chapter is to speak of sundry Observations that
many 2. Sundry Observations.
have made, whence they have gathered Excuses to confirm themselves in their
evil ways. As in the first place, The quiet ^. The quiet end of some wicked
men.
and peaceable end of some wicked men: I have observed, says one, how good an
end they have made, died like Lambs; I wish I may make such an end my self.
Answer, Like Lambs indeed, like Jeremy's Lambs, Jer. 51. 39, 40. They rejoice
and sleep a perpetual sleep, like Lambs led to the Slaughter. Like Lambs
indeed, as having neither apprehension of Death (the second Death) nor hope of
eternal life. But when did you see a wicked or worldly man die like that Lamb
of God, lifting up his Eyes to Heaven, praying with a Heart full of hope, joy,
peace, assurance? saying, John 17. 4. I have glorified thee on Earth, have
finished the Work thou gave me to do: Into thy Hands I commend my Spirit. Or
singing like that Swan, 2 Timothy 4. 6, 7, 8. I have fought a good Fight, finished
my course, kept the Faith, there is now a Crown of Righteousness laid up for
me, etc. I am not secure Si securus hinc exit, ego non sum securus.
about his eternal state, said St. Austin, that died secure of his own. Such
may rather be said to lie like Stocks and Stones; and to die like Nabal, whose
heart was dead within him ten days before he died, and became 1 Samuel 25.
like a stone. It matters not much, said a godly Divine, Whether a godly man
Dr. Harris.
be in Heaven the day before his death, (his Understanding being clouded, his
Faith assaulted) so he be there ever after; nor whether a wicked man be secure
at and before his death, and descend from a Heaven of security, into a Hell of
misery. There is no conclusion to be made from the Epilogue and last act of
ones life; Qualis vita, finis ita. From the former course of his life, we may
more rationally argue; according to that of the Father, He cannot Aug. l. de
Disc. Chris. c. 2.
dye ill, that lived well; nor well, that have lived ill: You may possibly see
some eminently godly person encountering the last Enemy with dread and horror,
yet goes to Heaven, as they Rev. 11. 12. In a Cloud, or as Elias in a
Whirlewind and Storm, 2 Kings 2. 11. while the wicked steal into Hell without
noise. For my part, said that famous Greenham, speaking to one in distress in
Sickness (As I look for no great matters in my death for my self, so) I would
not think the more hardly of you, if you should die in this discomfort; nor
would I wish any to judge otherwise of God's Child in that state of death; for
we shall not be judged according to that particular instant at our death, but
the general course of our life. You may see much more to this purpose in our
famous Perkins, His right way to dying well.

Another is stumbled, and takes offense, 2. The low parts of the Religious.
as he pretends, at the mean Condition, and weak parts of those that are
Religious, looking upon them as so many shallow heads. And it was not for
nothing therefore when our Savior had related, That the Poor receive the
Gospel; that he added, Blessed is he that is not offended in me: In respect of
Math. 11. 6.
his Followers. But shall we say, That Lucian, Porphiry and Julian, and such
atheistical Scoffers are the only wits of the World? Tell me, if thou art able
to Judge, and have any Candor: If St. Paul's Rhetoric in his Answers, and in
his many ex tempore Apologies, does not equal or exceed his, who was Sir-named
the Orator (Tertullus). And not to mention his other Epistles, read and weigh
that short one to Philemon, and tell me, If thou find any where better
Oratory, such Flowers and Floods of Eloquence? Were not those great Worthyes of
their times, Justin Martyr, Clemens, Tertullian, Origin, Basil, Nazianzen,
Chrysostom, Austin, Jerome, able to cope with, match, and over-match all the
learned Opposers of Religion in their times? And will not any one that has any
savor of piey, or fancy, confess our Herbert to have as good a vain in Poetry,
and to have as lofty strains as any of our frothy and wanton Poets? And has
not our Nation had as choice wits, and profound Scholars in all kind of Polite
Literature as were to be found in the World again? Such our Jewel, Perkins,
Abbot, Andrews, Reynolds, Whitaker, Davenant, and those two great Luminaries,
Usher and Gataker, (whom their very Adversaries admired for their Learning:)
yet all not only Champions for the Truth, but Exemplary for a strict and holy
Life.

3. Another takes the like distaste, when Religion does not raise men to
Riches, etc.
he sees Religion not accompanied with Riches, and outward Prosperity; but the
most Religious often in Straits, Wants, Trouble, Persecution; whereas our
Preachers say, That godliness is so profitable to all things, having the
Promise of this Life, as well as that to come; yet they see whatever the godly
may meet with in another World, in this they fare not better, often worse then
others. Is godliness the great gain and contentment, say they? we can find
neither the one nor the other: True, if we call Riches, Honor, Preferments,
the great gain, and contentment to consist in a brutish, Epicurean satisfying
the Flesh: These the godly count but petty gains, and little contentment in
them. But his gains are Pardon of Sin, Interest in Christ, the Favor of God,
the Comforts of the Holy Ghost, Riches of Grace, Peace of Conscience, a Title
to, and Assurance of, a heavenly Crown: These are with him the true and great
Gain, and the matter of his Contentment; which is no where to be found, but in
the Courts of Godliness; not in the Courts of Princes, or Palaces of Prelates.
You may have one King say, Vtinam nunquam Regnassem, so did Philip the Second
say, Would I had never been a King; yet had he many Kingdoms came tumbling in
upon him; he had received 564 millions, he said, But had no Contentment, but
Cordolium, hearts grief from all. You may hear another, a Pope say, Would I had
never been Pope; so did Adrian the Sixth, who said, His exaltation to the
Papacy, was the greatest unhappiness that ever befell him: And another of them
said, The higher he rose in Greatness and Preferments, the farther off he was
from Contentment, and hopes of Salvation; when I was an inferior Churchman,
said he, I had good hopes of my Salvation, when raised to a Bishopric, I was
full of doubts and fears; but when made Pope, I did utterly despair.

4. Another Objecteth, and hereby excuses The Divisions among Christians.
himself (while he is of no Religion or Conscience at all himself) that we have
so many Divisions, that he knows not with what Party to join: An old Cavil and
Reproach cast upon the ways of God. The Heathens would hit the Christians in
the Teeth with this, You Christians worship but one God, and cannot agree; we
worship many, and yet agree. It is to be confessed, and sadly bewailed, that
there are too many Divisions in these our days; yet not to be so much wondered
at, if we consider how it is Satan's grand Policy (as not to be divided against
himself, so) it is his greatest Artifice to disseminate and foment as many
Divisions among others as he can. 2. What a learned Divine said in this case,
viz. It is Dr. Potter.
a great vanity to hope, or expect, that all learned men in this life should
absolutely consent in all the pieces and particles of Divine Truth. The light
whereby we see in this state of mortality, is feeble and very different, in
regard of the good spirits illumination, the capacities of men, their diligence
in Study, Prayer, and other means of Knowledge. There were differences in the
Apostles times; In the Church of Corinth, one saying, I am of 1 Cor. 3. Romans 16.
Paul, another, I of Apollo. Divisions in the Church of Rome, which the Apostle
warns them of, and to avoid: And in the present Church of Rome (howsoever she
Vaunts and Vapors of her Unity, and upbraids us with our Divisions, which she
and her Emissaries have occasioned, procured and seek to perpetuate) are as
many and far more momentous differences, then among all Protestants whatsoever;
and have been managed with as much bitterness of Spirit, and Invectives one
side against another; the Jesuits against the Dominicans, the Seculars against
the Jesuits, etc. as ever they have written against Protestants. There is not a
Controversy between them and us, but the same is controverted by some of
theirs, as Bellarmine See Dr. Potter's Answer to Char. mistaken, c. 7.
does plainly confess. Besides, there is a German Doctor, who has collected
out of Bellarmine himself Two hundred thirty seven Contradictions, and set them
down in his own words, as my Author tells me. There are differences among us,
but not about the great and weighty Points of Religion, which are in Scripture
laid down plainly and clearly* but Circumstantials, and matters of more
Intricacy and Speculation; where yet an unity of Faith and Love may be
maintained, under a diversity of Opinion; yet are all agreed against Popery on
the one hand, and Profaneness on the other. There is difference of Opinion
among Physicians, yet all agree an Hectic is no good Constitution, a Plurisie,
Feavor, Consumption, are dangerous Diseases, and not to be slighted: Difference
among Lawyers, yet all agree Treason, Felony, Murder, are Capital Crimes. So
difference among this and that Party, but all agree in condemning Popery as
Idolatrous, and profane Ignorance, and contempt of God and godliness, to be
destructive of Salvation.

5. But one thing more, say some, I am The bad lives of some Ministers.
troubled at, and it much confirms me in my way; I see many Ministers that can
Preach well, who live but badly; and sure if there were such need of
strictness, they who know so much, and speak so well, would be careful to
practice it. Answer, Woe to the World because of Offenses, but woe and woe
again to them by whom the Offense comes. If Elie's Sons be Sons of Belial,
they make the Lord's People to 1 Samuel 2. 12, 17.
transgress; and some to abhor the Sacrifices of the Lord. And who seriously
reflecting on this, can choose but cry out with the Prophet Jer. 23. 9. My heart
within me (bleeds) is broken, because of the Prophets, Jer. 23. 9. 11. 14, 15.
all my Bones shake, verse 11. For both Prophet and Priest are profane, --
They commit Adultery, and walk in Lies: They strengthen the hands of evil
Doers, that none does return from his wickedness. -- And after, from the
Prophets of Jerusalem is profaneness gone into all the Land. But our blessed
Savior has directed what to do in such a case; Mat. 23. 2.
what they bid you observe; that observe and do: But do not after their works,
for they say and do not. But though some are so, blessed be God all are not:
There are many that are like their Master, Acts 1. 1. Sayers and Doers, who
teach by Life as well as Doctrine; And can say with the Apostle, Thou have
fully known my Doctrine, manner of Life, Purpose, Faith, Long-suffering,
Charity, Patience, 2 Timothy 3. 10. Yea, who can appeal higher; ye are witnesses
and God also how holily, justly and unblamably we have had our Conversation
amongst you.

Thus Reader have we done with those Excuses of the first sort, viz. as to Sin:
I shall more briefly dispatch the other two remaining, and now come to speak of
Excuses as to Duty.

CHAP. VII. Excuses as to Duty.
HAving spoken of those Excuses as to Excuses as to Duty.
Sin, taken from our selves and others: I come to speak of those which relate
to Duty, whereof the first is, Parvulus 1. Childhood.
sum, I am a Child; It was Jeremy's excuse, when called to Prophecy and
Preach, Jer. 1. 6. Ah Lord, says he, I cannot speak, for I am a Child: It is
true, he might with more show of reason plead this, in relation to such an
extraordinary Service, then our Children (or we in their behalf) to be excused
from ordinary Duties belonging to them. We are apt to say, Would you have me
teach a Child? Catechize a Child? teach a Child to pray, and make him a
Hypocrite? They have day and time before them, let them Play, and do as
Children; And have they not Death and Hell before them too? Train up a Child,
says the Prove. 22. 6.
Lord, in the way of his Youth, and he will keep it when he is old. And again,
who so fit to be taught as these, Esaias 28. 9. Whom shall he teach Knowledge?
and whom shall he make to understand Doctrine? them that are weaned from the
Milk, and drawn from the Breast. Gracious Timothy was grounded 2 Timothy 1. 5. and
3. 15.
in the Scripture, when a Child, by his religious Mother and Grandmother. And
Solomon tells us, what Lessons he had given him by his Father and Mother, Prove.
4. 3, 4. Our Savior bids us to bring our little Children to him, for of such
so brought up Mark 10. 14.
is the Kingdom of Heaven. We read of Children believing in Christ, Matthew. 18.
6. Of little Children knowing the Father, 1 John 2. 13. Therefore does that
aged Disciple direct his Epistle to his little Children, as well as to the
young Men and aged Fathers. Our greatest care should be of our young Children,
they are Spes Gregis, the hope of the next Generation: We break the Colt when
young, bend the Twig, and twist it while green; We swath and swaddle the Bodies
of our Children, when small and tender, to keep them strait; and then, if ever,
is the time to frame and form their Spirits, to prevent ill habits. The
lameness or crookedness in the Cradle (as in Mephibosheth) is hardly, if ever
cured; much less are ill Principles to be rooted out, that were sucked in when
Children. He who had been so from a Child, was past Disciples Cure, Mark 9. 21.
The young Disciple usually wears the Garland, and proves the most useful and
eminent aged Father: My Soul desires the first Ripe Mic. 7. 1.
Fruit, says the Prophet. The most eminent Saints and choicest Instruments in
God's Church, have been usually such as have been trained up in Pious
Education, called and sanctified in their Infancy, or Childhood, as young
Samuel, Solomon, Josiah, Jeremy, John Baptist, Timothy, etc. of old: And some
such Instances we have of late, That incomparable Usher for one, of whom it may
be said,

Multa tulit, fecitque puer, sudavit and alsit.

He could speak of his being in Christ from ten years of age, then was he
converted; and what a blessed Instrument of much good was he not to many
particular Persons and Congregations where he came and preached; but as a Star
of the first magnitude his light did shine not only all over the Horizon of
these two great Islands of Great Britain and Ireland (his Native Country) to
which he was so great a glory, but his Name and Memory is precious to all the
Churches in the Europaean World. But above all that example above all examples
of our blessed Savior, when but a Child of Twelve years, who was so increased
in Knowledge and Wisdom, that he was among the Doctors in the Temple, hearing
and putting forth his Questions to their astonishment and admiration. And that
saying of his in answer to his Mother, worthy to be printed in the Breasts of
all hopeful Children, and be inscribed in the Frontispiece of all their Books,
I must now be about my Fathers business. And he was Luke 2. 49.
not yet come into the Teens, was but Twelve years of age then.

A second makes the like excuse when his 2. Unlearned.
duty is laid before him, and says, Non sum Doctus, as he to whom the Book was
given and bidden to read, answered, I cannot, Esaias 29. 12.
for I am not learned; I am a Layman, a poor Mechanic, Illiterate, what would
you have of me? should I meddle with Scripture matters? Duties of Religion?
Would you have me instruct my Family, pray, give thanks at Meat? It is for
Ministers, Scholars, and the learned, to deal in such matters, says the
ignorant Papist and the lazy Protestant. But our Savior bids the Laity as
well as the learned Priests, Search the Scriptures. And St. Paul Joh. 5. 39.
exhorts all Christians, that the Word of Col. 3. 16.
God should dwell in them richly in all Wisdom, teaching and admonishing one
another, etc. The most eminent Saints in God's Acts 4. 13.
Calendar were sometimes illiterate men, Fishermen, Publicans, Plebeians, etc.
But after they had been conversant with Jesus, they were taught and enabled of
God, and made fit for every good work: They who are not Book-learned, may be
Christ-learned. Austin said in his time, Surgunt Cons. l. 8. c. 8.
indocti and rapiunt Regnum coelorum. The unlearned rise up and get the start
of us, the learned of the World, and break into Heaven with a holy Violence,
while we with our learning and disputes lie weltring in the mire. Think not
therefore want of Book-learning may excuse thee from all common Duties of
Christianity. There is not one Heaven for Scholars, and another (or none at
all) for the unlearned: In an Army you see all are not Commanders and
Commission-Officers, but the greater number common Soldiers, upon whose hands
the great shock and brunt of the Battle lies; So in God's Host (the
Church-militant) all are not Divines and Pastors, but the greatest part of
Christ's Flock consists of ordinary, and many of them unlearned Christians. In
the Catalogue of Martyrs in Queen Mary's days, the total is summed Heywoods.
Elizabeth.
up to amount to 260, whereof five were Bishops, one and twenty Doctors, eight
Gentlemen, but the greatest part by far was of the meaner rank; eighty four
Artificers, an hundred Husbandmen, Servants and Laborers; fifty five Women,
Maids, Wives and Widows.

A third little differing from the former, 3. Want of Parts.
is, I want Parts, and sufficient Abilities. This was Moses his excuse, O Lord
I pray thee have me excused, I am not Vir verborum, Exodus 4. 10.
I am not eloquent; I pray let it be done by some better hand. So plead some
Masters of Families, had I the Gift and Ability of some others, I would pray,
and set up Religious Exercises in my Family; but I want expression, and that
discourageth me. So it may be some Ministers, I should Preach more frequently
and more cheerfully, had I the gifts and utterance of some Paul or Apollos:
God's work would not be done negligently, they say. True, but if it be done
faithfully, seriously and sincerely, it is accepted according to what a man
has, and not according to what a man has not. We find by experience God does
often bless the Endeavors of conscientious Masters of Families to a great
measure of promoting and spreading Religion all over the Family; and as often the
Labors of some his faithful (though less eminent) Ministers, to the conversion
and building up of more then some of the chief Master Builders: As if the Lord
would say, Not by Might, nor by Power, Zach. 4. 6.
but by my Spirit; And as if he would have us say again, Who is Paul? and what
is Apollos? It is God alone who gives the 1 Cor. 3.
increase.

4. The Calling is the fourth excuse from 4. Our Calling.
Duty, of which also somewhat was spoken before, and is that which is alleged
in the Parable, which gave us the matter of this Discourse. My Calling, my
honest Employments must be looked after; I must go try my Oxen, I must go take
possession of my Land purchased: Reasonable and just Excuses one would think,
no contempt, nor defiance. They stood not idle in the Market, nor were in
Tavern or Alehouse tippling: I pray have me excused was the worst Language they
gave, yet rejected. The third said, I have married a Wife, and must consummate
the Marriage, I cannot come. None said, I will not; yet is their slighting
recorded, and all three rejected. No Employment, no change of Condition, can
privilege from attending God's Service: One thing is necessary stands always
indispensably true; the other might be done, this must not be left undone.
There was a Dispensation in the Deuteronomy. 24. 5.
old Law, That if a man had new married a wife, he should not be pressed to war
that year; but no Dispensation for omitting the Service of God for one day. The
King by his Place, and by reason of the weighty Affairs incumbent on his
Office, be thought fit to be privileged above any others (as being Superior to
all, and Inferior only to God;) yet must is for the King, and shall from his
Superior: He was commanded by God, that when he sat Deuteronomy. 17. 18, 19.
upon the Throne, he shall write him a Copy of the Law, and it shall be with
him, and he shall read therein all the days of his life, etc. Thus did holy
David, who made it his meditation continually, and by his being Psalm. 119, 97,
99.
so continually versed therein, he became wiser then his Teachers: And besides
his many private Devotions, the Psalms, Hymns and Prayers of his own composing,
he was a constant Student in God's Word. We read of that Renowned Successor of
his, Josiah, that he took the 2 Kings 23. 2.
Book of the Law, and himself read it to all his People. Luther tells of that
pious and valiant Duke of Saxony, that he had six of his Gentlemen who attended
him, read daily to him six hours out of the holy Scripture. And never to be
forgotten is the practice of one of the Kings of this Nation, King Alfred, who
divided the four and twenty hours of the natural day into three parts, allowing
himself eight hours for his bodily refreshment by Sleep, Food and Recreation; a
second eight hours he spent in Reading, Praying and Writing; and the third
eight he spent in attending Affairs of State, hearing Causes, etc. A rare
example of a pious Prince, and one that would give account of his time spending.

5. But the great and general excuse is, 5. Hereafter, not yet.
Nondum venit hora, I will hereafter; but the time is not yet come. This was
not the Answer of one single Person, but Vox Populi, The People said, The time
is not yet come, H^g. 1. 2.
the time to build the house of the Lord. So generally when we call upon men to
repent, and amend their lives, they put us off, and say, It is a good work, and
must be thought upon, and they will wait for a good hour to do it in. Thus in
another sense Christ may say, My time is not yet come; but your John 7. 6.
time is always ready; your time to build your own Houses is come, is present,
mine is future, must stay: But, says the Lord, have I not met with you in your
ways? Ye have sown much, and reaped little; I have blown upon it, and what ye
had was put into a Bag with holes; and why, because you ran so eagerly to build
your own Houses, and my House lies wast. This is the common and most dangerous
Excuse; and too many instances we have in our daily experience: Few go to Hell,
said a good Divine, for Mr. Calamy.
saying they will not repent, but many for saying they will, but not yet. This
was the Sluggard's Plea, Yet a little more sleep, Prove. 6. 11. Acts 24. 25.
a little more slumber. This was delaying Felix his Plea, I will take a more
convenient season, which he never had. This the put-off of Two in one Chapter,
called by Christ, the one desired respit, till he had discharged his last
office to his aged Father, Lord suffer me first to bury my Father: The Luke 9.
59, 61.
other, Let me go bid my Friends farewell: But for all, we read they both bad
Christ farewell, and lost the fair season of Grace. Alas, how do many dally with
Repentance and Salvation, and sport themselves with their own Deceivings. The
young man is ready to make large Promises, what he will do when he is old: The
single, or unsettled, man, what he will do when he is settled: The man in Health,
what he will do in Sickness: And he in Sickness, what he will do when restored
to Health; and all but words. Sickbed Purposes are deceitful, and Deathbed
Repentance as uncertain: First, Whether it shall be granted. Secondly, Whether
it shall be accepted. The present tense is the acceptable tense, the future is
the rejected tense: Many shall seek to enter, and shall not be able, Luke 13.
24. Shall and will seek, but have not heretofore, or do not yet. The Sponsalia
de praesenti make the Marriage good, De future signify nothing. In
Christianity the more have the better speed; yet alas how sad is it to consider
the most of men do delay and delay, adjourn, and put off Repentance and
Obedience De die in diem, from day to day, as young Austin (then no Saint) did
with his Noli modo, Not yet Lord, spare me a little: He was afraid, as he said,
he should be heard too soon. But at length it pleased God to awaken him
thoroughly out of this Lethargy, and then he gets him into a private place,
under such a Tree, and there he leaves his modo and modo, and cries out with a
flood of tears, How long, O Lord! how long! Oh let there be an end of my sinful
course; and a new Spirit given me now, now; Cur non modo Domine, non cras,
cras, Conf. l. 9. c. 12.
sed hac hora, etc. Lord I do not say, nor do thou say to morrow, or next day:
But Lord, why not now, this very day; yea, this very hour? The great Heroes of
the World that are eternized in the Book of Fame, as Caesar, Alexander, and our
Christian Chieftain Scanderbeg, carried all before them by their Celerity and
Expedition. Of Caesar it is said, Omnia confecit celeritate, He brought all his
ends about by his continual speed. Of Alexander (whose Motto was, (...), Lose
no time, defer not,) That he was wont to make such long and speedy Marches day
and night, that he surprised his Enemies, and was upon them before they could
make resistance; and the like did Scanderbeg: And the two former fought only
for corruptible Crowns, the later for to save and deliver his Country. Why
should we not use the same diligence, setting aside all dangerous delays to
save a Soul, and gain a Crown incorruptible?

6. Others must be excused, that they 6. Want of Company.
are not so forward in ways of holiness and strictness from want of Company,
at least such as they most desire should go along with them. This was Barak's
excuse to Jud. 4. 8.
Deborah, If thou will go with me, I will go; but if thou will not go with me,
I will not go: It is true, good company is ever good; and it were much to be
wished, that as the wicked join hand-in-hand, so the godly did join
heart-in-heart; As the one assemble themselves by troops in Harlots Houses, so
that the godly did flock together as Doves to their Windows. But the World is
not yet so good (God grant it may mend) that the strait way to Heaven should be
over-thronged: Holy Jeremy Jer. 15. 17. 1 Kings 19. 10.
was fain to sit alone: And before him, holy Elias walked alone, not a Prophet
or a godly Person that he knew of left. But the Saints must not look to march
and move in a Military posture, all move, stand, stir, turn, and go together,
as one man, when the Word is given: But must be content to move, as the Sun in
his own proper Orb, when there is not a Star to be seen accompanying it. This
made Noah so shine in the old World, and Lot in Sodom. He that will not be
content to go to Heaven alone, will hardly ever come thither.

7. And not a few in such times and 7. Fear of sufferings.
places, where the Church is under Persecution, desire to be excused, though
they think well of Christ and his way, from the Discouragements they must meet
with, and fear of Persecution. And blame us not, if we love not Persecution,
say they, Life, Liberty, and Estates are sweet. This was the Sluggards old
note, There is a Lion in the way, Prove. 22. 13.
I shall be torn in the Streets. But thus did not Daniel say, nor those
Primitive Christians, when it was no more but so, Christianos ad Leones, ad
Flammas; Away with these Christians, these Fanatics, Contemners of our Laws,
Disturbers of our Peace; for so they were then accounted; away with them to the
Lions. They feared not Death, but Hell; not to Burn, but Sin: They feared not
loss of Places, Dignities, Honors or Life, but of Heaven. Jovinian,
Valentinian, and some others resigned up their Commissions and places of
Command, rather then they would comply with that Apostate Julian in his
Idol-worship. Neither were those holy Martyrs in Queen Marie's days so tender
of their Skin, their Ease, Liberty, Life and all, when the World began to
wander after the Beast again; They loved not their life unto the death, that
they Rev. 12* 11. Heb. 11. 35.
might obtain a better Resurrection. Those words of Christ sounded louder in
their Ears, If any will come after me, Let him take up his Cross and follow me:
He that will Luke 9. 23.
save his life (by denying, or being ashamed of me) shall lose it: But he that
shall lose his life for my sake and the Gospel, the same shall save it. What
that noble Ittai the Gittite said once to David in a day of general Revolt,
they have said to Christ, In what place my Lord the King shall be, whether 2 Samuel 15. 21.
in life or death, there will we thy Servants be.

8. Some other happily may be deterred 8. Terms of Honor.
from relinquishing his former ways, upon point of Reputation, and little
Punctillices of Honor; his name should now be blasted. This was Zedekiah's
excuse, when Jeremy did so earnestly obtest and press him to submit to the
Caldean, and so save Life, City, Kingdom, and all; Obey, I beseech Jer. 38. 17,
19.
thee the Voice of the Lord, and thou shall surely live, and thy House and this
City shall not be burnt, etc. Oh, says he, I cannot do it in point of Honor,
for I fear the Jews, which are fallen away to the Caldeans, that they will mock
me. Thus, in a Bravado, he chose rather to persist in his obstinacy and perish,
then save himself by any show of relenting and submission. And a much better
man then he tells us what it was that stuck with him, when he was so backward
to engage in that Service the Lord put him upon, viz. Jonah the Prophet, Jonah
4. 2.
Was not this my saying, said he, when I fled to Tarshish? for I knew thee to
be a gracious God, and merciful, slow to anger, and ready to forgive, and
repentest of the evil, q. d. I must go and tell the Ninevites, God will destroy
them, and may be they may repent, and then be spared; what shall then become of
my Honor? I shall be branded for a false Prophet: Therefore Lord destroy
either them or me; them, that my Honor may be salved; or me, that I may not
outlive my own Reputation. Poor passionate Jonah! that could be more content
that God should lose the Glory of his Mercy, then thou the Honor of thy
Ministry. But whosoever thou art, that can not be content to lay thine
Honor in the dust, and break in pieces this golden Calf, stamping it to
powder, know, thou art not one whose deservest thy name to be listed among
Christ's Scholars, whose very first Lesson they must learn, is Humility and
Self-denial.

9. Again, there is that think themselves 9. They are well already.
excused from any further pursuit of holiness, upon this supposition, that they
are well already. Such was the young man's case, who said to our Savior, All
these Mat. 19. 20.
have I kept from my youth; that was ^his conceit of himself, who knew but a
little of the outside of the Law, and nothing of the inside of his own Heart.
Thus the Pharisee justified himself for his external Luke 18. 11, 1^.
Performances, condemning the Publican, notwithstanding his inward Contrition.
Laodicea was sick of this Disease, Who Rev. 3. 17.
reckoned her self Rich, increased with Goods, and wanting nothing; when indeed
she was poor, miserable, blind and naked. This is as dangerous a case as any,
Vbi dixti sufficit, periisti, said St. Austin, When thou say I am well
enough, thou art gone: There is more hope of a Fool then of this man, so wise
in his own conceit, Prove. 26. 12.

10. Another excuses himself from performing 10. It is no part of my Calling.
some part of his Duty, alleging, It is no part of his Calling: And if it be
so indeed, it is a just Excuse. It was Cain's plea once, Am I my Brothers
Keeper? So Genesis 4 9.
do others, when, in their company, they hear others swear, curse, rail, or do
any other evil act, and never reprove them for it, say, Am I my Brothers
Keeper? It is enough for me to look to my self; I am no Preacher; it is no part
of my Calling. I pray whose Calling is it, if an Ox or Ass fall into a Pit to
lift it out? It is thine, it is every man's; and is the eternal life of a Man of
less value, then of a Sheep appointed to the Shambles? He that goes not about
to hinder, is a partaker. Remember he that disclaimed himself to be his
Brothers Keeper, in that proclaimed himself his Brothers Murderer. Have no
fellowship Ephesians. 5. 11.
in the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them: There is thy
Calling to be thy Brothers Keeper; Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thy Lev.
19. 17.
heart, thou shall in any wise rebuke him, and not suffer Sin upon him: There
is thy Calling again to be thy Brothers Keeper.

11. Another excuse is, Despair of success: 11. Despair of success.
And as I said of the former, if thou could make this out, thou might be
excused. But so it is not, nor can be, if thou will not wilfully cast away thy
self, holding fast thy sin, and forsaking thy own mercy, Tonah 2. 8.
refusing to come to Christ, who is able and ready to save to the utmost all
that come Heb. 7. 25.
to God for mercy through him: Yet was this the lazy Servants excuse, I
presumed thee to be a hard Master, I might sow and Mat. 25. 24.
not reap, use my Endeavors, yet lose my labor; I therefore feared, and hid
my Talent. I may say to such, as Christ to the Pharisees, Full well ye reject
the Commands of God, to hold fast your own Traditions; So do these reject the
Grace of God, to stick fast to their own Prejudice. But these take the ready to
make sure their own Condemnation in a most irrational way. When was it ever
known that any Malefactor, desirous to preserve his life, would stand mute? or
wilfully cast away himself by flying out against the Law or Judge? But will
make his plea to obtain favor, cast himself upon God and his Country, and sue
and entreat that he may have the benefit of any clause in the Law, or former
Presidents in like case, and so he comes of safe. But these, as it were, in
contempt of God's mercy stand mute, will not plead, nor pray the benefit of the
Law (the Gospel of Christ I mean) nor desire they may have the same favor that
former Presidents have had, the greatest Offenders pardoned upon submission;
but wilfully cast away themselves, as if God, the Father of Mercies, were
inexorable, and their Condemnation peremptorily, and irrevocably determined.
Thus sometimes have some right godly Christians behaved themselves under their
spiritual distress, by reason of extreme melancholy, dreadful assaults of
Satan, and sad desertion for a time, etc. concluding there was no hope, when
yet all was safe. Famous is the Story of Mrs. Anne Honywood, who was in that
distress of Spirit, and so possessed with an immovable persuasion of her
eternal Damnation, that she said to a worthy Minister who was with her,
endeavoring to comfort her, That it was no more possible for her to escape
damnation, then for that Venice-Glass, which she had then in her hand, not to
be broken, if it fell to the ground; she let it fall, it rebounded to the Wall,
and was taken up whole. The Lord might have left her in her sad
misapprehensions, but to confirm her, and warn others by her example, was
pleased, in that miraculous manner, to confute her fears. Somewhat like to this
is the story of Mrs. Katherine Bretterg, a pious Gentlewoman, who for some time
was under such distress, In the lives of Mr. S. C. I I. Part.
doubting of her Salvation, that she often wished, She had never been born, or,
that she been any other Creature then a Woman, crying out often, Woe is me a
miserable, woeful, forsaken Creature, with abundance of Tears: She sometimes
durst not pray, but said, I may not pray, I may not pray; but it pleased God at
last not only to bring her out of her fears and distress, but to give her
strong assurance of her Salvation, that she dyed in much peace, and full of
Joys unspeakable and glorious. I may add to these two (to spare more instances
in this kind) the example of Mr. John Glover, of whom Mr. Fox in his
Martyrology speaks, who was persuaded he had sinned against the Holy Ghost; and
was in that Distress for five years, that had he been in Hell he could not have
despaired more; he was so macerated and worn away, that he neither in that time
took quiet rest, nor could brook Meat or Drink, or any outward comfort: But
after all this was delivered, and such a frame of holiness and measure of
comfort was wrought in him, that he seemed to live altogether a celestial life.
This may call to our minds that of the Apostle, If the Righteous be scarcely
saved, where shall the Ungodly 1 Pet. 4: 18.
and Sinner appear? And that of St. Paul, Romans 11. 32. God has shut up all in
Unbelief, that he may have mercy upon all. Where you may observe two strange
Doctrines backed with a more strange Reason; 1. That not one here and there,
but all are shut up in Unbelief. This is the common case of all Christians (one
time or other) to be shut up in this Dungeon. This poor tempred Creatures think
strange; the next is stranger. 2. That God shuts them up in unbelief; God is
their Keeper all this while, and not Satan, as they are apt to conclude: God
shuts them up, as Joseph did Simeon, for their Humiliation and Trial: Unbelief
is God's Prison (I may say in this sense) Presumption is Satan's. 3. The reason
is strangest of all, That he may have mercy upon all such, viz. That they may
see their need of Mercy, fly to it, cast themselves upon it; as did holy Mr.
Perkins dying, cry, Mercy, mercy is all I want; and God may have the whole
glory of it, and they may the more admire the Wisdom of God in this
dispensation, when he shall enlarge them; as Joseph's Brethren did, when he
spoke no more roughly to them as formerly, but declared his relation to them,
and testified his brotherly love. But all this while, there is no place for
despair to all such as wait upon God, and rely on his mercy.

The last excuse I shall mention in this kind, is, of some whose meaning is
better then their understanding, an excess of Humility, Excess of humility.
who, when invited, hold off from their duty by a voluntary (but no ways
commendable) humility. Thus did the Centurion excuse himself from a receiving
of Christ, I am not worthy thou should come Mat. 8. 8.
under my Roof. This is the case of many a gracious Soul, who, by reason of
some scruples, keep off from receiving Christ in his Sacrament, when thou art
the person Christ calls; Ho every one that thirsts, come Esaias 55. 1, 2.
to the Waters, buy Wine and Milk without money, and without price: Thou
think thy money, preparation, and price of condignity would make thee more
welcome, but it is not so. Thou say, I dare not come, I have not the
purification of the Sanctuary; I shall eat and drink my damnation, if I eat
unworthily. Know therefore, there is a legal worthiness, this thou can not
have, and an Evangelical worthiness, which may consist with the legal
unworthiness. Do in this case as the Levites of old, when they came to the
Passover, they were ashamed, and sanctified themselves, 2 Chronicles. 30. 15.
(the more ashamed, the better sanctified; and the more sanctified, the more
ashamed ever) and came with this Prayer, The good Lord pardon every one that
prepares his heart to seek the Lord, though he be not prepared according to
the purification of the Sanctuary. And there never was a more solemn and happy
Passover kept for many Ages, it is said. Remember thou worthless Sinner, Christ
was wont to eat and drink with Publicans and Sinners; Humility is the best part
of the Wedding Garment: Thou could not be at all worthy, if thou thoughtest
thy self so. Our best dress in self-preparation and self-worthiness, Zach. 3. 1.
would be like Joshua's Robes, filthy Garments, and Satan might then be at thy
right hand. Thy best worthiness is self-unworthiness and self-abhorrence, no
welcomer Guest to Christ, then a weeping and mourning Mary Magdalene, such
shall sup with Christ, and he with them; And he will say to such, as to her, Go
in peace, thy Sins are forgiven thee.

CHAP. VIII. Excuses as to Faith and Believing.
I Come now to the last kind of Excuses, Excuses as to Faith.
as to Faith: And these are as many as either of the former, whereof I shall
give you a taste only. These are as dangerous as either of the other two, and as
prejudicial to Peace, as they to Grace and Holiness: But these fall out often
to be the case of the best of God's Servants here, who when they have escaped
the Pit of open and gross Sins, are in danger of being taken in the snare of
spiritual Wickedness, whereof this is a chief, Unbelief. The Sin of the whole
World, John 16. 8. Of God's People, Romans 11. 32. All Israel fell into it, and
fell by it in the Wilderness, Heb. 3. ult. Moses and Aaron charged with it, and
punished for it, Numb. 20. 12. This makes sad breaches between God and his
People often; and we had need take the more heed of it, because we are apt to
flatter our selves in it, and think we do what in reason and duty becomes us.

1. Moses is a sad instance of humane 1. From the greatness of the thing
promised.
frailty in this kind, Numb. 11. 22. Who, when the Lord promised to furnish a
Table in the Wilderness with Flesh and Foul for all Israel for a month
together, had his Faith staggered, and did upon the matter say, Lord excuse me,
How can this be? A month is a great while, and Six hundred thousand are a
great many mouths; I knew thee to be Almighty, and were it for a Meal, I could
easily persuade my self to believe it; or if it were for a moneths-board of a
few thousands; but Lord they are Six hundred thousand men, besides as many more
Women and Children. Why Moses, Is the Lord's hand shortened, because it is
marvelous in thy Eyes, is it so also in mine? Zach. 8. 6. Alas, how often do we
in our outward straits distrust and limit God: I have such a great charge, and
small means, a little Oil and Meal in the Vessel to take to; Can God furnish a
Table in the Wilderness? And in respect of our spiritual estate, we are as apt
to limit God's Mercy, as others his Power in respect of their outward state. He
can forgive the hundred Pence; but can he, will he forgive the ten thousand
Talents? Can all sin, my sin, and blasphemy be forgiven? yea, says Christ,
Mat. 12. 31. For God's thoughts are not as thy thoughts, nor his Ways as thy
Ways, Esaias 55. 7, 8.

2. As Faith is sometimes nonplust (overplust 2. The thing promised too good.
I may say) with the greatness of the thing promised, so sometimes with the
goodness; we think it too good to be true. Thence it was that Sarah laughed,
upon Genesis 18. 12.
the tidings of a Son to be born of her in her old age: It was a kind of
unbelieving Smile, as if she had almost said in her heart, as that good
Shunanite did in like case, Nay, my Lord, do not lie unto thy Handmaid, 2
Kings 4.

3. Sometimes we reckon our selves too 3. Our selves too bad.
bad, altogether unworthy; as the Centurion put by Christ from coming to him, I
am not worthy, etc. Indeed were we upon even ground with Christ, or could the
Creature be so with his Maker, as David 2 Samuel 24. 24. Genesis 23. 13.
was with Araunah, Abraham with Ephron, we might strain courtesy, and be coy in
receiving any favor or gratuity at his Hands gratis, and without due
consideration. But as it would show no great good manners in a Subject to
refuse his Princes Royal bounty, because undeserved, and above his possibility
of requital (though it well becomes the greatness of a Princes spirit not to
receive any respect from the hands of his Servant, or Subject, without large
requital, as David to Barzillai;) So does God to 2 Samuel 19. 32, 33.
us, for a Cup of cold water, such is his bounty. But take thou heed of this
Reply, I am not worthy, therefore can except no more at God's hands then I
deserve. What Man or Angel could ever yet say, I am worthy? yet consider again,
thou that art ready to reject the freely offered Grace of Christ upon this
score, saying, I am not worthy; that it is more then ever Christ said to any
one that came to him, Be gone Sinner, Thou art unworthy. The Centurion said so
of himself, but Christ gives him another Testimony, Verily, I have not Mat. 8.
10.
found such Faith in all Israel. I read once that Peter said to Christ, Depart
from me, O Lord, for I am a sinful man: But I never Luke 5. 8*
read that Christ said to any one, Depart from me, for thou art a sinful
wretch, O man. Abigall might in modesty say she was only fit to wash the Feet
of David's 1 Samuel 25. 41, 42.
Servants, yet did she not refuse the honor of his Bed, when the motion was
made to be his Wife. And though the blessed Virgin was sensible of her
lowliness and unworthiness of that singular Grace (above all showed to any
mortal Creature) she gratefully accepts, Behold the Handmaid Luke 1. 38.
of the Lord, be it to me according to thy word. Who am I? is fit for us to say
with David, if we respect our own desert; but when the Lord makes his Promise,
we may embrace it, and desire he should make it good, saying, Though this is
not the manner of men, yet is always the manner of God. Thou art worthy is
only a Note fit for the Song of the Lamb: Merit is a Rev. 5. 9.
strange word in Heaven, never heard there of any Saints, only Christ's Merits.
When the Proclamation was made, Who is worthy to open the Book in the Angels
hand, and to unloose the Seals? there was not any stood up nor one found
worthy, but the Son of God: Nor is there Man or Angel now in Heaven worthy of
that Celestial Glory they there enjoy. The Angel holds his station there of
free Grace, Men by Mercy; neither by Merit. The Angel by Donation, Man by
Condonation.

4. Some again do sometimes in a sad 4. Sad and fixed misgiving of mind.
manner lie down under their Burden, and say with the Prophet Jeremy, Chap. 10.
19. It is my burden, my hard lot, and I must bear it; and thereupon give up the
Forts of Faith and Hope, and give all for lost, and themselves too, by
intertaining immovable, invincible and pertinacious misgivings of mind, with
which they are possessed; having sad apprehensions of themselves, and dreadful
misapprehensions of God, being at the same time possibly overwhelmed with
Distress, over-gone with Melancholy, overcome with Impatience, tired out with
a short waiting, fiercely and furiously assaulted by Satan, and deserted of
God; and then as men swallowed up of sorrow, are ready to cry out, Vicisti
Satana, Thou have overcome Satan; This is thy hour and power of darkness, and
there is no persuading them to the contrary. A sad and doleful case! yet in
some such like seemed the Psalmist to be in that dark night of his desertion,
when in a disconsolate manner he sighed out, That his Sore (his anguish of
Spirit) ran all night, and Psalm. 77. 2.
ceased not, and his Soul refused to be comforted. And then did he reason, as
if he had no Faith at all, That God had cast him off, forgotten him; yea,
almost forgotten himself, forgotten to be gracious, which is all one, and both
alike impossible and impious to conceive. And then there is no speaking to such
at all, but they will reply to all that seek to satisfy and persuade them,
Esaias 22. 4. Look away from me, labor not to comfort me: And no other reason is
to be expected, they will not believe, because they will not. In this temper,
or distemper rather, was Thomas, who when all the Apostles said, They had seen
the Lord, positively Replied, I will believe none of you all, I must see a
sign, and put my hands in his side, or I will not believe; wilful Thomas holy
Bradford might well call him. In the like plight was that distressed Mrs.
Honywood, Mrs. Bretergh, and Mr. Glover, of whom I spoke before. We have a
saying, Dolores leves loquuntur, Ingentes stupent, Lesser Griefs have Tongues,
and vent themselves; but the great amazing Griefs convert men into stocks and
stones; they have neither Eyes, nor Ears, nor Sense, nor Reason, nor any thing:
But as in the first Chaos, darkness covers the face of the deep, and all
darkness is hid in their secret places, as it is, Job 20. 26. till God speak
Peace, and say, Let there be light. Thus it was with Israel, when stunned with
Grief and Oppression, they would not receive any Message from Moses, no, nor
from God; He spoke to them, but they would not hearken unto him, for anguish of
Spirit, and for cruel Bondage, Exodus 6. 9.

5. Carnal reason makes many Exceptions 5. Unlikely means.
against Divine Precepts and Promises, from the improbability and incongruity
of the means. Thus Naaman excepts against 2 Kings 5. 10, 11, 12.
washing in Jordan, for Cure of his Leprosy; why not in Abana and Pharpar? He
expected some more extraordinary matter, the Prophets Touch or Prayers, and
goes his way dissatisfied, till upon better consideration. This the most common
and universal bar to the Faith of the World: Both Jews and Gentiles have
stumbled at this stumbling stone; The one required a Sign, the other call for
Wisdom. To both a Christ crucified, and Faith in a God 1 Cor. 1. 22.
made Man, and more humbled and abased then ever mortal was, seems an absurd
and irrational Article of Faith. And to this day the Jew cannot get this Beam
out of his Eye, nor this Vail off his Face, nor the wiser World (to whom the
Wisdom of God goes for foolishness) get over this stumbling block. Now we may
take notice that God all along delights to make use of contemptible means to
atchieve the greatest ends; The weak things of the World to confound the
mighty, the foolish to confound the wise: That all glory may redound to the
Supreme Author, and no part of it stick to the Instrument; Quid Philosophiae
and Theologiae? Quid Hierosolymis and Athenis? Tertull.
The Worlds Wisdom is this greatest Enemy to Divine, and the whole business of
Faith; and that upon the account of the unlikeliness of the means. What makes
the Papist stand up so much for Merits, and stick so fast to a Righteousness of
Works, but his mean Opinion he has of Faith? What makes so many among us have
so little esteem of the Preachers and preaching of God's Word, but the mean
esteem they have for the calling of the one, and of the efficacy of the other?

6. Present Providence being cross to 6. Present Providence unlike former
Presidents.
former Presidents, is a great Remora, and rub in the way to the Faith of many,
for relying upon God in time of distress. This we may see in Gideons Reply to
the Angel, who came and said to him, The Lord is with thee thou mighty man of
Valor: He demurs, and replies, If the Lord be with Judges 6. 12, 13.
us, why then is all this befaln us? And where be all his Miracles which our
Fathers told us of, saying, Did not the Lord bring us out of Egypt? But now the
Lord has forsaken us, and sold us into the Hands of the Midianites; q. d.
Israel of old was wont to have God's presence manifested to them, by his
marching before them with a victorious Hand and stretched out Arm: But now we
see not our Signs, There is no more a Prophet Moses; how can we think other,
then that God has forsaken us? Thus would weak-sighted and short-spirited man
prescribe, and tie up God to o^e constant method, not being able to reconcile
God's chastening his people to his owning of them, or to read his Love in any
other thing then outward Prosperity, or speedy deliverance; nor does Distress
signify any other to them then Rejection. But as sometimes the Lord creates a
new thing in way of Judgment, Numb. 16. 30. So again sometimes in way of Mercy
he leads his people by unknown Paths, Esaias 42. 16.

7. Sometimes again Providence run not 7. Providence cross Promises.
even with Promises, and then is a weak Faith much disheartened. This caused
some haesitation in Moses, who expected Israel should have been forthwith
delivered, God having so promised, but after his speaking to Pharaoh, their
slavery was more increased; so that the People fell foul upon Moses for his
undertaking, Exodus 5. 21. And Moses himself seemed to be at a stand, when he
broke out into those words, Lord why have thou so ill entreated this People?
why is it that thou have sent me? For since I came to speak to Exodus 5. 22, 23.
Pharaoh in thy Name, he has done evil to this People, and thou have not
delivered them at all. But this occasioned many a sad murmuring in the carnal
Israelites all along in the Wilderness, who had promised themselves nothing but
Prosperity, Ease, Plenty, and a present Possession of the promised Land: And
for this their Unbelief, they fell short of the Promise, and fell in the
Wilderness. God will train up his People in the exercise of Faith and Patience,
before they inherit the Promises. Thus did he to Abraham and Sarah, Heb. 6.
Hab. 2. 3, 4.
15. The Vision is for an appointed time, and will certainly speak, and not
lie: But it may tarry long, therefore must we wait (as well as believe) for it
will surely come, and not tarry, says the Prophet. In the mean time the just
must live by Faith: And as he that believes shall never be confounded, so he
must not make have by Impatience, and prescribing to God his time, Esaias 28. 16.
But wait and tarry the Lord's leisure, who is never slack to make good his
Promise. But 2 Pet. 3. 9.
waits to be gracious, Esaias 30. 18. And usually man's extremity is his
opportunity, according to what was said of old; In the Genesis 22. 14.
Mount will the Lord be seen.

8. It is now too late, says Unbelief again 8. The time is past.
at other times; I fear I have slipped the day of my Visitation, and therefore
fear that Faith, Repentance, and all my endeavors come too late, and will
prove as fruitless as Esau's Tears, and the Blessing is gone past recalling. Oh
that time could be called back! Oh that I were as in times past! Job 29. 2, 3.
when the Candle of God shined in my Tabernacle! Oh that I had known the day of
my Visitation, in that my day, and the Job. 29. 2, 3.
things of my Peace! but they are now hid from my Eyes. Oh that God would come
once again, and call Samuel, Samuel, as he did when I lay down and slept; but
now all is too late, and all is in vain. Thus said once the Servants of Jairus,
The Damosel is dead, trouble not the Master any further. Mark 5. 35.
Thus said Martha, If thou had been here, when time was, my Brother had not
died; now he is departed four days ago, and by John 11: 32, 39.
this time stinketh. Oh ye of little Faith, why reason ye thus in your hearts,
Nullum Tempus occurit Christo, Christ and his Grace incurs no Lapse by loss of
time. Believe Jairus, Thy Daughter is not dead, but sleeps; Dead to thee,
asleep to me: Believe Martha, and thou shall see the glory Joh. 11. 40.
of God. Take heed of taking up such sad Conclusions, as to say, My strength
and hope is perished from the Lord, Lam. 3. 18. Ezekiel. 37. 11. Our Bones are
dried up, and our hope is lost, and we are cut off for our parts. I am as
certainly damned, some have cried out, as if I were already in Hell; yet
despair not, it is not yet the twelfth hour. All the day long the Lord
stretches forth his Hand, and it is not yet the night of Death when none can
work. Look up to the Mercy-Seat out of this Belly of Jonah 2. 4.
Hell, as Jonah did, and thy Prayer will be heard, and thy Repentance accepted.
Christ is able and ready to save to the utmost period of time, the utmost
period of life, the utmost period of hope or despair, when thy hope is giving
up the ghost. Job 11. 20.


9. Blame me not, says another, if I cannot believe what is above all reason
and sense 9. It is above all humane Reason imaginable.
imaginable, what was seldom or never known. Thus reasoned he that heard the
Prophet foretell there should be so sudden a change from the greatest dearth to
the greatest cheapness, such a fall of Corn in one days space as was never
heard of, A measure of fine Flour for a Shekell, and two 2 Kings 7. 2.
measures of Barley at the same rate: How can this be, says he, if God should
make Windows in Heaven, yet how can this be? Thus is impotent and short-sighted
man bold to prescribe a measure to Omnipotency, and to set down what he can,
and what he cannot do. This made Luther once to chide Melancthon, cast down
under the difficulties the first Reformation met with: Thou think Philip,
says he, that God must act intra and infra, within, or according to what
Philip propounds: But, says he, he will act ultra and supra, beyond and above
all that we can ask or think. Thus it is with many a poor Creature, who, as if
they did study industriously to make themselves miserable, Ephesians. 3. 20.
when they are pressed to fly to Christ and hope for Mercy, and the Minister
tells them, Believe and Repent, and your Sins shall be blotted out as a Cloud;
why, says he, if the Lord should open the Windows of Heaven, all his Treasures
of Grace and Mercy, yet can this be? Know, O man, God has opened the Windows
of Heaven, when he sent his Son, that Dayspring from Luke 1. 79.
on high to visit and redeem us, and to give Light to them that sat in
Darkness, and in the shadow of Death. God opened the Windows of Heaven again,
when he set open that Fountain for Sin and Uncleanness, Zach. 13. 1. Esaias 55.
1, 2.
and proclaimed, Ho every one that thirsts, come to the Waters, buy Wine and
Milk without Money and without Price; yea, let him that is athirst come, and
take of the Water of Life freely. There is cheaper then a Shekel for fine
Flour, and half a Shekel for a Rev. 22. 17.
measure of Barley: He gives freely, Rev. 21. 6. He forgives freely, Luke 7. 42.

10. Another holds it unreasonable for 10. Continued afflictions.
him to believe that God has Love and Mercy in store for him, he is so often
under great and manifold afflictions: Deep calls to Deep, all the Waves and
Billows of the Almighty are gone over him. And whence come Afflictions, but
from Anger; and Job 5. 17.
why, but for sin? Answ. Then has the Scripture told us wrong, which says
more Prove. 3. 1^. Heb. 12 ^. Genesis 30. 33.
then once, Whom the Lord loves, he corrects. Look into all the Flock of
Jacob, if there were one not spotted, it was none of his; Laban's were all
white Cattle. The Lord had one Son only without Sin, not one, not him without
smart Sufferings. They who are now in their white Robes, Rev. 7. 14.
were once in their blacks, and had waded through great Tribulations. St.
Chrysostom once was invited to a Marriage, and was to go through a foul Lane,
but as he was going, met a Malefactor going through the High Street to his
Execution, whence he had this pious meditation, How much better is it to go
through the worse way, if to a Feast, then the fair to Execution? Non qua, sed
quo, said he, No matter what way we go to Heaven, so we get but thither:
Through many Tribulations was ever wont to be the way to Heaven, Acts 14. 22.

11. But I fear, says one, I have committed 11. Fear I have committed the sin
against the Holy Ghost.
the Sin against the Holy Ghost, and then what place for Faith or Hope? It is
like the Sin of Elie's House, not to be purged by any Burnt-Offering or
Sacrifice. But do thou fear indeed? The more there is of that fear, the less
of this danger. Such as fall into that sin are Leviathan like, without fear,
Job 41. 33. Past feeling, Ephesians. 4. 18. Have Eyes, but see not; Ears, but hear
not; Sin, but tremble not. Know therefore, that every sin, even the most
heinous and grievous, is not the sin against the Holy Ghost, otherwise Manasseh
had been in it; not all sin of Ignorance, though pursued with greatest
Violence, otherwise Paul's had been it; nor any sin against Knowledge fallen into
through surprise and infirmity (and after repented) otherwise Peter's had been
it. But if Paul had had Peter's knowledge of Christ, or Peter Paul's rage
against Christ, both had had a sad account to make. He that shall attentively
read and compare those two places, Heb. 6. 4, 5. with Heb. 10. 26, 27, 28, 29.
will understand the better what this Sin against the Holy Ghost is, and what
Ingredients are in it. 1. There must be Knowledge and Illumination in the
mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven; It is not a sin of Ignorance. 2. There is a
sinning wilfully; It is not every sin of Infirmity, or relapse into a former
sin. 3. There is in it a falling away, not every slip, or stepping aside; not
every fouler sin bewailed and broken off, but an absolute falling off. 4. All
these with a studied and professed opposition to Christ, and his Grace and
Spirit: Thence they are said to Crucify Christ again, and put him to more
shame, as if he had not suffered enough before, and to despite the Spirit of
Grace.

So that lay all these together, this cannot be thy case, oh poor mournful,
distressed, doubting and complaining Christian; who do lament, mourn, faint,
pant, hunger, thirst, fear, grieve, which they never do, who fall away as is
here described, but are given once to impenitency and obdurateness of spirit.

There are four kinds of Falls, which may befall the Child of God, each worse
then other: The first and lightest is, that in our daily combat, by reason of
the sin that dwells in them, they do what they would Romans 7. 18.
not, and cannot do what they would but daily fall short; In which respect we
are none of Gal. 5. 17.
us Supralapsarians, but Sublapsarians and Relapsarians too: This is but like
the fall of a mist in Winter, the Sun breaks out, and a fair day follows.

The second is, Gal. 6. 1. When a good man is overtaken with some more notable
miscarriage, as were they who dissembled in the business of Jud^izing, Gal. 2.
14. They did not (...), walk strait, these did Paul (...), restore. This is as
a fall whereby a Leg is put out of joint; yet set again, and all is well. Let
him that is free from these two, take a Ladder, as Constantine said to Acesius
the Novatian, and go Socr. l. 1. c. 7.
to Heaven alone; For in many things we sin all, Jam. 3. 2.

The third is more sad, when a Believer falls into some fouler sin, as did
David and Peter, into sins wasting Conscience. This like the fall of Eutichus
from the third loft, dead for the present, but after recovered by a Miracle of
Mercy.

The fourth is a kind of Apostasy, or insensible decay, an abatement or loss of
first love, and may be never comes to former strength and liveliness, or to
regain their former peace. Thus, as David in his age grew cold, and needed an
Abishag to lie in 1 Kings 1. 3.
his Bosom, his natural heat being abated: So his Sons spiritual heat abated,
by reason of the many Abishags that lay in his bosom; and though he was
beloved of his God, yet did his Sun set in a Cloud: This like the fall of the
hair in old age, waxes thinner and thinner; though life remains, nature is not
so strong and vigorous as formerly.

But there are four worse kinds of falls peculiar to wicked men: The first
proves final, but is not total at first, but sensim sine sensu, by little and
little; Thus the thorny ground miscarried: This like Elie's 1 Samuel 4. 18.
fall backward, to the breaking of his Neck.

The second, Is a total and final, but not voluntary at first, but are beaten
out of heart, as the stony ground by tribulation arising: This like the fall of
Sisera, he fell down Jud. 5. 27.
dead, with his nail sticking in his Temples.

The third, A more fearful, a total, final, voluntary and deliberate; yet not
malicious fall: Thus Demas is supposed to fall, who of a Disciple, or Teacher
formerly, is said afterward to have become a Priest in an Idol-Temple at
Thessalonica (so Dorotheus Esther 6. 13.
Reports.) This fall is like the fall of Haman, when they thus begin to fall,
no hopes of Recovery.

4. Yet is there a worse; The fourth is as the opening of the fourth Seal,
where appears Rev. 6. 8.
the pale Horse, and Death upon his back, and Hell following, a total, final,
voluntary, deliberate and malicious falling away: Such was the fall of Simon
Magus, Hymenaeus, Alexander, Julian, etc. Upon such a fall the Gulf is fixed,
the Decree gone out, Nulla retrorsum, no renewing such to Repentance. This fall
is like the fall of Jerichoes walls, which fell down flat Josh. 6. 20.
with a Curse annexed against Rebuilding; or of Judas, who falling head long,
burst asunder in the midst, and all his Bowels gushed out; or if you will, as
the fall of Lucifer himself, who from an Angel of Light, is become a Prince of
Darkness.

This last only is the Sin against the Holy Ghost (upon which I have therefore
the longer insisted) from which they are far enough, that are often so much
affrighted; who are more afraid then there is cause; when their case is at most
but as Paul's, Peter's, David's, Solomon's, Manasse's; or at worst as the
thorny-grounds, or stony, or as Demas's; in all which there is a door of Hope
opened upon Repentance; and not the last, a mischievous, malicious, and
despightful rejecting and treading under foot the Son of God; upon which
account many miserable Creatures have been terribly, but needlessly, terrified,
as was that blessed Soul Mr. Glover, who upon the consideration of those words,
It is impossible, etc. Heb. 6. 4. concluded of himself, that he had committed
that unpardonable Sin, and could not get it out of his mind day nor night, and
so continued along time, that he could neither sleep quietly; nor had joy to
eat, drink, or any thing; yet was afterward recovered. Of all the stories I
have read or heard, I have not met with a sadder then that related by Aretius,
a foreign Divine, who, upon this Subject, speaks of "a certain rich Merchant
at Strasburgh, whose whole life had been most abominable for Whoredom,
Drunkenness, Usury, Contempt of God's Word, to his old age: In which at last he
began to bethink himself, and what would become of him at the last day;
whereupon Aretius in Mat. 12.
his own Conscience and Satan together did so terrify him, that he fell into
downright despair; so that in many horrid Expressions, he gave himself up to
Satan, acknowledging that his he was; he would say the Grace and Mercy of God
could not be so great as to pardon so many and so great Sins. Hereupon he was
filled with horror and astonishment, even gnashing his Teeth, weeping, wayling,
and (which is horrid to relate) calling upon the Devil to fetch him away to
Hell; he would throw himself upon the ground, refusing both Meat and Drink:
That if ever you saw the Picture and Idea of a despairing person, he was one;
yet upon Conference with holy Divines, and application of God's Promises, and
many Prayers made for him in Public and Private, he repented, recovered, lived
piously several years after, and dyed peaceably. But enough of this, now to
proceed.

Another says, My case is next door to 12. Relapses into the same sin.
this Sin, if it be not it; I have replased into the same sin again, or others
as bad, after Repentance and Knowledge of the Truth, what hope is there for me?
I must say, yet repent, and humble thy self, thy case is sad. Yet shall I add
what Tertullian says in this case, Far be it from me by saying there may be
Lib. de Panitentia.
hope after a second or third fall to encourage any to a sinning anew. Yet did
Sampson fall a second time into the same, and Jonah into another as bad as his
former: Peter lapsed and relapsed a second and third time, yet repented, and
received to favor as great as ever. God calls upon Back-sliders to return,
and promises Mercy: Promises to heal Back sliders and backsliding. Jer. 3.
12, 14.
He bids us forgive a Brother that offends seven times a day, if he ask
forgiveness, Luke 17. 4. And his Mercies are sure above our mercies. Yet says
Tertullian again, God forbid that any should make this use of this Doctrine,
that because God is so ready to forgive, man should be the more bold to sin;
shall abundance of Divine Mercy provoke to more Impudence and Impiety? shall
man make himself the worse, because God is so good? Sin often, because he
pardons often? But yet says he, Let no man be overwhelmed with despair, if he
have fallen again. Let him fear to offend again, not forbear to repent again,
etc. Let none, says he, refuse to be restored to health again, if his Disease
have returned again; if the Disease be returned, the Medicine must be renewed.

To conclude, The last Plea against believing I fear I may be ^ Reprobate.
is, I fear I am in God's black Bill: And if our Sins be upon us and we pine
away in them; how should we then live? s^y those Cavillers Ezekiel. 33. 10. So say
some, If I should be reprobated, how can I believe I shall be saved? would you
have me believe a lie, or am I not bound to believe I shall be damned? Answ. No
man is bound to believe he is a Reprobate, but every man bound to give all
diligence to make his Calling and Election sure.

2. I say as formerly, no man can know himself to be a Reprobate; though
Election may be know in this life, Reprobation cannot so easily; for though our
present Faith and Obedience argue Election, yet present Infid^lity and
Disob^dience conclude not Reprobation; for then it would follow that none such
should after repent and believe, which we daily see the contrary.

3. I do not say, Every one is bound to believe he shall be saved, but every
one is bound to believe that he may be saved.

4. Every one is bound to believe he shall perish, if he do not believe and
repent, and that not by reason of any secret Decree, but because he goes
against the express conditions of Salvation, Mark 16. 16. He that believes
shall be saved, he that believes not shall be damned. Therefore busy not thy
Head to enquire into God's Decree; but study thy Duty according to his express
Command and revealed Will.

5. There is an express Command of God, That all men every where should repent,
Acts 17. 30. All sorts of Men, all sorts of Sinners; and there is an absolute
and universal Promise of forgiveness upon Repentance, Luke 24. 47. There is an
absolute Command also, that we should believe in Christ, 1 John 3. 23. So that
we offend God as much in not believing, as in any not obeying.

6. Know there is a sufficient remedy provided for thee, whatsoever thy case
may be, Heb. 7. 25.

7. Thou will not reason thus in other matters, as to say, If I am doomed to be
famisht, why should I eat or drink? God's Decree will stand. When God shall
destroy the course of Nature, put an end to Seed-time and Harvest, and shut
thee up in Prison within Stone-walls, and deny thee daily Bread; then fear thou
may be famisht: So if God should take away his Gospel, his Ministers,
Ordinances, and his Spirit, and call in all those Precepts and Promises he has
made in his Gospel (which he will never do) then thou may conclude thy case
desperate. Were it Decreed I should be drowned (which yet I can never know)
should I therefore cast my self into the Sea? or if thrown in, refuse to swim
to save my life? or rather labor to keep my self out of the Water? None but
ignorant and desperate Wretches make such simple and desperate Inferences from
God's Decrees.

8. Use then thy Endeavors, and leave all to God: Do as Joab did, when he saw
the Battle behind and before; Let us play 2 Samuel 10. 12.
the men, says he, and the Lord do with us what is good in his Eyes; If I
perish, I Ester 4. 16.
perish: But if I perish, I will not perish like a Coward or Sluggard, Heaven
shall hear of me; I will perish repenting, believing, praying, so as never any
man did yet. Thou have at least as good ground to encourage thee to pray and
hope as Nineveh had, who when under such Comminations and Threats of
destruction at hand, said, Who knows but if we repent, cry to God mightily and
reform thoroughly, the Lord Jonah 3. 8, 9.
will repent, and have mercy on us, that we perish not?

CHAP. IX. The Causes and Reasons of Excuses.
THus have I wearied the Reader, and my self too, in seeking to hunt out this
subtle Soul-Deceiver out of his Subtersuges and Lurking-holes. If we could
catch those Foxes that mar our Vines, and bind this Destroyer of our Country
as they called Sampson) it were time well spent. We will sit down now, and see
if we can discover the Reasons of those so many and various Excuses: Them we
shall reduce to two heads, 1. Enquiring the Causes, whence they come. 2. The
Ends, why they are taken up.

1. For the first, If we enquire whence Causes of Excuses.
they come, it will lead us back as far as Original Sin; there, then, thence
they had their Original: They came in with the first Sin. As Satan was a
Destroyer and Murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the Truth; so was
this Sin a Deceiver 1. Man's Fall, Causa prima.
and Liar from the beginning; when Integrity went out, Excuses came in: An old
Date, and memorable Year. Primo mundi, The first year of the Conquest: Anno
libertatis deperditae, The first year of man's slavery under Satan; And as with
a Conqueror many new Usages are brought in, so is it here. God made man
upright, there was none of these in his prime Constitution; but man fallen,
sought Eccl. 7. ult.
out many Inventions. This was Causa prima, The first Cause: There and then did
this Black Art commence, which ever since the Children of men have studied and
improved. The ancientest Art or Science in the World, and most practiced; Young
and Old, Learned and Unlearned, all verst in it; no need of these in Integrity.
He that Joh. 3. 20, 21.
does good comes to the light, but he that does evil flies it, lest his deeds
should be made manifest. Then did Adam and Eve lay their heads together, to
cover their Bodies with Fig Leaves, and their Sin with Excuses. The harmless
Fowls of the Air build their Nests on the tops of Trees, in the sight of the
Sun; but the Beasts of Prey have their Dens, Caves and Holes, wherein they hide
themselves, and steal not out, but in the dark.

2. The second is* near akin; A prima 2. A Prima orta, Our Corruption by the
Fall. Jam. 1. 13.
orta. Original Corruption (Peccatum Originatum) flowing thence, has filled
the World with Excuses ever since. Now is man led aside of himself and enticed,
now is every Imagination of the Heart evil from his youth. And man busieth
himself about Genesis 6. 5.
these two Imaginations chiefly, 1. How to devise and contrive Evil. 2. How to
conceal and cover it. As the Fox and Badger first earth themselves under
ground, then do what they can to stop up the mouths of their Dens, that they
may not be discovered. Thus does man busy his Brains night and day how to
defend Sin, and to prove Darkness to be Light.

3. Nor could the World be so full of 3. Causae assistentes. 1. Priacipal,
Satan.
Excuses as it is, if there were not some assisting Causes to set them forward;
Of which there be two sorts. The one Principal, viz. Satan, and he, to be sure,
is never far off to lend his assistance. And hence you may see with wonder how
prompt and ready some are at this Art, as if they had been trained up in
Loyola's School, that you may know whose Children and Scholars they are, by
their Language and Evasions: He that is the Father of the Liar, is the Father
of the Excuse-maker: He that taught man to lie, taught him to make an Excuse;
He that taught Eve to entice, and Adam to sin, taught both to make excuses. The
Devil first put into Judas heart to betray his Master, then taught him to wipe
his mouth, and say, Is it I? He first taught Ananias to tempt the Holy Ghost,
then puts Acts 5.
a lie in his mouth to excuse it. Know therefore Man, or Child, when thou
tellest a lie to make an excuse, the Devils stands at thy Elbow: Speak the
truth, and shame the Devil.

2. The second and less principal, is Man, 2. Secondary.
Father, Master, or what ever other: It is not possible else that many so young
should be so dexterous, and ready at this Art, if they had not been taught.
Parents sometimes put a lie into the Child's mouth, and bid him say, He is not
at home. Thus the High Priests instructed the Soldiers to say, Christ was
stolen out of his Sepulcher Mat. 28. 13
while they slept; and they would take it upon them. Profound Casuists (the
Jesuits Predecessors) who have since so improved See the mystery of Jesuitism.
this Art to such a perfection, that they must be acknowledged the only Masters
of it; who can find a cover for every Dish, and an excuse for every Sin.

4. There be other Causes Concomitant, 4. Deficient causes. 1. Not considering
God's Omniscience.
which I may call Causae deficientes, Deficient, or defective Causes, 1. Want
of due sense and consideration of God's Omniscience, Omniprescence, Purity, and
his other Perfections, of searching the Heart, weighing the Spirit, that he is
a strict Observer of all our Actions; a severe Discoverer, Detecter and
Detester of all Deceit; and that will bring to light all the hidden works of
Darkness; otherwise they would stop and say, Will not God find this out? They
consider not, says the Lord, that I remember all Hos. 7. 2.
their ways, how their own doings have beset them about, they are before my
face. They forget how he fetched out Adam out of his Thicket, and singled out
Achan from the Crowd. Jacob knew his Fathers sight was bad; and the Wife of
Jeroboam, that Ahijah's 1 Kings 14. 4.
Eyes were set; or he would not have been so bold to deceive his Father; or she
to disguise her self, to amuse the Prophet. Had Gehazi known his Masters spirit
had gone along with him, and that he should have been so immediately examined,
and taken tripping in his Tale, he would have let Naaman and his two Bags
alone. If the Prophet knew what the King of Syria did in his Bedchamber; The
Lord that revealed that to him, knows all thou do in the Chambers of thy
Imagery: He compasses thy Bed and thy Path, knows Psalm. 139. 3.
thy down-lying and up-rising, and is thoroughly acquainted with all thy ways.

2. A second deficient Cause is Men consider 2. Or the extent of the Law.
not the latitude, extent, purity and spiritualness of God's Law, That it
requires truth and sincerity in the Worship, Service and Obedience, which we
do perform to to God. The word of God is quick and Heb. 4. 12.
powerful, -- piercing to the dividing of the Soul and Spirit, and is a
discerner of the thoughts and intents of the Heart: Now did men believe, and
were sensible of the quick and lively Power, the Majesty and Authority of the
Word, and did remember those Rules to walk with God and be upright; In all our
ways to acknowledge him; That whatsoever we do, we should do it as to the
Lord, and not to Men: and Col. 3. ^3.
withal consider That by this word we shall be judged in the last day; It is
not possible Joh. 12. 48.
they should study such shifts, and flatter themselves in them; for there would
be no more need of them, then for the man that does well to hide his head, and
fly from the light, when he can make out his Joh. 3. 21.
works to be wrought in God.

3. Very few have heard the sound of the last 3. Or the day of Judgment. Mal.
3. 17.
Trumpet sounding in their Ears; nor do they believe there is a Book of
Remembrance written before God. And that a dreadful day of account is coming,
when these Books shall be brought forth, and that Rev. 20. 12.
then God will set all in order before the Sons of men, with all the
circumstances of their evil Actions; and then bring every Secret to light, and
reward all according to their Works: For did they so, it is not possible there
would be so much base dealing and wickedness in the World, making Lies their
Refuge; as if they had made an Agreement with Hell, and a Covenant with Death.
But there is a world of Atheism in Christendom, and of Infidels among
Christians, that seek ^o dig deep to hide their Counsel from the Lord; and
their Works are in the dark, and they say, Who s^eth us? and who knows us?
They turn things up side-down, says the Prophet, turn a fair side outward, and
a Esaias 29. 15, 16.
foul side inward.

4. In the fourth place, There is little 4. Want of Conscience.
of that we call Conscience in the World; and the want of it is a main
deficient, or efficient I may say of Excuses. There is much talk of Conscience
every where, but where is it to be found almost? Right Conscience is Cordis
scientia, says Bernard; Or cum Deo scientia, say others; not Scientia
simplicis Intelligentiae* as I may say, a bare speculation, but an active,
practical and uniform Concurrence of Breast and Brain, of Profession with
Practice; yea, of Man with God: when words and deeds agree with the heart, and
the heart with God. But alas, there is much of Science in the World, little of
Conscience; much Head-knowledge, little Heart-knowledge; much studying men,
little minding of God. Were there more of this in the World, there would
neither be carrying on of Designs, nor studying Excuses; but Acts 24. 16.
a serious and sincere endeavor to be without offense both before God and
before men.

2. For the ends which Excuses are 2. Ends of Excuses.
made use of, 1. Many fly to them, as we say, For shame of the World, and
Speech of 1. To avoid shame.
the People; as did they who took up stones to throw at Christ, who plead^d,
They did it not for any of the goods works John 10. 33.
he had done (that had been too bad) but for Blasphemy: Better a bad excuse
then none at all. People would have cried Shame on them, it they had not covered
their Malice with some plausible pretense. So again, when Pilate urged his
Accusers for Reason, Reason, as they cried out to him for Justice, Justice;
why? what Evil has he done? I find no faule in him: They would have been
thought inexcusable, if they could not have said, We have a Law, and by our Law
he ought to die: But none could they name that he had ever violated. So when
the Scribes and Pharisees never John 19. 6, 7.
left pers^cuting Christ, John Baptist, and the Apostles, and all that were
better then themselves, People would have cried shame on them for their
Impiety; But when they could say, You see we Reverence the true Prophets,
Moses, Samuel, Jeremy, Daniel, etc. We Celebrate their Memorials, garnish their
Sepulchers, and for those Mat. 23. 30.
good men we lament their loss; Had we been in our Fathers days, we would have
Sainted ^ot Slain them: But Jesus and the Baptist we know not whence they are;
The one has a Devil, the other is a Wine-Bibber, a Samaritan, Heretic a Mover
of Sedition, and what not? So that now they must not be thought any ways ill
affected to true Piety, but honored as the Pi^lars of the Church, the zealous
Asserters of Truth, Unity and Order; and the only Sappressors of Heresy,
Schism F^ction, Sedition and Novelty. Just so do the Papists St. Peter, St.
Paul, St. Lawrence etc. we keep days in their Memory, preserve their Relics,
pray to them, honor them with a kind of Worship, show more Piety toward them
then all you Protestants do. But if Luther, Calvin, Cranmer, Ridley, etc. teach
the very same Doctrine that Peter and Paul, they shall be Anathematized, or
burnt to Ashes, if they can light of them.

2. A second end, Is to gain a repute of 2. To gain a Repute of Religion.
Religion: And such is the luster and beauty of Religion, that though few
affect the power of it, yet all court the Name, and are ambitious of the
Reputation of it. Thus Machiavel instructs his Prince to put on the Vizor of
one Religious; yet to scruple nothing mean while, whereby he may more enlarge
his Dominion, or drive on his Designs. Thus those very Jews again John 10. 33.
make their defense, We stone thee not for any Cures, or other good Works
wrought, or thy shows of Sanctimony; but thy Blasphemy and Arrogance; To make
thy self the Son of God, and equal to God, we cannot bear: Very pious Souls!
Though many have been so wicked as to do it, none ever was so weak as to own
it, that they hated Piety and Virtue for its own sake: A fair Pretense is
fittest to cover so foul a Disposition. Those that hated, and cast out their
Brethren of old, as the Prophet said, for owning the Name of God (no other
Crime) yet said, Let God be magnified, Esaias 65. 5. All was done out of zeal to
God's Glory, and the Churches Peace. What do the Papists and other Persecutors
pretend less?

3. A third end, Is to stop the mouth 3. To stop the mouth of conscience.
of Conscience, and still its Clamors: Conscience would lead the man an unquiet
life, and would be clamorous, if he had not somewhat to pretend. Therefore some
grave shows of Religion, some form of Godliness, some Sins forborne, some good
Works done, some Duties performed must bribe Conscience to let them alone. Thus
Mat. 23. 14.
could the Pharisee devour a poor Widows house; yet keeping on his constant
course of Prayer and Divine-Service, the noise of the Widows cry never troubled
him. So they that crucified the Lord of Glory, when they had such a pretense as
had a face of Law, Habemus Legem, were not at all scrupulous and so squearnish
as Pilate, who called for water to cleanse himself of that Blood; they never
call for water to wash their hands, but take his Blood, and all Pilate's guilt
upon themselves; His Blood Mat. 27. 24, 25.
be no us and our Children they cry, without the least remorse. Only they must
have it done before the Passover, and must not go into Pilate's house that day
of Preparation, that they might not be defiled when they came next day to the
holy Passover; which Jo. 1^. 28.
they conscientiously were preparing themselves for.

4. This is a profitable way to save charges, 4. To spare pains.
cost, pains and trouble, about Religion and their own Souls. And what a wonder
is it to see those very men, who will spare for no cost, pains or charge for
their Bodies, Diet, Apparel, Physic, Recreations, or their Buildings and
Furniture; yea, their Horses, Dogs, Hawks, every thing; stick only to be at
cost and pains about their Souls! The easiest and cheapest Religion is always
best: The shortest way to Heaven pleases most. Now these Excuses fit their
turn for that, and nothing like them. For should they be at charge to mind
Religion (as some do) it would ask pains, study, care, diligence, fear,
trembling; there must be reading, praying, meditating, reforming, repenting,
and I know not what more. To what end all this wast, says the Sluggard. I have
heard of a more compendious way, and I will venture upon it: A good excuse will
save all this labor. And he is a very poor man indeed that is to seek an
Excuse.

These deal with their Souls, as many Threadbare Gentlemen do with their Backs
and Garments, who must be in the fashion, and loath to be at charge of new
inside and outside; buy some handsome fashionable outside, put a little
Trimming on it, and care not what the inside is; who can look into that? or as
others, who get a long Vest, or Cloak, to cover all, whereas to Subueula pexae
trita subest Tunicae. Hor.
have all new and good, would ask more cost.

CHAP. X. The sinfulness, vanity and frivolousness of Excuses.
HAving given an account of the Causes The sinfulness of Excuses.
and Reasons of Excuses in general, (not intending to speak of each
particularly:) I come now to give an account why in our Proposition at first I
called them sinful and frivolous.

1. I shall speak to their sinfulness. 2. To their frivolousness.
Their sinfulness appears in three things.

1. They are Maxima impeditiva bonorum; The greatest hindrances of any one
thing 1. The great hinderers of good.
in the World, of all good. 1. They keep men from the good of Duty, Faith and
Obedience, which they are called to. 2. From the duty of Repentance, which they
might have upon failour of the former. 3. Then from the comfort they might have
had from Faith, Obedience and Repentance, had it not been for them. 4. They
keep from God that Subjection, Honor and Obedience which we owe to him. All
which is to be seen in those Guests in that Parable, Luke 14. 18. when invited
to come to the Gospel-Supper, to partake of Christ and his benefits, they show
little Faith to believe the report of so much Grace and Mercy tendered; little
Obedience to come in upon a Gospel invitation, persuming those were just
Excuses they alleged of the Farm, Oxen, and Marriage. 2. Having those Excuses
in readiness, they never trouble their minds with Repentance, as if they had
been at all to blame. 3. Then are they frustrated of all that good and benefit
which should have accrued to them upon acceptance: They rejected the Council of
God against themselves, as was said of some, Luke 7. 30. They were in a fair
possibility of well-doing, had they not barred up the way to Salvation by these
excuses. 4. The Lord seeing his Grace so slighted, upon such sleeveless and
frivolous pretenses, is justly incensed, sends to call in others, resolving
(whosoever should) these should not participate of his Grace and Mercy.

2. They are secondly, The maxima 2. The great Seminary of Evils.
productiva malorum, The greatest Nursery and Seminary of Evils: A world of
evil springs from them. They may be called Progenies Viperarum, A Generation of
Vipers; or Semen Maleficentissimum, as Junius; or Malignantium, as Ar. Montanus
renders that of Esaias 1. 4. A Seed of evil Doers, a pestilent Seed of a very
lewd Race. Of these Excuses that may be said, which Solomon charge the Whore
withal, She increases Transgressors among men, Prove. 23. 28.
and makes them ten times worse then they would be: Or what was charged on
Jeroboam, an active Ringleader unto general Sin, who lay under much guilt; He
sinned, and made Israel to Sin: Yea, which is worse then both, that may be
charged upon Excuses, which the Lord charge upon the false Prophets, That
they strengthened the Jer. 23. 14, 17.
Hands of evil Doers, that none does return from his wicked way, by promising
them life. Encouraged and animated with these, they have made a Covenant with
Death, and Agreement with Hell; not as if in a Esaias 28. 15.
regardless and desperate manner they slighted them, but as being in their own
conceit and apprehension sufficiently secured against them. So Junius gives the Sea Jun. in locum.
sense.

3. Whatever men may pretend, these 3. They are all one with flat denial.
Excuses are upon the matter none other then plain refusals, and flat denials;
but in a more smooth and complemental garb. They speak as if the men were
wondrous well affected, only sorry they could not magnify their religious
Inclinations, by reason of these diversions: But the truth is, they had no real
intention at all; Verbalis excusatio realis recusatio, An excuse in words is a
refusal in deeds. And the Lord interprets it for no orher, therefore sends to
call in others more cordially willing: These have rejected me, and I will
reject them. Hence our word (...), Luke 14. 18. rendered excuse; is often
rendered to refuse, renounce, reject, deny, as Acts 23. 11. 1 Timothy 4. 7. and 5.
11. Tit. 3. 10. Heb. 11. 25. So that they might as well have spoken out in
plain English, as Corah did, Numb. 16. 14.
We will not come up; for they never meant it, though they made such a fair
pretense for a blandation and color.

2. Their frivolousness appears, in that 2. Their frivolousness.
they are not able to stand; 1. Before the presence of God. 2. The trial of his
Word. 3. The strict examen of Conscience. 4. A fiery trial of Affliction. 5.
Least of all the day of Judgment. Those must be more solid things (not Wood,
Hay or Stubble,) that can stand before these; such are precious Faith, true
Repentance, sincere Obedience, a pure Conscience, and undissembled Holiness,
and the whole new Creature.

1. They cannot stand before the presence 1. They cannot stand before Gods
presence.
of God, in any solemn approach before him; for what Communion has Light with
Darkness? A solemn drawing near to God in any religious Duty will dispel these
frivolous Excuses, as the approaching Sun does Fogs and Mists, and sends the
Beasts into their Dens. If the Majesty of a King Prove. 20. 8.
(then much more of a God) sitting upon his Throne, does scatter the Wicked
from before him: What man that has any reverence of a Deity dare come before
him with his Idols in his heart, to enquire of him, least God should answer him
according to Ezekiel. 14. 2, 3.
his Idols? Who is there that allows himself in any known sin, can come before
God and say, Examine me, O Lord, and prove me; try my Reins and my Heart? see
if there be Psalm. 26. 2. Psalm. 139. 23.
any way of Wickedness in me. Who is there that has any acquaintance with God
and Prayer, and knows that God is a jealous God, of pure Eyes, and will be
sanctified in those that draw near to him; that dare say to God as the Heathen
to his Goddess? Da mihi fallere, da justum, sanctumque videri. Or as he to
Elisha, Herein the Lord be merciful 2 Kings 5.
to me, when I go into the house of Rimmon, etc. This were to mock, not worship
him. These Excuses must off, as Moses his Vail, when we go to have any thing to
do with God.

2. They are not able to stand before the 2. Nor before the word. Acts 24. 25.
Word of God, applied close to the Soul; as we see in Faelix, who started and
trembled, and had soon enough of the Sermon. True it is, a man may slightly and
cursorily run over the whole Bible, and daily have a glance at this Glass, and
not minding himself, turn away, and go on in a sinful course. But if he
continue to look wishly into it, as St. James says, as if he would look it
Jam. 1. 25.
through: As Elisha so looked upon Hazael, it would dash sin out of
countenance, as that look did him. So mightily and powerful is the word of God,
that it pierces the thoughts and intents of the heart: And these paltry
Excuses are no more able to stand before it, then Dagon before the Ark.

3. Frivolous again, because not able to 3. Nor the strict enquiry of
Conscience.
abide the strict examen of Conscience, when it calls ad scrutimum secundo, and
tertio; When it takes them to task, as Elisha did his Servant, It finds them
faultring and sumbling. Few men are either Scripture Proof, or
Conscience-proof, willing to put themselves upon the Trial and Verdict of God
and Conscience. Conscience is as Eliah to Ahab; God's word, as Micaiah; the one
1 Kings 22. 8.
an Enemy, the other speaks no good to them but always evil.

4. Nor able to abide a day of trial, when 4. Nor a day of distress.
God lays his hand upon the outward man by Affliction; or the inward man, by
impressions of his Displeasure, writing bitter things against them: The Paint
falls off when it comes near the Fire: Or as we say of Witches, all their skill
fails them, when under an Arrest of Authority. (Such is the impression of
Divine Majesty upon his own Institution, that Satan falls as Lightning before
it.) So when these Excuse-makers, the Masters of this Black-Art are under God's
Arrest, all their Art, fails them, and their heart too. But the godly man is
not afraid to converse with God, with his Word and Conscience; therefore no
Prove. 31. 21.
more dreads Affliction, then the good Huswives Family dreads the winter Snow,
being clothed with double and treble Garments. God himself, his Word and
Conscience, speak good to him, therefore Affliction also and every thing else
must do the same.

5. Lastly, Least of all are they able to 5. Nor before Gods Judgment Seat.
stand before God's Judgment Seat; for if they cannot stand before God in any
solemn manner of approach, nor before his Word, when he speaks on Earth, and
his Voice shakes the Conscience of the guilty Sinner, nor before Conscience,
God's Sub-Officer, nor a day of Sickness; how shall they be able to stand
before the Son of man, when he shall come in flaming fire, with his mighty
Angels, to render Vengeance 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8.
to all that obey not his Gospel? How shall they be able to endure when he
speaks Heb. 12. 26.
from Heaven, whose Voice shall shake Heaven and Earth. I may therefore reason
with thee in the Prophets words, If thou have run with Footmen, and they have
Jer. 12. 5.
wearied thee; how will thou contend with Horsemen? Or as Rabshakeh said to
the dismayed Jews, If you be not able to stand before any of these single, how
will ye be able to withstand the whole Power of his wrath.

CHAP. XI. The Application of the whole.
HAving gone thus far in the Explicatory part of the nature and several kinds
The Application.
of Excuses; what remains, but to make some useful Application of the whole,
and so come to an end. And what use can we so fitly begin with as a sad
Lamentation?

Here may we then well sit down as Israel of old did by the waters of Babylon,
and 1. By way of Lamentation.
burst out into tears, when they remembered Sion (and now reflected upon their
present Condition) Much more cause have we, if we remember Paradise and
Primitive Integrity, when the Image of God was upon man, and his Tabernacle
with man: Man being like the Moon at full, full of transcendent light; God as
the Sun directly beholding him, and man as the Moon in her fullness reflecting
the glory of his received light to his Creator again. Man once a Companion of
Angels, and a Compendium, as it were, of a Deity in a little Volume; for we are
his Offspring. But now he is degenerated, and into what an Acts 17. 28.
Abyss of sin and slavery is he plunged! we stand amazed as at a sad Prodigy,
when we behold those two Luminaries, the Sun and Moon in an Eclipse. But man
is the greatest Prodigy in the World, in whom the two great Lights of Judgment
and Conscience have suffered so great an Eclipse, so that the light which was
in us is now darkness; the natural man conceives not the 1 Cor. 2. 14.
things of God; and in stead of that propenseness to good, and rectitude in our
mind, now all his imaginations are evil. We Genesis 6. 5.
may not only say, O Lucifer how art thou the greater Light fallen? But O man,
the second great Luminary, how art thou fallen too? Well might the ancient
Israelite weep who had seen the former Temple in Ezra 3. 12.
its glory, to see so mean a one now like to succeed in the room of it. Well
might Israel bewail the change in Rehoboam's days, from what it was in
Solomon's, when Wisdom and Justice sat in the Throne, and now folly was set in
high degree; weakness and wilfulness ruled and misruled, and lost all. The
golden age and 2 Chronicles. 12. 10.
sheilds of Solomon turned into brazen. Well might Job bemone his condition, so
much altered; he had sat chief among Princes, and was now all alone upon a
Dunghill, a Companion of Owls; and Worms and Job 30. 29. and 1^ 14.
Vermin his Associates. Well might Nebuchadnezzar have lamented, could a Beast
speak, who had commanded the Empire of the World, now driven from the Throne,
and grazing among Bruits. I may take up the words of the Lamentation, and say,
What shall I take to witness for thee? what shall I liken to thee? Thy breach
is great like Lam. 2. 13.
the Sea, who can heal thee? Where is man's Wisdom now! have they no
understanding, Psalm. 14. 4. to call Light Darkness, and Darkness Light; and
what is become of his Conscience now, that when he is called from Sin to Duty,
Repentance, Faith, Obedience, he flies from all, by and to Excuses?

Woe to the World because of Offenses, was Mat. 18. 7.
once said: And woe to the World because of Excuses. They are the sin of the
World, of the Church, of all, of every one. When we are called off from sin, we
make Excuses; when to confess sin, Excuses; when to Duty, we put off with
Excuses; when to believe, we make Excuses; when the highest Grace is tendered,
we make all void by Excuses. Nothing but Excuses, Excuses, none so young, so
ignorant, but is skilled in them; none so poor, but is stored with them; none
so good, but one time or other has had one; none so bad but has many of them.

I have named an hundred in this Discourse, and another may come after and find
an hundred more, and yet leave gleanings to them that come after us both: few
good Excuses, but store of bad from self, others, God, Satan, any thing, every
thing. Let us take a short Survey.

1. When we are called to avoid sin, or break it off; how do we shrug and
shrink? When the Lord cries out to Lot, Have thou, escape for thy life, linger
not; how do we cry loath to depart, as the Sluggard out of his Bed. When the
Lord calls as Jonathan 1 Samuel 20. 38.
to his Lad, make speed, have, stay not; Cito, long, tarde, as we say of the
Pestilence, we invert it, and say, Tarde, prope, cito; we should fly from Sin
speedily, fly far off from it, return slowly or never. We remove slowly, loath
to part with it, as Jacob with Benjamin: Cry out for it, as Micah Judge. 18. 14.
for his gods; go along as far as we can, or dare, as Phaltiel did to Michal
his wife (from whom he was to be divorced) and 2 Samuel 3. 15.
cannot part without tears; and in stead of going far, we do as Hagar, sit down
within a bow shoot, loath to see sin die, and return Genesis 21. 16.
to it again as soon; what means this bleating else? Oh not so my Lord; Is it
not a little one, a venial sin? If I never do worse, I hope I may do well
enough; I have tasted but a little of this Honey, and must I die for it? Have
not others done as bad, or worse, and yet done well? I have Examples,
multitude, great ones, some that go for good men, my Leaders; I hope my place,
calling, quality, profession, common custom may excuse me; beside, I live
civilly and peaceably, and do what the Law will bear me out in.

2. Again, when men are dealt with to confess and acknowledge their sin, what
ado is here, how long was Samuel ere he could get Saul speak that hard and
unpleasing word Peccavi? how many shifts and evasions first? I have done my
duty as far as I thought my self bound, I am not in fault at all; we sometimes
deny the fact as Gehazi, sometimes extenuate it. It was my ignorance, says
one; It is my nature, another; an ill custom I have got, a third, I was not my
self: A fourth, I was in drink, in passion, in have, anger, or in fear: Or but
in jest, say others, my zeal, good meaning: Conscience must excuse me, say
others, I had passed my word, made a Vow, bound my self under an Oath and
Curse, and what would you have me do? my Credit and Honor lay at stake, my
Shame was prevented, Profit advanced, my Calling followed, such benefit to my
self or friend procured: Besides, the matter was not so great, and was but
once, nor had I any ill intention in the earth; I should have been singular,
and I know not what, if I had done otherwise, and made scruple. I am civil,
painful, peaceable, pay every one his own; and if I never do worse, I make no
question.

3. If we cannot but yield it to be a sin, then have we other Excuses, Let
others look to it, I am faultless; it was their doings, not mine; I was a
Child, and must do what my Father bad me; a Servant, and must keep my Masters
Secrets, and do his Commands; I had my dependence on my Superiors, and must
comply with their will; I had Commands to encourage me, Promises to allure,
Threats to terrify me, Examples to draw me, Friends and Companions to
importune me, how could I refuse? Besides, what some scrupulous persons, more
precise then wise, make such a matter of, is the custom of the Time, Place,
Country and Company that I converse with. God help if so few as some men say
should be saved, and the way to Heaven should be so narrow.

4. When we are pressed to repent of Sin, and forsake it, how do we still
Conscience, and justify our selves. Are we not all Sinners? have not the best
their infirmities? There is no perfection in this life; sometimes we cast it
upon Satan, he dogged me; sometimes upon God, he denied me the Grace, gave me
not his Spirit, or ought me a shame.

5. When called upon to more seriousness and amendment of life, we are ready to
plead God's great Mercy, gracious Promises, Christ's Merits, the Doctrines of
free Grace, justification by Faith, remission of Sins, imputed Righteousness,
and our purposes of Repentance hereafter.

6. When excited to holiness, we plead the disrepute Holiness is in, the
inconveniences we may meet with, the Aspersions cast upon the Godly, the
Afflictions and Trials they meet with, the difficulties in the way of
Salvation, the scandalous Lives of some Preachers, the foul Miscarriages of
some Professors; and one great Observation above all the rest, the quiet and
peaceable end that some great Sinners have made.

7. When we are warned to take heed of security and slothfulness, some are
ready to plead God's unchangeable Decrees; they who are elected shall be saved,
endeavors are to no purpose; all our Works cannot merit: If not elected, it is
in vain to strive against the stream, Faith, Repentance, and Obedience will
come to nothing; God gives Grace and Salvation where he pleases, and none
else can have it. These are the Excuses about Sin.

2. In the next place, when we are called upon to duty, instead of saying,
Speak Lord, 1 Samuel 3. 10.
thy Servant hears, as Samuel; or Lord, what will thou have me to do? with
Paul. Acts 9. 6.
How many put-offs? I have put off my Cant. 5. 3.
Coat, how shall I put it on? I have much indisposition at present. It is
unseasonable, midnight, come again some other time, trouble me not now, Luke
11. 7. Or if we yield at any time, it is with no good will, as the unjust Judge
(not out of fear of God, or regard to man) relieved the Widow, only to be rid
of her; so do some perform Duty, not out of love to God, or Duty, but to be rid
of the clamours and importu^ity of Conscience, and to be more at ease and
quiet. Good God! what a world of Excuses have the Sons of men devised to shift
off thy holy Commands! Some have confessed the Duty is good, the Command just;
but I must be excused, I am a Child, I have no competency of parts, my
insufficiency may excuse me. Others cry out, What a weariness it is! what
strictness, difficulty, unpleasantness is in the way to Heaven! my Ignorance,
want of breeding, unaccustomedness to such courses may excuse me; others again,
I am for it, like Hag. 1. 2.
well the work, but the time is not yet fit for it, I will acquaint my Friends,
and fairly bid them farewell, and take my leave of Lu. 9. 61.
them, or to be sure will after my Fathers decease, when my Estate is come into
my own hand. I have now a busy Calling says another, a full Employment,
little spare-time for Soul matters: But I fully purpose when my Children are
grown up, and provided for, at least when I am old or sick; and I trust all
will be well: others again in such cases will plead, It is not my Calling; the
rich may, the Minister must, I may be dspensed with; lastly, some will say I
fear all is too late, I despair of acceptance and success.

3. When we are invited to believe and exercise Faith, how is it we have so
many Excuses; the Promise is too good, I too bad, altogether unworthy, not
holy, not humbled enough, the means unlikely, Providence are dark, Promises
delayed, the Vision does not speak; it is not with us now as with former
Presidents, God withdraws, Satan insults, my Heart misgives me, my Flesh and my
Heart, my Faith and Hope fail me; my Sins are too great, my Repentance too
little, for so many, heinous, reiterated Sins, against Knowledge, Conscience,
Vows, Promises, Corrections, Deliverances, Experiences, etc. how should I
believe?

Thus we see there is nothing but Excuses, Excuses at every turn, Excuses for
Sin, for Duty, for Faith, for every thing. And if we enquire into the cause,
does not this plainly discover the face of the Soul to be woefully smutched, our
native Beauty deformed? God made man upright, but he has sought out many
Inventions, ratiocinia Junius renders it, Reasonings, (strange Reasonings)
Computationes, Ar. Montan. Reckonings (strange Reckonings,) does not this
plainly show our Nature is tainted, Blood corrupted, Inwards infected? does not
this demonstrate that we are acted, instructed and beguiled by the Serpent?
that we have strayed from God, and are estranged toward him; that we are
unsensible of his Purity, forgetful of his Presence, unacquainted with the work
of the Spirit, and the Inside of his holy Law? Besides, that we are little
versed in Conscience-work and self-examination, and that we are extreme
forgetful of the Day of Judgment.

Again consider, are not the Ends as base and sordid? To avoid the worlds
shame, to gain the repute of some Religiousness, to flap Conscience in the
mouth and muzzle it, and to procure some little ease to the Flesh, by saving
the labor of through conversion and sin-mortification.

Again, what is the fruit of all, is not that as bad as bad can be? to hinder
all intended good, frustrate Gods gracious Tenders and Promises as much as in
us is, to obstruct the way to Heaven, and to make the strait Gate yet straiter,
to gratify Satan, to make our selves utterly incapable of mercy: what does
more confirm and harden in Sin; what does discover more gross hypocrisy than
these Excuses, which in word seem to express a good inclination and
willingness, when indeed they are flat Denyals.

Yet once again consider; will these bring thee into Gods presence with any
cheerfulness, when thou art to draw nigh to him? will these cause thee to lift
up thy face with joy and confidence to God? will they not make thy Spirit to
faulter, thy Faith to flag, thy Hands to hang down? Can these stand before the
light of Gods Word duly perused, or endure a through search of an awakned
Conscience? when affliction comes, will not these increase thy trouble, adding
inward to outward? and when Death comes, will not these put another sting into
it, and put more poison into that Cup? And where will thou appear at the day of
Judgment with these thy Excuses, but be confounded as he that stood
speechless, having nothing Mat. 22. 12.
to say for thy self.

And consider lastly, if it be not through these that millions of Souls do
daily miscarry and are shut out of Heaven, having by them shut themselves out
of Grace before. Now lay all these together, and tell me seriously if here be
not just matter of Lamentation. Sit thee down therefore good Christian, and
before thou passest from this, consider if this be not, or has not been thy
case, and that these many Excuses have not left thee without Excuse at the last.

2. From this use of General Lamentatation 2 Use of Humiliation.
we may proceed to Particular Humiliation; and may not each of us take up the
words of the faulty and forgetful Butler, and say, I call to mind my Sin this
Genesis 41. 9.
day, and say this concerns me, I have been wont to excuse my faults,
sometimes by flat Denial; sometimes laying the blame on my Ignorance,
forgetfulness, my Nature, Custom, Passion, etc. And when called to Duty, have
we not made such slight put offs as are mentioned before, or worse may; be such
as Corah, we will not come; We will not have this Man Number. 16. 14. Lu. 19. 14.
Psalm. 12. 4.
Rule over us, our Tongues are our own we will speak; As for the Word of the
Lord we will not do it, but do as our Fathers, Kings, etc. have done before us,
shall Moses or the Minister put out our Eyes, it is not the Lord, nor shall we
see Sword or Famine, Hell or Damnation; it is some peevish Baruch that
instigates the Prophet, shall this man (the Minister) that came to sojourn
amongst us became a Lord over us; and the like: now I may say, if Cain shall be
punished sevenfold, surely Lamech seventy fold, if they that know not the
Masters Will are punished, how many stripes shall he have that knew and did
not? if these in the Text who made such plausible Excuses were shut out, what
shall become of them who made light of it, fell upon the Messengers and slew
them? many there be, if they will speak out, have made worse, less tolerable
Excuses, some accusing Satan, some God; his Decrees have made them careless;
his Severity desperate; his Mercy presumptuous; the Blood of Christ more
filthy; his Grace wanton; his Patience impenitent, yea, have thou not said in
thy heart, who is the Lord, I know him not, what will the Lord do for us, what
profit shall we get, if we walk humbly before him? Let us to Egypt, let who
will go to Canaan that hard Land, that eats up, maintains not the
Inhabitants, give us Fleshpots, take you the Manna, give us the Pleasures,
take you the Recompense of Reward; we see no such Excellency in Christ, Beauty
in Holiness, Preciousness in the Promises, Glory in Heaven, as to make us
willing to die to Sin and the world and our selves, and give up our selves to
this strange life of Austerity, strictness, watching, praying, Repenting, and
renouncing the world: If those fair Excuses were condemned, what shall become
of them that make foul repulses and persist in their Rebellions, yet the one or
the other is the case of most. But that you may not think so slightly of
Excuses, we shall tell you a little more of their sinfulness. They are the
grand Sin of the world, the great Apollyon, the oldest mother of Iniquity, the
closest Sin, that does so easily beset us, a Big-bellyed Monster, has in it
all manner of sins; rip it up and you will find it guilty of every Breach of
the Law, and every miscarriage against the Gospel.

First it stands guilty of the Breach of the whole Law, both of the first and
second Table, and particularly of every several Command, e. g.

The first Command which requires that inward, natural, holy worship and honor
which is due to God is broken. 1. By omission, the Knowledge, Love, Joy,
Delight in God, obedience to him, calling upon, praising and serving him is
neglected upon pretense of the Merchandise, Farm, Oxen, etc.

2. By commission, this fills the world with false Gods, sets up others in his
stead, which are preferred, esteemed, trusted in, sought after more than God:
Hence some charged to have loved their Belly, Pleasures, Profit, Children,
Mammon more than God: The Papists honor their He and Lud. Vi^^es.
she Gods, says one of their own, and worship them no otherwise then God
himself. They pray to the Virgin Mary as to God, and prefer her sometimes to
Christ himself, they call her Mother of Grace, Mother of Mercy, pray to her to
deliver them from Satan, save them from Hell; yea, some have been so shameless
as to say, God has divided his Kingdom between himself and her, reserving
Justice to himself, and settling Mercy upon her; so that it is lawful to appeal
from the Sons Justice to her Mercy; and that the Souls Plaster is compounded
of the Mothers Milk and the Sons Blood; no greater Blasphemy or Impiety can be
uttered, yet have they their Arguments, their Authority, their privileged and
allowed Books of Offices to excuse them. These things are notoriously known, I
do therefore spare Quotations. So had Saul somewhat to Excuse his leaving 1 Samuel 28. 15.
God to go to the Witch, viz. Because God would not honor him with an Answer
at his Desire; Ahaz had somewhat to plead for his renouncing God, and setting
up the Gods of Edom, because 2 Chapter 28. 23.
he was smitten by the Edomites.

2. As for the second Commandment, concerning Instituted Worship, a world of
Excuses have been found out to evacuate it, till they at Rome have turned it
out of the Decalogue, and set an Et Caetera only in the room of it. Jeroboam
had an Excuse for his neglect of the Instituted Worship in the Temple, and
setting up his Calves, it was to ease the People of much unnecessary Labor.
The Papists 1 K. 12. 28
think the spiritual and simple Worship prescribed in the Gospel to be low,
mean, untaking, therefore set up Image Worship to stir up Devotion, call their
Images good Laymens Books, affirm the Image may be worshipped with the same
worship with the Prototype, as the Crucifix with Latreia (the same worship whch
is given to the Deity) so it be with these Excuses and Crotchets of
distinctions, improperly, reductively, etc.

3. For the third comes in the Swearer with his Excuses, may I not swear so
long as it is to the Truth? again, so long as I do not swear by the Name of
God, but by the Mass, this Light, my Hand, Faith, or Troth, etc. But this is
forbidden by the Prophet, Jer. 5. 7. By our Savior, Mat. 5. 35, 36. By the
Apostle, Jam. 5. 12. Or again, if I did not swear by the Name of God I may be
excused, I should not otherwise have been believed, or I was urged to it, or
was in passion, etc.

4. Excuses are the great Sabbath breakers. If I rest, though I sanctify not
that Day to the solemn service of God (public and private) may I not be
excused? I plow not, market not, if I go to the Church, though I do nothing at
home besides before or after; If I hear a Sermon once a day, what need I go
again the second time? If I keep it my self, though my Servants or Children
travel, sleep, play, what is that to me? These forget the Commandment runs,
Thou, thy Son, thy Daughter, etc.

5. If we come to the second Table, we shall find Excuses as faulty there, as
injurious to men, as guilty of impiety against God: These fill Church, State,
Families with confusion and disorder. The Mother of Sedition, Rebellion and
Disobedience in the State, of Schism, contempt of all good Order and Ministry
in the Church.

Sometimes in Defect. If Magistrates be bad, they think they may be contemned,
if weak, resisted; If Parents old, poor, indigent, they think they may be
neglected; so taught the Corbanists Mar. 7. 11. If Ministers be not Eminent, or
live as you would have them, slight them, and slight the Service and Offerings
of the Lord, as they did upon the account of Elies Sons. If Magistrates be
remiss and 1 Samuel 2. 17. 2 Chronicles. 13. 7.
weak, cast off their Yoke, as did Jeroboam, who conspired to depose his Lord
and Sovereign.

Sometimes again in Excess, what Superiors command, we must obey; as they
lead, we may follow; what they prescribe, we must follow: They shall answer for
us, etc.

If I have to do with my Equal, then I am as good a man as he, I Will carry no
Coals. If with my Inferior, I may tread on him, make him know I am his Betters,
my Servant shall know I am his Master, my Wife that I am Head, etc.

6. This is a great Murderer, and guilty of much Blood. If I am affronted says
the Gallant, I will draw, or send a Challenge: If challenged, I will not so
Vn-man and Vn-Gentleman my self, as not to fight him. To lose the repute of a
Christian (one that fears God and the guilt of Blood) is no disparagement;
but to lose the reputation of a Gentleman (or indeed a Lamech) that were a
perpetual Genesis 4.
disgrace. If any wrong me, should I not hate him, if he provoke me, strike
him, and lay him at my foot? If abuse me, may I not revenge my self, and do to
him as he has done to me; never be reconciled to him again? as I hate to be
false to my Friend, but shall love him as much as he loves me, so I will not be
false to my self, but hate an Enemy as much as he hates me.

7. This is the great Adulterer, and Mother of Whoredoms. If I commit Adultery,
David; if Incest, Lot may Excuse me. If I have committed Fornication, it is a
Venial Sin; many of the Fools of Israel have done so before me, I am not the
first, nor shall be the last; if I talk at random, and speak scurrilously, it
is but to make my self and others merry, and words are but wind; if I have a
wanton Eye, or lustful Thoughts, Thoughts are free, what has any to do with
them?

8. The Eighth Commandment is wholly taken away by Excuses. If I steal, better
so then starve. If I be false to my Master said the unjust Steward, Luke 16.
Blame me not if I desire to live, I have nothing to live upon but my Wits,
better so than dig, or beg, or be cashiered. If I rack my Tenants, may I not
make the best of my own? If I overreach in Bargaining Caveat Emptor, may I not
sell my Commodity as dear as I can? If I spend all, it is but my own; if I
hoard up all, lend, spend, give nothing, may I not please my self? If I have an
advantage against my Neighbor, and take it, vexing him with troublesome Suits
in Law; the Law, not I am to be blamed. If I commit Sacrilege, the Church has
enough, and too much already; It is but a piece of a Babylonish Garment, given
to the Church in times of blind Superstition. If I pay not my Tithes, the
Parson comes easily enough by his Living. Thus is there no Eighth Commandment.

9. For the Ninth, we may say Excuses were a Liar from the beginning, and abode
not in the truth, and yet pleads for all manner of untruths. If I tell an
untruth, the Jesting Lie does no man harm, the Officious Lie does a deal of
good to my Friend. The Excusatory Lie hides a fault and saves anger, yea the
pernicious defaming Lie will have somewhat to defend it self. I have now cried
Quit with him, he reviled me and I have reviled him; if slander, it was my
Enemy. If I take up an ill Report and spread it, you have it as I had it, I was
not the Author of it; yea, if I make Oath to a false Charge, it is but what is
put in my mouth, and others will second it. Thus is there no Ninth Commandment
left neither.

Lastly, as for Coveting, what Excuses have men ready to justify any thing? If
my Neighbor has Field, or Tenement that lies convenient for me, why may I
not seek to add House to House, and Field to Field? by fair means if it may be,
as Ahab to Naboth, or else out him by Law and dispossess him if that will not
do, as did Jezabel by a Wile and Quirk in the Law; or play the Sycophant, and
forge some cavilling Accusation, to pick a hole in his Coat, as sometimes
Zacheus had done; or by flattering Insinuations undermine him as Ziba did
Mephibosheth, or if I envy, repine at, or malign my Neighbors good, what has
any to do with that? Thus have Excuses made void the whole Law, and not left
one unviolated.

2. As Excuses are such capital offenders against the Law, they are as much
against the Gospel too, endangering the frustrating of Gods Counsel, slighting
the offers and tenders of Grace, as those in the Parable, Luke 14. 18. Thereby
receiving the Grace of God in vain, or turning it into wantonness, or slipping
the season and opportunity of the day of Grace, as if he that out of Grace
stretches out his hand all the day long, were bound to stretch it out all
their life long to a rebellious and gainsaying people.

2. Are as injurious to Christ, slighting his Person and Kingly power, because
his Visage so marred, Outside so mean, Parentage so low, Followers so
inconsiderable, his Precepts so pure, Yoke so strict, Cross Mat. 11. 6.
so heavy and ignominious, that he goes for a blessed man that was or is not
offended in him. They cast him out of the Vineyard, and had a reason for it,
then the Inheritance was their own. They take Mat. 21* 38.
away his Life, and have a Law and great Reason of State for it, to prevent the
Roman subjugation. Excuses have banished the Gospel, because it brings a
Religion and Laws, different from former Customs, Acts 16. 21. have made the
Jews to stumble at the imputed Righteousness of Christ, To. 10. 23.
having a Legal Righteousness of their own, have emboldened the Papists to join
other Mediators with Christ, as the Blessed Virgin, and their Patron Saints, to
mingle the Blood of Christ with that of Martyrs, their own Merits, Pardons,
Pennances, Satisfactions, all to Corroborate (but indeed to Invalidate) the
alone all-sufficient Satisfaction of Christ. Excuses have corrupted the
Doctrine of Grace laid down, Tit. 2. 11, 12. Perverted the use of Grace, Romans
5. 22. that Grace should reign by Righteousness; have made Christ the Patron
and Minister of Sin, Gal. 2. 17. because he came to save Sinners; in a word,
have subverted the whole Gospel, perverting the Doctrines of Justification,
Faith, Repentance Remission of Sins, to encourage men to sin, and presume with
the greater security.

3. Excuses have sinned against the Holy Ghost, sighting and putting by his
Motions, Excitations, Convictions, as did Felix, not regarding his present,
first, second reiterated Knocks, Calls, Invitations, but persuading themselves
the Spirit will come again at their pleasure, when they are old, sick, or
dying; as Sampson once thought, he would go shake and rouse up himself as in
former times, but wist not Judge. 16. 20.
that the Spirit of the Lord was departed from him.

3. Excuses are of so evil and malignant aspect, that they have turned all
things unto Sin, that they have had to do with; increasing to more ungodliness,
making ill use of Gods Decrees, Ezekiel. 33. 10. Of Gods Providence, as Adam, the
Woman whom thou gave me. Gods Patience, Eccles. 11. 8. His Silence, Psalm. 50.
21. His Mercifulnes, Deuteronomy. 29, 19. Riches of Goodness, Romans 2. 5. His Grace,
Romans 6. 1. His Preservations, Jer. 7. 10. We are delivered to do all these
abominations. His Denyals, or dipleasure, 1 Samuel 28. 15. The Lord does not
answer me, I hold my self disobliged from seeking farther after him. The Lord
does not remove this Plague, I am therefore disobliged from further waiting on
him, 2 Kings 6. ult. May we not therefore, seeing it is of such a poisonous
nature, that it sucks poison out of every thing, say that it is (...), Out of
measure sinful? And I may add one thing more; Nothing does more harden men in
sin, keeping them from Repentance, keeping them that have once sallen from
arising, and causing them that once turn back, to slide back by perpetual
backslidings, to hold fast Deceit, and Jerem* 8. 4 5. 8.
refuse to return; no man once saying, what have I done? but spurred on by
these Excuses, rushing into Sin, as the Horse into the Battle.

3. Some Uses of Information, 3. Uses for info^mation.


1. This may inform us, what a shifting Creature Man is, full of Shifts and
Excuses, you know not, Proteus like, where to have, and how to hold him: It is
so hard a matter to fasten a Conviction upon him, harder to take him off from
his false bottoms; so many Mazes, Muses and Meanders, windings and turnings,
that it is hard driving them out of them all. See it in Pharaoh; when God first
sent to let Israel go, his answer was, I know not that it is the Lord; then
requires a Miracle to Ex. 5. 2.
prove it, Exodus 7. 9. Aaron throws down his Rod, it becomes a Serpent, then is
he half persuaded; But when he saw the Magicians do the like, he is off again,
v. 13. So was he coming and going again, about the Waters turned into Blood, v.
22. But when the Frogs were in his Chamber, and croaking in his Bed, you would
have thought you had him fast. Entreat the Lord to take away the Frogs, and ye
shall go, Exodus 8. 8. The Frogs are no sooner gone, but he is gone too. When
the Plague of Flies came, then Israel should go again, Verse 25. When they were
gone, Israel must not stir, Verse 32. Thus he dealt fast and loose with God:
Sometimes you hear him relenting, after repenting of his Repentance; sometimes
praying, anon saying his Prayers backwards. One while he sends for Moses, and
entreats his Prayers, and seems stricken, Exodus 9. 27. At another time, sends
for him in all haste, and prays, and promises fair, and asks God and them
forgiveness, Exodus 10. 16. 17. Yet, though this great Fool was ten times in the
Mortar of Affliction, his Folly departed not from him. At first, he would not
yield at all, Exodus 5. 3. After a little, Chap. 8. 28. they should go, but not
so far. Chap. 10. 11. They might go now as far as they would, so their Wives,
Children, and Cattle staid. At last when he could no longer will nor choose,
then go serve the Lord as ye have said, and take all with you, Herds and
Families, and b^ess me also, Exodus 12. 32. How many shifts had Saul, ere he
would come to say, I have sinned, 1 Samuel 15. The world is more full of shifts,
than any thing else. So that to those three things which posed the wise Man,
that he said he could not find them out; The way of a Ship in the Sea, of an
Eagle in the Air, of a Serpent on a Rock: Prove. 30. 19.
We may add a fourth, hardest of all to be found out; The way of a Man with his
Excuses. From hence it is, that the work of Conversion is so difficult; hence
that the work of the Minister is never at an end. This made the wise Man say,
He Prove. 11. 30.
that wins Souls is wise, is the man of a thousand, and has learned the Art
of Arts. Man is so sly and subtle a Creature, and so full of shifts and
put-offs; that as it is an endless Task, to reason Children out of their Will,
when they are ill of Worms, persuade them to take any thing to do them good,
they had as lieve dye almost as take it, show him the Aloes, oh it is bitter;
now his Worms gnaw not, he is well now, or give him any thing else; then if ill
again, he will, but not yet, to morrow, or anon, but not yet; then, not so
much! half that quantity! then he looks many a sad look upon it, and takes a
little, when he sees there is no remedy, and when he has it down, is ready to
cast it up again. So is it with many men, as to their Souls, to take any thing
that may do them good, to purge out Sin by Repentance, how many Put-offs? How
many Pleas? How many Delays? How many four Faces? which shows, they had as
lieve dye almost, as repent and live: Or, they will only take a little (as one
says) upon a Knives point, or at the point of Bp. Andrews.
Death.

2. This gives us an account why there is so little true Grace, and so few real
Converts in the world, so little Repentance, Faith, Obedience and Sincerity;
the Reason is, there are so many Excuses. As he said once, To will is present,
to perform is another thing, out of my power, so may most say, To Excuse is
present, but to perform is out of my Endeavor and Desire, they never go about
it. Hence the misery of man is great upon him. And Issachar-like, for Laziness
and present Ease, he chooses rather to lie under the two heaviest burdens of
Sin and Wrath, then to be eased of both by using a strenuous endeavor in right
use of Means. An Excuse costs little, but any course of Piety asks Cost. E.
g. Repentance requires Confession, Contrition, Humiliation, Mortification,
Reformation. Prayer calls for Watchfulness, Sobriety, Faith, Reverence,
Fervency, Frequency, Holiness, Obedience, Charity, uprightness of Conversation.
Obedience, that again calls for the Heart, Spirit, Faith, Fear, Love,
Diligence, Care, Conscience, Patience, Constancy, Proficiency, Perseverance. As
for Faith, that is to be grounded on the Promises, and maintained by studying
them, eying Precepts, Conditions, Threats, frequent Prayers, and by a constant
course of obedience and sincerity of Heart. Sincerity likewise calls for much
Inspection of our Hearts, Examination of our Ways, and State, much eying of
God, searching the Scriptures, observing our selves, avoiding of sins and
occasions of Sin, performing Duties, close and strict walking with God, and
according to his word. Now all these require cost and pains, which the lazy
person thinks may be well spared by this commodious and easy way of Excuses.

3. See the folly and falsehood of that common Proverb, A bad Excuse is better
than none at all: We may invert it and say, Better no Excuse, than the best of
them all, which make men double guilty, by adding sin to sin, and sinful
Evasions and Excuses to sinful Actions; the godly sincere man is the happiest
man in the world, that in this sense he is (...), without Excuse, as needing
none, the only Excuseless person in the world, and the more excused, because he
has the fewer Excuses.

4. What a sad difference is there between Gods Care of man's salvation, and
Man's Care, or rather Carelessness? What could God do more, he provideth a Feast,
inviteth the Guests, sends out his Servants once and again, Come, all is ready,
Mercy is ready to save you; what could Man do less to save himself, or more to
undo himself, slighting all by frivolous Excuses? The Shepherd does all he can
to preserve his Flock, and the silly Sheep love to stray and wander, and so
become a Prey to the devouring Wolf. The tender Mother would keep the Child in
her Lap, and that seeks to get loose, and meets with a knock. The Mother puts
on fair Clothes to keep her Child clean, and the first thing the Child does, is
to paddle in the Dirt, and make a Beast of it self. The Father provides his Son
a Portion and sets him up, that he may live like a Man, and he by improvidence
makes all away, and becomes a Beggar. Here is much Care on the one hand, and
woeful Carelessness on the other; yet neither Shepherd, Father or Mother, are
blamed in the former Cases; but here all is cast upon God, as if we would
father and fasten our perdition upon him.

5. This shows us what a vast difference there is upon this account, between
the Sincere and the Hypocrite, in 3 respects. 1. The sincere does all he can to
fortify himself by serious Arguments and Excuses against Sin, and for Duty.
How can I do this great wickedness and sin against God? Genesis 39 9.
The other does all he can, beats his Brains, studies Arguments, baffles his
Conscience, frames Excuses to fortify himself against Duty, and to encourage
himself unto sin.

2. What a difference is there between the one Excusing, applauding and
admiring his state, and the other questioning, suspecting and disliking his
state, judging and abhorring himself. The proud Pharisee cries up his own
Righteousness, and his many good Deeds: The poor Publican cries out of his
Sins, and begs for Mercy. Holy Job abhorrs himself in Dust and Ashes, and
wicked Saul extolls himself to the Sky, I 1 Samuel 15. 13.
have done all that the Lord commanded me. The holy Apostles suspect
themselves, and in an holy Jealousy say, Is it I? and impudent Judas full of
desperate Malice, dips in the Dish, and looks his Master in the face, and
says, what, is it I? Humble Smyrna bewayls her Poverty and Defects, when the
Lord said she was Rich, Rev. 2. 9. And vapouring Laodicea vaunts of her Riches,
when the Lord says she was wretched, and miserable poor.

3. As to confessing, and concealing Sin: The one does freely and voluntarily
confess it, the other uses all his skill to deny or conceal it. Judah unasked,
unforced, said, What shall I say; God has found out our Sins, Genesis 44. 16.
when indeed there was pure Innocence; Gehazi questioned and examined, denies
the Fact, Thy Servant has been no where. 2 Kings 5. 25.
What a difference was there between David's Repentance, and sense of Sin, and
Readiness unsensibleness. The one cries out, I have done foolishly, it is I, what
have 2 Samuel 24. 17.
these Sheep done? The other said, It is not I that sinned, but these Sheep,
the People 1 Samuel 15. 21.
that went with me.

6. This shows us what a difference there is between Man's Judgment of
himself, and Gods Judgment. Let but Man be his own Judge, he has so many fair
Excuses, none would be guilty; but when God enters into Judgment with him,
there is none will be found innocent.

7. What a difference is there between a man's judgment of Sin at present
while Conscience is benumbed, they make a mock of Sin, make light of Reproofs
and Threats, and please themselves in their Excuses, as Cain and Judas; and
when Conscience is awakened and affrighted, how have they then thrown away all
their Excuses, turning all into self-accusation, self-condemnation, utter
desperation, and sometimes self-destruction? Desperate Cain cries out, Now I
see what Sin is, and apprehend mine so great, as it cannot be forgiven. And
cursed Judas cries out, I have sinned, I have sinned, the Blood of the Son of
God rings in my Ears, and cries for Vengeance; and I, whither shall I cause my
Shame, my Sin and Guilt, and Horror to go?

8. This may inform us again (and think seriously of it,) what a difference
there is in God's Carriage now to man, and man's to God, to what it will be in
that day. First, God here calls men graciously, beseeeheth 2 Cor. 5. 20.
them to be Reconciled, offers Grace, Mercy and Forgiveness freely; but then
the Sinner will find the Case altered, Man will be the Petitioner then, and
beseech God to be reconciled, and beg for Mercy and Forgiveness in vain; for
then is the time of retribution, and God will deal with Man, as he had dealt
with him before. There is now Entreating on God's part, and Slighting on Man's.
But oh! what entreating will there be then on Man's part, and slighhting on
God's! wretched Man slights God's Grace, Promises, Precepts, Threats here, and
God will slight man's Cry, Tears, Prayers, Repentance, and Torments there. God
must have thee Excused when thou go on in thy Sin, and thou must have God
Excused when thou go on to thy punishment. There Excuses will be met withal
in their kind, and matched with Excuses. When God calls, thou say Excuse me,
if I show no Obedience, and when thou call, God will say, Excuse me, if I
Qui salvo metu and salva fide peccant, salva Venia in Gehennam detrudentur.
Tertul.
show thee no Compassion. Thou could formerly be full of Sin, yet full of
Hope, and I am now full of wrath to thee, yet a God full of mercy: You once
said, Who is the Lord, that I should serve him? and now says the Lord, who are
ye, that I should save you? you then said to me, I know thee not, now I answer
you in your own Language, I know you not: It was once your answer to me, Depart
from us, it is now my final answer to you, Depart for ever from me, ye
despisers of my mercy; you once mocked at my Threats, and laughed at my
Commands, and I will also Prove. 1. 25, 26.
mock at your Misery, and laugh at your Calamity.

2. There will be old pleading then, to little purpose; thou will then be
ashamed of these pleas, it was my Nature, Custom I had got, it was in my Drink,
Passion, or the like.

3. It will be in vain to say, Lord, Lord, I was a Christian, professor of
Religion, a constant Churchman, I have heard thee preach in the Synagogues,
teaching in our Streets, or Houses, I have eat and drank in thy presence, and
at thy Table, done many good works, and spoke many good words.

4. It will be to as little purpose to say, Lord, I trusted in thy mercy, to
the promise of the Gospel, to the Blood of thy Son, when the Lord shall reply,
My mercy was declared to them that fear me; my Gospel for them that deny
ungodliness, and Luke 1. 50. Tit. 2. 12. 1 Jo. 1. 7.
live soberly, righteously, and godly, my Son's Blood was shed to cleanse, and
take away Sin. I am amazed, and tremble to think what amazement and horror will
then seize on all workers of Iniquity, when they see themselves thus
disappointed of all their Lying hopes, and it calls to my mind the sad plight
that that cursed Haman was in, when he saw the King, Queen, Mordecai, Harbonah,
all against him. The Kings favor he so relied upon, that he never questioned a
change, he could but ask and have. The Queen had invited him, and none but him
to a Banquet, Harbonah was one of those that bowed to him, Mordecai was the
only man he meant to Ruin; but now on a sudden the Scene is changed, his Plots
fail, his Sin is discovered, Mordecai is advanced, the Queen that Feasted him
is his Accuser, and it was in vain to fall down and beg Mercy, the King, whose
favor he had abused, pronounces Sentence, and he is immediately hurried to
Execution, and made a Spectacle to all the Court, and a dreadful Example of
God's just Judgment to all ages. Harbonah, and all Officers about the Court,
not once opening their mouth in his behalf, but all ready to aggravate his
Crimes, and to further ^is destruction. Little did he ever think, he should
have seen such a day. The like or worse, will be thy case, presuming Sinner,
who now rely'st on the mercy of God, the blood of Christ, the promises of the
Gospel, and the many Favors God has bestowed on thee, all which thou have
made ill use of: Thou will find to thy sorrow, God, Christ, the Gospel, all the
former savours and mercies of God, rise up against thee to condemn thee, and
none to speak a good word for thee (Angels or Men) but to aggravate thy
Offenses, and then will it be too late to fall down and supplicate. They shall
have Judgment without Mercy, that have despised and abused Mercy.

5. Consider what will be in that day, when God shall summon all the World
together, both good and bad, face to face; what fending and proving, what
accusing and excusing will there then be? The Friend will not spare to accuse
his Friend, to save himself; the Child the Father; the Husband the Wife; the
Adulterer and Adulteress, will each impeach other; the people cry out of their
silent, or seducing Ministers, and all say, It is long of you, that I am in
this place of Torments, my Blood be upon your Head: Had it not been for your
Persuasion, Counsel, Encouragement, Example, I had never been so bad then, or
so miserable now. Then will those that were thy Companions in Sin, leave thee
in the Lurch, as the Priests did Judas, to shift for thy self, See thou to
that. There will wicked Ahab, who sold himself to work wickedness, see himself
stripped naked of all his old Excuses, and cry out, and condemn himself (unhappy,
accursed Ahab) and justify Elias, Micaiah, Naboth, saying, Oh, that I had
never wronged, hated, or persecuted you! Cursed Covetousness! that set me on to
desire my poor Neighbors spot of Ground! Cursed Jesabel! that did contrive
the procuring it! Cursed Witnesses, who out of baseness of Spirit, would make
Oath against an Innocent! Cursed Judges, and Ministers of State, to comply with
such illegal Commands! Cursed false Prophets, to send me to Ramoth Gilead!
Cursed Satan, who put that delusive answer into their mouths! And cursed my
self most of all, who sold my self to work wickedness! It is I, unhappy I, that
must now pay for all.

9. This may inform us further, that fair words, good Language, and civil
Carriage, may be shut out of Heaven, as well as Profaneness, Persecution, and
slighting of Mercy. Those in the Parable had specious Pretenses, delivered
themselves in fair Language, I pray thee have me Excused, and I pray thee have
me excused, said the two first, neither of them said, I will not, I care not:
one said, I cannot, but none, I will not, yet all shut out. Trust not then to
good words, and a plausible Carriage.

10. This may inform us again, that Heaven may be lost by an undue, eager, and
immoderate pursuit of things Lawful, following our Callings, Trade and
Business: the Oxen, Farm, and Wedlock, are to be regarded, but in a lower and
subordinate measure; never to justle out the one thing necessary. The great
Husband, and good Huswife, may be as far from Heaven, as the Spendthrist, and
ill Huswife. One Calling minded, makes not the Christian, without the other.
Rest not then, in thy diligence and painfulness, in thy outward Calling.

11. Lastly, this informs us, that Relative Duties alone, make not a Complete
Christian, if Religious Relations be neglected, as they often are. I have married
a Wife, and therefore I cannot come: Cannot the Wife be observed and respected,
but God must be unserved, and neglected? It is small commendation, to be the
most loving Husband, and the best Wife in the world, if not also the best
Christian. To be the most provident, and indulgent Father, the most dutiful
Child; if regardless of God. What a Solecism and Incongruity is that, the Man
to have great respect to his Wife, little to God; the Wife careful to please
the Husband, careless of pleasing Christ; a Child dutiful to Father,
disobedient to God; a Subject loyal to his Prince, disloyal to his God, and a
Rebel; true to thy Country, and false to thy God? This is to be faithful in
the little, and unfaithful in the much and main. There are Relations wherein
all stand in to God, have an equal regard to these Relative Duties, relating to
God, as to them to men, and thou art the right Christian.

4. An Use of Examination. 4 An Use of Examination.


We shall now proceed to an Use of Examination, and only make three Enquiries.
1. Art thou one that do abandon all frivolous Excuses, and give up thy
self to the call, and will of God, as the Disciples, when called to follow
Christ, left all immediately, and followed him? Do thou say, with Samuel,
speak Lord, thy Servant Mat. 4. 22. 1. Sam. 3. 9.
hears; with Esaias, here I am, send me; with Job, What I know not, teach thou
Job 34. 32.
me, and if I have done Iniquity, I will do so no more. This is the Character
of a gracious Heart, the Language of a willing people. This Obedience is above
Sacrifice, and readiness to hearken, above the fat of Lambs. But if thou
studiest delays, and put-offs, Let me first bury my Father, Bid my Friends
farewell, try my Oxen, settle my Land, etc. Take heed thou be not set down
Tardy, Delinquent, and Recusant. Good people are the only Excuseless persons,
wicked all Excuses.

2. Do thou furnish, and fortify thy self with good Excuses, to keep thee
steadfast, and unmovable in good, and resolute against Evil; such as Abraham's, I
have lifted Genesis 14. 22.
up my hands to the most high God, therefore will not take a Thread, or
Shoe-latchet, or any the greatest matter to be made rich by any thing
indirectly gotten. Or Jepthahs, I have opened my mouth to God in a solemn Jud.
11. 35*
Vow, and I must not go back. Let it be Son or Daughter, or an only Sin, it
must go. Or have thou Joseph's Excuse in readiness? How can I do this
wickedness, and sin against Genesis 39. 9.
God? Or Tamar's, when tempted to like filthiness, I, whither shall I cause my
2 Samuel 13. 13.
shame to go? Do not entreat, do not force me. Or the Rechabites? when urged to
drink, who answered, we may not, we have a Charge from our Father to the
contrary. Jer. 35. 6.
These are good Excuses, and fortifying Considerations, such as the people of
God use to preserve themselves by, these will hold water, and endure the day of
Trial.

Again, do thou make our Savior's Excuse, when assaulted with all kind of
Temptations, to Satan, Scriptum est, It is Mat. 3. 15.
written, and I must keep me to the Rules of Scripture; to John, when he
refused Mat. 4.
out of modesty, It becomes us to fulfill all righteousness; again, to his
Mother, when checked by her, Wist ye not, that I must Luke 2. 49.
be about my Fathers business? these are for our Imitation. Or art thou ready
to make Peter's Excuse, God is to be obeyed before men, Act. 4. 19. Or can
thou make St. Paul's Excuse, and say for thy self, I delight in the Law of God
in my Inner man, I consent to the Law that it is good, if there be any evil
that I do, it is what I would not, it is what I hate, if any good not done, or
not so well done, it is the good I would do, and would do better, Romans 7. 15.
16. Or lastly, to make all sure, do thou fly to Christ for Sanctuary, seeking
no other Advocate, or Excuse-maker, but cleavest to him, desire to be found
in him in thy Integrity, Faith and Conformity to him. That thou can say with
the Apostle, We 1 Jo. 5. 19.
are of God, though the whole world lies in wickedness. The world has a world
of Excuses, and miscarry in them, we have but one Excuse and Plea, and that we
are sure will hold, and that is, that we are of God, and that we are in Christ
Jesus his Son, this is the true God, and Eternal Life, 1 Jo. 5. 20. Here says
the Believer, is my Rock, on this I build, and the Gates of Hell shall never
prevail against me; no tribulation, or distress shall remove me; no
presumption, nor security; no Righteousness, or want of legal Righteousness;
not self-confidence, nor self-distrust; not spiritual Riches, or Poverty; not
Duties or want, or weakness in Duties; not life, nor death, life in Sin, or
life of Grace; nor death in Sin, and death to Sin; nor height, nor depth,
height of parts, or depths of imperfections; heights of assurance, or depths of
desertion; but Christ is all, and in all. If I be found gleaning in any other
field, fall upon me and spare not, here I have a Commission to glean, and
gather full handfulls, among the sheaves of his large merits. If I have sinned,
Christ is my Advocate; if offended, he is my Peace; if I pray, he is my
Mediator, through whom I have access with confidence; if I have no
righteousness, he has, and lay claim to it, if I have, he has a better; I
disclaim my own. Christ is my only Apologist and Apology, I desire none to
plead and answer for me, I need none; I make no Excuse for my self, he is my
Excuse-maker, and all the Plea I shall put in is this, That his Name is called
Jehovah Tzidkenu, the Lord our righteousness, Jer. 23. 5. Consider seriously
dear Christians, are these thy Excuses, these are godly and safe ones, that the
best have made use of to their preservation and comfort?

3. Or art thou a man of Excuses, and thy Obedience made up of such srivolous
ones as are before named, and do thou think, when thou art to appear before
the Lords Tribunal, to plead Not guilty, saying in thy own defense, for the
Sins thou shall be charged with, They were small, common, customary Sins, that
it was thy nature, ill custom, thy drink, passion, ignorance, company, example
of others, great, good men, multitude, Universality made thee to offend. That
thou have had a good intention, blind zeal, vows, promises, oaths, many good
duties, a negative, or relative righteousness, diligence in thy Calling,
conformity to humane Laws, and the like, which may plead thy Excuse; I testify
against thee, and assure thee, all these will prove a Curtaild Garment, too
short and scant to cover thy nakedness, as the Prophet says. And Es. 28. 20.
when the Lord shall lay Judgment to the Line, and Righteousness to the
Plummet, the Hail shall sweep away thy refuge of Lies, and the Waters shall
overflow thy hiding places: Down comes this House built upon the Sand, and how
sad shall be thy fall! The Lord will reject all thy Confidences of thy
Innocence, and thou shall not prosper Jer. 2. 35. 37.
in them.

The last use of Exhortation or Dehortation.

I shall make no use of Reproof, the whole Discourse has run that way, to
reprove the Sin of Excuses. But our last Use shall be of Exhortation, and if I
could make it an Use of Remove, I should not repent my pains. It is the usual
manner of others, when they have been persuading and pressing their Hearers or
Readers to any good, to conclude with Exhortation; I that have been all this
while dissuading from Evil, shall conclude with Dehortations, and as they do
usually back their Exhortations with Motives, I shall make it my design, to
make my Dehortation from Excuses, to take effect by some Remotives and
Removers; and there are four Removes I shall commend to the Christian Reader to
prevent Excuses, and then commend all to God.

And the first Remove of Excuses, is ready and hearty obedience, get and
practice this, and it is better then all Excuses; it prevents and removes them,
so that there is no need of them at all. The Angel that could say, I have done
as thou have commanded me, Ezekiel. 9. 11. has no need of any Excuse, nor did
Adam need or use any in his Innocence.

2. The next Remove, is Repentance. Because our obedience is imperfect, (not as
the Angels unfallen, or as Adams before his fall) our next course is
Repentance, our Secunda post Naufragium Tabula; leaving all other frivolous
Excuses, fly to this, this the best Remove next to Obedience. This procures a
Deleatur, a cancelling of the Bill, a blotting out all our Sins, so is Gods
promise, Ezekiel. 18. 21. Now where there is a removal, blotting out, and
remission of Sin, there needs no more Excuse, or covering of Sin; when sin is
pardoned, it is therefore said to be covered, Psalm. 32. 1. Blessed is he, whose
iniquity is forgiven, and whose sin is covered, blessed is he to whom the Lord
imputes not sin, etc. All these Blessings came upon the truly penitent. And
therefore there is no more need of Excuses, where there is no Sin. Repentance
is the best Excuse, Apology, or clearing of our selves, as the Apostle calls
it, 2 Cor. 7. 11. (Beza renders it Excusatio, and so is the signification of
the word grammatically:) it procures a Pardon, which no other Plea, or Apology
can, and that gives a Covering, which all the Excuses in the world can never
do. Of other Coverings that may be said, which the Prophet speaks, Ezekiel. 30. 1.
They cover with a Covering, but not of my Spirit, adding sin to sin; add
Excuses to Excuses, and you add Sin to Sin. He that so covers Prove. 28. 13.
his sins shall never prosper, but he that confesses and forsakes shall find
mercy; you will cover, and God will discover: But true Repentance is a great
Cover-sin. This was the way which David took for clearing himself, and to have
his Sin covered, he confessed, repented, cried out, I have sinned, 2 Samuel 12.
13.
done foolishly, wickedly, and the Prophet said, The Lord has taken away thy
sin, thou shall not die. Not guilty is the worst Plea we can make at Gods
Tribunal, and to stand upon our Innocence. Because thou say, I am Innocent,
I will plead with thee, Jer. 2. 35. Job durst not stand to this plea, If I am
righteous, said Job 9. 15.
he, I would not answer God so, but make my supplication, (as an humble
Delinquent) to my Judge; our best way of speeding in Gods Court, contrary to
what of man's, is to sue in forma pauperis, in forma peccatoris: If I should
wash my self in Snow water says Job again, and make v. 30. 31.
my Hands never so clean, yet thou shall plunge me in the Ditch, and make my
Clothes to abhor me, my Excuses with which I would cover my Sin, would leave me
in a worse pickle of pollution. That vile Shimei sped better at David's hands,
upon 2 Samuel 19. 19, 20.
his speedy, and humbe submission, and acknowledgement of his offenses, then
either the innocent Amalekite, that brought 2 Samuel 1. 15. 2 Samuel 4. 12.
Readiness Crown, or those perfidious Brethren, that brought Ishbosheths Head,
when the one knew himself to be an offender, and the three last, thought they
had merited, and looked for a reward. The penitent Prodigal had better
Entertainment at the Fathers hands, that cried out, Father, I have sinned, then
the elder Brother, that pleaded, he had never offended. Judahs Ingenuous
confession of the miscarriage, what shall we say, or how can we clear our
selves, the Fact is apparent, God has brought our Sins to light, we are all
thy Servants, etc. so wrought upon Joseph's Bowels, that he could not speak one
rough word more, but fell to embracing and comforting them.

3. In the third place, because both Obedience and Repentance are defective,
our next Remove, is to fly to the blood of Christ by Faith, and this threefold
Cord will be sure to hold fast the Anchor of thy Soul. This is the only safe
remove to trust to, and this gives a supersedeas to all other Excuses.
Repentance is a good Cover-sin, in some cases, and goes a great way; but the
Blood of Christ is all in all, when all is 1 John 1. 7. 9.
done, to cover and take away Sin, it cleanses us from all unrighteousness. It
was not all sorrow and contrition, but the offenders highing and flying to the
City of Refuge, and abiding there, which Number. 35. 25.
did Excuse and secure him from the hands of the Avenger. And the death of the
High Priest, did fully acquit him from his Crime. Christ is our great, and only
Excuse-maker, our only Advocate and Mediator; and if be he our Apologist, we
shall be (...), without Excuse, in a good sense. Who is he that will contend
with me, says the penitent and believing Soul, flying to Christ, He is near
that Justifies me; who Esaias. 50. 8
is he that will condemn, Christ has died, etc. and he makes Intercession for
us; and his Intercession is above all the Pleas we can make for our selves.
Benjamin came off better, by Judahs interceding for him, and Nabal by Abigals,
then if either had spoken the best they could, in their own behalf. This made
the Apostle desire to be found in Christ, not in his own righteousness. The
Righteousness of Phil. 3. 9.
Christ, if we speak properly, is the only Cover-sin, and his Blood the only
Expiation, and his Intercession our best plea and defense, and true Faith our
best Title and Claim. By him all that believe are Justified (there is our
safety) from all which we could not be Justified by the Law, Acts 13. 39. And
to this give all the Prophets Act. 10. 43
witness, that whosoever believes in him, shall receive forgiveness of Sins;
and where Remission is granted, there is no more need of Excuses. Christ says
to the troubled Soul, that is perplexed to think what answer to make, as to
Mary Magdalen mourning, why weepest thou? what troubles thee? is it any want?
He says as the good old man to the Levite, that knew not where to Lodge, Peace
be to thee, let Judge. 19. 20.
all thy wants be upon me. Is it Debt? He has undertaken, and speaks to his
Father in thy behalf, as Paul for Onesimus, If he Philem. 6. 18.
bath wronged, or owes any thing, put that on my account. Is it Sin? He says
in thy behalf, interceding for thee, as Abigal to David. Upon me, upon me, let
this Iniquity be charged. He was made Sin for us, 2 Cor. 5. 21. Is it the
Fathers Wrath and Curse thou fear, as Jacob did his Fathers? He satisfies
thee in the words of Rebecka to her Son, Fear not, upon me be the Curse, Genesis
27. 13.
only obey my voice. Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, having
been made a Curse for us, Gal 3. 13.

4. The fourth and last way to make sure against all sorry and beggarly
Excuses, is to furnish thy self with solid, substantial, and unexceptible
Excuses, such as cannot be excepted against, such as the Servants of God of old
were wont to repel any motion to sin, or diversion from duty by, whereof I
shall instance in five out of the Old Testament, and as many out of the New.

And the first is that known one of Joseph, when thou art solicited to any
base and sinful act, resist it with this, How can I do this great wickedness,
and sin against Genesis 39. 9.
God?

2. Get Tamars Excuse, when set upon in the most violent manner, by thy dearest
Friend or Brother, to the perpetrating of any foul Sin, and say, Nay, my
Brother desist, persuade me not, do not force me, no 2 Samuel 13. 11. 13.
such thing ought to be done in Israel, and I, whither shall I cause my shame
to go?

3. It was a just and wise Excuse, that of the honest Soldier, for his refusal
of Joabs Reward promised him, if he had slain Absalom, whom he saw hanging in
the Tree; he should have had Ten Shekles, and a military Girdle for his pains.
He answered discreefly, if thou would give me a thousand Shekles, I dare not
do it, for the King charged thee in my bearing, not 2 Samuel 18. 10, 11, 12.
to touch the young man Absalom; otherwise, I should have wrought falsehood
against my own Life, for nothing is hid from the King, and thou thy self
would have set thy self against me. In which his Answer, he gives in four
weighty Reasons for his Excuse. 1. It were not safe for me to go against the
express Charge of my Sovereign, at the pleasure of any Subordinate, how great
soever. 2. For thy thousand Shekles, I should have paid dear for them, they
would have cost me my Life, and I love not to buy Gold or Honor at so dear a
rate; what good would the thousand Shekles, and the Girdle do me, If I must
die, as soon as I should require them? and I should have wrought the greatest
falsehood against my own Life, whch is more dear to me, than any Riches or
Honor. 3. To be sure it would come out, Nothing is hid from the King. Kings
have many Eyes, and many Ears abroad, and see more than others. 4. Thou thy
self, who set me on, when the matter should come to be scanned, could not
carry me through, but would have been a Witness against me. Wise, and weighty
Considerations all. Oh, that we had the like in readiness, when tempted with
whatsoever promises against the known Will of God. 1. I may not disobey my
Chief, and the supreme God, to gratify any Inferior whatsoever. 2. What
should I Get, and what would it profit me, to gain the whole World, and to lose
my own Soul. What folly or madness so great, as to be false to my own Soul? The
Soul is of more worth, than all the Shekles, Girdles, Offices and Preferments
in the World. 3. To be sure nothing is hid from the Eyes of him with whom we
have to do, Kings have many Eyes, God is Totus oculus, all Eyes. 4. That is no
lasting friendship which engages thee to sin, Thou thy self would be against
me. He that is so forward to thrust thee into Sin, will be the first to come in
against thee, and when thou come to be questioned, will leave thee in the
Lurch, when their own turn is served.

4. Noble and magnanimous was that Neh. 6. 3.
Answer, returned by Nehemiah, when Sanballat and Tobiah, with others, sought
by several Messages and Fetches, to divert him, and take him off from the Work,
wherein he was engaged, he would not so much as once speak with them, but sends
them this peremptory Answer for his Excuse. I am about a great Work, I cannot
come down to you, why should the Work cease, while I leave it to come to you?
They gave not over, but never left sending Message after Message, four or five
times; but Nehemiah was the same man still, and stuck to his former Resolution.
It is likely, when thou art engaged in any Work, or Concern of God, it may be
when but in thy Closet, the World, or thy carnal Friends, or thy outward Flesh
may seek to divert and intercept thee; and thou have no better Answer to
return, then to say, I am about a great Work, Gods Work, Soul Work, I cannot
come down, it must not be left so. Thou must take up Nehemiah's Resolution,
when thou art entered upon any good Course, or all will come to nothing. Non
Vacat is a better Plea sometimes, Ep. Sanderson.
than non Licet. Said a Learned Casuist.

5. The last Example of Excuse, out of the Old Testament, which I shall
mention, is that of the Rechabites, who, when invited Jer. 35.
by the Prophet Jeremy, and that by Gods own direction (to take trial of their
temperance and obedience) into the Chamber of a good man, Igdaliah the man of
God, where there was store of Wine in Cups and Flagons, not one of them would
taste a Cup, but Excused themselves by this, our Father Jonadab has charged us
to the contrary. Oh, where shall we find these Rechabites now! whenever thou
art tempted to drink to Excess, return the same answer, my Father has said, Be
not Ephesians. 5. 18.
drunk with Wine, wherein is Excess, my Lord and Savior has given me a
Charge, Let not your Hearts be surcharged with surfeiting Lu. 21. 34.
and drunkenness, lest that day come upon you unawares. And although thou
may be reproached for thy over niceness, by a company of Epicures and
Atheists, it may be the Lord will say of thy House, as of the Rechabites, Thy
House shall stand Jer. 35. 19.
and continue before him, when they have drunk out theirs, and theirs have
spued out them.

2. From the Old Testament, we shall pass to the New Testament, and with whom
shall we begin, but with him who is the Example above all Examples, our Blessed
Savior? who, when he had been absent, and missed by his Parents, and carefully
sought for, up and down among their Kindred and Friends, was at length sound in
the Temple among the Doctors, hearing, and asking them Questions, whom, when
his Mother mildly reprehended, Why have thou thus dealt with us, behold thy
Father and I have sought thee sorrowing. His Reply and Excuse was, I Luke 2. 49.
must be about my Fathers business. Here you have the Example of a careful
Mother, and of a more careful Son. She full of care for her Sons welfare, he of
Religious Care of his Fathers Concerns. Blessed Mother of God! why should
thou take on so, and be sorry! Thy Son was not out of his way, when thou
soughtest him, but thy self; thou might be sure to find him out of harms
way, not among the Truants, but the Doctors, nor in the streets, but in the
Temple, whither he did all his Life after continually resort. Ob Blessed Son of
God, to be so careful of thy Fathers Business, when so young! and I not yet,
when so old! Thou so forward, and I so backward! Thy Sun was up betimes, and
moved (as the Sun in the Heaven) with the same regular and speedy motion in the
morning, as at high noon. And our Sun rises not till Noon, breaks not out
sometimes till Even, before the setting. Thy Sun never had Solstice, all thy
Life was motion, action, going about doing good, teaching, healing, seeking to
save what was lost. And we so many Solstices and irregular motions. Thy
forwardness condemns our bacwardness, and thy Excuse is our Reproach, and
leaves us without Excuse.

Here is a Pattern for you Youths, that are all for Play and Sports, remember
your Savior in the morning of his Youth, before he was yet entered into the
Teens (when but twelve Years old) was found not in the streets among
Play-fellows, but in the Temple among the grave Doctors; nor as a spectator of
them, or Gazer on the Structure and Ornaments of the Temple, but an attentive
Auditor; and as a great Proficient, was able both to propound and answer with
so much understanding as was admirable, about matters of Religion. Learn thou
the way to the Temple, and the place where the Teachers meet, to reverence and
attend to them, that thy profiting may appear by thy understanding and answers,
and enable thy self for holy Conference. Here is an Example also for Gentlemen
and those of highest Birth, your High born Lord was not found among his
Kinsfolks and Friends, as if his Business was to pay Civilities to friends, and
acquaintance, to give and receive Visits and Treatments, which is all the
account some can give of their time spending; nor was he ever found in the
Tavern or Theater; but now and after constantly in the Temple. But alas, how
many are there whom you may seek long enough ere you find them in the Temple;
in the Tavern every day, at the Temple seldom; at the Theater they never miss,
among they Players; among the Doctors, or Teachers seldom, specially expressing
any reverence or devotion, but as if they came rather to scoff than learn. But
let such consider seriously, can they say, if asked what make thou here? I am
about my Fathers Business. Yea, this may be an Example to all men to attend
their Callings, and to mind the Business which God sets them to do, Minister
Verbi es? hoc age, was famous Perkins's Motto, that wheresoever thou art found,
thou may be found so doing* And this will be thy best discharge, I must be
about my Fathers Business.

2. We must obey God rather than men, is a just Excuse, when God commands one
thing and man another, as was the case of the Apostles, Peter and John when
Acts 5. 28, 29.
they returned that answer to the High Priests Charge, of Preaching no more in
the Name of Christ. But be sure the thing thou stickest at be so indeed, and
not in thy Imagination, lest whilst thou suffer for * not obeying man* thou
may also sin in disobeying God too, whose Command is, Superiors should be
obeyed in all Lawful things.

3. That was an excellent Excuse which Saint Paul made (being in Bonds pursued
by many enraged Enemies, and charged with heavy Crimes) Men and Brethren, Act.
^3. 1.
I have lived in all good Conscience, and that before God to this day. The only
Excuse in the world Saint Bernard calls it. Perfecta and absoluta cuique
Testimonium Conscientiae suae. Saint Peter calls it the answer of a 1 Pet. 3.
21.
good Conscience. Saint Paul had as many heavy Adversaries as ever man had, had
as many grievous Crimes laid to his charge, as the great Incendiary and Pest in
the State; and an Haeresiarcha, Arch Heretic in the Church; a mover of
Sedition and a Ringleader of the new Sect of the Nazarens (alias Christians,
or true Believers) as Tertullus laid to his charge; yet stands he like a Brazen
Wall, and as easily acquits himself of all their Accusations, as he did once
his Hand of the Viper which he shook off, with this, I have lived in all good
Conscience before God. An accusing Conscience is the worst Accuser, and the
Excusing Conscience, the best Excuser. Exercise thy self therefore in this Art
of Christianity, to have always a Conscience void of offense toward God and
toward man. Act. 24. 16.
If thou have God and a good Conscience on thy side, thou need not care who
is against thee; thou have Compurgators enough, it will be with thee as it was
with that famous Cato, who had many Accusers and many Trials, but quoties
accusatus, toties absolutus, it was said of him, he had as many Judicial
Absolutions, as he had unjust Accusations, and so came off ever with honor.

4. See if thou can make the same Apostles Excuse, or Excuses, Romans 7. from
verse 14. to the end. When in the Review of thy spiritual state thou see so
much for which to condemn or abhor thy self, as that thou fallest short of the
Law, (that spiritual, thou carnal,) short in thy performances (the good I
would, I do not,) that thou art pestered with such a depraved nature, (that
when thou would do good, evil is still present, etc.) see if thou can find
the same temper of a gracious Spirit (under these conflicts) in three respects
which was in him. 1. As to Evil. 2. As to Good. 3. As to the Law prescribing
good, forbidding Evil. 1. As to Evil, can thou say, That there is no Evil
thou do allow thy self in, v. 15. 2. No beloved Sin, The Evil which I hate,
v. 15. 3. No voluntary, wilful Sin, That which I would not, v. 16. and. 19.

2. As to good, 1. though I fail in doing, I fail not in desiring, in
endeavoring. My will is good, though performance poor, to will is present with
me, though how to perform what is good in such a manner as I would, I find not.
2. Of all good, he says, It is that he loves, it is the good he would v. 19.

3. As to the Law prescribing Good, and forbidding Evil, can thou say as he
did, 1. That the Law is holy, and the Commandment holy, just and good? v. 12.
A wicked man will say the Commandment is holy and just (it may be too holy and
too just,) but how to call it good he can hardly tell, it does so meet with him
and cross his Lusts.

2. Can thou say thou consentest and subscribest to the Equity and Purity of
the Law, v. 16. I consent to the Law that it is good. I tell you it is a
gracious Heart that can say so, I like not the Law the worse for its strictness
and purity, I find no fault with Gods holy Law, all the fault I find is with my
own unholy Heart, I wish not for a better Law, but a better Heart.

3. And can thou say further, Thou delightest in the Law of God, and in thy
Inner Man, v. 22. That thou do heartily close with that though it make
against thee, and command more and better obedience then thou do perform, and
reprove and threaten Sin.

I say this is a fair conflicting man's Excuse, and does clear thee from being
a Hypocrite.

The fifth and last Excuse, and that which is simply and absolutely the best and
fittest for us in our frail and imperfect estate to fly unto, with which I
shall conclude this Discourse, and with which I heartily wish thou and I may
conclude our Lives, is to fly to Christ. This is our ultimum refugium, our last
refuge, when all fails, and we are by Satan beaten out of all our holds and
pleas. This is the Excuse Saint John furnishes us withal, 1 John 2. 2. If any
man sin (and he that says he does not, is a Liar) We have, says he, an
Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the Propitiation
for our sins. Christ is our Advocate, Spokesman, Surety, Excuse-maker. An
Advocate is properly one that is of Council for a Client to assist him and
plead his Cause in Court, which he cannot so well do for himself. Christ is
such an Advocate. It were ill with us if we were to plead our own Cause and to
answer for our selves. But if Christ undertake for us there is no fear of
miscarrying, how deplorate and desperate soever thou judge thy Case. He has
carried the whole Company of Believers (and some of them had been as great
sinners as any other) through the Briars and is able to save thee to the utmost
by his Intercession. This has born up the Spirits of Sinners in their greatest
Agonies. Charles the Fifth when near to Death, is said to comfort himself (when
in great perplexity about his future state) with this. Christ, said he, had a
double Title to Heaven, the one in right of his Sonship, the other by the merit
of his Passion, he was content to make use of the one for himself, and has
left me the other which is all my Claim, and I am sure that I making this Claim
shall never be disappointed. It was St. Bernards before: Satan is the great
Accuser, and Christ the only Excuser. He our Surety, Mediator, Justifier,
Advocate, he was wont to plead in the Behalf of his Servants, against their
Accusers; of his Disciples against the Pharisees, Mat. 12. 3. For Mary against
Martha, Luke 10. 41. For Mary Magdalen against Simon, Luke 7. 40. He fetched off
the Woman taken in Adultery (ready to be stoned) with one word speaking. His
word goes far and his blood speaks better things for us then a thousand
Prayers, Tears, Alms, or all our Faith, Repentance, Obedience can do, then the
best blood of Martyrs, or all the Intercession of Saints and Angels, Heb. 9.
14. Benjamin might thank God for a good Brother that became Surety for him
first, and Advocate for him at last, that he was brought off so well. Onesimus
might thank God he had such an Advocate as Paul to prevail with his Master for
his Reception. And we are all bound to give thanks for Jesus Christ who is
become our Surety and will be our Advocate. For what once our Savior said to
the obdurate Jews to the aggravation of their Sin and increase of their
Condemnation, If I had not come and spoken to them, and done the works which no
other man did, they had had no Sin, but now they have no Cloak, or Excuse (as
it is in the Margin) for their Sin, that he speaks to his Servants by way of
Consolation, If I had not come into the world and done and suffered that for
you which none other could, you had had no Cloak, nor Excuse for your Sins, but
now I am your Surety and Advocate, I have taken away your Sins, and shall
present you holy and unblamable and unreprovable in the sight of God, Col. 1.
22.

Behold the Lamb of God which takes awy the sins of the World.
FINIS.
Books to be sold by Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and three Crowns in Cheapside.
A Commentary on the Hebrews. By John Owen, D. D. fol.

49 Sermons upon the whole Epistle of St. Paul to the Colossians. By Mr. John
Daille: Translated into English by F. S.

Tho. Taylor's Works, the first vol. fol.

2. An Exposition of Temptation, on Matthew. 4. verse 1. to the end of the 11th.

Divine Characters in two parts, distinguishing the Hypocrite in his best
dress. By Samuel Crook, B. D.

A Learned Commentary or Exposition on the 1 Chapt* of the second Epistle to
the Corinthians. By Richard Sibbs, D. D. fol.

A Commentary on the whole Epistle of S. Paul to the Ephesians. By Mr. Paul
Bain^f.

A practical Exposition on the third Chapter of the first Epistle of S. Paul to
the Corinthians, with the Godly Man's Choice, on Psalm. 4. v. 6, 7, 8. By Anthony
Burgess, fol.

The dead Saint, speaking to Saints and sinners living, in several Treatises.
The first on 2 Samuel 24. 10. The second on Cant. 4. 9. The third on John 1. 50.
The fourth on Isa. 58. 2. The fifth on Exodus 15. 11. By Samuel Bolton, D. D.
fol.

Christianographia, or a Description of the multitude, and sundry sorts of
Christians in the world, not subject to the Pope. By Ephesians. Pagit, fol.

These 7 Treatises next following, are written by Mr. George Swinnock.
1. The Christian Man's Calling; or a Treatise of making Religion ones
business, in Religious Duties, Natural Actions, his Particular Vocation, his
Family Directions, and his own Recreation; to be read in Families for their
Instruction and E^ification. The first Part.

2. Likewise a second Part; wherein Christians are directed to perform their
Duties, as Husbands and Wives, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants, in
the conditions of Prosperity and Adversity.

3. The third and last part of the Christian Man's Calling, wherein the
Christian is directed how to make Religion his business, in his dealings with
all Men, in the choice of his Companions, in his carriage in good Company, in
bad Company, in solitariness, or when he is alone, on a weekday from morning to
night, in visiting the sick on a Dying-bed; as also the means how a Christian
may do this, and some motives to it.

4. The Door of Salvation opened, by the Key of Regeneration.

5. Heaven and Hell Epitomized: and the True Christian characterized.

6. The fading of the Flesh, and the flourishing of Faith: Or One cast for
Eternity, with the only way to throw it well.

7. The Incomparableness of God in his Being, Attributes, Works and Word,
opened and applied. All these by Geo. Swinnock, M. A.

An Antidote against Quakerism. By Stephen Scandwet.

A learned Commentary on the fourth Chapter of the second Epistle of St. Paul
to the Corinthians, to which is added, First, A Conference between Christ and
Mary. Second, the Spiritual Man's Aim. Third, Emanuel, or Miracle of Miracles.
By Richard Sibbs, D. D. 4 to.

An Exposition on the five first Chapters of Ezekiel, with useful observations
thereupon. By Will. Greenhill, 4 to.

The Gospel Covenant, or the Covenant of Grace opened: Preached in New England.
By Peter Bulkeley, 4 to.

God's Holy Mind touching Matters Moral; which himself uttered in ten words, or
ten Commandments; also an Exposition on the Lords Prayer. By Edward Elton, B.
D. 4 to.

A plain and familiar Exposition of the ten Commandments. By John Dod, 4 to.

Fiery Jesuit, or an Historical Collection of the Rise, Increase, Doctrines,
and Deeds of the Jesuits. Exposed to view for the sake of London, 4 to.

Horologiographia Optica; Dyalling Universal and Particular, Speculative and
Practical; together with the Description of the Court of Arts, by a new Method.
By Sylvanus Morgan, 4 to.

Praxis Medicinae, or the Physicians Practice, wherein are contained all inward
diseases from the head to the foot. By Walter Bruel.

Regimen Sanitatis Salerni, or the School of Salerns Regiment of Health,
containing Directions and Instructions for the guide and government of Man's
Life, 8 to.

Christ and the Covenant, the work and way of Meditation; delivered in ten
Sermons. Large Octavo. By William Bridge, late of great Yarmouth.

Heart-Treasure: or a Treatise tending to fill and furnish the head and Heart
of every Christian, with soul-inriching treasure of truths, graces, experiences
and comforts, to help him in Meditation, Conference, Religious Performances,
Spiritual Actions, Enduring Afflictions, and to fit him for all conditions,
that he may live holily, die happily, and go to Heaven triumphantly. By O. H.
with an Epistle prefixed by John Chester.

The sure Mercies of David, or a second part of the Hearts Treasure.

Closet Prayer, a Christians Duty. All three by O. Heywood.

A Glimpse of Eternity. By A. Caley.

A Practical Discourse of Prayer, wherein is handled the Nature and Duty of
Prayer. By Tho. Cobbet.

Of Quenching the Spirit, the evil of it in respect both of its causes and
effects, discovered. By Theophilus Polwheile

Wells of Salvation opened; or Words whereby we may be saved: with advice to
Young Men. By Th. Vincent.

The Re-building of London encouraged and improved in several Meditations. By
Samuel Rolls.

The sure way to Salvation: or a Treatise of the Saints Mystical Union with
Christ; wherein that great Mystery and Privilege is opened in the nature,
properties, and the necessity of it. By R. Steedman, M. A.

Sober Singularity. By the same Author.

The greatest Loss, upon Matthew. 16. 26. By James Livesey.

Moses unvailed. By William Guild.

The Protestants Triumph, being an exact Answer to all the sophistical
Arguments of Papists. By Ch Drelincourt.

A Defense against the fear of Death. By Zach. Crofton.

Gods Sovereignty displayed. By Will. Geering.

A sober Discourse concerning the Interest of Words in Prayer.

The Godly Man's Ark: or City of Refuge in the day of his distress, in five
Sermons; with Mrs. Moor's Evidences for Heaven. By Ed. Calamy.

The Almost Christian discovered: or the false Professor tried and cast. By Mr.
Mead.

Spiritual Wisdom improved against Temptation. By Mr. Mead.

The True bounds of Christian Freedom: or a Discourse showing the extents and
restraints of Christian Liberty, wherein the truth is settled, many errors
confuted; out of John 8. verse 36.

A Treatise of the Sacrament, showing a Christians Privilege in approaching to
God in Ordinances, duty in his Sacramental approaches, danger, if he do not
sanctify God in them; both by Sam. Bolton, D. D.

The Lords Day enlivened, or a Treatise of the Sabbath. By Philip Goodwin.

The Sinfulness of Sin, and the Fullness of Christ, two Sermons. By W. Bridge


