A DISCOURSE Touching Tanger: In a LETTER To a PERSON of QUALITY.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1680.

A DISCOURSE Touching Tanger.
Honored Sir,
I Remember at our parting, I made you a promise to gratify your curiosity the
best I could, with an abstract of my judgment and observations, touching his
Majesty's City and Port of Tanger: and had obeyed you long since, and had not
my Head been rather oppressed than employed, by the unexpected difficulties of
my toylsom charge; which to this day render me so little Master of my
Resolutions, that the few Minutes I borrow, like broken Slumbers, scarce afford
me leave to reflect seriously on any other Subject. Be pleased therefore to
take this short account only, as an earnest of what you may farther expect;
when with more freedom of thought I shall be enabled to send you a Present of
the same kind, better worth your acceptance.

Tanger, according to remotest accounts, I find to have been a Colony of the
Romans; which conquering People did from thence lead their Armies, by which
they subdued all that part of Africa. They called a great Province by that
name; and thought it so well worth their labor, that they Planted, Peopled,
and Built it to the Magnitude of the greatest Cities; as we find by the
Fragments of their Structures, where ever we have occasion to break ground in
the Fields; and by the noble Aquaeducts; some whereof to this day supply the
Town with Water, said to be the best in the World. But by the declension of
that Monarchy, it shrunk by degrees to the dimension it now bears.

It was here the Moors formed, and from hence prosecuted, their great design of
conquering Spain: the advantageous Situation whereof, is thought to have not
only encouraged those Infidels to the Attempt; but lent them such aids, as
mainly conduced to their success.

At length, about the year 1474, while the Princes of Barbary were at War
amongst themselves, this, with other Towns upon the Coast, fell into the hands
of the Portuguez, etc.

Upon his Majesty's Marriage with our present Queen, Tanger was given in part
of her Dowry: a Capitulation much opposed by the Spanish Ministers, and gave
that Government so much apprehension, that, upon his Majesty's sending so great
a Garrison as he did upon our first possessing it, (jealous what design there
might be) withdrew a great part of their Army from the Frontiers of Portugal,
and Quartered them along the Coast of Andaluzia, to have an Eye upon our
Motions: by which State contrivance as is thought of the Portuguez, they got
the respite of one whole Campaign from the Incursions of the Spaniard. This I
the rather mention to excite our own value for Tanger, which barely our
possession of, gives other Princes so much caution.

This sufficing for the Historical part of Tanger, to the time of his Majesty's
possessing it. I will now proceed, with the brevity of a Letter, to treat upon
the four following heads, viz. Upon The Service Tanger has already rendered the
Crown. What Service it may render it, if improved. The mischief it may do us,
if possessed by any other Powerful Prince. Some general Observations touching
Trade.


Tanger is, as I have observed, so advantageously Situated, that it Surveys the
greatest Thorough-fare of Commerce in the World; having in one view almost the
whole Sea comprehended between the four Capes of Travalgar, Gibraltar, Spartel,
and Ceuta; those on the European, these on the African shore: so that no Ship
or Vessel can pass in or out of the Mediterranean, unobserved from thence.

It comes therefore to pass, by means of this narrow Gap or Inlet, that Men of
War, Pirates and Corsairs of all Nations, covet to Ply and Cruiz in and about
that Station, where they are sure to speak with all Ships that pass.

Here it was, that a Squadron of the Dutch on two several occasions, during
that War, lay in wait for our New-found-land-Fleet, who had no recourse for
safety but to Tanger, where they were protected and secured, till the danger
was over: the greatest part whereof had otherwise demonstrably fallen into the
Enemy's hands.

It was on this Station that Sir Thomas Allen, during the first Dutch War,
incounter'd their Smyrna Fleet; and here, in the last War with Algier, a whole
Squadron of Turks fell into our hands at once, and were all destroyed: and both
then, and since by Sir John Narbrough, there has been by a manifold degree more
mischief done to that Enemy on this Station, than in all the Ocean besides: and
we have frequent examples of single Ships being chased into this Port for
shelter.

To this Port, upon the breaking out of the last Dutch War, was sent us advice
of a Squadron of their Merchant Ships, that were bound from Malaga homeward,
but ill guarded, with an exact account when they were to depart: which Squadron
we incounter'd; and had the Affair been more fortunately managed, they had all
fallen into our hands; though, as it was, the greatest part were destroyed and
taken.

To this Place, on diverse occasions both by Sea and Land, we have received
notice from Salli, and other places on the Coast, of proper Seasons whereby to
Attack that Enemy, and have often succeeded in our Attempts upon those
intimations: and I think I may with good assurance aver, That by the advantage
of this Place, we have destroyed more of those Pirates, than all Nations
besides put together, who have been industrious to their power to prejudice
them; especially the French, Dutch, and Portuguez.

And yet, farther to show you how this Place has been already useful, let it be
remembered, that during the Plague in England, when it was penal in the highest
degree in Spain, to hold the least Commerce with us; notwithstanding the hazard
they ran, the Spaniards themselves came over by stealth, and by degrees did
here supply their wants, without paying Custom either here or there; this Place
being the general Magazine to all the Coast along.

What quantities of French Commodities were lodged here, during their War with
Spain, and were by little and little in Spanish Vessels fetched over, and put
on Board their Gallions when they were ready to receive them, without ever
Landing them?

With what ease and expedition did Sir John Narbrough, the last year, Carreen
and Refit the Ships under his Command within the Mole; where we had neither
Hulk, nor any sort of Provision for that Service? When I often heard him say,
with great satisfaction, That he would undertake to Refit a Squadron in half
the time, and with half the charge, that it could be done any where else out of
England: and I think I do not give him more than his due, if I presume to say,
he is as qualified for credit in that particular, as any man whatever of his
Profession.

How many Merchants Ships in peril by Distress of Weather have been relieved
and preserved by the assistance they have received from hence?

I could also insist on the damages done on the French from this Place, during
our War with them.

Nor have the advantages been small arising from considerable quantities of
English Merchandise, Manufactures, etc, disposed of hence into Barbary; but,
having an eye to may promise of writing you only a Letter, I shall in a word,
as to this first head, only say, That Tanger may be justly reckoned to have gone
far toward the recompencing to the Government, the charge his Majesty has been
at, in its preservation and improvement. And if while in its Infancy, when
there could be no just regulation of the charge, nor the place framed and
cultivated fully up to the uses and ends of the Government, we can demonstrably
make such a Calculation; what may be hoped from it, when besides the large
retrenchment it has already admitted in its charge to the King, we shall be
able to demonstrate so many farther extraordinary Services it is capable of
rendering the Crown, as I doubt not to prove in the following Section.

Which is to show wherein, and to what degree, Tanger is applicable to the ends
and uses of the Government.

I think I may challenge mankind to point me out, in the whole Globe of the
Earth, a spot of ground so improvable of the honor and interest of the English
Nation, as Tanger.

What is it has rendered England so formidable, so rich, and so renowned a
Kingdom; but the strength of our Navyes, and Universality of our Commerce? For
our Fleeces might grow till they Rot, and our Mines remain in the bowels of
their Mother; and our People rust into the Barbarity of their Ancestors, and
our Nation become a prey to every aspiring Monarch; did not this mighty Machin
set all Heads, and Hands a-work, quicken our understandings, and polish our
manners, and from an object otherwise of pity, or contempt, render us the
greatest Pattern in the World, of the power of Industry, the Fountain of all
the Blessings we enjoy: And because there are many various Wheels and Motions
therein, why should not Tanger be esteemed among the principal of those
movements, which keep this vast Engine going?

First, in respect of Spain, in case of a War with that People; he who knows
any thing, is not ignorant that the damages we sustain by such a War, are more
through the Embargo of a free and open Commerce with them, so useful and
profitable to this Nation, that it becomes a doubt, whether it be not of more
account than one half of the Trade we have with all Europe besides; I say, the
mischief in such case will be more, by a suspention of our Commerce, than any
great damage can arrive us by their hostilities: If so, then I undertake to
say, That Tanger is able in a good degree, if not totally, to answer this great
objection. For, by virtue of our vicinity with Spain, especially the five
principal Ports of Sevil, Cadiz, St. Lucar, Port St. Mary's, and Malaga; and by
the convenience of a good Harbor here, which by the success of the Mole is now
well nigh effected; our Nation there, in case of a War, may remove, and settle
their Factories here: Which, both for the safety of their Persons as well as
Estates, they need not be invited to do; having to my certain knowledge, sundry
times been upon the point of taking that resolution like one man, by some
jealousies they have had of mis-understandings likely to ensue, betwixt us and
that People: And affairs being once so settled, the Spaniards themselves, as
their occasions press them, will take care to be supplied from hence; as in the
Instance I have given during the Plague of England. By this means, our Estates
run no hazard of seizure or Confiscation. We shall be able to put off our
Commodities at better rates; and the King of Spain wholly deprived of his
Customs: Tanger it self becomes a proportionable gainer by the bargain, and his
Majesty's Subjects rest under the protection of their own Country Laws and
Government, and in the liberty of the exercise of their own Religion.

Thus, as on the one hand Tanger renders a War with Spain, less burdensome to
us, by so preserving the Commerce unbroken; so by its advantageous Situation,
and improvement to a good Port, it would prove so great a Thorn in their sides,
by the incessant hostilities we should commit upon them, (for it is not two
hours Sail from Tanger to the Coast of Spain) the hazard and obstruction of
their West India Trade, the ruining their Commerce one with another all along
the Coast of Andaluzia, which would certainly ensue; and the sundry other
damages by the help of Tanger, too long to ennumerate, or not at present
occuring to my observation: All this, I say, put together, seems to me to yield
matter sufficient to furnish us with the highest sentiments of estimation for
Tanger, though no other consideration were put into the Scale. For if this
whole Theory, or Postulata be true, (as a good deal is proved by matter of
Fact, and the rest not to be disproved, but as time must try;) then I may
undertake to say, that the Nation seems by Tanger to have gained this great
point, which is, that if heretofore the reasons touching the importance of
preserving our Commerce with Spain have for the most been found superior to
the motives (though great) which that People may, by their affronts and
injuries, have given his Majesty of resentment; those Arguments, I say, are by
means of Tanger removed, and his Majesty in a better state of demanding
satisfaction, or doing himself right; or the Spaniard hereby become conscious
of the disadvantage, detered from those provocations. And that they are
apprehensive of the benefits thus accruing by our possession of Tanger, is
every day visible from the pains they take to discourage its prosperity, by
obstructing by all ways possible our supplies of whatever kind from thence;
especially of materials for carrying on the Mole, etc. Whereof they are in
great fear: So that, if positive arguments in our Favor were less cogent, the
bare opinion they have of the use may be made of Tanger in their prejudice,
ought to beget in any reasonable man, who loves, and has any regard to the
honor and welfare of his Country, proportionable wishes for its encouragement.

But, leaving Spain, let us proceed to observe what may be of remark touching
Tanger, with respect to France.

The French Commerce with Spain, and their Interest in the Spanish Gallions and
Flota, has been universally concluded equivalent to half the Nations of Europe
beside; and they have more business in, and about this Station, and frequent
the Streights mouth with more shipping of one sort or another, than any two
Nations in Christendom: From whence our Ships riding at Anchor, may weigh, or
slip, and speak with all that pass in or out. Now what an awe will Tanger bear
on such a People; and what greater blessing can a Maritime Nation, as England
is, so justly jealous of their Honor and Authority abroad, ask of God
Almighty, than to be possessors of a Place productive of so many eminent
Services, a place capable of yielding so many good Offices to our selves, and
Friends, and so much annoyance to its most powerful Enemy? This I mean, who in
our Age has succeeded so far in its designs of Rivaling us, in the darling
Privilege and Prerogative of our Dominion upon the Sea; and how far it behooves
us to cherish the means that Providence affords, and Nature seems to mark out
for our improvement, toward the attaining of so important an end, let every
honest Englishman Judge. And from France, let us proceed to Holland.

During the first Dutch War, Tanger was in its Infancy, the Mole of little
benefit, nor were the Ministers then so much enlightened in its usefulness;
insomuch, that during that War, the Hollander (especially toward the latter
end of the War) did with a small Squadron on Ships, scour the whole
Mediterranean: And what with that, and the preferrence they then found in the
Spanish Ports, they gained much upon us in those parts. But in the last War it
was quite otherwise; for upon the damage we did their Malaga Fleet, from
Tanger, as I have already observed, and the care then taken to have Ships upon
that Station, it is observable they scarce had any Trade within the
Mediterranean after, during the War: For the Dutch are a frugal and wise
People; and when the charge of their Convoys grow in any degree burthensom,
they choose rather to suspend their Trade, than prosecute it with any
extraordinary expense or hazard; especially that of the Mediterranean.

Now if Tanger can produce such effects in our Favor, in case of a War with
Holland, as it has done, and may yet do in a much greater degree; and if it can
be in the like manner of use to the Dutch, in case of a War betwixt them and
Spain, as it has been to France, during that War; Then let us allow it an
additional share in our praise and estimation, and cherish it in proportion to
these farther benefits: And now for Algier.

Algier is a Den of sturdy Thieves, formed into a Body; by which, after a
Tumultuary sort, they Govern; having the Grand Signior for their Protector, who
supplies them with Native Turks for their Soldiery, which is the greatest part
of their Militia: And they in acknowledgement, lend him their Ships when his
Affairs require it. They are grown a rich and powerful People; and by a long
practice of Piracy become good Seamen; and when pressed by our Men of War, as of
late we have experimented, they fight and defend themselves like brave men,
inferior I am persuaded to no people whatever. They have no Commerce, and so
without any taste of the benefits of peace, whence their life becomes a
continual practice of Robbery; and like Beasts of the Desert, only forbear to
worry, where by fear, not honesty, they are detered; and yet when hunger
pinches, and a good morsel lies in their way, they will venture hard for their
prey; as may appear by the occasions given by them for this, and the last Wars.

The Algierines, I say, having no Merchant ships, nor any Trade of their own
with other Nations, know nothing of the motives Christian Princes generally
have of War and Peace; so that their Polity and Rule is, whom and how they may
Rob and Plunder, with greatest impunity. Therefore with some Nations they will
have no peace at all; because they can dispoil them without hazard. With
others, (as our selves) they will sometimes listen to proposals of peace; but
not as long as they can re-imburse themselves upon our Merchantmen, what they
suffer by our Men of War. Now it is worth ones while to consider how this Wild
Beast may be tamed, so pernicous to the Trade of the Kingdom; and how far
Tanger may lend a helping hand in the bringing it to pass.

I have already given you an account of the advantage we have of Situation, and
how improvable toward the obtaining Dominion in and about these Seas; and of
the damage the ships of Algier have already received on this Station, by the
help of Tanger.

The Algerines, above all others, when at peace with us, do infest these Seas;
this Station being seldom without some or other of them, cruizing in sight of
the Port: Where they frequently come to an Anchor, and Water, and supply
themselves with Necessaries, sell their Prizes, and reap great benefits by the
Place.

They have it also in their Instructions from the Government, to call here, and
observe how the Mole advances, and the place thrives; and I have been told by
the Captains themselves, who protest, that nothing gives them so much dread, as
the apprehension they have of the use we may make of Tanger against them.
Insomuch, that when the Gally arrived that was presented his Majesty, the
Algerines looked upon themselves as half undone; as the Captain of the
Mary-gold, the last Turks prize, who was taken off of Tanger this War, assured
me. Our Gally Frigates likewise gave them great awe, as they still do; being a
sort of Vessels which by the help of Tanger, may be much improved to their
annoyance. And if his Majesty would please farther to order the building of
Vessels of War proper and peculiar to this Service and these Seas, he would
quickly see the good effect it would produce, in bringing that People to know
themselves: For though some of our English Vessels sail as well as the
Algerines, when clean; yet such are yet but a few, and we must also sail a good
deal better than they to do our business upon them. Nor is it less demonstrable
to me than a Problem in Geometry, (however it may seem not so much our present
Subject) that we may build Ships that shall in a manifold degree out-sail our
best Sailors: These Ships need but be few, and of little charge, and should be
always kept in these Seas, both in War and Peace. For'tis the occasion makes
the Thief; and a Coast or Place unguarded is neglected: What signify the
strongest Walls unmann'd; or all the advantages of Nature, if Industry be
wanting in their application?

Tanger well managed, may be rendered the greatest scourge to the Algierines in
the World: and may afford them the best effects of Friendship. For if in time
of War we can force them from this so beloved Station, and attack them or their
Prizes bound in or out; and in time of Peace (which we cannot refuse them) they
can be admitted to make use of Tanger, and the Port, as their occasions
require; they may perform their Voyages in half the time, and with half the
trouble of returning home, to refit and Victual. For these Foxes prey remote
from their holes: and for one Prize they take in the Mediterranean, take ten in
the wide Ocean. So that in their return homewards, if they can dispose of their
purchase at better rates here, than they can have there, and can refit again
cheaper; What should discourage their embracing the advantage, which will be
great to them, and proportionably so to us, by the sale of their Purchase
amongst us, etc?

But, says an honest man, and a good Christian, this would be a scandal to
Christendom. To which I reply, It is not thought so by the most Christian King;
nor must we think so, if we consider them a Government, qualified to Treat with
Christian Princes, as we do: for do not we enter into Articles of Peace with
them, which are formally agreed to, and mutually Ratified? If so, how can we
refuse them any thing, to which Friendship may give them a Title?

Now, if what I have observed, touching the Government of Algier, bear any
weight; then this must follow, that, upon conviction of the premises, they will
always esteem Peace with England more Eligible than War, and no temptation
whatsoever (as heretofore) can be believed will supersede Arguments of so much
force as those we have noted. If so, then upon this single bottom, separate
from any the foregoing remarks, we may build reason sufficient to fortify my
Position, for the cherishing and encouraging of this important Place by all
means possible. For if Tanger shall appear so materially instrumental in
preserving a perpetual Peace with Algier; then hence alone the expense of
keeping it is abundantly defrayed to the Government.

For the charge of one Algier War, abstracted from the consideration of the
spoils they commit upon our Commerce during such War; I say, the Money expended
for carrying on, and supporting of one such a War, being put into Bank, would
at 6 per Cent. produce more than the Annual charge of maintaining the Place. If
so, how may we then reckon of Tanger, considered conjunctive of all the
foregoing Calculations of benefit that have been produced in its favor? Then,
as for Salli;

Salli is a Government depending on the Emperor of Fez and Morocco. They have
but small Ships; the Bar before the Port not affording depth for Vessels of
above 10 or 12 foot draught of Water. All the Winter they lie still. For after
the South-west winds have blown, there comes in so great a swell of a Sea upon
the Bar, that it is not passable: So that this is a Summer Enemy, and a very
poor one too, if we would be persuaded to have an eye to them, as we ought. For
I Will undertake, with three or four small Frigates, such as the Drake, Lark, etc.
which on occasion of Neap Tides, when they (I mean the Sally-men) have not
Water to go in and out, should clean and re-victual at Tanger, and so return
upon that Station; those inconsiderable Rogues would by such care be soon
reduced to nothing: and yet, when left to their liberty, they do a great deal
of mischief to small Merchantmen.

The benefit arising by thus awing those People (besides that to our small
Craft) will be, that it will in two or three year bring the greatest part of
Trade of Barbary to Tanger; as by reason of the Plague has been already made
good: For while the Infection of those Countries kept people from Trading
thither, all, or the greatest part of their Commerce, was by Tanger: and a War
diligently managed by those small Frigates, may produce the same effect.
Besides, it will teach them to value our Friendship, and help us to a better
understanding with them at Tanger, and in all likelihood gain us a point of
great advantage: which is, to Treat and conclude a Peace with them upon equal
terms. For, to buy a Peace (as has been the practice hitherto) is so mean and
dishonorable, and gives them so much contempt for our Friendship, that it is
not to be supported.

Now if these ends are to be obtained, (as I am truly convinced they may) it
will be wholly owing to Tanger. Which having said, I proceed to my third and
last head.

If Tanger be a Jewel of so many extraordinary virtues, and so peculiar to the
use and service of the English Nation, 'twere a great deal of pity it should
adorn any Prince's Crown, but his who wears it: For, it is but inverting the
Argument, and the Artillery is traversed upon our selves, and all these
Cordials become so many Corrosives. For though the bare loss, or want of these
benefits, to a Nation of our Circumstances, would be misfortune enough; yet,
when out of this privation of good (which is a consequential damage) shall be
propagated so many more and greater positive Evils to us, than its possession
promises of service (for such will be the consequence, if Tanger (which God
forbid) should come into the possession of the French) with what care and
tenderness ought the Government to cherish it, and labor to secure it and the
Nation, against such a hazard? The Trade of England into the Mediterranean, is
equal, if not exceeding all other Nations put together. Can any thing then
challenge a greater share in our esteem, than the means which insure this
mighty benefit to us? Shall Princes War one upon another for the sake of a
paltry Town, upon the pass of a simple River; and shall not we think it worth
our while to preserve a Place of this importance: so productive of good on the
one hand, or evil on the other? A place so improveable of the ambitious
purposes of the French, that were it in their hands, it would wound us in so
many tender places, that as we should be always groaning under the weight, so
we should never wipe off the Imputation such a loss would fasten upon us. We
are just now Alarmed with the news of Tanger's being to be sold to the French.
But we have a wise Prince, learned beyond his Predecessors in the interests and
advantages of Navigation and Commerce, and a great promoter thereof: Nor is his
Royal Highness, who has signalized himself so much, to the Nations and his own
glory, by his singular applications to the like study, so ill possessed of the
value of this Place, to concur in any deliberations of that kind. So that I
reckon this Rumor but among the other Libels against the Government.

How clamorous was our Nation upon the disposing of Dunkirk to the French,
though the charge of keeping it was scarce supportable; and in case of a War
with that People hardlytenable? Though the use of it was only in some degree
privative of benefit to an Enemy in case of War, but of no positive profit to
us in time of Peace; and yet whenever a Privateer or two sailing out of that
Port, shall annoy us but never so little in time of War, the complaint is
renewed, and that proceeding censured a fresh: How would that Minister then be
absolved with the People, who should advise the parting with Tanger; where our
little finger would be more felt, than our loins here?

But I have heard grave men say, Tanger is a great charge to the Nation. It Is a
charge, it is true; but I show what it has already done toward the defraying
it; and to what an abundant degree it will hereafter come to discount the
expense. A first rate Ship, in time of War, is as great a charge to the King,
as Tanger is: And yet, did ever any body complain that our Ships were a
burden, or our Fleets too numerous, when there was occasion for their Service?
Does not Tanger live principally upon the growth and product of England; and
the money, for the most part, circulate among our selves? Is the King's
Treasure mis-employ'd there? Don't we see every day the place improve; the Mole
in a good forwardness? Which expense too will soon be at an end. Are there not
many useful provisions made, for the encourageing of Shipping and Commerce? And
are we not sensible of it, by the increase and improvement thereof? For I
remember the time, when a Boat from Spain would draw down half the Town to the
Waterside; whereas now a Squadron of Ships scarce excites that curiosity.

Legorn, now a famous Port, and Scale of Trade, was in this Duke of Florence's
Grandfather's time a poor Fisher Town. Maturity is the Child of Time; and
though God Almighty may blast the best formed purposes; yet nothing, humanly
speaking, can prevent our fruition of the great benefits I have enumerated, if
we but apply the means; which in a few words are these.

To prosecute vigorously the works of the Mole; which in two or three years,
may render it a noble and safe Port.

To fortify the Town to the Landward; Which work should go hand in hand with
the Mole; lest when it shall appear worth a Conquest, our weakness should
betray us.

To have a Garrison consisting of two thousand Foot, in two Regiments, and
three hundred Horse; to be well and duly paid, and to be recruited once in
three or four years, by draughts out of the Guards: By which means we should
always have a strong, orderly, and well-disciplin'd Soldiery; and not
vagabonds, and raw, miserable, shiftless wretches, such as raised men for the
most part prove; whereof scarce the one half survive their seasoning.

The punctuality of relieving the Garrison (as has been of late resolved) will
also keep them in heart, cheerful in their Duty, and not put them upon such
desperate courses, as many of them in melancholy drunken fits have taken, by
running to the Moors; where, to the scandal of our Religion, they either turn
Renegades, or remain in perpetual slavery. The health of the Garrison will also
by this practice be preserved; for the Soldiers diet being salt meat, disposes
them in two or three years to inveterate ill habits of body, Obstructions,
Scurvies, Fluxes, etc. Whereof by reason of returning to the same diet again,
when a little mended by the care of the Physician, they relapse; and nothing
but removing them to a better can recover them.

By this course I say, Tanger would be the desirablest place for a Soldier in
the World, where they neither feel hunger, or cold, nor excess of heat; the
duty easy, unless now and then, when the Garrison is thin of men: Where an
industrious man can never want work, and is no where better rewarded: In brief,
it is a place that, instead of a Sepulcher as some call it, will by this method
become a Nursery of brave men; where, if they dye in the Field, as some now and
then do, they have their reward in Heaven: If they survive to see their
Country; they will be cherished and considered at home, as men of honor and
merit, who have drawn their Swords, and served their King and Country, against
the Enemies of our Religion, and of God himself.

The use of Horse is of so great importance, to the safety and tranquillity of
the Place, that I take it for granted we shall never be free from the insults
of the Moors, till our Horse shall be augmented to the aforesaid number.

The strength of all the Christian Garrisons upon this Coast, principally
consists in Horse: Which example alone might suffice for our instruction; for
we are but of yesterday; and their practice the result of some Ages of
experience, which is the best guide.

This Town was once preserved, or rather recovered, by the bravery and
opportune Service of the Horse; for the Castle being surprised in the Night by
the Enemies privately getting in over a low and defective part of the Wall, the
Horse taking the Alarm in the Town, mounted, and before they could get
possession of the drawbridge, got in, attacked, and defeated them; who had
otherwise demonstrably remained with Victory.

I am bold also to say, and it is the Opinion of others who were upon the
Place, that had our Horse, the day the Earl of Tiviot was lost, performed their
Duty; that great Man, and the major part of those with him, had escaped the
Fatal slaughter.

With such a strength of Horse as this I propose; we shall not be only able to
perform with ease what is yet wanting for the fortifying and Securing the
ground we have gained; but deprive the Enemy of the profit they make by the
Tillage and Pasture of the Country round about us: For they will be
necessitated either to keep an Army constantly in the Field, which we know they
cannot; to lose the benefit and fruits of one of the sertilest spots of Ground
in the World: or allot us such Conditions, as shall render us in a safe, easy,
and plentiful Estate; which I take assurance to affirm we shall, in such case,
easily obtain.

As the benefits we shall reap by such a number of Horse, prudently managed,
will be very great; so the hardships we shall suffer without them will be
insuperable: For the ground about Tanger being uneven, broken, and proper for
Ambushes; our Foot will never be able to do any thing to the purpose, but in
Conjunction of a proportionable number of Horse, to discover and clear the
ground, relieve and succor them when pressed, and secure their retreat when
outnumber'd and forced to retire.

Our Fortifications also; relieving our Forts, and many other eminent Services,
will be but very imperfectly performed without the assistance of a good body of
Horse.

The fruits of this care and charge will be reaped, in the benefits resulting
by the Trade and Commerce it will beget and establish here; for upon a secure
prospect of safety to Goods and Merchandise, both by Sea and Land, and
exemption from public Charges and Duties, and a general concurrence of all
circumstances of ease and expedition in Importing and Exporting of goods, will
in time render Tanger the general Magazine of all the Merchandise from the
Levant appointed for the Trade of the Spanish Indies, as it will of our
Northern Commodities of greatest value: For the exorbitant, or rather
insupportable Duties upon Goods in Spain, puts all People upon By-ways, and
secret hazardous practices, in the Shipping and disposing of their Commodities;
and while Tanger can yield so good encouragement, considered with the benefits
of its vicinity with Spain, all People will covet to lodge their Estates there,
where the whole charge (besides their being out of the reach of danger of
seizure) of Register Money, which is our quarter per Cent. there Collected;
Commission; Porterage; Freight to Cadiz, etc will not amount to the charge of
half Freight, Guard-money, National Duties, and Warehouse room for two Months.

But there occurs one great and dangerous impediment to the establishing this
benefit at Tanger; and that is the disputes that may arise, betwixt the English
Consuls in the Spanish Ports, and such as shall so Transport Goods from Tanger,
upon which they may expect a benefit: but this must be forbidden by all means
possible, by the strictest significations of his Majesty's pleasure in that
behalf to his respective Consuls upon the Coast; for there are so many
inconveniences accompanying such a permission, as would quite destroy all
hopes of success in this affair: and indeed it is to be feared this very
objection, or rather imposition, has already administered no small
discouragement. But as the interest of private men must submit and give place
to public Utility; so in case it appear that this proceeding shall in any
considerable degree affect the Consuls in the respective profits and emoluments
of their Office, it may be recompensed to them some other way: But I do humbly
propose it, as fundamental and irrevocable, that no Consul whatsoever of the
English Nation, be permitted to exact or demand a penny for any Goods exported
from Tanger, to any of the Spanish Ports; but that a bare Certificate from the
Government there, of such Goods Shipped either in English or Foreign Vessels,
shall serve as an ample acquitment, and entitle them to exemption from all
scrutinies and demands of the Consuls of any kind whatsoever.

It is also humbly proposed, that all Ships and Vessels of War, as shall by
appointment attend the Garrison and Port of Tanger, may have special leave and
permission from the Lord High Admiral of England, to receive on Board, and
Transport such Goods to Cadiz, or any where in the Neighborhood, as the
Merchants shall have occasion to imbark; but not unless such Ship or Vessel be
bound to such and such a Place for his Majesty's service: By this means,
Merchandise will go safer and cheaper, obtain quicker dispatch; and the Trader
consequently another good encouragement to prosecute this way of Commerce.

It is farther humbly proposed, that all Convoys outward bound which touch not
at Cadiz, as the Turkey Ships, etc. may have order to call at Tanger; as also
all such as are homeward bound: which being once become an established
practice; People, as well Foreigners, and others, will lodge their Money there,
to be embarked for Turkey, etc. And from the Levant, Merchants will load their
Commodities designed for Cadiz, or the Spanish Indies, in English Bottoms, to
be deposited in Tanger, from whence they may require them as their affairs
shall govern: By which means our Shipping also will be much encouraged. This I
urge not but with submission to the sense of the Turkey Company, who are the
fittest Judges how far such a practice may Influence their Trade. And thus much
touching Trade in general, with respect to Tanger.

There is no Position, as I have observed, that bears more of the evidence of a
Demonstration, than that of the reduceableness, and extirpation (by the help of
Tanger) of the Piracy of Salli, and all the Coast of Barbary: which, besides
the main benefit of relieving the general Commerce, will bring as a consequence
the greatest part of that Trade to Tanger. For those small Frigates as shall be
employed against Salli, (with whom it is presumed we are never to have a Peace,
upon no Consideration whatsoever) shall have it in their Instructions (as the
French proceeded during their War with Tunis) to obstruct all Commerce with
that People, but by way of Tanger; which may be done without any great offense,
by compelling such as they find Trading upon the Coast to go to Tanger, there
to unload, in order to the searching after Contra band Goods; where, if they
are found guilty, as most Traders thither are, the forfeiture of their Goods,
and the trouble that in such case will be given them, will be sure to deter
them from a second attempt: if they are innocent, the vexation of being carried
out of their way, their detention at Tanger, the incident charge, expense of
time, hazard, and one encumbrance or another, will incline them either to
forbear Trading with Barbary at all, or by way of Tanger; where they will not
fail of encouragement; for by thus obstructing the Trade of Salli, the Moors
pinched through the want of our Commodities, will make their next recourse to
Tanger, where finding good reception and dispatch, the Commodities of the
Country which were wont to be carried to Salli, having no vent there, will
fail; and the stream of Commerce of course be diverted hither: and when once
the road is beaten, it will not be easily broken. This too, as it brings the
Moors to seek us, will consequently draw such as were wont to Trade to Salli,
to Tanger.

But it must be the care of the Government here, to discourage to the utmost the
residence of English Factories any where upon the Coast, but at Tanger: by
which means men's persons and Estates are secure against the insolence and
Caprice of that Barbarous People; who, upon trivial and unjust pretenses, make
seizure of all; whereof we have recent Instances, the effect whereof we yet
feel, and we at Tanger often become as it were Hostages, and compelled (neither
to the praise of our Honor, or Politics) to make such Concessions as are both
dangerous and scandalous, and all out of a tenderness to a stubborn,
opinionative People, who like some Animals, rather than make a step out of
their own way, will go over a House.

And here I may not omit to observe, that, as generous a People as we are,
there are yet among us a sort of Men of the most degenerate abandoned
Principles, who continue that sordid, or rather impious practice of supplying
these Infidels with Powder, Guns, and all sorts of Warlike Stores, even while
we are in actual War with them both by Sea and Land; against not only the Law
of Nations, but even Humanity it self: which guilty, scandalous, and
unchristian proceeding I trust to see punished, as it deserves; and if our Laws
prove defective, in that particular, our Legislators may be humbly moved to
find expedients in this behalf.

The next useful consideration toward the improvement of the Place, is to
encourage, by all means possible, the Magistracy and Civil Government; and this
will invite People of Substance to settle and abide here: the reputation of our
Justice and Probity, will be a means of supplying us with a greater number of
able and honest Citizens; and those will support the honor of our Courts, and
maintain the dignity of a Corporation. This is very essential to the
establishment of new beginners, as we are; and, of all points, the hardest to
compass.

In the next place, it is my humble opinion, that his Majesty might be
prevailed with to let Leases to the Inhabitants, for such a term of years as
might encourage them to rebuild their dwellings, which are much decayed, and
will fall to the ground, unless some such provision be made to prevent it: and
this, in time, will also much increase the Public Revenue.

I do farthermore humbly observe, that the want of a positive Decision,
touching the Freedom of the Port, has occasioned much contention and
inconvenience amongst us; and great hurt to the Place: For unless it be
understood to be a free Port, as Legorn, Marsellea, etc. which Places ought to
be our Rule and Example in that particular; we shall be rather a Trap and a
Snare to People, than an encouragement and protection. For many an honest Man's
misfortunes have reduced him to Poverty; and when invited hither, by a notion
of that freedom and Liberty which other Ports, bearing that Title, yield to
such as put themselves under their Protection, in hopes of a peaceable
application to the repairing their broken Fortunes, they shall be here vexed and
molested with Suits and Imprisonments; People will shun us, as an infected
Place: and that great benefit which other Ports of this sort reap, and is so
essential to the growth and prosperity of this, is forfeited. I would not here
be understood to make Tanger a Den of Thieves, where Barataria, and other
infamous practices of ill men, should have encouragement; but humbly propose
only, that our Superiors would please to inform themselves, wherein those
Ports which are called Free differ from others, and what those exemptions and
Privileges are which give them that Name; and from thence form and establish
such a Constitution, as may for ever put us out of pain: for this Constructive,
or rather equivocal Freedom, as I may call it, which we have hitherto been
under, can never turn the Place to account.

I might farther multiply instances, wherein, in time, by the Wisdom and Favor
of Authority, and the care and industry of the People, this Place may be
rendered productive of sundry profitable improvements, touching Trade,
Manufactures, Fisheries of Tunny, Anchovas, etc. which in the end would support
the Government: But I here put an end to your trouble, summing up all in this
short Animadversion.

That Tanger, like the usefullest Elements, as it may be made an admirable
Servant; so it may be rendered a severe Master. It Is an outwork of the Nation,
which you know is a principal strength of a Fortress; it is a safe Port, a
Magazine, a Scale of Trade, and a Community of brave and loyal Men, where there
is no appearance of Faction against either Church or State. It Is a Place
improveable to the utmost degree of the Interest and Honor of the English
Nation, of Vexation and Damage to our Enemies, and Service to our Friends; and
consequently of influencing our Treaties and Alliances, with the most powerful
of our Neighbors. I have often heard the Earl of Sandwich observe all this,
and more of Tanger; with whom it had so superlative an esteem, that he was wont
to say, If it could be Walled and Fortified with Brass, it would repay the
charge: and I doubt not, if our misfortunes or Sins do not prevent it, but
Posterity, in the Annals of our History, shall read the Acquisition and
Improvement of Tanger among the Felicities of his Majesty's Reign; whom God
Almighty prosper, and send us a happy meeting: which is the constant Prayer of

Honored Sir, Tanger October. 20. 1679. Your most humble and faithful Servant.

FINIS.

