Mr. Sheridan's Speech after his Examination before the late House of Commons,
on Wednesday the 15th. of December, 1680.
It Is, I confess Sir, a great misfortune to fall under the Displeasure of the
Honorable House of Commons, it is a Burden that no man, though never so great,
Is able to bear; It cannot then be a wonder, if so inconsiderable a Person, and
of so little strength as I, should stoop under the weight; Not that I fear any
Danger to my Person, but grieve for the wounds it gives my Reputation, which I
have always valued above my Life, and that it might be preserved spotless, I
have ever made it my study to keep a good Conscience, void of Offense, toward
God and toward Man; and therefore I little expected to be brought as a
Criminal to this Bar, or any Tribunal.

But I am convinced, Innocence is no security against the Darts of Envy or
Malice, and that he who will hazard his Body or his Soul, may take away the
Life and Fame of any one at pleasure, it is to men of such principles I owe my
present Trouble: I do not say this to reflect upon any Member of this Great and
Honorable Assembly. My Evil is from without Doors, and I know the Authors and
the Contrivance so well, that, if it were convenient, I could name them, and
trace the whole Chain, Link by Link, to the very first, hammered by Prejudice,
and particular Interest.

I do not wonder that, in the present circumstances, you should have an ear
open to all reports that any way relate to the public, this is due to your
Station, and to your Prudence; and because Justice and your Honor require it,
I as little doubt your reserving the other ear for the Pleas and Defenses of
the Accused, or that you will condemn any man unheard: Upon this assurance it
is, that I am bold to beg, with all due respect and reverence, that I may have
liberty to speak for my self without interruption; If you are pleased to grant
me this favor, I will use it as fully and briefly as I can, for your
satisfaction and my own vindication.

I have been represented (I hope without offense I may say, traduced, for so I
can make it appear) for asperson of no Fortune, a Papist, a second Coleman, and
what is more ridiculous, though not more false, a Jesuit, and the Duke's
Confessor.

In clearing my self from these Aspersions, I must be forced to say something,
which nothing but necessity, that either has none, or breaks all Laws, can
excuse from vanity. As that I was born a Gentleman, of one of the antientest
Families, and related to many Considerable, in Ireland; in one County there is
a Castle, and a large Demean, and in another a greater tract of Land for
several Miles together, yet known by our Name. I need not say who was the head
or chief, it is too much that my Grandfather was the last who enjoyed the
Estate, and that my Father left an Orphan in the beginning of King James's
Reign soon found himself dispossessed and exposed to the World, that whole
County, with five others, being entirely escheated to the Crown. My Parents
Protestants, my Mother a Gentlewoman of England of good Fortune, a Foster, who
for my Fathers sake quitted her Country and her Relations, both famed for
honesty, for their Loyalty and Sufferings in the late Rebellion, when my Father
escaped twice narrowly with his Life, and at last was forced to fly, for
relieving and protecting both the Fortunes and Persons of very many English.

To my Birth I had a suitable Education; I have some slender pretense to
Letters, am not altogether a Stranger to the Civil-law, nor the Laws of
England, the means intended for my Livelihood.

But, without my seeking or knowledge, some Friends procured for me the
Collectorship of the Customs of Cork, and the management of most of the
Inland-P^^enue of that Country: This Employment, and the Accidents attending
it, together with that of the East India Prizes, and others in the last War
with Holland, put into Kinsale, enabled me to bring for my own proportion of
Advance-money, for the present Revenue-Farm of Ireland, 9532 l. as appears upon
Record in the Chancery of England; and being by a Brother of mine, then here,
without my privity or desire, engaged in this undertaking, and a stranger to
all the Partnership, excepting one, June last was 3 years I sold my Interest
for 4000 l. profit. This Money I employed in Corporation and Church-Leases, in
Mortgages and other securities, at 10 l. per Cent, the Interest of that
Kingdom. And after this account, if I have no visible real Estate, I hope no
man can doubt but that I may live independently, tho besides I happen to be a
younger Brother, so far from being a prejudice, that it is possible to prove my
advantage, being designed the Heir of two elder Brothers, who neither have, nor
are like to have any Children. The Bills of Exchnge drawn and remitted to and
from Ireland, by Sir. John Frederick and Company, Mr. D. Arthur and other known
Merchants, will show my proper fond, and no man's Bounty supported my Expenses;
and therefore, because I can with great Truth, I do the more freely declare,
That I neither have, nor ever had any Relation to the Duke or Duchess of York,
as a Servant or Dependent, a Sallary-man or Pensioner, and was so far from
succeeding Mr. Coleman, that his Employment never entered into my Thoughts
taken up with Affairs of a far different nature. My journey to Flanders was no
way criminal, and in a great measure the effect of curiosity, having before
seen very little of that Country, Holland, or Germany; and as I went not with
the Duke, so my return in his Train was purely accident.

For my Religion, as I was born of Protestant Parents, so I was all along bred
a member of the Church of England, and (by the Grace of God) will live and die
in this Profession; for it is not so much owing to the chance of Education, as
to my choice, being satisfied by Reason, by Scripture, and the Laws of my
Country, no inconsiderable Argument, that of all, it is the most purely
Christian.

Since I was seventeen years of Age I have gone duly to Church, and several
times in every year received the Sacrament; I did so twice while in Flanders,
as Dr. Lake and Dr. Doughty (the Duke's Chaplains) and others can witness; and
I have done so six times since my return thence, there are in this Honorable
House that can testify some part of this Truth. I have taken the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy eleven times, am ready to submit to all further
injunctions of Law in matters of Religion, have in Disputes encountered, though
unwillingly, with many of the several Orders abroad, remained unshaken in my
Principles; This at Ghent, putting a Jesuit (more zealous than the rest) into
great passion, made him pronounce me obstinate, and declare, He could sooner
bring over ten of the most rigid Phanaticks of England, than hope to make me a
Proselyte. Now if all this be not sufficient to wipe off the imputation of
Popery, I confess I am to seek for a defense.

Among others it is objected, That by my Interest in his R.H. I got my Brother
made a Bishop; in opposition to the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, and contrary to
Merit. To this I answer, That my Brother has been as much, and as injuriously,
though not so publicly defamed as I; that he came off with Honor; that a peak
between two Great Lords of that Kingdom, and one of the greatest of this, did
not only prevent his being sooner promoted, but was the occasion of his being
bespattered with many falsehoods and calumnies; that few in Ireland deserve it
better; that what he enjoys, he obtained not in opposition to, though without the
recommendation of the chief Governor, nor by the mediation of the Duke, but of
a great Minister, in the presence of my Lord Bishop of London, from the King's
immediate Grace openly shown in Council, and with a particular mark of His
Royal Favor.

I hope it is no Crime to honor and revere the Duke as he is a Prince, or if a
private man to love and value his innate Worth and Qualities; or to have said,
as it is reported (I wish nothing else had been with less Truth) That I would
hazard my Life and Fortune to do him any lawful and just Service; If it be a
Crime, as I can no ways apprehend of the Brother of my King, while publicly
prayed for in all the Churches of the three Kingdoms, I confess my self guilty;
But I am not so wedded to his Interest, as to espouse or pursue them, if he can
have any such, contrary to the Duty I owe, and ever will pay my Sovereign, my
Country, my Religion and my God.

And I do here most solemnly protest, as I hope for Heaven, if I knew him in
any instance a Conspirator or a Traitor, I would not only detest, but endeavor
to bring him to public Justice; and if ever he can be proved a Criminal of
this nature, I will have no more respect nor regard, but less, for him, than I
would for any common Offender. And therefore, without the hopes of reward, or
the fears of punishment, I declare in the presence of the Almighty, If I knew
any part of the Popish-Plot, or the persons concerned in it, I would long since
have revealed the whole Contrivance. But none in their senses can believe, that
a known Protestant could be made privy to such a Conspiracy; to which, if
necessary, might be added, that I was in a Country remote from that, where the
Design is said to be hatched.

I own my self of so extensive a Charity, to love the persons of all honest
Men, notwithstanding their differing from me in opinion, about the Modes and
Circumstances of Religion, and to be for Liberty of Conscience, when consistent
with the safety of the state, to all quiet and peaceable Dissenters; But when
it is urged and made use of to other ends, or as a Cloak for Rebellion or
Treachery, I abominate all such Indulgence.

But I will no longer dwell on this Subject, than to mind you of Colonel
Mansel's mistake or forgetfulness, when he informs this Honorable House, That
in or about July, 1678. I dined at his Treat for a German Lord, in order to a
Design of his upon a Foreign Command, and that 2 or 3 days after, I should
advise him against it, telling him the Duke would very soon have occasion for
such Officers. First, I do say, to have said so was no Crime; But I easily see
through this Artifice, it is to serve as an argument, that I understood somewhat
of the Plot, of which I am as ignorant as any man living, beyond what I have
since learnt from the Prints and public Fame. In the next place, I do utterly
deny I ever said the words, because I do not know the Duke had any such Design,
and am certain I cannot invent. Besides, by many circumstances, needless here
to mention, that Dinner was after the Courts return from Windsor, and
consequently after the breaking forth of the Plot. I desire the Gentleman would
recollect himself; at that time he was very great and intimate with a Roman
Catholic, H. N. from whom if he heard not the words, as I am not apt to
imagine, I am confident he dreamed them. He cannot be ignorant that I knew why
he was disbanded in Ireland, etc. and that I always declined, not only as
having no Interest, but as unwilling for other reasons, to introduce him to the
Duke, as he often pressed; and therefore he made his application to others, but
with us ill success.

And now give me leave, I beseech you, Mr. Speaker, to answer an Objection,
that I have prescribed a way how the King should live without Parliaments: I am
so far from entertaining such a thought, that I ever esteemed the Constitutions
of England by King, Lords and Commons the happiest kind of Government in the
world; and if the discourse called, The Rise and Power of Parliaments, etc. be
mine, of which many will have me the Author, the reading it, would be of this a
sufficient Confutation: In that, Parliaments are magnified, their power rather
enlarged than lessened, and their frequent meetings recommended as most
convenient.

In a word, whatever Character my Adversaries have given of me, I am not a
Protestant in Masquerade. I can neither Lie nor Dissemble, I am really what I
profess, and as the word is commonly taken, no lover of Arbitrary Government,
in any single or complicated body.

As to the Letter Subscribed by Fitz-James, I do sincerely protest I have no
Acquaintance with any of the Name, nor ever saw the Hand before, nor the
intended Messenger C. who not finding me, left it with the Maidservant: But in
this there is nothing Criminal.

As to the Computations, they are a Transcript from a Paper of Sir Peter Petts,
containing the number of Conformists, Non-Conformists and Papists throughout
England, taken by the Bishops order, in, or about the time of the General
Indulgence, and by him produced presently after the Plot, upon the talk that
there were fifty thousand Papists, able to bear Arms, within Temple Bar and
about Westminster; a number near double to what, at the taking this survey,
they were found men, women and children in the whole Kingdom.

For the Copy of my Cousin Wilsons Writing, I confess it the only thing I
endeavored to evade, having ingenuously, and without reserve answered all
other questions. That individual Paper I never saw before the preceding night,
when meeting it in the Drawer of my Bedchamber, (always open, whether I am at
home or abroad) I laid it uppermost with purpose of Inquiring how he came by
it, and whether he knew the Author; But not seeing him till next day in
presence of the Members sent to search my Lodgings, I could not ask him, and
was surpised to have so Indiscreet and Reflective a Paper found in his hand,
and among mine. It Is true, that about three Weeks before, I found another of
the same Contents, in an Old Crabbed hand, to me unknown; which after I had
Read, and concluded it might possibly be left by some of my Acquaintance in
their Visits, and being unable to guess at the person, not knowing how long it
had layn there, being Dated above a Month before, I immediately threw it into
the fire. Yet in this Paper, which has made so great a noise, there is neither
Felony nor Treason; and being the Act of another, and never by me published,
having neither Sub, nor Superscription, nor Writ to, nor for from me, nor
Copi'd by my Order, cannot, I presume, be a Libel, nor I hope imputed to me, to
whom it came perfectly by Accident: If it were lawful to speak ones guesses
from the Contents, it should seem to have come from a Learned Gentleman, one of
your own Members, then in the Country, Skilled in the Spanish Tongue, to which
both my Cousin and I are perfect strangers; nor was either of us out of London
then, or for sometime before. If I could as well hit upon the person, as his
Quality, I would give a more Satisfactory account of this matter; and I hope
this Honorable Assembly will the sooner Credit me, when they reflect, that
upon seeing another Paper of my Kinsmans writing, I would not by a lie deny
this to be his hand.

As for my Writing to Mr. Gadbury, I refer my self to the Letter in Sir W.
Waller's hands: I have told you the accidental occasion; I desired from him,
(whose Acquaintance I knew large, even among the Members of that Parliament)
the most material of public News; I neither asked for Schemes or Figures, I
have ever Laughed at the idle and ridiculous Art of Judicial Astrology,
invented, at least practiced, to Impose upon, and Pick the Pockets of the
Ignorant and the Credulous.

And now as to the Cause of my Commitment: The story Dr. D. told me as News, of
Peter Norris his knowing as much of the Plot as any man in England, his going,
or being gone into France to fetch a Priest to be a Witness. I can only say, as
near as I remember, I gave the same account to Mr. Secretary; not as an
Informer, but as News; for not being looked upon as such, I was not desired to
Swear, nor could I to a hearsay: In this I call Heaven to witness I had no
Sinister design, but an Honest intention of having the full Truth brought to
Light: Nor do I know, nor have I any reason to believe, that Mr. Secretary's
after proceedings were from any other principle. Upon my telling him the Name
of Norris, and his saying he had never before heard it, and commanding me to
send the Doctor to him, or the others Description; As soon as I met with the
Doctor, which was several days after this Discourse; and he as not knowing Mr.
Secretary refusing to go, I desired from him the Description, which some time
after he brought me; I gave or sent to Mr. Secretary, for I cannot tell
whether. But of this I am certain, that all I knew of the Affair, was from the
Doctor only; and that I never communicated it to any, but Mr. Secretary, and
that by what I writ under the Description, appears to be near a Month after
Norris his departure, and consequently could not be designed to stop his
Journey, or prevent the Priests coming over, or obstruct the fuller discovery
of the Plot, which no man living desires more than my self, believing it the
Interest of every honest Subject and Protestant, (out of which number I cannot
be excluded) to have all in it, from the highest to the lowest punished
according to merit, and that tranquillity it has so long disturbed, re-settl'd
in the Kingdom: And now I hope none of the Members of this Honorable House can
imagine I could be guilty of so Horrid a Crime, as having any knowledge of the
Priests being poisoned, as is suspected, or given out he might be. I am so
ignorant of this, or any part of the Conspiracy, that I do not so much despise,
as decline, because not needing it, the generous offer of Mr. Speaker, or other
Members Intercession for my Pardon: I acknowledge, as I ought, the Favor with
all fitting respect; but I thank God, I am so Innocent, that I dare, as now I
do, challenge the whole world, to make out one particular, where in Word or
Action, in the whole course of my life, I have done or spoken falsely, or
unjustly; and yet no man ever suffered more Calumnies, without any cause, or
the least shadow of Truth, beyond the witty malice of those, whose Eyes are
blinded, and Consciences seared by Envy and Interest, who from pretended
Friends are become my real Adversaries, contrary to Reason and Justice. But
further, none can believe I could keep any dangerous Correspondence, when its
well known that for these three years and a half all my Letters were no
otherwise Directed, than for me at the Royal Coffee-house.

Besides it appeared at the Committee by Norris his own Papers, that this
Priest Dowdall, (whose Name I never heard before) died September last was
twelve Months, eight Months before I heard there was such a man in the world as
Norris, and at a time when I was in another Country. And since you have thought
fit to acquit Dr. D. who was my Author and Principal, and who owned himself a
Roman Catholic; I hope you will not think it equal, that I a known sincere
Protestant, and but an Accessory, should stand Committed, and Committed after
such a manner, as neither Felon nor Traitor, not only Accused, but Convicted,
could suffer a Closer Confinement.

And here, Mr. Speaker, I entreat your leave to ask Pardon, if at the Committee
my behavior has offended any of the Members of this Honorable House, and to
say, whatever heat I expressed, was the effect of Passion, to which I was
moved, by hearing several of them in public, as at Locketts and other Eating
and Coffee-houses, had called me Papist, and a second Coleman, with other
Aspersions I cou*d not bear without resentment: To this was added my being
commanded a Messenger for Dr. D. an office beneath me, and wherein I could not
expect to be successful, not knowing whether he would appear without
Compulsion. I hope it will not be accounted an unexpiable Crime for a Gentleman
of more Years and Discretion, than I can pretend to, to show himself disturbed
at a conoeiv'd Indignity or Affront; and in hopes it may not be accounted so
heinous, I do once more withal due Submission beg pardon. There is one thing
more I cannot without trouble touch upon, the Reflections the Written Votes,
very different from the Printed, bring upon my Reputation: In those it is said,
it appears that I have succeeded Mr. Coleman, than which there never was a more
groundless, false, or malicious invention: And also that I questioned your
Authority, and said your Proceedings looked like the late Rebellion. However
Sir William Roberts came to make the Report, my words were to Sir John Morton
in another Room, and to him I appeal whether they were not thus. Upon his
advising than I should fare the better, if I freely showed my Papers, I told
him I would not hid one, nor dispute their power, tho I had heard others did;
and that the Seizing Closets and Writings, was not only Illegal, but looked
upon as one of the Causes of the last Rebellion; thereupon he wished I had not
said the Words: I replied, I meant no harm by those Objections, and
notwithstanding my mentioning them, they should find in me a readiness to obey,
and an entire submission; and added if the were offensive, I unsaid them, and
asked his pardon, as I now humbly do from the whole House, if I am thought
herein to have offended. And to do Sir John Justice, he was pleased to promise
he would take no notice of the Discourse, unless commanded; to whom with the
rest of the Committee I refer my self, whether of my own accord I was not going
along with them, when I met your Messenger.

If I had been guilty of any Crime, I had not only Warning, but Threats and
Advices to fly many days, some weeks before, when I was told by Letters from
unknown hands, and by several persons of Honor and Quality, that I was
designed to be brought into trouble; I need not in this place say, for what
reason. And here I cannot by the way but take notice of a Report made by
Justice Waroup at this Bar, and so read at Coffee-houses; that he should have
Searched Mr. Sheridans Lodgings, and there found only a Parcel of Popish Books,
whereas he never was in mine, but at Mr. Brunetly's House, an Italian Merchant,
whose Books those must have been and therefore I hope this was some Clarks,
rather than his mistake.

And now since no man can be placed beyond the reach of Malice, and the devices
of the wicked; and that I happen to be brought hither as a supposed Criminal, I
am extremely pleased, I have the good fortune to meet with so wise and equal
Judges as compose this August and Honorable Assembly; where I am so far from
fears that I do not doubt, but upon an exact (...), and an Impartial
Examination my having been so infinitely produced, and so wrongfully exposed to
the public; will be so far from gratifying my Adversaries unjust desires, that
they will not only be defeated, but my self greatly advantag (...) and
therefore I leave my Cause as the Footstool of your Justice, and willingly
submit to your Pleasure and Determination praying no other favor, than what I
am (...) you would grant without asking, your full Consideration of the whole
Matter, your speedy Condemnation or Acquittal, as I shall be found Guilty or
Innocent.

FINIS.

