(...), The things that belong unto Peace: OR, A Seasonable Discourse FOR THESE
Factious Times.

Delivered lately in a SERMON BEFORE THE JUDGES, At St. Mary's in Nottingham,
at the Assizes there.

And now Printed at the Command of some Persons of Honor.

To which is annexed, A Short and Modest Apology for the Author and Book of the
Several Weighty Considerations; humbly recommended to the Serious Perusal of
all, but more especially to the Roman Catholics of England.

By Thomas Sheppey, formerly of Pembrook-Hall in Cambridge, now Chaplain to the
Right Honorable William Lord Byron, Baron of Rachdale, etc.

And when he was come near, he beheld the City, and wept over it, saying, If
thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the Things which belong
unto thy Peace!

Luke 10.41, 42. LONDON, Printed for Henry Mortlock at the Phoenix in St. Paul's
Churchyard, and at the White Heart in Westminster Hall. 1682.

To the Right HONORABLE, Truly Noble and Loyal, William Lord Byron, Baron of
Rachdale, etc.
My Lord,
INtending to present You and your Noble Consort with something that may bear a
more suitable Correspondence with your Greatness and my Obligations, than this
Trifle can pretend to, I humbly request your good Lordship, while That is
preparing, to accept of This, as an Earnest of What, if God grant Life and
Health, shall in due time follow.

Your Lordship was pleased to honor this Discourse with your Presence, and,
(as diverse other competent Judges did) with your Approbation. I hope its
Defects will now meet with the same Candor and Pardon, which diverse other
failings of the Author have frequently experienced.

I have subjoyned a Just Vindication of my Self and of a Treatise I writ about
three years and a half since, from the silly Cavils of some Bigoted Papists
and some indifferent Protestants. The Latter of which as little Care for their
Religion, as the former Understand Theirs.

The Sermon was not easily Persuaded to the Press; but I assure you, the
Apology was altogether extorted from me: For I am so great a Lover of Peace,
that I can hardly prevail with my self to take up even Defensive Weapons. And
even now, like him in the Poet, Clypeum post Vulnera sumo.

For your Lordship and many Others can bear me witness how rudely I have been
treated by my Implacable and Restless Adversaries; and that, when I have
expressed the most Obliging Civilities to their Persons, and treated them with
far more Respect, than ever I animadverted upon their Tenants with severity.

My design in Publishing these Papers (next to Gods Glory) is to evidence my
self a sincere and Loyal Protestant against all Exceptions: and to Demonstrate
that your Lordship could not give a more convincing Argument of your Zeal for
the Church of England, than by receiving into your Protection one that shall
consecrate his Life and Studies to the service of his Holy Mother; and his
Noble Patron, in the Quality of,

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble, most obedient, and obliged Servant,
THOMAS SHEPPEY.

1 THESSALONIANS. IV. part of the x. and xi. Verses. But we beseech you, Brethren, that
you increase more and more; And that you Study to be Quiet and to Do your Own
Business.


AMong those many Glorious Titles wherewith the Evangelical Prophet Isaias
endeavors to honor our Blessed Savior, he particularly applies those of a
Counselor and Prince of Peace c. 9.6. To us a Child is born, to us a Son is
given, and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, the Prince of
Peace. And that, without question, upon this very Account, because the Messiah
at his coming and divulging his Gospel by Himself and his Apostles was to give
the best Advice, and most Heavenly Counsel, that ever was offered to the sons
of Men. Now among all those wonderful Lessons and Instructions, which are left
us by him in the Writings of his holy Apostles and Evangelists, I know none
more Excellent, nor at present so seasonable as this he has bequeathed to us
by the Pen of St. Paul in the words recited to you. Counsel so good and
effectual, that whosoever will faithfully embrace it, shall easily be master
both of this World and the World to come, and be able to vie Felicity with the
Greatest Monarchs. Counsel that will at once disingage us from all our Fears
and Jealousies, and put us out of danger of any thing, but of being too happy;
that is, of Resembling God himself, who transacts a life in the greatest Peace,
Tranquillity and Quiet imaginable. So that not only the love of God, but self
interest it self invites us to this Divine Philosophy: Nature as well as Grace
prompts us earnestly to prosecute our own advantage; and Time as well as
Eternity ingages us to comply with this Heavenly Counsel of Increasing more and
more; Of studying to be quiet, and of minding our own Business.

The words are very plain. God make them as visible in the Practice of our
Lives as they are intelligible in themselves.

They are indeed ushered in with a word of Induction, But I beseech you etc.
But the Connection making little or nothing to the clearing of any Difficulty in
them; I shall consider them absolutely without any coherence, but what they
have with themselves; and so make those Remarks upon them, whereon with Gods
help and your patience I shall ground this present discourse.

Yet I cannot but take notice of that mutual Aspect and Combination these
duties here recommended have among themselves. For by making a daily advance in
our Christian Progress, we shall arrive at such a serenity of mind, that we
shall be very fit to serve God and our Generation in that Employment and
Station, wherein his allwise Providence has placed us. Or, vice versa; By a
conscientious diligence in our own lawful Vocation, we may be confident of
attaining real Peace and making considerable progress in Grace and Christian
Virtues. Or thus; By studying and following the things that belong to Peace, we
shall be enabled to make a sufficient growth in Grace and advance in our own
both Temporal and Eternal concerns. So you see I can hardly mistake, wherever
I begin to make those Remarks, I just now mentioned. For at last it will all
amount to this, to make us Good, Christians, by increasing more and more: Good
Subjects by studying to be quiet: and Good Neighbors by doing our own business.

1. And in the first place we may hence inform our selves that our Holy
Religion is no idle, sluggish habit; but as our Great Chancellor in a Royal
Assembly fitly termed it, A Principle of life and Vigor within us. A
Principle, which though at first but as a Grain of Mustard seed, yet by
increasing more and more, it becomes a great Tree. For by Increasing more and
more, our Apostle here means nothing else, but what St. Peter presses so
vehemently in his 2 Epistle. c. 3.18. to wit, Growing in Grace, and in the
Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. We must be continually going forward and
growing upward from Grace to Grace, from Virtue to Virtue, till we be of full
growth in Christ Jesus. A Christian must neither be like Hezekiah's Sun, that
went backward; nor like Joshuah's Sun that stood still: but like David's Sun,
Psalm 19.5. Which is as a Bridegroom coming out of his Chamber, and rejoices as
a strong Man to run his Race. There is always in Christianity a (...),
something remaining. And though some of our Neighbors brag much of their State
of Perfection; of their Ne plus ultra in their spiritual Journey; of Immediate
Unions with the Divine Essence in the pure fund of the Spirit: Yet we poor
Protestants, God help us, must according to the command of our meek and humble
Jesus, when we have done all we can, look upon our selves but as unprofitable
Servants, and follow the example of our Blessed Apostle. Phil. 3.13. Not as
though I had already attained, or were already Perfect: but this one thing I
do, forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth to those
things which are before, I press toward the Mark for the Price of the high
calling of God in Christ Jesus.

2. The second Obligation here seriously recommended to our consideration and
practice is the study of Peace and Quietness. A most Important and Seasonable
Duty, and which cannot be too much pressed at this time. Now as Plato said of
Virtue, so I may say of Peace; Could she but assume a visible shape, we should
all presently become enamored of her. Wherefore I know no more effectual
Medium to urge the practice of the Duty in my Text, than by presenting to you
the Blessed fruits and effects which will undoubtedly accrue to us by it: I
mean by maintaining that Peace and Quiet we at present enjoy, and which nothing
but our own boisterous and unruly passions can rob us of. Let us then I say,
but take a full view of what the Apostle here so pathetically presses upon us,
and recommends as an object worthy of our utmost Care and Study. It is nothing
else, but what is our Happiness more than our Duty. Peace, that Soul of the
Universe, that Chain of the World and Cement of Nature, the Bond of
Governments, the Desire of Men, the Joy of Angels, the delight of God himself.
Peace, the design of Nature, the Perfection of Grace, and Consummation of
Glory. Peace, the Reconciliation of Sinners, the Consolation of the Saints, the
Crown of the Blessed. Peace, at which the Scriptures aim, which Faith intends,
Hope aspires to, Love mounts toward it, and it is complete Beatitude to attain
it. To procure this Peace, the Son of God came into the World, he toiled and
labored to treat about it; He died to confirm it, and arose again to proclaim
it, and sent his Holy Spirit to bestow it on us. His Labors acquired it, his
Blood bought it, his Death merited it, and his Love bequeathed it. At his Birth
the Angels chanted it forth, Glory be to God on High, and on Earth Peace. And
at his Resurrection He himself published it; Peace be with you. Thus was Peace
the Beginning of his carrieer, and the end of his Course. Peace was the design
of his Combat, and Peace was the Crown of his Victory.

Indeed if we look a little more particularly into the matter, we shall find
that this Quietness which we are here commanded to study, is the perfection
both of the Greater and of the Lesser World: I mean Man himself.

The greater World is composed of two parts, the Celestial and Elementary
World. To what tends that constant and regular motion of the Heavenly Bodies,
that most exact Dance of the Rouling Spheres, but to make up the Harmony of a
most ravishing Concord? And that mutual Marriage and Conjunction of the
Elements, what does it breathe forth but the sweets of a most Amiable Peace in
the Sublunary World? The motions of the Heavens being so different, and the
Qualities of the Elements so contrary, who would not presently conclude an
inevitable War must follow, both in the Heavens by their diverse Revolutions,
and in the Elements by their manifold Antipathies? And yet both the Heavens
compose their discord, and the Elements do, as I may say, lay aside their
Quarrel to produce and preserve that Peace which is the life of Nature and the
Conservation of the World. From whence proceeds the Beauty of the Universe, but
from Order? and what maintains this Order but that Peace which is amongst its
members? Every one keeps its Rank and Station without intrenching upon the
others Offices, and so they keep an inviolable Peace, which preserves their
Being, and buoyes up their Dignity. Whereas if Debate and Dissension should
once intrude among the parts of this great Body; immediately upon Debate would
follow Disorder, and upon Disorder a Dissolution of the whole Fabric: and that
which Quietness makes appear so Goodly and Beautiful, that it derives its very
names of (...) and Mundus from its comely features, would in a moment by
Discord be turned into a Chaos of Confusion.

Let us descend a little to Particulars and see how Peace is the Perfection of
the Parts as well as of the Whole.

All that is in this Great Family of the World may be distributed into two
Classes or Orders of things. Some whereof have nothing but a simple Being, as
Stones, Minerals and other inanimate Bodies. Others, besides a Being, have
Life, either Vegetative as Plants, or sensitive, as Animals. I speak not as yet
of Man, who, besides, his sensitive, has a Reasonable and Intellectual Life.

And First, as to Things that have nothing but Being; that very Being is their
Perfection. Now what is it that preserves the being of Stones and Minerals, but
the Peace and agreement of the four first Qualities (as they call them) Dry and
Moist, Cold and Hot: Their Being has no other foundation but the marriage and
Union of these contraries, that compose them. As soon as one Contrary begins to
get the upper hand over his Fellows, and the Peace is broken, presently a
dreadful Civil War commenceth: they mutually destroy one another, and this is
infallibly attended with the ruin of the whole Compositum. And hence it comes
to pass that all Bodies under Heaven, even the most solid Stones and Metals are
corruptible, because they are all composed of contrary Ingredients; and Peace
cannot be very permanent in the midst of so much contrariety. Thus Concord
preserves them and War ruins them. Quietness is their Perfection, and Debate
the Original of their Destruction.

The very same thing happens in Plants and Animals; and therefore from them I
proceed to Man himself, and shall endeavor to show, how this study of
Quietness is the Perfection of Man in what ever state we consider him: either
in the state of Nature as a Man; or in the state of Grace, as a Christian and
God's Friend; or in the state of Glory, as one of the Blessed Inhabitants of
the Jerusalem, that is above, the Mother of us all.

In the state of Nature the good and welfare of Man's Body depends upon the
Peace and Harmony of the forementioned Qualities; and his dissolution proceeds
from their Discord. The natural good of his Soul consists in an interior
Repose, Tranquillity and easiness of Spirit, which renders him serene, content
and satisfied, His Body is sustained by Peace as its Life, and his Soul breaths
after Peace as its utmost felicity. Irrequietum est Cor nostrum, Domine, donec
revertatur ad Te. Even all his outward Senses and inward faculties seek after
Quiet and repose as their ultimate End and Good. What do all the Senses aim at
in those several Objects they pursue with so much eagerness, but to repose in
them by delight? All the Senses are in perpetual motion, searching on all sides
for proper Objects and Diversions, and having met with them they embrace them,
and embracing them they unite themselves to them; and being united to them,
they delight in them; and being delighted, there they rest and are at quiet,
rejoicing in their Happiness; and thus in their Repose they meet with their
Perfection.

And as for his interior Powers, his sensitive Appetite, Imagination, Memory,
Understanding, Will, what do they quest after, what do all their bustlings,
stirs and motions tend to, but to find Repose, by uniting themselves to Objects
agreeable? In a word, All that is in man looks out after its proper Object, and
in its Object its delight, and in its delight its peace and quiet, and in its
quiet its End and Happiness. So that Peace is the Perfection of Man and of all
that is in Man. To what do all his desires and devices, his Designs, Labors
and Industry bend, but to settle himself in his ease, and in his ease to meet
with Content, and in Content to find Peace, and in Peace to enjoy Happiness?
Why do Men delight in Society? to what purpose were Empires, Commonwealths and
other Communities founded? to what end serves Order and the Dependence of
Inferiors and Superiors, of Commanding and Obeying; but to take away
Confusion, to establish Order, and with Order, Peace and Quietness among Men?
What is the meaning of Magistrates and Laws, Policy and Punishment, but to
uphold this Peace, by cutting off those Refractory Members, that would disturb
the Harmony of the Body Politic? Just as they turn a jarring Voice out of a
Quire of Musicians, and take a false string from a Musical Instrument.

And thus is Peace the Perfection of Man considered in his pure Naturals. Peace
is the scope of his Designs, the end of his Labors, the Center of his
Faculties, the Repose of his Motions, the Life of his Body, and the Happiness
of his Soul.

But to little purpose do we study to be quiet in this World. At least it is a
fond hope to meet with a perfect and accomplished Peace any where but in God.
Nature and the whole Economy of Nature cannot yield that Quiet and Repose that
Man is bound to seek after. And not only does Faith teach us, but Reason
demonstrates, and Experience convinces us that nothing here below can yield an
entire Peace to our hungry appetite, but that Divinity which gave it Being. And
therefore we must raise Man a degree higher than the order of Nature and
consider him in that of Grace: as a Christian endowed with Faith, Hope and Love
of God, whose fruition he expects in the state of Glory, and in the fruition of
God his complete Peace, his entire Quiet and absolute Perfection.

It is true, the works of God are all Perfect, and God created Man complete
both as to his Body and his Soul. His Body enjoyed perfect Quiet, by reason of
that Temperamentum ad pondus, that exact Temper and Harmony of the humors. A
Harmony that Death could not destroy, nor Maladies disturb: since he was
enobled by a supernatural Gift, which rendered his Body Impassible, Immortal and
Incorruptible. His Soul in like manner enjoyed most perfect Repose, not
experiencing the least contradiction in the inferior Part, and being at Peace
with God by an entire agreement of his Will with the Divine Will original
Righteousness maintained this harmony by calming his Passions, bridleing in his
Senses, taming his Flesh, and subjugating his Appetite to Reason, and his
Reason to God. From whence sprung so great an accord in the Soul of Man, that
even upon Earth he had a foretaste of the sweets of Heaven.

But Sin having caused Reason to rebel against God, made the Appetite to
rebel against Reason; and violating that agreement which was between God and
Man, did likewise disturb that quiet which Man had in himself, and sowed those
seeds of Dissension between the Flesh and the Spirit, Sense and Reason, the
Appetite and the Will. Nor did Sin only interrupt the inward Peace of his
Soul, but the outward Repose of his Body also, by taking from him that gift of
Grace, which made it Incorruptible. And then the materials and humors, whereof
he was composed, presently began to mutiny; and this spoiled the harmony by
sicknesses, and utterly destroyed it by Death. And hence arise all those
mischiefs, which at this day inviron the wretched Offspring of Adam both in
Body and Soul. Had Man maintained the Peace with God by a sweet Concord of his
Will with his Sovereign's, he had likewise retained most absolute Tranquillity
in himself. But as soon as he broke the League by his Rebellious will, all
things broke the Peace with him. His Body by the clashing together of the
humors; his Soul by those many contradictions he finds there. Then presently
War was proclaimed; the Angel took his Sword, and the Earth armed it self with
Thorns, the Heavens with Thunder, the Air with Contagion, and wild Beasts with
Fury. Beasts, Elements and Angels, the whole Creation rose in Arms against
their Makers Enemy. And whereas before, he had peace with all Things: with God
by Grace, with himself by the happy Concord between the Soul and Body, with all
other Creatures by that Obedience they paid him: Now he is attacqued on all
sides; God became his Enemy, his own flesh his Adversary, and all Creatures
rebelled: and so by woeful experience he found that to break Gods Peace is the
greatest mischief that can betide a Rational Creature.

But at last after innumerable Acts of Hostility past on both sides; on man's by
his multiplied Iniquities, and on Gods by his severe Chastisements; he whose
Property it is to have Mercy, and to forgive; though the first provoked and
assaulted, yet was graciously pleased to propose terms of Reconciliation; and
that not by an Angel or Servant, but by his own Son. God was in Christ
reconciling the World to himself: and he dismantled those strong Holds that Sin
had raised, and breaking down the wall of Partition made all Friends. And
therefore the Apostle expressly calls him Our Peace. He united the Humanity and
Divinity together in his own Person; by the Hypostatical Union he joined God's
and Man's Nature together, which were before at such vast distance: and by
Grace he re-unites the Will of God and the Wills of Men, which were so contrary.

And now you see what reason there is we should study to be Quiet: since Peace
and Quietness are the very end for which the Son of God came into the World,
did and suffered so much, and at his last Departure bequeathed it to his Church
for his richest Legacy. And therefore he that does not make this his study,
does as much as in him lies to frustrate the whole Course that God has taken
with us, and to render the Blood of the Son of God of no effect.

And yet for all this, wicked and Turbulent Men will not be quiet with any:
like Ishmael, their hand is against every man, and every man's hand against
them. They are at War with themselves by the disorder of their Passions; at War
with their Neighbor by quarrels and discord; at War with God by disobedience.
They are uneasy and unquiet on all hands. From God they are troubled with the
dreadful threats of his Justice; from Man they meet with a thousand
disturbances and contradictions, and from themselves with infinite disquietudes.

But good Men, Gods Children, are at perfect Peace with all; with themselves by
due curbing in their Passions; with their Neighbors by perfect Love and Amity;
and with God by an Universal Obedience to his Commandments.

They are at quiet with themselves by submitting the Flesh to the Spirit; Lust
to Reason; the Inferior part to the Superior. For as in a Consort of
Musicians, the Harmony proceeds from this, that every Voice keeps its own part:
so in Man, when the flesh is kept under and the Soul permitted to reign, from
this due Order and observance, as from a Consort of Voices, proceeds the sweet
harmony of interior Quietness. And as a Musick-Master is continually attentive
to keep every Voice in its due rank, to elevate those that are too low, and
depress those that are too shrill: thus Reason in Man must keep a strict eye
over the Body, and keep it from mounting too high and disturbing the Harmony.
And this was our Apostle's great secret, when he found the flesh rebel against
the Spirit: Castigo corpus meum, and in servitutem redigo. Thus by captivating
our flesh and subduing our Passions, Reason will command, the Soul will reign
and maintain the Microcosm in perfect Peace and Unity.

But man being in the Philosophers phrase (...), a Creature shaped out for
Converse and Society, he can no ways keep peace with himself, if he be not at
quiet with his Neighbor. As one member of the body, ruins its self, if it
attempt to loosen that which fastens it to the rest of the Members. And de
facto, there are no persons so uneasy and unquiet as envious Persons, Riotous,
Debauched, Seditious Men, who make it their study to sow Dissentions. It Is
true, they are a trouble and vexation to their Neighbor: but a far greater
torment to their own Souls; and while they scatter abroad the seeds of War and
Tumult; they reap the first fruits of it in themselves. And thus both Nature
and Reason teach us, that if we desire to be happy and enjoy Repose and
Tranquillity in our selves, we must study to be quiet with our Neighbor. But
especially we are obliged to this Duty, since the Son of God who so dearly
purchased this Peace for us, has so earnestly commended it to our practice by
his own Doctrine which breaths nothing but Peace; and by his own example, who
truly acted as the Prince of Peace; and in his commands by the mouth of his
Apostle, that we should keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace; and
from the Nature of the Church it self, which is but one Body, whereof the Holy
Ghost is the Soul and Jesus Christ the Head, and the faithful are the Members.
Love is the life of this Body, and Peace and Quietness that band that ties one
Member to another, and all to the Head.

Who ever yet saw in one and the same Body one Member war against another? And
yet both in the mystical Body of the Church and the Political Body of the
State, what more ordinary than for Christians, who are all Members of this
Body, to bite and devour one another? It belongs to none but Madmen and
Desperadoes to tear their own flesh and rend out their own Bowels. And yet
every day presents us with Christians snarling at each other: nay man becomes a
Wolf to his Neighbor, one member devours another: and what would be accounted
a prodigy in Nature is become a familiar spectacle in Religion. But let such
Persons flatter themselves with what specious pretenses they please, we are
assured they cannot be Members of Jesus Christ the Prince of Peace; but limbs
of Satan the Father of Dissension: no Children of God, whom they hypocritically
profess, but of the Devil, whom they so exactly imitate. They belong not to the
Heavenly Jerusalem, the Temple of Peace; but to Hell, the Mansion of Tumult and
Theater of Confusion.

God in the old Law commanded us to love our Neighbor as our selves: and Jesus
Christ renewed it in the Gospel: A new Commandment I give unto you, that you
Love one another. And he has extended this Love even to our Enemies
themselves: But I say unto you, love your Enemies: Desiring to establish a firm
Peace among Men, as he had done between God and Man.

But alas! May we not complain with Linacer? Aut hoc non est Evangelium, aut
nos non sumus Christiani: Either this is not Gospel, or we are not Christians.
We are at this time so far from studying to be Quiet, from minding the Things
that belong to Peace, that we seem to want that Love that is between Beast and
Beast. If one Sheep faint, the rest will stand betwixt it and the Sun to
shelter it. If a Swine be injured, the whole Herd will muster together to
revenge the Jujury. Natural Historians are full of examples of grateful Lions,
kind Eagles and trusty Dogs, ready to die both for and with their Masters. In
holy Writ we read of Elijah fed by Ravens, and of Daniel not hurt among Lions.
Sed O detestandam Humanae Malitiae Crudelitatem? Aves pascunt, ferae parcunt,
Homines saeviunt: as the blessed Martyr St. Cyprian complained in his time. Or
as holy David in his; Ill minded Men, imagining mischief in their heart, and
stirring up strife all the day long. Their throat is an open Sepulcher, the
poison of Asps is under their Lips. Their mouth is full of Cursing and
bitterness, etc. their teeth are Spears and Arrows, and their tongue a sharp
Sword, Psalm 20. More sharp, says S. Bernard de Tripl. Custod. than the Spear
which pierced our Savior's side: for it does not only wound Christ's mystical
Body, but even rent it in pieces; making as Many factions in the Kingdom as
there are Offices; and in the Church as many Creeds as Heads. Destruction and
Unhappiness is in all their ways, and the way of Peace they have not known; In
their bed, appointed for rest, they study how to be Turbulent, and travel with
mischief and bring forth Ungodliness. These, these are the Troublers of our
Israel, the Thorns in our Eyes, and the Goads in our sides, the very Firebrands
and Bellows of Sedition. But we hope better things of You, and things that
accompany Salvation, though we thus speak. And though for the Divisions of
Reuben there are great thoughts of heart; Yet we will leave this Point and
these wicked Men, who are like the troubled Sea when it cannot rest, whose
waters cast up Mire and Dirt: and proceed to something that may prove an
expedient to these growing mischiefs; and that shall make up the last part of
this Discourse; and it is this; The best way to maintain Quiet between God and
Man, between Man and Man, and in a Man's own Breast, is to put in execution the
Apostles advice here, that we every one do our own Business.

Wherein the Apostle recommends to us Diligence in our Calling: thereby
excluding Idleness and that (...), or intermedling with other Men's Affairs. We
must be busy, but in our own Concerns. And then withal, by the near Connection
of this with what went before (Studying to be quiet) is intimated, that the
more busy we are at home, the more quiet we are like to be abroad.

Man, says the Scripture, is born to Labor as the sparks fly upward. And
though every good and perfect gift be from above, yet we must not neglect
Industry in our Station and Calling The Husbandman must rise up early and sit
up late, and eat the bread of carefulness, and then he may prudently expect
that his Gainers may be filled with all manner of store; that his Sheep may
bring forth thousands and ten thousands in his Fields; that his Oxen may be
strong to labor, and that there may be no decay in his Cattle. Every man must
attend his Office; the Seaman must look to his Ship and the Tradesman to his
Shop, that so he may eat the Labors of his hands. The Glorious Angels
themselves though Spirits, yet are Ministering Spirits, ordained for the Praise
of God and the Service of his Church. Even in the state of Innocence Man was
placed in the Garden of Eden to dress it as well as to keep and enjoy it. And
this Diligence is to be used, says Solomon, Prove. 6.11. Lest Poverty come on
thee, as one that travelleth; and necessity like an armed Man. That is to say,
If thou mind not thy business, Beggary will assault thee so suddenly, so
violently, that thou can not resist it. All that belong to Gods Vineyard must
be Laborers; All are Stewards in his Family. And as for the Magistrate in
particular, his business is so great that it made St. Chrysostom exclaim, Miror
si quis Rectorum salvari possit. Nay, it is Observable that Gods way of
proceeding with his own People the Israelites, puts every man in mind of his
doing his business. For though he could very easily have rained down on them
loaves ready baked and fit to eat; yet he rained down Manna, which being
scattered about the fields, was with no small labor to be gathered together,
to be bruised in a Mortar, or some other way and so formed into Loaves and
baked: that so at the same time he might supply their wants and teach them
Diligence.

But if to the Temporal Concerns of a Man, you adjoyn the spiritual necessities
and Eternal Interests of a Christian, you will, ex abundanti, as we say, be
convinced of the great Reason St. Paul had to press this Duty of looking to our
Business. I will instance but in that one business of Repentance, wherein a Man
must unravel his whole Life: it is the leading a new Life, a putting off the
old Man, and putting on the New; an utter extirpation of all superfluity of
Naughtyness; and an Address to and a final passage through all the Passages of
Holy Living. We have all our accounts to make even between God and our own
Souls. The Duty of Repentance. (without which we shall All perish) consists of
many Parts and so much employment, that it requires much Time, and leaves a Man
in the same degree of hope of Pardon, as is his Restitution to the state of
Righteousness and holy Living. And who ever has made the experiment will find
that it is not so easy a business to root out the habits. of many inveterate
Sins, which a Man has contracted through the whole Course of his Life. We find
it work enough to mortify one beloved Lust, in our very best advantages of
strength and Time. In so much that we read in the lives of the Ancient Hermits
of a famous Ascetick, who having spent many years in that one Verse of the
Psalmist, I said I will look to my ways, that I offend not with my Tongue; yet
acknowledged he was far from having attained that very Lesson. And yet a defect
in that very business is able to evaporate all our Religion: for he that
bridles not his Tongue, that Man's Religion is in Vain. To which we may annex
the Command of the Apostle, that we use all Diligence to add to our Faith
Virtue, and to our Virtue Knowledge, and to Knowledge Temperance, and to
Temperance Patience, and to Patience Godliness, and to Godliness Brotherly
Kindness, and to Brotherly Kindness Charity. Now certainly, Sirs, who ever
seriously weighs these things, will presently cry out, who is sufficient for
these things? Life is short, Art is Long: the mystery of Godliness is no such
easy Trade as many dream of. And therefore the Apostles Counsel is most
reasonable here, To study to do our own Business, and only our own Business;
for I think we have enough to do.

However one Caution must necessarily be here interposed, and it is not mine,
but that of a late Excellent Prelate of the Church of England: It may be a
fault, and a great one too, so to do our own Business, as not to regard what
becomes of others. So our own turn be served and we get by it, no matter who
loses. This is deservedly prohibited by our Apostle himself, Philip. 2.4. Look
not every man on his own things, but every man also on the things of others;
and v. 24. he, complains that All seek their own, and not the things that are
Jesus Christ's. And therefore our own here and our own there are two different
Things. That which he blames there, is our Own of Interest: there may be too
much of our own in that. But what he commands here, is our Own of Duty, and
Office. In this we must do so much our Own, that we must not meddle with
another.

Now how well this is observed, especially at this time, we need but appeal to
our own eyes and Ears. I have not time to Anatomize these (...), as the Apostle
fitly styles them, those Intermedlers with others Affairs, those Peepers and
Pryers into other Men's houses. I will only deliver my sentiments in a very few
Words concerning those Political Pragmatico's, who with their unwasht hands, so
slovenly (to speak no worse) intrude into the Arcana of the Government both of
Church and State: Those State-Eavedroppers that with the Athenians are
constantly hearkening after News; and with S. Peter never thinking of
themselves, are still demanding, And what shall this Man do? And I wish it
rested there! No, to hear and see will not serve the Turn; unless they have an
Oar likewise in the Public Vessel. Which if by their Merit they cannot
procure, they presently fall to Despising of Dominions, and speaking evil of
Dignities. Nay as the same Apostle complains, they must needs speak evil of
those things which they know not. Certainly there can be no greater
Demonstration of the Malignant Spirit reigning and rageing in Men, than thus to
Blaspheme the Gods upon Earth. To the serious thoughts of these Puny Politicos,
these Demicaster Statists, I desire to recommend that notable Passage, 2. Pet.
2.10, 11. Where the Apostle describes their Forefathers thus: They despise
Government; Presumptuous are they, self-willed: they are not afraid to speak
evil of Dignities. Whereas Angels, which are greater in power and might, bring
not railing Accusations against them before the Lord.

The sum of which Discourse tends to this: that the Angels, though by their
Office they make report of the Miscarriages of Princes, yet their accusation is
without railing, out of a Reverence to their High function and Gods Immediate
Image in them. And S. Jude v. 9. does marvellously amplify this Observation,
assuring us that S. Michael, who is the Prince in the Celestial Hierarchy of
Angels, when he contended with the Devil the Captain of all the Bands of
Infernal Spirits, durst not bring against him a Railing Accusation. Because
though the Devil be despoiled of all Grace, yet he remains in the Principality
of his Naturals; and in respect to the Eminency of those, the Angels forbear to
reproach him. Durst not the Highest Angel in Heaven revile the most wicked
fiend in Hell, and shall impudent Men venture to calumniate and defame the
Earthly Gods themselves, God Almighties immediate Vicegerents, I mean the
Magistrates both Ecclesiastical and Civil? How far these Boutefeus by their
Tongue Squibs and Pamphlet Crackers have contributed to those feuds we are now
embroiled in, I will not take upon me to determine. But of this I am sure that
Political Writers have made it an Observation that it is a dangerous forerunner
of subversion sinisterly and irreverently to Apprehend and Interpret the
actions of their Governors: and that there seldom or never come any more
Pleasing, than those they so despise, God Almighty punishing upon them the
affronts offered to his Viceroy's and Substitutes. Remember that Vzzah for but
putting forth his hand, though to save a Tottering Ark (which was as it were
the Palladium of the Jewish Nation) yet it cost him no less than his life by an
immediate stroke from Gods own hand. And if we will not be content to have the
Olive, or the Figg or the Vine to reign; a Bramble may come and devour the
Cedars of Libanus.

I conclude this, I hope not unjust, Invective against State Busy bodies, with
the Excellent remarks of the Son of Syrach, Ecclus. 21.22. etc. A foolish Man's
foot is soon in his Neighbors house; but a Man of Experience is ashamed of
him. A Fool will peep into the house; but he that is well nurtured will stand
without. It is the rudeness of a Man to hearken at the door; but a wise Man
will be grieved at the disgrace. The lips of Talkers will be telling such
things as pertain not to them; but the words of such as have understanding are
weighed in the Balance.

And now to you, My Lords, in a Word, and but in a Word, I shall humbly address
what remains: And to do your Own Business. Your Business is of so Vast an
extent, that I dare not venture upon so Comprehensive an Argument. Nor indeed
had I time at my own choice, should I be guilty of so much Indiscretion, as
before so many Sages and Oracles of the Law to discourse at large of the Office
of a Judge. This would be to act before Roscius, and to read a Lecture of
Military Discipline before Hannibal. You are in those high Offices, which
render you like the Heavenly Bodies, (it is the observation of the Noble and
Learned Verulam) You have much Veneration but little Rest. I shall not
therefore contribute any thing to your Trouble, but only leave this single Item
with you, and you to Gods Blessing. I dare not call it an Instruction, but
rather with the Apostle, A stirring you up by way of Remembrance. It is your
Business to look that others live quietly and do their own Business, and none
but their Own. To this purpose you are entrusted with the Fasces; the rods for
smaller Offenses, and the Axe for Capital Crimes. Let the rod like Jonathans be
dipped in Honey; and the Ax brightened with the oil of Mercy.

Now to the King Immortal, the only wise God, who as he has been our Savior,
so will one day come to be our Judge; together with the Father and the Holy
Ghost, be all Honor, Glory and Obedience, now and ever. Amen.

A Short and Modest APOLOGY FOR THE AUTHOR AND BOOK OF THE Several Weighty
Considerations, Humbly recommended to the Serious Perusal of All, but more
especially to the Roman Catholics of England.

2 Cor. 6.8. By Honor and Dishonor, by Evil Report and Good Report: as
Deceivers and yet True.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1682.

HAving given the World a full and succinct account of my self in an Epistle to
the Right Reverend and Learned Dean of S. Paul's, Dr. Edward Stillingfleet, by
way of Preface to the Several weighty Considerations, etc. I judge it wholly
superfluous to repeat any thing of that Nature; and therefore referr the Reader
to that Preface and the Book it self.

1. My present Task is only to wipe off that Dirt, which very unworthily and
undeservedly has been cast upon Me and my Book by such, whose malice and envy
leaves no stone unmoved to render their Neighbors as Odious, as by the
Villainous Pranks of many of their Party, they have now made themselves.

And if some passages be brought on the stage, which may any ways prejudice
particular Persons, and which otherwise might have lain for ever dormant; They
may thank themselves in rouzing up one, who desired to bury himself in
Obscurity -- Oblitusque suorum, Obliviscendus and illis -- and to have shakd
hands as a fair Enemy, since he could not close with them as a bosom Friend.
Nay even now I am forced forth, I shall make it appear I do all (cum moderamine
inculpatae Tutelae) rather to Ward my self, than to Wound my Antaganist.

There are but two Objections that have any thing of Color, and therefore to
those I shall make a more punctual Reply. The other exceptions are so
frivolous, that when I have named them, I have blown them away.

The first has been mischievously framed by Papists; and the other unwarily
taken up upon a mistake by some Protestants.

Some Papists with unparalleld Impudence and falsehood have spread a Report
since my withdrawing from their Communion, that it was high time for me to act
as I did, for my then Superiors had designed to have confined me to a Cloister
beyond Sea, for my scandalous Life herein England.

The first Forger of this Diabolical lie was a Derbyshire Gentleman (whose name
out of respect to some of his Relations, and for the sake of his Children, I
purposely conceal: and shall do so, till by further Provocations compelled to
disclose it, and paint him out in his Colors, and acquaint the World with some
of his good qualities) Infamous for having drawn his sword to have killed his
own Father, for abusing his Mother, a zealous Protestant, and telling her she
deserved to be burnt alive for her Obstinacy; and for his boasting that he
accounted it no more to stabb an Heretic, than to kill a two-penny Chicken.
This Account of him I had from one of his nearest Relations.

There are some others that have very industriously contributed to the
scattering abroad this calumny in all Companies they light upon. If they still
persevere, I may, all in good time, give them their just Character in requital.
In the interim I had rather the Whiteness of my Innocence (which I shall
perfectly demonstrate as to this matter) should by an Antiperistasis produce
their blush, than the laying open their real Crimes, cause their Confusion.

So far were the Superiors of that Order, wherein I was engaged, from sending
me beyond Sea, as is maliciously suggested, that no longer than two Months
before my deserting them, I was confirmed a Superior and Prelate among them (
viz. in October 1678, at which time they held their Intermediate Chapter)
having had that Dignity conferred upon me the year before, in their solemn
Provincial Chapter, May 6. 1677. So that I was an Actual Superior among them,
when I forsook them: and but just before, my Patent was ratified to have
continued so, well nigh two years longer.

To make this good beyond all dispute, I shall here present the Judicious and
Impartial Reader, with the Commission or Patent it self, word for word as it
was communicated to me by that Learned and Famous Father, Father William
Herinx, then Commissary General, soon after promoted by the King of Spain, to
the Bishopric of Ipres in Flanders, and since, as I am informed, Deceased.

The Original has been perused by diverse Eminent Persons in the Nation, and I
have it by me still to produce, if any of my Adversaries shall have the
Confidence to question or deny the reality of it. Take it as follows:

FRater Gulielmus Herinx Ordinis fratrum Minorum S.P.N. Francisci S.Theologiae
Lector Jubilatus, Ex-Definitor Generalis, ac super Provincias Germaniae
Superioris, Belgii, Angliae, Hiberniae, Scotiae, Daciae, etc. cum Plenitudine
Potestatis in utroque Foro Commissarius Generalis.

Dilecto Nobis in Christo, Venerando admodum Patri Fr. Thom. Sheppey, Ejusdem
Ordinis, Provinciae vero nostrae Angliae fratrum Minorum Recollectorum
Sacerdoti, Praedicatori and Confessario, Salutem and Pacem in Domino
sempiternam.

Cum secundum Definitionem Capituli Provinctalis Almae nostrae Provinciae
Angliae Fratrum Minorum Recollectorum, hoc Anno 1677. die 6. Mensis Ma^^ in
Coventu Regali Sommersetano Londini celebrati, institutus sis Guardianus
Districtus Nordovicensis: ^^circo ham tuam Institutionem confirmantes, Tibi (de
cujus Idoneitate, Religionis Zelo ac sufficientia multiplici in Domino
confidimus) virtute Praesentium Mandamus, and in meritum Obedientiae Salutaris
injungimus, quatenus post harum Receptionem statim Te ad dictum Locum
transferas, injunctum Guardiani Munus secundum Gratiam Tibi a Domino datam and
donandam, vigilanter executurus: In Virtute Spiritus sancti per sanctam
Obedientiam, praecipientes Omnibus praefati Districtus Patribus, ut Te tanquam
suum legitimum and indubitatum Superiorem ac Praelatum recipiant, Tibique in
Omnibus, quae hoc Munus Guardiani concernunt, pareant cum effectu. Quos Tibi,
Teque Illis quam possumus charius in Domino commendamus. Vale in Christo Jesu,
ipsum pro Nobis Oraturus. Datum Loco and Tempore Epeditionis nostrae
Capitularis, quibus supra sub Nostro Chirographo Officiique Sigillo Majori.

Fr. Gulielmus Herinx Commissarius Generalis.

Locus Sigilli.
I forbear the Translation of this Paper, partly that I may not seem my own
Encomiast, and partly that I may not swell this Apology beyond its intended
Dimensions. But this I presume will be abundantly sufficient to satisfy all
unbiased Persons, that I was not so contemptible then, as now they would make
the World believe. Nay I appeal to the Consciences of Those of three Counties
in this Nation, where my Concerns chiefly lay, whether even to the last moment
of my Abode, till I declared my Resolutions of Uniting my self to the Church of
England, I was not in that Love, Esteem and Authority with them, that nothing
was accounted too good or dear for me. Many Protestant Gentlemen with whom I
was then acquainted can testify this, and how plentifully I lived, while of
their Communion. And this I both do and will ever thankfully acknowledge. But
the short of the business is this, My Unpardonable Crime was my preferring my
God and my King before the Pope.

The other Objection, which has done me much and manifold prejudice (though I
charitably hope without any malicious Design in the first Author) is a
groundless surmise that I was engaged in the Popish Plot. Mr. Stephen Dugdale
was the Person who first gave Occasion to this suspicion by inserting my name
into his Printed Narrative. But he has since been so ingenuous as to
acknowledge his mistake, and that publicly in these words.

WHereas in a late Book of mine there is mention made of one Mr. Sheppey
formerly a Priest of the Roman Church: These are to give Notice that I never
knew the Person, nor mentioned him upon any other Account, but that Dr. Needham
of Derbyshire had said in his Evidence, that he with others fled upon the news
of the Plott: which, I am satisfied since, was upon account of coming up to
London to declare himself a Protestant, and publish his Reasons for so doing:
which I am satisfied he has done with great Approbation. And I am sorry upon
mistake I should give any ground of suspicion against so worthy a Person.

Given under my Hand this 5th day of January 1680/1. Stephen Dugdale.


Now the mistake both of Mr. Dugdale and Dr. Needham of Derbyshire lay here, in
affirming that I fled upon news of the discovery or the Plot. For all the
Country where I then sojournd, know that when others fled, I remaind and
appeared publicly diverse Months after: that I went and surrendered my self to a
Justice of Peace and Deputy Lieutenant of the County, on purpose to answer any
thing that might be alleged against me; and he assured me he heard of nothing
I was charged withal: that I never was so much as a Convicted, no not a
Presented Recusant: and that afterward being fully satisfied as to the
Traitorous Principles and Practices of the Church of Rome, I immediately (but
not without License first obtained from the Lords of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council) came up to London, and reunited my self to the
Church of England, from which I had been unwarily seduced; and there, to give a
general satisfaction, I published the Book of the Several weighty
Considerations, etc.

Having thus dispatched the two main Exceptions that have been made against me;
I shall make quick work with the other trifling cavills that have been proposed
to blast my Reputation.

That the Dean of St. Paul's composed the Weighty Considerations for me; as it
is very silly and senseless in the Objectors, so it is but too great an Honor
for my self. But those who have any brains, are better acquainted with the
genius and unimitable Style of that Great Man's Writings, than to think that he
could stoop to so mean a Production.

That, if I please, I can answer the Book my self, is a complement I thank them
for. But I desire them to ease me of the trouble, for I profess in good earnest
it is past my skill. And for their Encouragement, I do here solemnly declare,
That if they can convict me of one Single falsehood wittingly asserted, or one
Authority forged: Nay, if they will but satisfy me in this One Point, that
Sedition and Treason, I mean the Deposing of Princes and Absolving Subjects
from their Allegiance, is not the Doctrine of their Church, as well as of
Particular Doctors and Societies; and has not been their Constant Practice,
when ever it lay in their Power; I will (as my Lord Bishop of Lincoln speaks in
his late Book) renounce all that I have written, and become one of the worst
sort of Chistians, a Roman Catholic. Or if this will not content them, I will
burn my own Book: and I question not, but they will have the same Charity for
me, as they have for all others they are pleased to call Heretics (had they
but the opportunity of Queen Mary's Days) to throw me into the fire after it.

That I had a Benefice of 200! a year conferred upon me, and that upon my
forsaking them, I immediately married; are such notorious untruths, that all
who know me, know those Rumors to be false.

As to the former, I wish they could make their Objection good. But I bless
Good, I remain as contented with those mean Circumstances, I have lain under,
since I departed from them, as they at present seem to be transported with the
flattering Prospect of a Golden Age to succeed as to their Interests. For I am
sure many of them talk as bigg, as if they intended to carry all before them.
But I hope the never Slumbring Keeper of our Israel, and the watchful eye of
our Magistrates will procure, that, as of late they counted their Chickens
before they were hatchd; so, now they may reckon without their Host.

A Person of Honor of the Romish persuasion was pleased to intimate to an
Honored Friend of mine, that I had wronged the R. F. Francis a S. Clara by
asserting his Vindication of the equivocating Jesuit, who was taken not far
off my habitation about 6 years since. (Of which Passage I give an account in
my Preface to the formentiond Book.) My obligations to that Reverend Father,
now, as I hear, deceased, are of such a Nature, that I would sooner cut off my
own right hand, than falsely asperse his Memory. But though Socrates and Plato
are both my friends, yet there is one much dearer to me than my self, and that
is Truth. And therefore for clearing my innocence as to that Point, I shall
only refer the Reader to the matter of fact, set down in the abovesaid Preface
(and which is known to be true by a Great Many in that Town, and County where
it happend) subjoyning that Reverend Fathers Letter to me upon that occasion (I
have the Letter still by me, and it has been shown to diverse Persons of
Quality) and so leave it to the Reader to give up his Verdict to bring me in
Guilty or not Guilty of Injuring my Friend. Father S. Clare usually went by the
Name of Mr. Hunt, as all know, that knew him. And this I mention to prevent any
mistake that might happen by change of Name.

The Letter.
Good Mr. Sheppey.
I Received yours touching your Neighbors forswearing himself. I have been
very ill, and it is frequent, which may excuse my not writing, which indeed I do
very seldom. I informed my self of the whole Passage from my Neighbors (i.e.
the Provincial and others of the Jesuits, who would be sure to make the best of
so foul an action of one of their own Members) who had express Letters of the
Truth. He was before the Mayor and Sheriff: being asked if he were Married? he
answered Yes, and this was taken for Answer: Only he promised to come,
whenever they demanded it. The Sheriff since wrote to him, not to appear,
though called. This is the substance; wherein he is Nothing reprehensible, and
he now follows his Course as before, except that only Town. Excuse me for not
being more large, my head is not good. Pray for

your old Servant, Fr. Hunt.
Jan. 16. 1675.

But there is a Letter of mine own written to a Gentlewoman, soon after I had
published my Several weighty Considerations; with which my Enemies make a great
noise, as if while I renounced the Romish Religion my self, I persuaded others
to continue in it. I am sorry I did not keep a Copy of that Letter by me, and I
wish with all my heart they would produce the Letter it self, that it might
appear to the world with how great Disingenuity they have treated me upon that
Occasion. The business was only this: having for some years been more than
ordinarily concerned in the spiritual affairs of an Ancient infirm Gentlewoman,
of whose death I expected to hear every moment; and knowing withal how much she
relied upon my directions, and that she would be reduced to great perplexity
upon the report of my proceedings: I thought it my Duty, both in respect of my
former obligations to her, and the care I had particularly taken of her, not to
let her be wholly neglected at that Conjuncture. Whereupon I wrote to her to
acquaint her with what I had done, and that, being designed for a place not far
from her, I intended, upon my coming down into the Country, to wait upon her
and give her those directions, I judged most proper and suitable to one in her
Condition. Advising her in the mean while not to trouble her self with scruples
and Controversies, but bona fide to follow such Instructions as I had formerly
left with her, till I might be so happy as personally to wait on her and
discourse her both about what I had done my self, and what course I would wish
her to take. And to yield her some satisfactory Consolation in the Interim, I
told her (out of an excess of my Charity to that Party) that if it should
please God to take her away before I could confer with her; yet I was so well
acquainted with her Virtuous Life and Conversation, and her sincere pious
Intention of serving God to the best of her knowledge and Ability, that I
doubted not she might dye in a safe condition: as well knowing that God of his
infinite mercy might deal favorably with one in her circumstances and not let
her be prejudiced in her Eternal Concerns, for some Notional Errors, deeply
radicated by a long uninterrupted habit of many years.

If this were a mistake in me, it was merely a Transport of that Charity I have
for all that profess Christianity. But because I was soon informed how basely
and unworthily this Letter was divulged and wrested to a wrong Sense, by some
at whose hands I have deserved better and civiller dealings; I never made her
any Visit; nor ever had I, nor will I entertain the least Correspondence with
any of that Faction, otherwise than in a common Civility: which also for the
future I shall avoid so far forth as good Manners and Necessity will permit.
And I take God to witness, I was so far from persuading that Person to remain
in Popery, strictly so called, that it was my design, had I seen her, truly and
fully to have represented to her several of the gross abuses of that Church,
and so by degrees have reduced her from what I conceived most dangerous in the
Popish Communion.

And had my Adversaries dealt heartily, they would rather have taken notice of
those many Pathetical Disswasives I sent to diverse of them against Popery, than
to lay such a stress upon a Charitable Expression. That I hoped well of a
Virtuous Gentlewoman, who might chance to die in the Communion of that Church.
But there can be no surer evidence of a baffled sinking cause, than thus to
catch hold of every Straw that comes in their way.

Either the Papists believe me still to be a Papist; or they do not. If they
do, certainly it is very ungraciously done of them, to vilify and calumniate
one, whom they still believe to be their trusty confident Friend, and to
endeavor the ruin of his good name, whom they would impose upon the World,
either as already being, or willing to become a Member of their Church: If they
do not believe it themselves, the more shame for them subtly and malicioussly
to insinuate to others, what they themselves give no credit to: I assure you
gentlemen, this is neither a holy Cheat nor a pious Fraud.

Were a disowning the Orders derived from the Church of Rome either necessary
or convenient, I should not be wanting to give that last proof of the sincerity
of my Conversion: But finding no solid ground or precedent for such a novelty,
neither in Dr. M. Luther, Archbishop Cranmer, no nor Mr. Calvin himself (who
never renewed their Orders, but only relinquished the Errors and Superstitions
of Rome) I shall acquiesce (and I think I have most, if not all, Protestant
Divines on my side) in that known Maxim, Quod sieri non debuit, factum valet.

And now to put a period to this Apology, I know not how more fitly to conclude
it, than by making this solemn protestation before God, Angels and Men, That
notwithstanding all that evil minded men have suggested to the contrary, I am
as real and loyal a Protestant, as the Objecters themselves are inveterate
Papists; and I look upon that term of indignation, wherewith they continually
mention me, of a fallen Priest, to be less infamous by far than what suits with
many of themselves, whom I know to be Renegado Protestants. In a word, as I was
sincere in my reunion, so am I daily more and more confirmed in my adhesion to
that Church wherein I was made a Christian, and which upon an impartial Survey,
I judge to be the best copy of the true Apostolical Primitive Church in the
World: I mean the Church of England as by Law now established; and therein I
finally purpose by Gods grace to live and dye; and if the All-wise Providence
should think it fit to reduce me even to the last exigencies of begging my
Bread, yet neither the solicitations of one, nor the unkiudness of the other,
shall ever prevail with me to alter this resolution. And I humbly request the
Prayers of all good Protestants, That God would enable me to reform the errors
of my practice, as I have done those of my Opinion; and that I may never more
scandalize that holy profession I here make.

And thus having publicly vindicated both my Innocence and sincerity, against
the usual cavils that are made against both, I think it high time to ease both
my Reader and my self.

THOMAS SHEPPEY.

FINIS.
A CATALOGUE of some BOOKS Printed for Henry Mortlock at the Phoenix in St
Paul's Churchyard.
THE Antiquities of Nottinghamshire, extracted out of Records, Original
Evidences, Lieger Books, other Manuscripts, and Authentic Authorities,
Beautified with Maps, Prospects, and Portraictures, By Robert Thoroton Doctor
of Physic. Folio. A Rational Account of the grounds of Protestant Religion:
being a Vindication of the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury's Relation of a
Conference, etc. from the pretended Answer of T. C. Wherein the true Grounds of
Faith are cleared, and the false discovered, the Church of England justified
from the imputation of Schism, and the most important particular controversies
between us and those of the Church of Rome thoroughly examined. The second
Edition corrected. By Edward Stillingfleet D. D. Dean of St. Paul's. Folio. A
Discourse concerning the Idolatry practiced in the Church of Rome, and the
hazard of Salvation in the Communion of it: in answer to some papers of a
revolted Protestant; with a particular account of the Fanaticism and Divisions
of that Church. Octavo. An Answer to several late Treatises occasioned by a
Book entitled, A Discourse concerning the Idolatry practiced in the Church of
Rome; and the hazard of Salvation in the Communion of it: The first Part.
Octavo. A second Discourse in vindication of the Protestant grounds of Faith,
against the pretense of infallibility in the Roman Church, in Answer to the
Guide in Controversies, by R. H. Protestancy without Principles, and Reason and
Religion, or the certain Rule of Faith, by E. W. with a particular enquiry into
the Miracles of the Roman Church. Octavo. An Answer to Mr. Cressy's Epistle
Apologetical to a person of Honor touching his Vindication of Dr.
Stillingfleet. Octavo. A Defense of the Discourse concerning the Idolatry
practiced in the Church of Rome: in Answer to a Book entitled, Catholics no
Idolaters. Octavo. Several Conferences between a Romish Priest, a Fanatic
Chaplain, and a Divine of the Church of England: being a full Answer to the
late Dialogue of T.G. Octavo. Of the nature of Superstition: A Sermon Preached
at St. Dunstans West, March 31. 1682.
All written by Edward Stillingfleet D. D. Dean of St. Paul's, and Chaplain in
ordinary to his Majesty.


