A DISCOURSE OF THE RISE and POWER OF Parliaments, OF Law's, of Courts of
Judicature, of Liberty, Property, and Religion, of the Interest of England in
reference to the Desines of France; of Taxes and of Trade.

In a Letter from a Gentleman in the Country to a Member ^n Parliament.

Salus Populi Suprema lex esto.

Printed in the Year 1677.

The following PREFACE newly writ by the Book-seller's Friend.
WHoever buys this Tract, will do a small Kindness to the Bookseller; but he
that reads it, will do a greater to himself. The Title alone is a temptation to
invite one to look into it, in this time of Disorder; But, if Wit and Learning,
Reason and Piety, the knowledge of Men and deep consideration of Government
signify any thing, the Discourse is a perfect snare to captivate the Reader.
And it has one advantage peculiar to it self to detain him, That he will meet
with many things there, which no man ever writ or perhaps thought on before.

The Novelty alone will gratify the men of Pleasure and Curiosity; And as for
the Grave and the Wise, that Chain of Reason, and good Nature which runs
through it, will make them scratch and think twice, before they condemn it.

It was written to a Member of the last Parliament about Christmas last was
Twelvemonth, and since that time has crept abroad into the World, and is now
made more Public, as well for the General, as the Book-seller's particular
good. But a great Chang of Affairs happning in this Interval, it is fit to
acquaint you, That the Author never dreamed of the Horrid Plot, which has bin
lately discovered, when he pleaded for Toleration to honest and peaceable
Dissenters. He measured other persons by his own Candid Temper, and did not
think there could be found a Sect of men, who would endevor the advancement of
their Religion by shedding the Blood of their Prince, in an Age, when
Rebellious Principles and their Abettors, have received such Confutations, as
they have in this, both by God and Man.

But Truth does not vary with Time, how much soever some persons may abuse it.
I cannot persuade my self, but that Liberty of Conscience is a Natural Right,
which all men bring with them into the World; For we must all give an account
of our selves to God, and stand or fall by our own Faith and Practice, and not
by the Religion of the State or Country where we happen to be dropped.

It Is impossible for men to believe what they list, or what others would have
them, tho it should be beaten into their heads with Beetles. Persecution makes
some men obstinate, and some men Hypocrites; but Evidence only governs our
Under standings, and that has the prerogative to govern our Actions.

The design of Christianity is to make men happy in the other World; and in
order thereunto, it teaches them to regulate their Passions, and behave
themselves with all sobriety, righteousness and piety in this. The Doctrines
whereby this is enforced, are so few and so plainly delivered, that they are at
this day acknowledged by all the several sorts of Christians that make a
number, or are fit to be considered under a name in the World. For how many are
there, who do not profess the Apostles Creed? which was the Old Rule and
Measure of Christian Faith, unalterable, unreformable, from which nothing ought
to be taken, to which nothing need to be added; as Irenoeus and Tertullian
declare. And if men would be persuaded to preserve these Ancient Boundaries of
Christianity inviolate, and suffer the Primitive Simplicity to be restored; the
great occasion of Squabble and Contention would be cut off; and they would not
dispute for ever, about a lock of wool, or the knots of a bulrush; but instead
of being extremely learned in trisles, and extremely zealous for Moonshine,
they would grow kind and charitable and lay aside their unreasonable Censures
of one another.

Aquinas and Bellarmine, and the Synopsis purioris Theologiae, would not be
studied so much, but the Sermon on the Mount a great deal more; and upon
casting up the Account, it would be found, that what we lost in subtilty
thereby, we should gain in Religion.

St. Hilary, the Famous Bishop of Poictiers, has an Excellent saying to this De
Trinitate Lib. 10. circa finem.
purpose, Non per difficiles nos Deus ad beatam vitam quaestiones vocat, nec
multiplici eloquentis facundiae genere solicitat; in absoluto nobis and facili
est aeternitas; Iesum suscitanum a mortuis per Deum credere, et ipsum esse
Dominum confiteri. God does not call us to Heaven by understanding abstruse and
difficult Questions, nor invite us by the power of Eloquence and Rhetorical
Discourses; but the way to Eternal Happiness is plain, easy, and unintricate;
To believe that God raised up Jesus from the dead, and to confess him to be the
Lord of all. The sense of this will soften the Minds of men, and dispose them
to mutual Compliances and Forbearances; and then we shall not think it needful,
by severities and penalties, to compel others to go to Heaven, in our way, with
great uneasiness, when we are resolved, they may with safety and pleasure get
thither in their own.

Upon these grounds, the Wisest Emperors in Christendom have allowed Liberty to
Dissenters, as Theodosius did to the Novatians, who had separate Churches at
Constantinople, and Bishops of their own persuasion to Govern them, and enjoyed
all the Privileges of Catholic Christians.

And the Opinion of King James sent to Cardinal Perron in the Epist. Isaac.
Casaub. epist. 316. page 385.
words of Isaac Casaubon, will be remembered to his honor, whilst his name shall
be known in the World, as the best rosolution which was ever given of this
Question. Rex arbitratur rerum ad salutem necessariarum non magnum esse
Numerum, quare existimet ejus Mojestas nullam ad ineundam concordiam breviorem
viam fore, quam si diligenter separentur necessaria a non necessariis, and ut
de necessariis conveniat omnis opera insumatur, in non necessariis, libertati
Christianae locus detur. The King is persuaded, that there is no great number
of things necessary to salvation; wherefore his Majesty believes there will not
be met with a shorter way to peace, than that distinction be carefully made,
between necessary things, and those that are not so; and that all pains be
taken for agreement in necessaries, but that allowance be granted for Christian
Liberty in those things that are not necessary.

This is not a demand which has been only made of late, since the Christian
name has been so scandalously divided as it is at this day; but it is that which
the Primitive Christians pleaded for as their right and due, that they ought to
be tolerated, though they were mistaken, so long as they were peaceable.

To this end Tertullian made an Address to Scapula, the Governor Tertull. ad
Scap. Cap. 2.
of Africa, and tells him, humani juris and naturalis est potestatis unicuique
quod putaverit colere, nec alii obest aut prodest alterius Religio. Sed nec
Religionis est cogere religionem, quae sponte suscipi debeat non vi. Cum and
hostiae ab animo libenti expostulentur. Ita etsi nos compuleritis ad
sacrificandum, nihil praestabitis Diis vestris; ab invitis enim sacrificia non
desiderabantur, nisi contentiosi sint; contentiosus autem Deus non est. It is
the right of Mankind and a Natural privilege to worship according to what he
believes. One man's Religion does neither good nor harm to another; it is no
part of any one's Religion to compel another man to be of the same with him,
which ought to be undertaken freely, not by compulsion, even as the Sacrifices
are required to be offered with a willing mind; and therefore tho you compel us
to sacrifice, you will do no service to your own Gods: for they desire no
offerings from the unwilling, unless they be quarrelsome; but God is not
contentious.

Lactantius has spent a whole Chapter to show the unreasonableness of Lactant.
lib. 5. c. 20.
persecuting men for Religion, and that violence is an incompetent argument to
propagate truth.

St. Chrysostom makes it a mark of Heresy, and argues thus; Does Chrysostom.
Homil. 19. in Matthew.
the Sheep persecute the Wolf? no, but the Wolf does the Sheep. So Cain
persecuted Abel, not Abel Cain. Ismael persecuted Isaac, not Isaac Ismael. So
the Jews persecuted Christ, not Christ the Jews; So the Heretics do to the
Orthodox, not the Orthodox to the Heretics; therefore by their fruits you shall
know them.

The truth is, The persecuting practice was first introduced among the
Christians by the fiery and turbulent spirits of the Arrian Heretics, who had
corrupted the Emperor Constantius, and Sulpit. Sever. Lib. 2. C. 54, 55, etc.
brought him to their party, and then made use of this power to confute the
Catholic Bishops and their Adherents, by banishment, imprisonment and
confiscation of goods. Against which unworthy proceeding, Athanasius inveighs
Athanas. Epist. ad Solitarios.
with great reason, and vehemence, as a preparation for the coming of
Antichrist. But when this poison was once cast into the Church, 'twas but a
short time before the sounder and sincerer part of Christians was infected with
it; and as their Interest grew at Court, so they made use of it, to basfle
their Adversaries, and retort their own Arguments upon them; obtaining Laws to
be made against several Heretics, with very severe penalties, the loss of
goods, of liberty, the power Cod. Just. l. 1. tit. 5. de Haereticis etc. Cod.
Theod. 2. 5.
of making a Will, and in some Cases, the loss of life. Which Law's are yet
upon Record in both the Codes of Justinian and Theodosius. But tho by this
means they prevailed at last to suppress the Heresies which troubled the
Church, yet the best and wisest men amongst them disapproved the Expedient, and
thought it unreasonable, to purchase the establishment of truth, by ^uch
rigours and by the shedding of blood.

The first instance which I remember of any Capital Sentence formally
pronounced against any Dissenters, was against Priscillian and some of his
Followers; But then St. Martin the Bishop of Tours interceded with all his
might to hinder the proceeding; and Sulpitius Severus gives Sulpit. Sever. Lib.
2. C. 65.
an ill Character of the fact, when he says, Homines luce indignissimi,
pessimo exemplo necati, aut exiliis necati. 'Twas of ill example and a scandal
to Christianity, that they were banished or put to death, tho they did not
deserve to live. And when a Band of Soldiers was sent to suppress a Conventicle
of the Donatists (who were very numerous and extremely trouble some in Africa.)
and bring them to Church; Parmenian objected the Armatum Militem, and the
Operarios Unitatis, to the Catholics, as an unseemly and an unworthy practice.
And it cost Optatus a great deal of Optat. Cont. Parmen. l. 1. C. 3.
pains, to write almost a whole Book to wipe off the Imputation; which he could
not do, but by denying the fact as a Calumny, whereof the Catholics were not
guilty, and disagreeable to the Doctrines of their meek and peaceable Master.

St. Austin has declared his Opinion how the Manichees were to be treated in
such favorable and gentle words, as show he was not pleased with the Law in
Aug. contra Epist. C. 1, 2.
force against them. Cod. Just. l. Tit. 5. de Haereticis: leg. Manichaeos: Illi
in vos saeviant qui nesciunt, quo cum labor verum inveniatur, etc. Let them be
rigorous against you, that do not understand what pains is required in the
discovery of truth; and with what difficulty errors are avoided: Let them be
severe against you, that know not, how rare and hard a thing it is to conquer
carnal representations by the serenity of a devout mind. Let them rage against
you, that are ignorant with what labor the eye of the Inward man is cured, that
it may be able to behold its own Sun; Let them be cruel toward you, that know
not what sighs and groans are necessary to the understanding of God in any
degree: In fine, let them be angry with you that are free from all such
mistakes as they see you deceived with. But for my self, I can in no wise be
severe against you, for I ought to bear with you as with my self, who was once
one of you; and treat you with that patience and meekness as was shown to me by
my Neighbors, when I was furiously and blindly engaged in your erroneous
doctrines.

Salvian a Priest, and as some think a Bishop of Marselles, has De Gubernet.
Dei, lib. 5. page 142.
manifested the like candor and meekness toward the Arrians. Haeretici sunt,
sed non scientes: denique apud nos sunt haeretici, apud se non sunt etc. They
are Heretics, but they are ignorantly so; they are Heretics in our esteem, but
they do not think themselves so; nay, they so firmly believe themselves
Catholics, that they defame us with the title of Heresy. What they are to us,
the same we are to them; we are certain they injure the divine Generation, by
saying the Son is inferior to the Father; they think us injurious to the
Father, because we believe them equal; the honor of God is on our side, but
they believe it on theirs: They are undutiful, but they think this the great
office of Religion; They are ungodly, but this they believe is true Godliness;
they err therefore, but they err with an honest good mind, not out of hatred
but affection to God believing that they both love and honor the Lord. Although
they want a right Faith, yet they are of opinion. That this is the perfect Love
of God; and none but the Judge can tell how they are to be punished, for the
mistake of their false doctrine in the day of Judgment.

This was the soft and charitable spirit which breathed in those eminent
Defenders of Christianity, who were so zealous for their Religion, as to suffer
for it themselves; but not so furious as to make others suffer to promote it.
They had another method of propagating the truth; in meekness instructing those
that oppose themselves. For indeed the only proper punishment of the erroneous,
is to be taught.

Having discoursed thus far concerning Indulgence toward Dissenters; i. e. for
Charity, Righteousness and Peace; and that every one has a Right, by the great
Charter of Nature, to make the best provision he can for his own happiness; I
foresee the envy to which this way of reasoning will be exposed; as if it
opened a gate to. All sorts of Sects and foolish Opiniators, even to Atheists
themselves; and stripped the Magistrate of that power, whereby he is enabled to
attain the End of Government, that the people under him, may lead quiet and
peaceable lives, in all Godliness and Honesty.

I know so much of human nature, and the extravagant follies of Mankind left to
the conduct of their own passions, that these would be the certain consequences
of unlimited Liberty to all persons; and therefore I plead not for it. My
notion of Liberty precludes all the inconveniences in this Objection. It Is not
a natural Law which is unchangable, but a natural Right only for a man to choose
what Religion he will profess. And there is no Right of Nature, which I know
of, but what is limitable to the Public Good, and forfeitable by the abuse of
it.

A man may forfeit the Right which he has to life, which he holds by Nature, as
well as to his Estate, which he holds by Law. An Atheist, a Murderer, etc. may
as justly be killed as a Viper, or a Wolf, or any other noxious Animals;
because they have don irreparable mischief to the Commonwealth already, and to
prevent doing more for the time to come. The natures of such persons are
greatly degenerated, and it is but reasonable, that they who have lost the common
Virtues, should likewise lose the Privileges of Mankind: And I judge the like
concerning the liberty which every man has to inquire into the truth of several
Systems of Religion, and publicly to maintain that which appears to him
establish^t upon the surest foundations.

When it is apparent, that Religion it self is damnified, the safety of the
Government endangered, and the peace of the Commonwealth broken by any sort of
doctrines, the persons professing those doctrines have forfeited their natural
freedom, and ought to be restrained.

Accordingly, First, No man is to be allow^d to publish impieties which
evidently tend to the dishonor of God and wicked life; as, That God does not
take care of the affairs of this World; and, That there are no rewards and
punishments in the other; That there is an indifferency in human actions, and
no good or evil antecedently to the Civil constitution, etc. For the truth in
these cases is so plain by the light of Nature, and by the manifold discoveries
which God has made, that no man who seeks for it with an honest mind, but may
discern it; and accordingly errors of this nature are not to be ascribed to
weakness of Judgment, which is to be pitied, but considered as proceeding from
malicious Principles, and tending to base Ends, and so are punishable as
corruptions in manners. This sort of men indeed are not within the limits of
this question, for they have no Conscience, and therefore can challenge no
privilege from it; and no Government can have security from men of no
Conscience; and therefore cannot be blamed, if it do not protect them. And,
seeing they oppose the consent of Mankind in such momentous affairs, why should
they not forfeit the benefit of human society? and if the Sword were oftener
drawn and sharpn'd against them, it might possibly reconcile some persons to
the Authority, who are now no great Friends to it, nor altogether of St. Paul's
mind, That the Minister of God bears not the Sword in vain, but is a punisher
of evil Doers, and a praise to them that do well.

Secondly, No man can claim any Right to freedom, whose doctrines tend to the
destruction of Government in general, or the dissolution of that which is
established. For the benefits of Government are so great, (tho like those of
health, they are not so sensibly discerned by any thing so much as by their
absence) that all Mankind have bin contented to purchase them, by parting with
something out of every ones stock, to maintain a common Arbitrator of
differences, and a common defense from injuries. And the Alterations of any
particular Form, or the removal of any particular Person, in whom the
Government is fixed, is always attended with so many certain inconveniences,
and, if with any, such uncertain advantages, that ordinary Prudence ought not
to trust such persons whose Religion leads them to Anarchy or to Change. Nay,
submission to Government is so incorporated into all Religions of the World,
Natural, Pagan, Jewish and Christian, that it is impossible any one can
reconcile Religion with the opposition to the present Government: Therefore all
such doctrines as these, That Dominion is founded in Grace; That it is lawful to
depose Heretical Princes, or vindicate the true Religion by the Sword; That an
Idolatrous King may be cut off; That the Original of Power is in the People,
and upon male Administration and Tyrannical Government, they may resume their
first Grant; are to be discountenanced in every Commonwealth, and the Abettors
of them to be restrained and punisb't; unless the Rebels of England have some
peculiar privilege; and they that ought to be hanged in every other Nation
under Heaven, have a particular Charter to be indulged as the Godly Party here.

Thirdly, He that will not allow the same liberty which he asks, destroys the
Right to his own demands; he is of a narrow persecuting spirit; in love with
his own dear self, proud, conceited, and an enemy to the Rest of the World.

For, I pray, are we not all equal by Nature, have you more of the Image of
God, or a less share of Original Sin than I? You tell me, that I am an
Idolater; and cannot I say, that you are a Heretic? You are certain, if God's
Word be true, and the Spirit of God do not deceive, you are in the right; I say
you are very confident, and Solomon tells us, The Fool rages and is confident.
I took not up my Religion upon trust, I have read the Bible and the Ancient
Writers, the most indifferent Arbitrators of differences in Religion; I have
consulted the Wisest men, and heard all Parties speak; I have prayed to God for
his Assistance, that he would guide me into all truth, and I verily think God
has answered my Prayers; and it is You, not I, that are in the mistake: But
because there may be no Contention between us, I am contented to compromise the
Quarrel, and we will dwell together charitably with united Affections, tho with
different Judgments. But You cannot in Conscience accept of this fair offer;
you have a Command to the contrary: Come out from among them and I will receive
you; Be not unequally yoaked with Unbelievers: have no fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them. You have a Promise to
depend on, and you look up to God to perform it. Behold, I will make them of
the Synagogue of Satan, which say they are Jews, and are not, for they lie; I
will make them to come and worship before thy feet, and know that I have loved
thee. Well Sir, I am sorry my Tender of peace is so scornfully rejected, upon
the misapplication of such Texts of Scripture, as equally and indifferently
serve all Parties, or are nothing to the present purpose; You must not be
angry, if I strike the first blow, rather than suffer you to take your own
opportunity to knock me o th head.

When the cause comes to be tried, before equal Umpires, you will be judged out
of your own mouth, that challenged Liberty, which you would not grant: For you
have transgrest the great Rule of Righteousness, not to do to others, what you
would have done unto your self. Upon these terms, the pretenses to Liberty are
destroyed. But if the Wisdom of any State shall confine their Indulgencies to
Pious, Obedient, and Charitable Dissenters, I cannot perceive the prejudice,
which difference in speculations and disputable Points can do in Religion, or
the Power of the Magistrate.

But at the same time I cannot but admire the admirable Temper and Moderation
which is shown in the Church and Government of England; That requires nothing
necessary to Salvation, but the acknowlegement of the Ancient Creeds; That
teaches nothing, but what is Pious and Charitable; Whose Lyturgy is Grave, Wise
and Holy; whose Rites are few and material; Whose Laws are full of Candor and
Compliance, allowing freedom to any Five Dissenters together to worship God, in
their own way: Whose true Sons and Subjects, are the greatest Favorers of
Christian Liberty, which are in the World; And I pray God, to give all people
that disown it, Wisdom to understand it.

THE Publisher to the Reader.
HAving, I must own, not without Pleasure, read the following Papers; and
believing they might in several Instances (I do not say all) give some
satisfaction to others, and contribute to the Public Good, for which, I
persuade my self, even those Notions that seem most od and impracticable, were
intended; I resolved to make them public; But was checked again, by calling to
mind, That he from whom I in some sort extorted them, obliged me not to
discover him: Nevertheless, considering I might do the One without the Other, I
pursued my former Resolutions; yet taking this further care, That even the
Printer should not know from whence they came. And now let me tell you,
whatever you shall think of this Discourse, It Is the Issu of a sober Brain, tho
perhaps a little too much inclined to Humor, and rigid Virtue; and not so
agreeable or smooth, as you would have had it, if my Friend had dressed it for
the eyes of any other besides my self, to whom he sent it Sheet by Sheet; and
having writ it in less than eight of the last Holy Days, you may believe, had
I allowed more time, it would have come, even to me, reviewed. As it is, I make
it yours; and assure you, what ever Censure you pass upon Him or Me, we shall
both be unconcerned: As Complesance made it mine, so a good Intention, of
serving my Country, makes it yours. For my self, I do not aim at being Richer
or Greater; The Patrimony left me, satisfied and invited my unambitious Mind,
to the Retirements of a private Life; which I have made easy by innocent
Recreations, Company, and Books: It was not my own seeking, that I am now
placed in a more public Station; wherein, tho perhaps I have done no Good, yet,
I am pleased, I never did any Hurt; having always pursued, without Passion or
Interest, what ever my Conscience (the best Rule and severest Judge of Men's
Actions) convinced me was best.

As to my Friend, he is one has read some Books, and more Men; thanks God he
is, that, which the World calls a Fool, a Goodnatur'd Man, one that heartily
loves all Mankind; and has so particular a Zeal for the good of his Country,
that I believe he would sacrifice his Life to serve it. But almost despairing,
That ever Things will be better than they are; and finding, by what he has seen
abroad, That a Man may live more happily in England, than in any part of
Europe; and now grown old, by Temper, more than Years, he has resolved, chiefly
to mind himself; whom, to enjoy more fully, he has bid adieu to all Thoughts of
Business; to which, having never been bred by any Calling, he has had the more
Opportunities of considering all, of improving himself, and observing most
sorts of Men; and, as a speculative Philosopher, to the Entertainment of
Himself and Friends, he passes very free Remarks on all Actions and Things he
judges amiss; and, being biased by no manner of Interest, I am persuaded he
speaks his Conscience: And he has the good Fortune, to make others often
conclude, He does not only speak a great deal of Truth; but also further
satisfies them, That it is much easier to find Faults, than mend them; That
there ever were, and ever will be, Disorders in all Human Societies; That there
are fewer in that of England, than in any other, and that they are there more
curable.

Thus much I thought fit to tell you, to prevent any Misapprehensions
concerning the Persons who are the occasion of this Trouble, or Diversion, call
it what you please.

The CONTENTS.
1. STate Affairs not fit to be discoursed by private men. Page 7 2. Of the Rise
of Parliaments. 11 3. Origin of Government, with a brief account of Laws,
Revenues, Trade, and Natural Religion. 12 4. A new Method of Electing Members,
Objections against this Present Parliament, and their Answers. 29 5. Of Laws,
etc. 37 6. Of better restraint of Offenses than Punishment by death. 48 7. Of
Courts of Judicature. 60 8. Of Liberty, Property, and Religion. 73 9.
Differences in the last nor hurtful nor restrainable. 81 10. How Toleration may
be safely granted. 92 11. How to prevent Divisions among Christians, and to
make all really not nominaly such. 99 12. To Regulate and Reform the abuses of
the Press; the inconveniences of Printing as now managed. 104 13. The Intrest
of England in Reference to France. 116 14. Reasons why the King did not declare
War against that Crown. 119 15. The King's Care of Ireland to prevent French
Designs. 140 16. Of an Union between England and Ireland, or the Repealing
Poynings Act. 143 17. Of Taxes to make them great and perpetual, most for the
Peoples ease and common good. 148 18. That 100 l. formerly was in Real value
equivalent to 300 l. now, and in use to 3000 l. With the reasons of the
disparity. 161 19. The dangers of not perpetuating, apportioning and applying
the Revenue to the particular charge and uses of the Crown or State, and the
advantage of doing so. 166 20. The Objections against perpetuating the Revenue,
considered and removed. 167 21. That French or any other Commodities are better
Restrained by height of Duty, than absolute prohibition. 173 22. Several Taxes
considered, Excise, Hearth-Mony etc. 174 23. A Tax upon New Buildings, a
Polemony, and how to secure it against frauds. 178 24. A Tax upon unmarried
people. 180 25. Of Trade, of the value of Labor, how the People and Riches may
be increased, etc. 184 26. That Foreigners are to be Invited, and how. 190
Many other things for Advance of Trade, as Registries or their equivalent on
Practisers of Fraud; how Workhouses may be Erected, all Poor and Beggars
provided for, and a Nursery for an Army either for Land or Sea-Service to be
suddenly raised on any emergency, without grievance or pressing of the People
etc.

Errata.
IN the Title page for (Member in) read Member of. P. 2. to the Reader, read
unfashionable rigid virtue. p. 18. l. 14. r. extravagance. p. 21. l. 15. r.
destructive. p. 28. l. 3. for (and policy) r. or Policy. ibid. l. 13. r. as
head. p. 63. l. 3. r. actual summons. p. 69. l. 4. r. arising. p. 82. l. 5. r.
End. ibid. l. 10. for (clearer) r. cleaner. p. 91. l. 19. r. a Red Sea. p. 105.
l. 9. r. Sacrament. p. 112. l. 22. r. have slay'd. p. 113. l. 25. dele, til,
they; p. 118. l. 20. r. finesso. p. 122. l. 10. for (unequal) r. uneasy. p.143.
l. 15. r. Poynings. p. 145. l. 7. r. claim a greater. p. 149. last l. for
(make) r. may. p. 159. l. last, r. Haver. p. 176. l. 22. r. Brewers only. p.
178. l. 13. r. but also. p. 188. l. 23. r. twice stronger. p. 191. l. 2. r.
many many. p. 200. l. 5. r. shall not be. p. 207. l. 2. r. representative. p.
239. l. 4. r. Bettor.

The Introduction.
SIR,
HAd you only commanded me to have given you an account of the Laws and Customs
of another Utopia, an Isle of Pines, or of O. Brazil, (tho unfit even for such
a Task) I would not have disputed it: But finding you have imposed upon me, who
am neither Statesman nor Merchant, a necessity of playing the Fool, by
treating of Englana's Policies and Trade; I confess I could not without great
reluctance comply with so severe an injunction.

I have always been averse to discourses of this kind; which in Private men are
no farther tolerable, than as idle Philosophers, to pass away their vacant
hours in such otherwise useless speculations; And in them too, I have heard 'um
oftener condemned than commended, the Authors esteemed foolish, and impertinent,
troublesome or dangerous; And some we know by indulging themselves too much in
this vanity, have straightened, if not wholly lost their Liberty and Fortunes. We
live not in Plato's Commonwealth, but in foece Romuli, where a full Reformation
of Laws and Manners, seems only to be wished, not to be obtained without a
Miracle. Why then should any, especially the unconcerned, busy their heads with
what they cannot mend? It Is much more pleasant and safer far, to let the World
take its course, to believe that in the regular, stated, motion of Nature,
things are so ordered by Divine Providence, that they will not, cannot, suffer
themselves to be il managed. Nature, if we hearkn'd to her Dictates, as well as
Religion (which we equally despise) would convince us, it were our Duty (I am
certain it would be our Interest, our Happiness even in this life) to submit
quietly to the Powers above, and their Ordinances, because All Powers are of
God.

Thus I acknowledge every private man ought to think and do; But public persons,
that is to say, Lawmakers are to consider they were born not only for
themselves, but for the good of others, and therefore are obliged to exert that
power with which they are entrusted, for the joint common good of the People,
without partial regards or private ends.

If they would sincerely mind this; and if our hot-braind State-Mountebanks,
who being but private men, yet quarrel at every thing that is not conformable to
the Capricio's of their own wild fancies, would cease to intermedddle in their
Superiors Province, England might be the happpiest Kingdom of the World;
whereas the contrary Practice rendered her not long fince the Seat of Civil
Wars, Tyranny and Confusion, and has at present so filled Her with Murmurings,
and Repinings, Iealousies, and Fears, that She which formerly gave Law to
others, and was a Terror to more than Europe, is now in danger, to become weak
and contemptible in the Eyes and Opinions of her Neighbors.

These, and such like, were the Considerations, that made me so long resist
your command; to which I had never yielded, but to prevent the loss of your
Friendship, with which you so solemly threatened me in your last. Take then in
the same order you prescribe, the best account I am able in so short a time to
give to your several following Particulars Of the Rise and Power of
Parliaments, Of Laws; Courts of Judicature; Of Liberty, Property and Religion;
Of the Interest of England in reference to the Desines of France; Of Taxes and
of Trade. But you are to observe, That what I write is with as much liberty,
and little care, as people discourse in Coffee houses, where we hear the
State Affairs of all Nations adjusted, and from thence guess at the Humor of
the People and at the Times.

In this therefore, you are not to expect, any studied Phrases, or Elaborat
connexions, close neat Transitions, etc. Your servant (whom I conjure you by
the strictest ties of Friendship, not to discover) has neither will, nor
leisure for such a work, which being intended only for your Closet, you may be
content to take in a plain English dress.

The great and many Revolutions and Changes, which in all Places have attended
Human Of the Rise and Power of Parliaments.
Affairs; and the particular Inundations of the Romans, Saxons, Danes, and
Normans, into this Kingdom; together, with the ignorance and carelessness of
former Ages, have left us, in so much darkness and uncertainty, that I think it
not only difficult, but morally impossible, to trace out exactly the Beginnings
of things. If it be so then in all affairs, we may cease to wonder, why men are
so much at a loss, in their Enquiries into, and Debates of the present matter,
viz. Of the Rise and Power of Parliaments; which has received very different
forms and shapes, according to the Interest and Power of the several
contending Parties; this makes me think, its true face can never be fully
discovered, tho perhaps it may be uncertainly guessed at, by some Lines, saint
Shadows, and stronger Probalities gathered from the scattered Memoires of
Monks, who cannot well be supposed impartial, especially in Ecclesiastical, nor
full in the relations of State Affairs; in the Accounts of which they did not
hold themselves concerned: But yet they are the best guides we have; For from
the Ancient Rolls in the Tower, one cannot believe, there was any exact Diary
of things; or if he do, must conclude, many are spoiled by the injury of Time,
omitted through negligence, or made away for private Ends. However we may yet pick
out of both this Truth, That tho the Rise of Parliaments, like the Head of
Nilus, be unknown, yet they have bin of long standing and of great Power.

And we shall find it reasonable they should be so, if we look back into the
grounds and Origin of Government; which we may suppose to have bin Origin of
Government.
introduced by the general consent and agreement of as many Families, as upon
the increase of Mankind, joined in one common Society, divided the Earth into
particular proportions, and distinguished between Meum and Tuum; To this they
were induced by Love, not Fear, which is but the consequent of that, Reason
convincing that the enjoyments of life were thus best served and promoted. And
because that Being and well-Being, could not be continued or enjoyed, but by
the Society of Women, and the Products of Labor; and that, if some would be
idle, and many covet the same Woman, the great Desine of Nature, Happiness,
founded on Living well, and in Peace, might be perverted into the state of
Misery, War; To prevent the two necessary Consequences, Poverty and Death, they
entered into mutual Compacts, Articles, or Laws, agreeable to that great and
fundamental Law of Nature, rivited into their Beings, To do as they would be
done unto; That is, They resolved, agreed, and promised one another, to be
guided by the Rules of Reason; or, which is one and the same, To continu Men.
But, because it was probable, some yielding too much to their Passions, might
swerve from this great Rule, and so, wrong Others as well as Themselves;
Therefore, that no man might be Judge and Party, they unanimously confirmed to
the Elder person, the continuance of that Right, which Nature had given him
over the Fruit of his Loins during its Minority, To determine what ever
Differences should happen; Believing Him, as the common Father of the Family,
to be most impartial, and as the longer Experienced, the Wisest Man.

This Power, tho Great, exceeded not the Limits of their then-enacted Laws, in
their true and natural Meaning, which they took care to make very few and plain,
That all Disputes and Intricacies (not only the Disturbers, but Destroyers, of
Justice) might be avoided.

And finding they were not only liable to Danger at Home, but from Abroad; from
such other Societies, as had already, or might afterward set up for
themselves; and that it was not possible for all, to watch against these
Dangers, they therefore resolved to put that Care into the Hands of one Man;
(for which great Undertaking, the Coward, as the Fool, if those two really
differ, were equally unfit, Inconsideration in the One, being what Fear is in
the Other, (a Betraying of the succors which Reason offers) Nature then, by
giving their Judge most Authority, Wisdom, and Conduct, which with true Courage
(the Effect also in a great measure, of Experience) are the great
Qualifications of a General, desin'd him for that Honor; which the People
readily confirmed, promising Obedience, and investing him with the Power of
making War and Peace: But (at his Instance) reserving to themselves, the
Liberty of Examining and approving the Reasons: Which the Great and Wise
Captain judged convenient; knowing, without the Consent of All, he could not
but want the Assistance of Some, which might dis-able him to defend himself or
them; whereupon, the Ruin of the Whole must inevitably follow.

And, because the Prince his whole time must be employed in this great Work;
part of which, was the preparing his Son for the Succession, by instilling into
him the necessary Seeds, the Principles of Virtue, Religion, Wisdom, Courage,
Munificence, and Justice: The People willingly agreed to entail upon Him, and
his Successors, a certain Excisum, or Proportion of every Man's Labor,
answerable to the Occasions of the Public; and to the particular State and
Grandeur, necessary for the Support and Maintenance of his Authority and
Reputation.

But because a greater proportion was needful for extraordinary accidents, as
of War, etc. They set apart annually another Quota, to remain for such Uses in
a kind of public Bank, so to be ordered, as might greatly increase their common
Treasure, and do good to the poorer sort of Laborers and Tradesmen, and
maintain in Hospitals, such Impotents or aged Persons, as shoud be disabled, to
make Provisions for themselves.

The Revenu they made Great enoff, as well as Certain, that the Prince might not
ly under any necessity of contriving from time to time, new Artifices and Ways
of raising Money, that great Rock of Offense, on which they foresaw no Prince
could stumble without Vexation, Animosities, and Hatred; not only discomposing
the Happiness, but occasioning the Overthrow of any State. And so the People,
being sure of the Remainder, they proportioned their Expense to their Gettings;
The former they moderated, not only by prudent Sumptuary Laws, but by the
hazard of their Reputations, esteeming it infamous, not to lay up yearly
something of their Labors; by which Course, the Public Taxes became easy. Which
they made perpetual, that their Children shoud be under a necessity of
following their Examples of Thrist, and so might likewise be insensible of the
Burden; Foreseeing that Taxes imposed upon People, who are so far from saving
ought, that they account themselves good Husbands, if they do but yearly make
both Ends meet, beget il Blood, murmuring and discontent; crying, that the
Bread is taken out of their Mouths, or the Cloths from their Backs, which are
often followed by the evil Consequences of Rebellions, and the Subversion of
the Common - wealth. For such never consider, That their own Extravance made
those imaginary Needs; which, when they happen, are no otherwise to be removed,
but by moderating former Expenses.

Thus, they wisely contrived, and interwove the perpetuating the Subjects
Safety, and the Princes Dominion; never secure, but when founded on mutual Love
and Confidence: I do not find the practice of this Policy any where so well
continued, as in the States of Venice and Holland; which has preserved the
first about 12 Centuries, and made the later increase so prodigiously in less
than one.

Now, because they foresaw, the products of their Labor would exceed their
Expenses, and that the remainder would be useful, for commutations with their
Neighbor for some of their Commodities, but that in driving this Trade they
would be exposed on Sea to Pyracies, etc. To make their Navigation safe, they
agreed, that the public for securing them, shoud receive by way of praemium or
insurance, a certain Excisum out of all things Exported or imported, which we
now call Customs.

And, lest the too great desire of Wealth, should make them forgetful of their
Duty to God, their Parents, and their Country, that is to one another, They
ordained, that a sufficient number of the Elders of the People, grave, sober,
discreet persons, should at certain times, set apart for that purpose, remind
them of their Duty, in every of those particulars, and also instruct their
Children in the Laws of God, and of their Country. And, because the tending of
this work would take up a considerable portion of their time, they allowed
Salaries to these public Officers, out of the common stock. In those days of
Innocence, when Art was not interwoven with Religion, nor Knavery with Policy,
it was an easy matter to be pious and just: And if the higher Powers were
pleased to remove these two, we should soon again see that golden Age; The Duty
of both Tables was comprised in few Articles, That to their Neighbors,
consisted as now, in doing as you would be don unto; That toward God, (of
whose Being they were convinced by the strongest of Demonstations, the
consideration of the visible things of the World,) in Thanksgivings, and
Adorations, the effect of Gratitude to the Author of their being, and of all
good things, in believing the Immortality of the Soul, and of its being
susceptible of Rewards, and Punishments in another Life, and in the
consequence, That Sin is to be repented of. These were their common sentiments,
the Dictates of Nature; The substance of which was acknowledged by all, even the
most barbarous of Nations; And therefore could not be the inventions of Policy,
the Dreams of melancholy men, or the Effects of Education: These are the
Opinions of the unthinking, and therefore wild and loose, and were the wishes
formerly of the few debauched; But the great, sober and wise Philosophers of
all Ages, upon the exactest Scrutiny, finding them to be the Impresses of
Nature, as essential to our Being as light to the Sun, pronounced the
speculative Atheist an impossible thing. And because they were sencible that a
Liar as destrustive of the very being of human Society, ought to be banished
the Commonwealth, the first of their Laws, and the Cement of the rest was, That
every man should not only speak Truth to his Neighbor, but stand firm to his
Promises. And knowing that Laws, tho never so good, would prove insignificant,
if not duly observed; And that some men would never be wise, that is, would
never consider, and consequently would not easily be restraind from folly, from
offending; to deter the slavish and inconsiderat, they did, not only annex
certain Penalties to the breach of the Laws, but unalterably decreed, That no
Offender tho never so powerful, should escape the punishment.

These Penalties were Pecuniary Mucts, loss of Liberty, bodily Labor to the
Public, or Banishment; The power of Life and Death, they would not give;
because they could not transfer that to another which was wanting in them
selves; the taking away of Life was peculiarly reserved by Nature, as its own
indispensible right, as most reasonable, because she alone coud give it: They
consider`d, That Terrors are but affrightments to Duty, That Corrections are
for Amendment not Destruction, which course should they have pursued, they
might accidentally have run themselves, into a state of War: Since Nature had
told them, it was not only lawful, but necessary, if they coud not otherwise
preserve their own, to take away the beings of any that attempted theirs; That
it would be against the End of Society, mutual Happiness; This rendering the
sufferer incapable of all, to which therefore he neither could nor would have
consented. This or something not unlike it was I persuade my self, the form and
substance of the first Commonwealths, which if you narrowly look into, you may
perhaps find some Lines, that drawn out fully, might be no il Model, for any
Commonwealth.

And to come nearer home; It has some resemblance to what, for several past
Ages, this Kingdom did, and does now enjoy. To omit the British times, of
which we have but very thin gleanings of the Druids their Oracles of Learning,
Law and Religion; And to skip over that of the Romans, who were never able
perfectly to introduce their manner of Commonwealth; We shall find that in the
time of the Saxons (a people of Westfrizland, so called from the shape of their
Sword, a kind of Cymeter,) and in that of the Danes, the manner of Government
was, as now in substance, the not in form or name, by King and Parliament. But
whether the Commons were called to this great Assemby or no, I cannot find,
from the imperfect Registers of Elder times; One may guess, they were
originally Members of it, because the same people in Westfrizland, from whence
they descended, do at this day continu, a Form of Government, different from
all the rest of the Provinces, not unlike this. There are sufficient proofs,
that the Peers, that is, the chief of the Clergy, and best estated Gentry, were
as often as the King pleased (for it was originally Edicto Principis) Summoned
to consult with him of the great affairs of State: Which Council was before the
Conquerors time, called by several Names; as Concilium absolutely, sometimes
the Epithets of Magnum, Generale or Commune were added: It was often known by
the name of Curca Magna and others, and was composed ex Episcopis, Abbatibus,
Ducibus, Satrapis and Sapientibus Regni; among which, if any will say the
Commons had place, I will not dispute, because in those times when Titles of
Honor were not the Arguments of good Fortune or the mark's of the Prince's
favor, the King called to this great Council, such as large Possessions,
Courage, or Wisdom recommended as fit: For we find that the Fathers having sat
there, gave no Right to such Sons, as did not with their Estates, inherit their
Virtues.

It appears farther, that the great Council in the later end of the Saxons
Reign, and til the beginning of King John's, had, by the grace of Kings,
accustomed themselves, without any summons to meet thrice every year, at
Christmas, Easter and Whitsontide; which course was not interrupted by any
particular Summons, but when in other seasons of the year, the public occasions
required their meeting. The long continuance of the Barons Wars, made the
before stated meetings, of the great Council, return to the uncertain pleasure
of the Prince.

What ever the power of the Commons was before the Conquest, it plainly
appears, that for somtim afterward, their Advice was seldom desired, and as
things were then ordered, their Consent was not thought necessary, being always
included, in that of the Lords: For the Conqueror having subjected the Natives
to an entire vassalage, seized upon all their Possessions, reserved to the
Crown larg proportions, in every County, gave part to the Church in
Francalmoine, and the residu to his fellow adventurers in the War, to be held
by Knight servic^. These subdivided part of theirs to their Followers, on such
conditions as rendered them perfect Slaves to their Masters, rather than their
Lords: By the possession of so much Power, these Barons or Freeholders (for
theword signified no more) did what they pleased with their vassals, became
very terrible to the Conqueror and his Successors: To curb whose Extravagance,
tho all were willing, King John was the first that made the attempt; but by his
over hastiness, he gave birth to the lasting broils of the Barons Wars. He
with desine to suppress the too great power of the Lords in the sixth year of
his Reign, about a War with France, called for the Commons Advice and Council
with the Lords; which had bin don above one hundred years before by Henry the
first, who in his Reign summoned them twice, at his Coronation, and in his
eighteenth year. The next time after King John that we find them summoned, was
in the forty ninth year of Henry the thirds Reign; whose Summons appears upon
Record: So that he may be said to have perfected, what Henry the first, and
King John desin'd, making the Commons a part of that great Judicature, which
they have ever since continued, and for some time after, in one and the same
House.

It was usual in those days to mention in the Writ, the Cause of assembling
this Council; In a Summons of Edward the first a wise, just, and therefore a
fortunate Prince, concerning a War with France, in the seventh year of his
Reign, these words are observable, Lex justissima provida circumspectione
stabilita, ut quod omnes tangit ab omnibus approbetur, much better sense than
`Latin.

Succeding Kings have bin pleased to consult in I arliament, of all the high
and great Concerns of the State, of what nature or kind soever. The consulting
thus with the wholeBody of the People, was first the grace and Policy of
Kings, and the practice was always succesful to those that used it, as the
contrary proved destructive: for the Kings having by this course gaind their
Subjects Hearts, found it easy, to command their Purses, and their Hands.

This great representative of the Commonwealth, the Parliament, consisting of
three Estates, viz. the Lords, Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons with the
King at Head, you will with me easily conclude, may do any thing, within the
reach of Human Power.

You must pardon me, if I wave Anatomizing the distinct Powers of the several
parts of this great Body; whosoever first attempted that, desin'd the
overthrow, of the best constituted Government in the World, where the King wants
no Ensines of Monarchy or Majesty; where the People have not only all the
Freedom, Liberty and Power, that in reason can be wished, but more than any of
their Neighbors enjoy, even than those, in the so much more cried up, but
little understood Commonwealth of Holland, where they have liberty in name, but
in reality are very Slaves, and beasts of Burden.

Now, whether the way of convening Parliaments, might not be altered into the
this following (or, some other more equal than the present seems to be) I leave
to themselves to determine, viz. That every Parish, Freeholders and others, if
they please, shoud meet and choose Two honest knowing men, on whom their power
of Electing Members shoud be devolved; This don in every Parish, the several
Two's to meet and choose Two for the Hundred; That agreed, the respective Two's
of every Hundred, at the time and place appointed to choose the Members, out of
such, as are resident in the Country, both Knights and Burgesses: Nor does it
seem very reasonable, that the later shoud exceed the former, especially
considering that many of the ancient Burrow's are decayed, and yet the number
raised by the additions of new ones, beyond what it was before: But by this
manner of Election that inconvenience, if any, will not be considerable. To
every two Members a sides-man to be chosen, who shoud duly attend, at the place
of Sessions; and that he might be prepared in the absence of both, or either of
the Members, they shoud make him master of all that passed from time to time in
the House. And that every person Elected, might serve the public without private
consideration, the Electors, or a Justice of Peace in their presence, to
administer an Oath framed to this Effect, That in all proceedings, they endeavor
to inform themselves, fully of the state of the matter, and therein Act
according to Conscience, without particular interest or desine; That directly,
or indirectly, on the account of their Vote or serving, they shall not receive
by themselves, or others, any Reward, or Gratuity whatsoever. On breach of this
Oath to be liable to all the Penalties of Perjury. It is not to be doubted, but
the honor of promoting their Countries good (That giving a sort of Immortality
which al men covet) will invite Gentlemen enough sufficiently qualified, to
undertake this work on these conditions, how hard soever they appear. It Is not
reasonable, that Parliament Men shoud be maintained, or rewarded (unless in
Praise and Statues) at the Countries charge: To do it gratis is all the real
good they do the Commonwealth, in which as private men, their Interest, and
consequently their Gain is greater, than that, of the meaner sort. The
Elections to be by the Ballotting box, to avoid heat, and secret grudges.

Nor would it be useless to ad, That al things be carried, fairly and openly in
the House; That the Debate of any thing proposed, be adjourned to the next days
Meeting; For in the time of Rest upon our Bed, Our nights sleep does change our
Knowledge, and qualify the Effect or cause of Passion, Inconsideration: That
every Member by himself, or Sides-Man, be constantly present, under severe
penalties to the Public: That nothing be put to the vote, but in a full House,
not of Forty (who cannot be the Major part of above Four Hundred, and therefore
at first was sure a trick) but of all the Members; nor then carried by Majority,
til the reasons of every single Dissenter be examined, the dissenting person
convinced, and in case of obstinacy after Conviction (of which in so wise an
Assembly, none can be supposed guilty) expelled the House; The question not to
be reassumed, til after the Election of a new Member, unless his Sides-Man be
of a contrary opinion in the Debate. It Is possible the swaying argument, was at
first, but one Man's, whose credit and authority might prevail upon the rest,
without examining his Reasons, which makes it prudent, to weigh the force of
what is offered against it: By the contrary course, they may, by this they
cannot suffer; since Reason or Truth is always one and the same, and however
disguised, by the sophistry of Wit, it must at last overcom. Thus by proving al
things, and holding fast that which is best, they will acquit themselves to the
present and succeeding Ages. Such manner of proceeding would silence al
murmurings and clamors, That the Parliament is divided into Factions; a Court
and a Country Party; Tho the interest of the one, be not directly opposite, to
that of the other, Yet the members, for ends of their own, Honor or Rewards, do
make them so; of this they are convinced, by seeing some turn Cat in Pan,
appearing strongly, in one Session, for that which in a former, they as
vigorously opposed. And by observing others to compass Elections by Faction and
Interest, by Purchase or covinous Freeholds: That, contrary to several Acts of
Parliament, Members living in the South are chosen for the North; and therefore
are, to the injury of the People, as much strangers to the affairs of the
Places, for which they serve, as those two points, are distant from each other:
That they pass Laws, witness that against Irish Cattle, etc. not for the common
good, but to show their interest and power, to mischief a man they hate, or to
revenge some received, or supposed Injuries or Affronts: That therefore, it is
necessary to dissolve This, as not being a free Parliament, and to call a new
one; That to do so frequently, is most agreeable to Reason, and to former
Statutes; And to that end several Causes are prepared to put a Difference
between the two Houses, in point of Jurisdiction, etc.

But such as more seriously weigh things, may I hope be convinced, These are
the groundless surmises of some, and false suggestions of others, discontented
and il disposed persons, the old disturbers of our Israel's Peace, who
delighting, to Fish in troubled Waters, endeavor once more, to put al into a
flame of tyranny and confusion, to see what Fish they may, by that treacherous
Light, bring to their OWn Nets. That it is idle to imagine, the Court, the best
refiner of wit and Languag, shoud not have as piercing a foresight, as the
Country; That being allowed, they must be sensible of the fatal consequence of
a divided House or Kingdom; their loss is at least as great as any others, their
Al is at Stake: It Is therefore contrary to their Interest, which never lies,
consequently to their practice, to endeavor Parties. It Is irrational, no less
than scandalous, to conclud, Because some men's sense, by second thoughts, and
fuller consideration of things, is altered, that therefore they are bribed; as
if personages, of so much Honor, Wisdom, and public spiritedness, coud be
induced, by any sinister practices, or by-respects, to betray their Country,
and intail upon themselves, and their posterities, more lastingly, than they
can their Estates, great and inexpressible Calamities. And can it be supposed,
the Ministers have so little understanding, as not to foresee, that the taking
off violent Members, any other way, than by conviction of their Errors, were
endlesly to increase their Numbers, and Hydra-like, by cutting off one Head, to
give occasion, to the sprouting up of many. Nor is it less absurd, to believe,
the Parliament, when they find the conveniences, the reason of Statutes ceased,
will not repeal them: It Is no affront to their Judgments, nor to
their-Loyalties, so to alter with the times; an obstinacy in the contrary
resolution, would indeed be a disparagement, to their Understandings. That it is
to be hoped, the Wisdom of the Parliament is such, as not to quarrel for
trifles, after the manner of Women or Children; That they will lay aside al
partial regards, and without heats, or personal reflections, intend the great
Work, the common safety; recollecting that they were the home - bred Divisions,
more than the Conqueror's Forces, that occasioned Harold's Overthrow, and
England's entire Subjection to the French; even those very Men, who invited
William, suffered in the Ruin; So just and natural it is, To love the Treason,
and hate the Traitor. Does not every Man know, That the Power of whole France is
greater, than that of a part, that of Normandy, could be? That William cannot be
supposed, to have been more watchful, to seize the Prey, than Lewis is? who
perhaps has set those very Men, at least their Leaders on work, that openly
pretend most, to oppose his Desines; while, in the mean time, by sowing
underhand, Discords and Fears, among the People, they best promote his
Purposes. It Is no unheard of Practice, for Politicians, as well as Watermen,
To look one way, and Row another: But I hope, no cunning Achithophel will be
able to divert the Parliament, from the great Business of this Conjuncture.

When they have don That; I wish they would think it worth their Labor, Of Laws.
To look into the Laws, and observe what of them, are fit to be repealed and
what continued. The Happiness of a State, consists in a regular Form of
Government, by just and equal Laws, few and plain, fitted to the most ordinary
Capacities: These Qualifications, are as necessary to the well-being of the
People, as that of Promulgation was ever accounted to the essence of a Law. But
such is the Fate of England, that the Laws are almost numberless, which makes
them unpossible to be remembered; and what is worse, are so very intricat, that
they may more reasonably be looked upon, as the devices of cunning men, to
entrap the simple, than as the Rule, by which al are to square their Actions
and their Lives: And what is yet worse, They were never promulgated, tho
provided for, by those Statutes, that enact the reading of some of them in
Cathedrals at least once a year, and of others four times. Is it fit or just,
Men shoud be punished by Laws they neither know, nor can remember? There is no
one entire Body of Laws; That of the Statutes is so tedious (and some yet remain
in the Parliament Rolls not printed) that it can hardly be read over in a
months time; tho an hundred times reading, will not enable a man, to remember
them, and yet he may suffer, for not observing what he has not, or if he had,
coud not remember: But what is the greatest Evil, If they coud remember, they
coud not understand; since the very Judges, who have not only been bred at the
Feet, but are themselves the Gamaliels of the Law, and much more, are wont to
spend whole Terms in the reconciling and expounding of particular Statutes. And
it often happens, That after these long Advisements, they being divided, in
their Opinions, the Parties concerned, wearied in those Toils, endeavor after
all their Cost and Labor, to quit their Right, or impatiently expect the making
of new, and more intelligible Laws.

These great disorders have bin occasioned by several conspiring accidents,
length and warping of Time, crooked Interests of some Lawyers, and the
continual Wars, Foreign or Domestic, with which this Country has bin
harassed, I might say, since the Invasion of the Romans, etc. But to com nearer
our own times, since the Conquest, since the first making of these Acts,
England has not enjoyed, one half Century, an entire Peace: To which
unhappiness, I know not whether, the vexation of the Law, or Bigottre of
Religion, have contributed most. I do not doubt but in other Ages, they were as
sensible of the Evil, as we are in this, But the same Accidents continuing,
rendered it remediless. Edward the Confessor regulated the Saxon Laws, but his
care proved of little advantage after the coming in of the Conqueror; who
desining to set up a new Form more agreeable to the Customs of Normandy, or his
own Will, made himself deaf to the peoples desires, of being governed by the
Rules of that holy Prince, who was deservedly Sainted, no less for his Zeal,
and love of Justice, in matters of Law, than for his strictness of Life, in
those of Religion. From the Conquerors time downwards, there have bin attempts
of this kind, almost in every Kings Reign; But the Wars, and Divisions (and
consequently Dissolutions) that often happend between the Kings and their
Parliaments, sometimes Lords, sometimes Commons, about the Liberty of the
Subject, or, Prerogative of the Crown, (not without good reason concluded to
have bin set on foot by the crafty Lawyers, by this time grown considerable)
prevented bringing to pass, the intended Reformation of the Law. I will not
insist upon all the Kings Reigns, where this was desin'd, nor go farther back
than Henry the Eight's time, when ingenious Sir Thomas More, was by him set on
work, to fram a Model: But the succeeding accidents frustrated that attempt:
the Troubles and Revolutions that continued, during the Reigns of Edward the
sixth, Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeth, hindered this work, which at wise
Burleigh's advise was resolved on, by the later Queen. The learned King James,
determined to finish it; and the knowing Sir Francis Bacon was pitched upon, to
fram a Schem of new Laws, or model the old; But the discontents about Religion,
with the greater artifice of the Lawyers, then more numerous, diverted that
glorious Enterprise.

Some living were Actors, others Spectators, of the Troubles that have since
happened, which gave way not to a Reformation, but Confusion of the Laws; and
yet the Long - Parliament (or rather Conventicle) knowing their great, and good
Master purposed it, resolved upon a new Method of Laws. But the Idol
themselves, had set up, as a just reward of their Treason, prevented this, by
turning them out of doors, with their beloved Magna Charta, calling it in
Contempt Magna f --. Too many in other Countries, no less than this, have
wholly lost their Freedom, by endeavoring to enlarge it, beyond Law and Reason;
as it has also sometimes befallen ambitious Princes, who, striving to augment
their Power, and Dominions, beyond the boundaries of Justice, have, instead of
new Acquists, forfeited their ancient and lawful possessions. The Gardiners Ass
in the Apologue desining to mend himself by changing Masters, found at a
dear-bought experience, none so kind as the first; The Observation of the Evil
of those days has given us reason, to believe, That wisdom best, which is
learnt at the cost of others, and to remember the Wise man's advice, Meddle not
with those who are given to change. This I speak as to the Fundamental of the
Government, which can never be altered by the Wit of Man, but for the worse:
But the Superstructures of Hay and Stubble are grown so cumbersom and rotten,
that they are fit for nothing but the Fire.

Though I am far from giving credit, to any prediction, or Prophecy, but those
of Holy Writ, yet I cannot but remember you, of that old Latin one, Rex albus,
etc. on which you know, our wishes taught us, to fix a pleasing interpretation.
This hint will bring to your mind, what perhaps has not been there almost these
thirty Years, That both for his Innocence, and the accidental Snow, that fell on
his Hearse, the late King Charles was that white King, who for some time, was to
be the last in England: That afterward his Son, shoud from beyond the Seas,
return to the possession of his Crown, and that in his days, Religion and Laws
shoud be reformed, and settled, upon the eternal Foundations of Truth and
Justice. The fulfilling of this Prophecy now, will seem as miraculous an Effect
of Providence, as that of our Soverain's Restoration, and will as much eternize
the Wisdom of the Parliament, as the other their Loyalty. What remains of this
undon, we might hope to see finished, as old as we are, if they would be pleased
to espouse it heartily, and defend themselves against the noise, wranglings,
and opposition of the Lawyers and Clergy, who are no more to be consulted in
this Case, than Merchants concerning Exchange, etc. because, as the Wise
Syracides observed, their Interest would bias them: There is (says he) that
counsels for himself; beware therefore of a Counselor; and know before what
need he has, for he will counsel for himself.

There was Law before Lawyers; there was a time when the Common Customs of the
Land were sufficient to secure Meum and Tuum; What has made it since so
difficult? nothing but the Comments of Lawyers, confounding the Text, and
writhing the Laws like a Nose of Wax, to what Figure best serves their purpose.
Thus the great Cook, bribed perhaps by Interest, or Ambition, pronounced that
in the Interpretation of Laws, the Judges are to be believed before the
Parliament: But others, and with better Reason, affirm, That it is one of the
great Ends of the Parliaments Assembling, To determine such causes, as ordinary
Courts of Justice coud not decide.

The Laws of England, are divided into Common and S^^ate Law; the Common are
ancient Customs, which by the unanimous and continued usage of this Kingdom,
have worn themselves into Law; Statutes are the positive Laws of the Land,
founded on particular accidents and conveniences not provided for by the Common
Law; Civil and Canon Law, are of no force, but as they are incorporated, into
the body of one or other of these Laws, if either may be called a body which
has neither head nor foot; For they lie scattered in some few books, Bracton,
Littleton, Glanvil, Fleta, Cook, Plouden, Dier, Crook, etc. their Commentaries
or Reports; or rather in the arbitrary Opinion of the Judges, or some celebrated
Lawyers; For nothing is in this Trade certain or regular; what one gives under
his hand for Law, another gives the direct contrary; Judgments and Decrees
reverst, as if that coud be just one day, that is unjust another: and why in
England must Law and Equity be two things? Since Reason and Conscience in all
other parts of the World are one and the same; and why cannot Laws be so
plainly worded, as that men of common sense, may without an interpreter,
discover the meaning? if they be not so ordered, speedy and exact justice will
at best be retarded. But you will tell me there would be no need to complain, if men
would follow Christ's advice, If any man will sue thee at the Law, and take away
thy Coat, let him have thy Cloak also; the Reason was so plain, that it was
needless to express it, viz. least the Lawyer, shoud com between, and strip you
naked, even of your shirt. This you see is prudence as well as Religion, as
indeed al Christ's precepts are in the very affairs of this World. Whatsoever
was true of the Jewish Lawyers, the present practice of some of ours, renders
them Obnoxious, to the censures of the sober, and the curses of the passionate;
most men agreeing, that to go to Law, is like a Lottery, or playing at Dice,
where if the game be obstinatly pursued, the Box-keeper is commonly the
greatest Winner. But since some men will be fools or knaves, why shoud not the
few honest be as much secured as possible?

When the Parliament have settled the Laws, I wish they would think of some more
fitting restraint of Offenses, than what the penal Statutes direct almost for
every crime, The Loss of Life. If we examine the severity of this practice, we
shall find it contrary to the Law of nature, the positive Law of God, Thou
shall not Kill, and ineffective of the intent of Laws, Amendment. Self
preservation is the chief design of Nature; To better which, and not to destroy
it, was the ground and end of Government and Laws; which makes it contrary to
Reason, That any Means shoud be made or declared such, which were destructive
of the end, for which they were made.

If then the loss of life, as it most certainly does, puts an end, to al
earthly happiness, it is evident, that it never was, nor ever coud be, judged an
Instrument productive of that end; perhaps it may be said, that this may be
true, of every single man, as such; and yet may be false, when considered, with
respect to the whole, as a Member of the Society: I answer, It cannot be true,
in the later, if false in the former; Because we must believe, that at first,
every man considered what was absolutely best for himself, without any respect
to another, on whom, he cannot be supposed otherwise to look, then as he was,
or might be subservient, to his own particular and immediate happiness. And
since the whole is made up but of several individuals, it must be granted, that
every of them had the same considerations: and since it was not in the power of
any, to transfer that right to another, which nature had denied to himself, we
may then safely conclude, it is against the Law of nature i. e. against reason,
to believe, that the power, of Life or Death' by consent of al, without which
there was no law, coud at first be vested in any supreme power; and that the
useing of it, does naturally put us into a state of war, the Evil because
directly destructive of Happiness, designed to be avoided. This is a truth
implied in the Law of England, not only by binding the Criminals to restrain
their Warring, but also by the punishment inflicted on Felo's de se, which
supposes no man to have power over his own life, as certainly he must have had
if he coud have given it to another. Nor will the difficulty be removed whether
we derive government either of the other two ways, Paternal right, or the
immediate gift of God; for Parents had no such Power by nature, in the state
whereof we are al equal. We are little more obliged to them for our being, than
to the influence of the Sun, both as to us are involuntary causes; that which
binds children to an indispensable duty of gratitude, is the parents care in
providing for their wel-being, when they are unable to shift for themselves,
and their giving them virtuous education, (that which is of al, the truest
obligation,) than which nothing is among us more neglected; which has made some
at the gallows, not without cause, take up the advice of Jobs Wife against God,
first curse their parents, and then dye; Children may indeed be ungrateful,
which is the worst, or the Al of crimes, but parents cannot revenge this by
death without being unjust; because there ought to be a proportion between the
crime, and the Punishment, and a warrantable Authority in him that inflicts it,
which in this case are al wanting; for Ingratitude, Theft, Rapin, and what ever
else is practiced by the wicked, are in themselves repairable, and the sufferer
may in an equal measure be compensated for his loss, for bona fortunae or the
goods of Fortune are exterior to us, and consequently accidental, and when we
are despoiled of them by any, we have full satisfaction by a restitution in
specie, or in value; this course is the measure and square of al Civil
contracts; for if I detain wrongfuly the money you lent me, I am compellable but
to repay you. Why then shoud it be Capital, to take your Horse without consent,
when either restitution, or a punishment more commensurate to the Offense may
be had? As for the authority of the punisher which must be warrantable, it is
plain the Father has no such over the Children who in the state of Nature are
equal with him; for since he gave not the Being, he cannot legally take it
away, and for the Act destroy the Agent; punishment being designed, not only
for the terror of others, but for the amendment of the Offender: To destroy
then the last, that such as are guiltless may continue so, is to my
apprehension, a piece of the highest Injustice. Besides, no Prince claims a
right over the Subjects Life, what ever he does to his Crown, otherwise than by
the positive Laws of the Land, which suppose the man himself to have given that
power by his consent, which is already proved impossible; Therefore we may
conclude, the inflicting of Death is against the positive Law of God, who has
reserved this to himself, as a peculier Prerogative, and although he has allowed
the Rulers of the Earth to share in his Titles, yet least they shoud entrench
on his Honor (of which he is very jealous) by exceeding the bounds of Reason,
he immediately subjoyns, but ye shall die like men, to put them in mind that they
were to act as such. It cannot then be supposed, that human constitution can
make that just which the Almighty declares unlawful. He that does so, sets
himself up above all that is called God, destroys moral good and evil, makes
Virtue and Vice but only names, which if allowed, we may bid farwell to the
People and Princes security; for this, roots up the very Foundations of Peace
on Earth, as well as joy in Heaven.

Nor will it serve to say, This was practiced in the Jewish Commonwealth; That
was God's own peculiar Province; and He that was sole Author of Life, might
dispose on it at his pleasure; and tho every part of that Economy be not
accountable, yet it is not without good Grounds supposed, because the Jews
Happiness or Misery seems to have consisted in the enjoyment or want of
Temporal Blessings, that the taking away Life here, was in lieu of that
punishment, which Sinners under the Gospel, are to receive in another Life: And
unless Human Laws might as immediately be called His, and that every Magistrate
were a Moses, I coud not believe it lawful for them to follow that Example;
especially considering, that they do not write after this Copy, in the
punishment of al Crimes: I will not make Comparison in many, yet I cannot but
take notice, that Idolaters, and Inciters to it, were there punished with Death,
while among us Atheism and Irreligion do not only go free, but the Professors
of those admirable good Qualities, pass for Wits and Virtuoso's: Drunkenness,
and Gluttony, are esteemed as Marks of good Breeding; computing the Abilities
of our Brains, by the number of Bottles our Stomacs can hold: This Vice, among
the Jews, was accounted so ridiculously silly, that they coud not believe, it
was possible for Men grown to the ordinary years of Understanding to be guilty
of it; and therefore we find no Punishment allotted, but for Children, viz. That
if drunken or gluttonous Children did not by the Parent's Admonition and
Correction learn more Wit, that then their Parents were obliged to bring them
forth, and testify their Folly, and with the Congregation stone them to Death.

But this abominable childish Crime, the Mother of al imaginable wickedness,
has among us no Punishment, or what is the same, if not worse, none inflicted.

As to the third part of the Assertion, viz. That the loss of Life is
ineffencive of the Intent of the Law, Amendment; This will appear true, by
observing, that Men, whose loose Education has made it their Interest, to wish
there were no other Life, by often wishing, and never considering, come at last
to be Fools; and with them, to say in their Hearts, there is no God: we have no
way to live, thanks to our good Parents, or our Country, but to rob, or steal;
as for the next Life, if there be any such thing, let that look to it self; let
us provide for this; a short one, and a merry; who knows, but we may escape
seven years? and that is the Age of a Man: If we are taken, and cannot get a
Pardon, it is but a few Minutes Pain, and there is an end: Thus these foolish
Wretches discourse themselves to the Gallows; on which, did you but know, the
vast numbers hanged, for some years last past, you would quicly believe, that
sort of Punishment rather makes more, than frightens any, from being Thieves,
Robbers, or other Criminals. In the Eastern Monarchies, the greatest Emperors,
the Turk himself tho always in War, fancy some kind of Art or Trade; and by
this do not only divert themselves, but by their Examples more powerful than
any precept, oblige the People to so necessary a Practice. The Ladies, even the
greatest, of al other Countries, have callings too, and spend not their whole
days, in making and receiving Visits, or in Preparations for them, exquisit
Dressings. If by such a Course, or any other, People were induced not to live
in Idleness, none would be under a necessity of starving, or breaking the Laws,
as many now are. And if afterward, any were still found guilty, a Punishment
likely to prevent others, and do a farther Good to the Public, would be to take
away the Names of al Criminals, that They may be no more had in Remembrance;
put them into a common Livery, a Fools-coat, red and yellow; keep their Heads
continually shaved, their Foreheads stigmatized with Marks distinguishing
their Crimes, and their Estates forfeited to increase the Princes Revenu;
condemn them to public Work - houses, Mines, or Galleys: The Labor and Toil,
the hard Fare, and the Disgrace, would deter more than Death; and, as some
believe, be more agreeable to the dictates of Nature, to the Law of God, and to
the profit of the Commonwealth. In Cases of Murder, the Public loses too much
by the Slain; It will not fetch him back, to send another after him: Why then,
shoud they think themselves satisfied for one Loss, to have it doubled upon
them by another? But supposing (which I never can allow) that Reason requires
Life for Life, can it think it equal, to set the Life of a Man but at a
Shilling? Is a Horse, or a Cow, a Sheep or a Deer, or a less thing, a Cock or a
Hen, an equal price for a Man's Life?

And yet for Perjury, he suffers but a pecuniary Mulct, or loss of ears. Why
shoud not he that swears falsely at least have his Tongue cut out? In the Jewish
Law, the Perjurer was to suffer the same kind of Evil, that he brought upon his
Neighbor; and at this day among the Persians and Indians, a liar is not only
deprived of Honor, but of al further speech: had it bin thus enacted among
Christians, the false Tongue, and the lying lips, would not have destroyed so
many men's lives and fortunes. But if we will not, after the Jewish, and Roman
manner, bring in reparation or the lex talionis, which with them was practiced
in other cases besides that of felony; Let us at least, make some further
provision for the security of man's Life, let it be put out of the Power of one
Witness, observing that great Law that said, at the mouth of two Witnesses or
three, shall he that is worthy of Death, be put to Death, but at the mouth of
one witness, he shall not be put to Death. What I seem to say paradoxically on
this subject, I would have you understand, as I intend it, of the first
societies of mankind; and you may likewise further observe, that tho custom and
the positive Laws have made punishment by Death, the practice of al Nations,
yet with humble submission to my superiors, I persuade my self, it was
introduced by absolute power among the Heathens, and since continued among
Christians, because they did not fully consider, that a better way might be
found for correcting and avoiding crimes.

Having now provided against Death, upon the account of any Crime, it may well
enuff consist with the Kings Mercy and goodness (which invite him to be tender
of the Lives of his Subjects) to determine positively, never to grant a Pardon
or remittal of the punishment to any Criminal, tho never so great a Person. In
Edward the thirds time it was enacted That no Pardon shoud be granted out of
Parliament; I wish it might graciously please his Majesty with his Parliament,
To enact further, That no Pardon shoud at any time be granted; Then which I am
sure nothing would more contribute to the perfect observance of the Laws.

Tho our Laws cannot, yet an entire execution of them in their utmost severity,
may be as unalterable, as those of the Meads and Persians; which course would
prevent the many il effects the hope of Pardon does now daily occasion, tho
there never were fewer granted, yet so long as there is any ground of hope, the
Debauchee is encouraged to go on in his folly, and none being particularly
excluded, he reckons himself not incapable of that Grace.

But now admitting, that the Laws were never so good, if they be Of the Courts
of Judicature.
not duly and equally Administered by the several Courts of Judicature, the
Evils do still remain. To prevent which great Inconvenience, such has been the
happy Contrivance of England's Constitutions, that the same Power that gives
the Law, cannot only pronounce it (in spite of Cok's Assertion to the contray)
but has also determined, That it shoud be a part of its own Power, To call al
inferior Courts, and Officers, Justices of the Peace, and others, to a strict
examination, How they have squared their Actions and Proceedings, to the Rule
they have given them; From which, when they are found to deviat, it would be for
the advantage of al, That the Parliament would exert its ancient Power. In
regulating the many Abuses crept into inferior Courts: Into which if there was
ever need of looking, there is now at this day, when the complaints are loud;
By which, tho perhaps Molehills may be made Mountains, Yet all this Smoke cannot
be without some Fire. This I have bin told for certain, That their Judgments are
founded as much upon Rules or interpretations of Statutes of their own
pleasure, introduced by the intrest of Lawyers, and Officers, as upon the
strict letter of the Laws, in which your Education, tho not your Practice, and
your long Observation, has made it superfluous for me, to particularise the
many Irregularities in the administration of Justice, which would fill a larg
Volum.

But to begin with the Courts, I think it were convenient that each of the Four
at Westminster shoud be reduced to their ancient Practice, and not suffered to
Encroah upon one another, to the Subjects great vexation, who often quits his
Cause rather than follow it through all the mazes of the several Courts, where at
last after some years tossing by Writs of Error, etc. from Post to Pillar, if
his money does but hold out, to make the Lawyers that sport, he may sit down by
his loss, or have recours to the Arbitriment of two honest Neighbors, which at
first had bin the speediest, and cheapest way of justice.

In ancient days, the Kings Bench intermedled only, with the Pleas of the
Crown; But now an Ac Etiam, ushered in by a feignd assertion of Force and Arms,
and by supposing the Defendant to be in Custodia Marescalli, or the Plaintiff
privileged some other way in that Court, robbs the Common Bench, whose
jurisdiction even by Magna Charta is of al Common Pleas between Party and
Party. The Common Bench, by practice of Atturneys not to be behind hand, has
likewise of late days introduced an Ac Etiam, and several Debts or Promises are
supposed, with intent to bind the Subject to special Bail, whereas I am
confident, it cannot either by Common or Statute Law be evinced, that anciently
special Bail or a Capias, before Summons was in any action required; and that
therefore it is a mere invention to get money, and to vex and impoverish the
Subject.

The Exchequer was only to hold Plea, of such Actions, where the Plaintiff was
really indebted to the King, (and perhaps too, not able otherwise to pay it) or
where the Parties were by their Privilege to plead or to be impleaded in that
Court. But now, by falsely suggesting, They are indebted to the King, and not
able to pay him but out of the thing in demand, they are suffered to su in that
Court, alleging a Quo minus, etc. in their Declaration: But before such
Irregularities were introduced, it was not so much Law, as Honesty, Prudence,
and skill in Arithmetic, that were the necessary Qualifications of the Barons:
In which Court, a Chancery was erected, to moderate the Rigor of the Fines and
Amerciaments estreated into that Court, and to extend to the Kings Debtors,
those favors which the Barons coud not show. The Causes then remaining for the
High Court of Chancery, were the Penalties and Forfeitures between man and man,
which at Common Law were du, and al other Causes, that for want of Evidence
were no where else tryable. But such have bin the mighty contrivance of the
Practisers in that Court, that they have found out a way for the Trial of al
Causes there, where notwithstanding a man's pretense in his Bil, That he wants
Witnesses (tho that be but a tric to entitle the Court to the action) after he
has Obliged the Defendant to swear against himself, contrary to the Common Law,
that of Nature Nemo tenetur prodere seipsum, which seems to be the possitive
intent of Magna Charta, he takes out a Commission to Examine Witnesses. In the
Civil Law the Complainant, if required, is obliged, as well as the Defendant, to
swear the Truth of the Bill; and sure, that is as fitting to be don, in the
King's great Court of Equity and Conscience, as in the ordinary Courts of
Justice in other Nations. Nor would it be amiss, That al Witnesses shoud in that
Court, as well as others, give their Testimony, Viva voce, and that there shoud
be some unalterable Rules both for the Officers of the Court, and the Clients;
since Conscience, and right Reason, are always the same and unalterable; which
would prevent the Reversing of Decrees, (a tacit Confession They were unjust)
and other Inconveniences, too many to be recounted; only One is so notorious, I
cannot pass it by, The assuming a Power of Impeaching Judgments at Common Law,
which the Statute declares to be Praemunire.

Another Practice as inconvenient as any, is, The Judges giving too great an
Authority to a former Judges Report or Opinion: It were to be wished, That in
the rest of the Courts, the present Practice of the wise Lord Chancellor Finch
were observed; who considering That a Report is founded upon such Reasons, as
are not with the Report conveyed to us, that only stating in brief the matter
of Fact; and that the Case is alterable by any one Accident, rightly infers,
That no Report, but the Reason of the present Case squared to the Rules of the
Law, ought to guide his Judgment.

To this may be added, That in every Court there shoud be a settled Number of
Clerks, Attorneys, and Lawyers as well as Judges: That these how just soever,
shoud not continu above three Years in any one Court. Whatever the Sherifs
Power was formerly, sure I am, That exercised by the Judges exceeds what now
they are possessed of; and yet the Wisdom, of former Ages, thought not fit, to
entrust the former two years together. That they shoud be obliged to give an
Account in public of al their proceedings, at the expiration of the said time.
That they be under a pecuniary Mulct, besides an Oath, to administer justice
impartially, in imitation of God, who to mind them of their great Duty, graces
them with his own Title, saying, Ye are al. Gods, and therefore must do as I do,
ye shall not regard in judgment the Power of the Mighty, nor the Distress of the
Poor. That the Judges, Lawyers, Atturneys and Clarks, shoud have out of the
public Revenu, sufficient established Salaries; To take no Fees, or Gratuity
whatsoever directly or indirectly; It not seeming reasonable that the people
shoud pay any thing for Justice, But as that Charge may be included in the
public Taxes; That no Offices whatsoever be Sold, and nothing but Merit to
entitle any man; For if Offices be purchased by the interest of Friends, or
Money, it is unreasonable, to expect, That Justice too, may not be bought and
sold; And for this Reason, it is as fit to make Laws, against this practice in
others, as against Simony in the Clergy. No man to have two Offices, or to act
by Deputy, but on extraordinary occasions. That al Causes be determined, at
farthest in six months; And that such, as through difficulty, or other accidents,
cannot be determined within that time, the Parliament at next Sessions shoud
decide them. To oblige the Judges to proceed exactly according to the strict
Rules of the Law made by Parliaments: For notwithstanding what the Lord Coke
says, It Is their duty, only Legem Dicere, not Legem dare; And therefore, where
ever any thing comes to be disputed, of the meaning of the Statutes, or that
any Cause happens, for which there is not exact and sufficient provision made,
they are to have recourse to the Parliament, whose Power is not only Legem
dare, but dicere: For it appears, That in ancient times, when Justice was more
speedy, and Statutes fewer, or rather none at al, the great business of the
Parliament, was to give Sentence in all difficult Causes, and to correct the
miscarriages, or sinister Practice of al inferior Courts and Officers, and
therefore was commonly known by the name of Curia Magna. Before the Conquerors
time, there was no such thing, as Courts at Westminster-Hal; The manner then,
of distributing Justice, was both speedy and cheap: the County being divided
into several Portions, there was in every Manner a Court, where all the Causes,
arriving within that Precinct, were determined by the Thane and his assistants;
but if too hard, they were removed by Appeal to the higher Court of the
Hundred, where all the chief and Wise Men within that Territory with the
Hundreder or Aldermannus gave Judgment; And if any Cause proved too difficult
for this Court, then they appealed to the County Court, where all the several
Thanes and Hundreders with the chief of the County called Comes, and sometimes
Vicecomes, judged it: But such Causes as were too intricat for them, were
removed to the great Court or Parliament, then known by several other Names:
Which jurisdiction was exercized, some Ages after the Conquest; Whence Sir
Edward Coke may be well suspected a greater Lawyer than an Antiquary; or else the
liberty they took, was the occasion of his exalting the Judges Power, in
expounding Statutes, above that of the Parliament.

Having now made it plain That the Parliament has this Power, and always had,
it were to be wished, they would make use of it, in strictly regulating the
Disorders of al inferior Courts, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil: Which perhaps
can never be better don, than after the manner of the famous Venetian
Commonwealth, by erecting a new Magistracy, or Court of Inspection, public
Censors, men of great Candor and Integrity, whose Power shoud extend, to the
Cognizance of al manner of Actions in Courts great and small; Of the demeanor of
al Officers of the State of what degree or quality soever, who taking care thus
of the Execution of the Laws, shoud be obliged from time to time, to give a full
and impartial Information to the Parliament, in whose Power alone it shoud be,
upon Conviction of the Criminal, to Suspend, Degrade, or otherwise Punish,
according to the Provisions they themselves make in such cases. That it may be
lawful for all Persons to address themselves immediately to these Censors,
whose Information shall by them be fully Examined, and neither their Informers,
nor themselves, liable to any Actions or Suits, upon account of their
Proceedings; to be accountable, to the grand and supreme Court of Judicature:
That their Number be such, as may serve to go Circuits round the Kingdom.
These, as the other Judges to be altered, every 3 Years.

And because nothing does more conduce, to the good of mankind, next to
wholesome Laws, and the practice of piety, than the Knowledge of things past: not
any thing being truer, then that What is, has bin, and there is nothing new
under the Sun; a perfect relation of which begets a great Understanding and
deep Judgment; the sense whereof made a Wise King say, None were so faithful
Counselors, as the Dead: That therefore the Parliament would appoint two of the
most learned of those Censors (acquainted with all the most secret affairs of
state; which if not as Counselors, yet as Hearers, under the same obligation
of secrecy, as Secretaries or Clarks of the Counsel, they may understand) to
write especially the matters of fact of al affairs and occurrences. The Annals
not to be made public, til the Writers, and al concerned, were gone off the
Stage. The fear of Offending, and the advantage of Flattery, being removed,
future ages would in the truth of History find that great Rule of Judgment and
Prudence, the World has hitherto been deprived of: There being (a man may
safely say) no true profane History in the World, save that of the Wise
Chinese, who have observed this practice, for several Thousands of Years;
keeping the Records, as an Arcanum for their Princes, who by these means, have
gained a steady judgment, in their own state affairs; which is the reason
given, for the long and prosperous continuance of that great Monarchy.

When the Laws, and Execution of them, are thus established, Of Liberty and
Property.
every Man will be sufficiently secured in the Enjoyment of his Liberty and
Property; which, tho commonly taken for two, are in reality one and the same
thing. I understand by the first, that Power, Man has reserved to himself when
he entered into Society; that is, a Liberty of doing any thing, except what the
Law forbids; or of living conformably to the Laws; not of speaking
contemptuously, of the Rulers of the People, nor of doing what he please, tho
the Law restrain it. By Property, I conceive meant, the right of Enjoying
peaceably private Possessions as bounded by Law: Liberty then respects the
Person, and Property the Estate. These two, I perceive, you have joined with
Religion, as the Of Religion.
three great Abstracts of Human Concerns; For, I presume, you consider Religion
as it is part of that Policy, by which the State is governed, and as such I
shall chiefly take notice of it; leaving it, as it refers to the Soul, and a
future Life, to Divines, whose proper Office it is. Taking it then for granted,
That every wise Man will study that which nearest concerns him; and, That the
Interest of the Soul, and eternal Life, does far exceed the valu of this our
transitory Being; That all Human Laws, are therefore binding, because agreeable
to Nature or Reason, that is, to the Signatures of the Divine Will: That true
Religion was the Law of God, and its end, the Happiness of Man in this Life, as
well as in that which is to Come: That it was divided into two Parts, Duty to
God, and to One another; which later to the thinking Man resolves into Love of
himself, who must find, that his Happiness consisting in the Enjoyment of
himself, cannot be without the mutual Offices and Endearments of Love; which
obliges him, in spite of all his Passions, when he fully considers things, To
do to all Men, as he would be don unto: This then being Human Happiness, and
the End and Foundation of the Laws of God and Man, it was Wisdom to annex this
great motive of Obedience, Religion, or the Consideration of future Rewards and
Punishments, to invite us the more powerfully, to the Obedience of Laws;
without which, even in this Life, we coud not be Happy, they being subbordinat
to one another; that as our Duty in one, makes us happy here, so that of the
other superadds a farther Blessing, and makes us happy hereafter; which later
in the connection of Things, thus ordered by Providence, was not attainable
without the other: And which indeed does declare Religion not to be a part of
Policy, but true Policy to be a part of it; or, in plainer words, That Human
Laws are so much better, that is, so much more binding, as they com nearer to
the Laws of Religion; contrary to which nothing in any Human Institution, can
be obligatory; that is, no Society of Men can make that just, which the Law of
Religion, or Reason, has made unjust: If then the Interest of State, and
Religion, be so intermixed, it is no wonder, That Men shoud be very sollicitous
not to be mistaken, in that which comprehends Both, the Human, and the Divine,
or among us, the Christian Law: And because it is as natural for Men, to have
different Understandings, consequently different Opinions (which are the
necessary Effects of the former, or of Education, and both equally out of our
Power) as it is to have different Complexions: It is impossible, that all Men
should exactly agree, in the meaning of any difficult Matter. If then the
Meaning of the Law be not to be had, it is not our Fault if we do not obey it,
which we must do, or be miserable. Now, because many evil Consequences, if not
prevented, would issu from hence, we must consider farther, That al wise Law -
givers impose nothing beyond the Power of the Person under the Law; For, Law
being the Rule of Actions, if I do not or cannot know it, it is no Rule to me.
Therefore, to understand this great Affair aright, let us examine, whether these
following Positions, and their Consequences, be not natural Truths.

That God did really purpose the Happiness of al Mankind: That therefore, the
way, or means, by which that was to be attained, was to be plain and easy, no
matter of doubt or dispute: That this way, is no where delivered unerringly,
but in the Scriptures, which al Christians allow, to be the Word of God: That
all the Disputes, are pretended to be proved by Scripture, that is, by
Consequences from thence: And since all the Parts of that Holy Writing must
agree with one another, it is plain, that the Consequences are not natural,
because contradictory, of which, both parts cannot be true; and therefore, the
Matter in dispute concerns us not: That, since al our Duty is comprised in
Scripture, the Rule for the Ignorant, as well as the Learned, Comments do amuse,
and confound, rather than expound the Text: That Disputes, begetting Heat and
Passion, are not only impertinent to our Duty, but uncharitable and destructive
of Christianity: That only the Fundamentals can be true, or necessary, because
in them alone al agree. That Christ has told us, the sum of al is, To love one
another, a pleasing and a natural Command: That he is the Way, the Truth, and
the Life: That whosoever Believes in Him, shall never perish: That Happiness
is not attainable here, nor hereafter, but by following his Example, and
believing his Doctrine, viz. what is positively affirmed in Scripture, without
examining, how or why; if those had bin necessary, he would not have left them
to the uncertain Disputes of after Ages. That al Ceremonies are in themselves
indifferent, but when commanded, are necessary in their use and practice; but
alterable, at the pleasure of the Imposers: That no Man can be a Christian,
that hates his Brother, i. e. He obeys not Christ's Command, gives not up
himself to the new Commandment, that of Loving one another: That no Man can
avoid Differences in Opinion; and since they are not the Effects of our Choice,
they are not sinful; therefore, he that condems another, for not being of his
Opinion, after he has endeavored, without Prejudice or Interest, to examine and
hold fast that which is best, considers not what he says, or if he do, he is
proud and foolish, because he says, by an implicit Consequence, none is Wise
but himself: That Faith is the Gift of God, but considered in Man, it is a
necessary Act; for when a Man is convinced, that is, has no doubts of the
Credibility of the Proposition, its conformity to Reason, nor of the Person
that he can neither deceive, as having no Interest, nor be deceived, as wanting
no knowledge, it is impossible for him, not to give up his Assent, Whether
Morality or Christianity be (which is much doubted) really different, they can
never be asunder; for the man that is not honest, is not, nor cannot be if he
continues so, a Christian; that what is true in Philosophy, cannot be false in
Divinity; and both Affirm, He that does al he can do, is not to be blamed, he
has don his Duty. That different Opinions not being avoidable, are in
themselves, as harmless and tolerable in a Society, as men can be; because, til
the Man be convinced, his sense of things cannot possibly be altered, after
Conviction, he that continues in an Error, i. e. that perseveres, in spreading
such Opinions, as are destructive of good life, and of public Peace, is a liar
or a mad man; the first, if he do not repent, ought to be expelled the
Commonwealth; the other, if he will not grow sober, must be sent to Bedlam.
From al which, it plainly follows, that our Opinions are not free, that no man
has liberty of Opinion, and that he who desires liberty of speaking what he
pleases, is unreasonable, if he intends to say any thing, that shall disturb the
Peace, and Quiet of his Country; if he may be restrained from that, his Errors
can mischief no other than himself: If the case then be thus, how comes it to
pass, that men fall out, and wrangle about nothing? seek knots in Bulrushes,
make difficulties where God and Nature never made any, puzzle themselves and
others? Let them fool on that have nothing else to do, and follow the Heathens
advice, It Is better to do nothing than be idle. This I confess would not be very
Tragical, if they would be content to be idle themselves, and not make work, and
sad work too, for others: But, Alas, they rob their Master of his Power; and
dogmatically pronounce, we must believe more than Christ tells us is required,
or else we cannot be saved in the next Life, nor happy in this; and many of us
are such silly Fools, that we believe them; and acting accordingly, too great a
number, I fear, make their Assertions good, as those ignorant People do, who
giving Credit to Astrologers, by squaring their Actings to the Predictions, and
therefore sometimes finding these things com to pass, are not only deluded
themselves, but encourage others to be so by such Nonsensical Impostors. But
since al Men have not Understanding, you will ask, How the Evil shall be cured? The
Remedies are only two: First, a right Education; and next, a removal of al
Interest: For, since the Foundations of Religion are Eternal Truths, were Men
rightly instructed, of which al are capable, because al desin'd for Happiness,
and Men got nothing by lying; we shoud have as much Truth, and as little
Disputing in matters of Christianity, as in the Mathematical sciences: Or, at
least, if men defined nothing really but the true Ends of it, Eternal Happiness,
it might be lawful for every Man, even in the way which another calls Heresy,
to worship the God of his Fathers; for, tho one thinks his a clearer or a
shorter way, than that of another, so long as he still goes on; that is, treads
in the Paths of a sober and virtuous Life; tho he may be more dabbl'd, or
longer on the Road, what is that to him? He that finds fault, may miss his own
way, by looking toward his Brother; his particular Duty requires al his care:
Besides, Every Man stands or falls to his own Master. But you will say, It Is
Charity to teach my Brother, and not to suffer sin upon him: It Is very true; but
first, it is not proved, that difference in Opinion is a sin, but the contrary;
next, Charity is not expressed in Thunder and Lightning, sending him headlong
to the Devil, because he will not be presently, whether he can or no, of your
Opinion; which, perhaps, is not truer than his own, tho your greater Confidence
assert it: But Charity is expressed by Meekness, Gentleness, and Love; by
Instruction and Pity, not by Hatred and Revilings; nay, not by Death, the too
often Consequence of Differences in Opinions: From which Considerations, it is
plain, that it is not Reason nor Charity, that divides us; but Interest and
Policy. How far it will consist with the safety of the Public, to suffer such
dangerous Causes of fatal Effects, as are brought in by these Clashes of
Religionists, not Religion, I leave to the Wisdom of the Parliament: Only, to
satisfy that part of your Question, I will give you some short Account, how these
Tares have so sprung up, as to choke almost wholly, all the good Seed sown;
afterward, you may judge if they may not now the Harvest is com, be cut down
gathered apart, and thrown into the Fire.

And surely if these Quarrels were only designed for the Good of the Soul,
(which yet if they were the Promoters, must be Men of wrong Understanding or
Notions, forgetting that Faith is the Gift of God) they would not hate and dam
one another for different, tho false Opinions: Nothing can have that Effect,
but the Committal of Sins; of which holy Scripture pronounces Death, the Wages,
or necessary Consequence: but these we see past over silently, few
Excommunicated for Whoredom, Adulteries, Atheism, and Profaness; many other
Crimes are openly committed without Punishment, which (perhaps) was the end of
instituting Ecclesiastical Courts.

The great desine of Christianity, was in a higher and more refined way the
same with that which Hierocles tells us of Philosophy, The Perfection of human
Life: Therefore, the Primitive Christians knowing the end of their Doctrine was
to make men good, to fill their Hearts with purity of intention productive of
good Works, not to make them Wife (if stuffing their Heads with empty and idle
Notions may be called so) avoided al such with great care, pressing only upon
men the Reformation of their Lives, by the plainess of their Practice and their
agreeableness to Reason; being well assured, the contrary Precepts coud bring
forth nothing, but endless Ianglings, and frivolous Disputes, which would (at
last) not only loosen, but destroy Religion, by taking away Charity, the Bond
and Cement of that and al Perfections. But when the Piety of succeeding Ages
had endowed the Church with Temporalities, and with rich Possessions, the
Churchmen altered their Doctrine, with their way of living; For now, ( kicking
like the Calves of Iesseron grown fat) the former practiced severity was turned
into Wantonness; The plainess of the Precepts, into intricat Niceties; This,
they judged necessary; For, if according to the Promise, the Gospel was to be
so plain, i. e. so agreeable to Nature, and Reason, that a Man might running
see to Read, i. e. a Man that made never so little use of his Reason, that did
but keep his Eyes open against the false Alurements of sense, coud not but
perceive the Lines of his Duty written in very larg and plain Characters:
perceiving every Man thus enabled to Teach his Brother, and that Miracles were
ceased, they found themselves under a necessity to make Godliness a Mystery,
that it might become gain to 'um in an il sense, and that they might secure to
themselves that Veneration and Respect, which otherwise were now like to fail.

Religion, by this means degenerating from its innocence and simplicity, into a
Trade of Policy and Subtilty, an Art to live by, Tent-makers and Fishermen
became too dull and ignorant; The preaching of Christ Crucified was fit only for
the Witty, and the Learned: No wonder then, that being now so much taken up in
refining the Cobweb inventions of their Heads, they wanted leisure to look to
their Feet, to order their steps aright, and therefore went astray, not only
from the Precepts of the Gospel, but the Imitation of the Life of the Holy
Jesus, which was the greater Duty of the two; as the End, for which his
Doctrine, the Means was given. And to make themselves the more admired, they
mixed That with the vain Philosophy of the Greeks, especially Platonism, with
an Addition of many absurd Heathenish, and obsolete Jewish Rites and
Ceremonies. When the Bishops became Princes, the number of Candidats
increascing faster than Preferments coud fall, the Ambitious were induced to
Court them by indirect ways, The Pretense of an extraordinary Knowledge or
Piety, to gain the Interest, and the Favor of great men, and by those steps to
mount the Spiritual Throne of Carnal Pride. Thus when Arius faild of a
Bishopric, enraged that a less learned man shoud deprive him of the Miter, he
resolved upon a malicious Revenge; and to make himself more famous, then the
Crosier coud, under pretense of discovering the falsities crept into Religion,
he alleagd one of the great Mysteries to have more of Platoes Fancy, than of
Christ's Truth in it; This Mother-Heresie by him introduced brought forth many
others, and (which was the greater Evil) has been the parent of uncharitable
Disputes, The certain occasions of much confusion in Life and Doctrine, of
Assassinations and Massacres, of Wars and Desolations.

The Christians now, contrary to Christ's positive Command, Call no man on Earth
Master, i. e. If an Angel from Heaven, (much less, a man) shoud Preach any
other Doctrine to you, than what I (your only Lord and Master) who am now
ascending thither enjoin you to obey, viz. To love one another, hearken not to
him, for, he is a Murderer and a Liar, a Cheat and an Impostor. Neglecting
this, and having the Persons of Men in Honor, they readily embraced their
Opinions; and changing the name of Christians, took up that of the Fathers of
their Sects, as of Arians, etc. These Divisions and Factions, and the
consequent Bloody Wars would persuade us, that Christ came not indeed, to send
peace on Earth, but a Sword; for, these Ringleaders imposed upon the credulous
Multitude, that al those superinduced new Fangles, Diabolical Inventions,
unreasonable Whimsies, and childish Fopperies were the great Pillars and Truths
of Religion; and therefore, to be contended for unto Death; While in the mean
time, they themselves were conscious, that they disputed not for Truth, but
Victory, for the sensual Gratifications of Ambition and vain glory, of pride
and Interest: and, if you will but give your self leisure to look into the
Controversies of former Heretics, or into those of later date, between the
Reformed, and the Church of Rome, etc. you will find them al on one and the same
bottom. The Church of Rome has good Reason, as to this World, not to yield to
any Truth in the point of Transsubstantiation; of which, certainly, it is enuff
to believe simply Christ's own words, This is my Body, because no more is
warranted, and therefore not necessary, and that indeed none of the Expositions
are free from unanswerable Objections, tho none appear so opposite to sense, and
absurd, as that of the Romanists and Lutherans: For if this Power, of working
Miracles be taken from the Priest, it may be thought he has nothing left to
make him Iure Divino; which if allowed, he is quick enuff to foresee that other
Princes may follow the Example of Henry the Eight. Those mistaken, on wilful
Apprehensions have involved the several Kingdoms of Europe, in blood and
confusion, intestine Commotions, and Wars; and will imbroil them yet further, if
the Causes be not removed: This has long been the wishes of some, and the
endeavors of others; but by the success seeing the Disease is not cured, but
that its venom does daily spread more and more, we may safely conclude, Tha^
Disputing is as incompetent a way to resettle the Truth of Religion, as the
Sword is to propagate it. Every Man naturally hates to be accounted a Fool, or
a Liar; and therefore, when worsted by the force of Arguments, (which may be to
him unanswerable, tho not convincing), he falls into Heat and Passion, which the
other returning with equal warmth, at length both lose the Question, and fall
from Words to Blows, from Disputing to Fighting; and not satisfied pedanticly
(for most commonly the Contention is only about Words) to lash one another,
they further make Parties and Factions. These hurried on with the Fury of a
perverse Zeal, the effect of Ignorance, espouse the Quarrel, and pursu the
Folly, and the Malice to the fatal Destruction of thousands, of Millions; as if
there was no getting to the Heavenly- Canaan, the New - Jerusalem, but by
wading, or rather by swimming through the Red Sea of Christian Blood; while, in
the meantime, the first Disputants stand looking on, or like sneaking Cowards
steal away from the Rencounter as soon as they have engaged others more
genrous, but withal more foolish than themselves. This England has to its Cost
experimented, and, it is to be feared, if not timely prevented, will again.

Others, finding the way of Dispute insufficient, believed that the Allowance
of a Toleration to the several contending Sects would do the work; and that in
truth, the denial of it so far as it might consist with the Peace of the
Commonwealth, seemed to be a kind of Persecution not unequal to that of the
Heathen Emperors in the beginning of Christianity: This Opinion being by the
Ring - Leaders infused into the Peoples Minds, who being apt to pity al in
distress, from Pity are induced to Liking, and from liking to Love, they at
length espouse the Party, and with so much the more Violence, by how much the
more it is opposed; nothing being more natural, than to resist Force, and covet
earnestly those things we are forbid. The Consideration of this, and his own
observation, that the more the Christians were put to Death, the more they
increased, made the wise Pliny write to the Emperor Trajan to forbear
Persecution; telling him, That sheading Christians Blood, was sowing the Seed
of the Church; every Man's Death giving to the Multitude a sufficient proof of
the Truth of his Profession, and gaining more Proselites than Preaching coud.
By the Emperor's following this good advice the Christians gained their
Liberty, and he an Accession to his Army; and the great increase of Converts
was thereby much restrained.

The sense of this great Prudence joined with his Majesty's great natural
Clemency, has with good reason prevailed upon his Ministers rarely to execute
the Severity of the Sanguinary and penal Laws upon Dissenters; and I am well
assured, that did they not believe by those Statutes remaining still in force,
That they are under Persecution or the dread of it; instead of increasing much
within these few years, they would certainly have decreased: I am therefore
persuaded, that Toleration with convenient Restrictions would lessen the Evil,
and remove most of its inconveniences; tho al can never be taken away without
another sort of Education. And if the Parliament that give it, find it
hereafter inconvenient, they may alter or annul it, how they please. In this
Toleration al Opinions are to be provided against that are destructive of good
Life, together with the consequences rather than occasions, Atheism and
Irreligion. As the Venetians once excluded, so must we for ever prohibit the
Jesuits and other Regulars: The number of secular Priests, and Nonconforming
Ministers or Teachers are to be limited; They with their Flocks Registered, and
to be incapable of any Office in the Commonwealth, and the Teacher to be
maintained by themselves; The richest of the Congregations to be security for
their Preachers, That they shall preach no Sedition, nor have private
Conventicles. That, besides the State may send two to hear al taught; That the
use of al Controversial Catechismes, and Polemical Discourses as well out as in
the Pulpit under strict Penalties be forbid: Such things, no less in their
natures, than their names signifying and begetting Distractions, Rebellions,
and Wars. Tho it be as impossible by Laws or Penalties to alter men's Opinions,
from what either their Temper, or their Education has occasioned, as it is to
change their Complections; Yet if men pursued nothing but Godliness and
Honesty, they would find their Differences in Opinion, are no more hurtful than
restrainable: And to make them less so, all names of hatred and division are to
be taken away, and the Parable of Christ's seamless Coat to be really fulfilled
again. That al, whatever their single Opinions be, be called by no other Name
than that of Christians, for indeed as such they al agree, that is, in the
Fundamentals of Religion; (as for the disputed things they are already shown
not certain, therefore not necessary, consequently (to us) impertinent which of
the assertions be true,) and only differ by the considerations of Pride, or
interest, as they are Trinitarians or Antitrinitarians, Arians, Socinians,
Papists or Protestants, Remonstrants or Antiremonstrants, Iansenists or
Molinists, Franciscans or Dominicans, Lutherans or Calvinists, Presbyterians or
Independants, etc. But for my own part I am of opinion, That we shall never
arrive at the true state of Christianity either by Disputing without Toleration,
or by Toleration with Disputing i. e. we shall not come to live Righteously,
Soberly, and Godly in this present World: For, disputing destroys al, and
Toleration alone will not take away those wrong Notions, with which the present
Age is prepossessed; tho some of the prejudices may be lessened by softness and
gentleness, by Love and Persuasions; this Iconfess will not do in all, because al
have not understanding, and such as want it must inevitably run into Error;
For, whatever the Philsophers Dispute whether the Will and the Understanding be
distinct Faculties, or distinct Operations of the same Soul, it plainly appears
in all our actions, that we will or nil things according to our Understandings,
which as well or il informed make us do things good or evil; so that, til our
Notions are rectified, we are to be pityed and instructed, not hated or
condemned. When by an excellent Education and a good Example we are taught not
only to know, but to practice our Duty, it will then be almost morally
impossible for us to offend; whereas, on the contrary while both are now
neglected, it is a wonder we are not worse: Pursuant to this, Solomon gives a
wise Direction, Train up a Child in the way thou would have him to go, and
when he is old, he will not depart from it. The great Business, then, not only
to assuage the pain, (which in the present Circumstances cannot be don without
Toleration) but wholly to remove the Distemper, is to introduce such a fixed
Method of Education, as may imprint on our Minds, true and early Notions of
Virtu and Religion.

The Parliament have lately begun to look into the Practice of Piety, and to
prevent or lessen Profanation and Debaucheries have enacted, That
Hackney-Coaches (it had bin more equal if al had bin under the Penalty,) shall
after the Jewish manner of Sabbath, rest from Labor: I wish, they would now be
pleased, to take care the People keep the Christian-Sabbath as they ought; Not
so much in a Rest from bodily Labor, as from Sin, the greater toil of the Soul;
to which, they are obliged by every days Duty; The use of the Seventh, above
the rest, seeming to be set apart for returning Thanks for Blessings, and for
Exhortations effective of Holiness and a good Life: The Duty of that day is not
fulfil^d, by hearing a quaint-Man preach himself, not Christ; Policy, not
Morality; confute the Pope, the Calvinist, or the Arminian, the Presbyterian or
the Episcopal -- Such Discourses engender nothing but Strife, and tend not to
Edification; they are the vain Traditions of Men, in which we shoud quicly
find, did we but seriously consider, that there was nothing of that Faith,
without which we cannot please, nor of that Holiness, without which no man shall
see God:

And, since the Parliament by that last mentioned Act, have begun to tithe Mint
and Commin; it is to be hoped, they will go on, and not leave the weightier things
of the Law undon; that their Wisdoms and their Zeal will be more employed about
the Power, than the form of Godliness, which may for ever be established by the
following Method, or such other as they shall think more agreeable, viz. To make
new Divisions of Parishes, which may with more convenience to the People be
don, than as at present they stand, by limiting every Parish to the compass of
about three Miles Square, and building a Church in the central - place, to hold
about a thousand; and to apportion the Parishes in Cities at least to the like
number of People: This will reduce the Parishes from about ten to a little more
than four Thousand. To erect Schools in every Parish, where all the Children
shall be instructed, in Reading, Writing, and the first Elements of Arithmetic
and Geometry without charge to the Parents: Whence to the greater Schools, to
be erected in the Dioceses, Counties, or Hundreds, after the manner of
Westminster, Eaton, or Winchester, so many of the ripest and best Capacitated
as shall suffice for the supply of al Callings that make Learning a Trade (as
Divinity, Physic, and Law) may be yearly elected, to be trained up in the
further necessary Parts of Learning, and from thence yearly sent to the
Universities; from the Universities upon al vacancies, Schoolmasters and
Ministers to be chosen; the first, not under five and twenty years; the later,
not under Thirty (the age allowed among the Jews for Doctors or Teachers, and
at which our Savior began to Preach); and both, to be Masters of Art, before
the one be Licensed, or the other Ordained by the Bishop; and none to be
Ordained, before they are secured of being Noble Men's Chaplains, or elected to
Parishes. That the Bishoprics be also divided according to Convenience and the
number of Parishes; That the Ministers and Schoolmasters be Celibats, not
under a vow (as in the Church of Rome) but on condition of quitting their
Benefices upon Marriage, and returning to a Lay-life; For, that of the priests
being jure Divino being disputed, is therefore (to say no more) to our
Salvation not necessary to be believed; For, unless they demonstrat the
contrary by Scripture, the sufficient Rule of Faith, or by Miracles, men will be
apt to believe the Story of an indelible Character, to be a Relic of Popery,
invented to aggrandize the Honor and Power of the Church, turned into a Court
of Rome; But be it what it will, it is plain they cannot be greater than St Paul,
who did not only for Convenience of the Church, avoid leading about a Wife, or
a Sister, but wrought at his Trade after he had Received the Holy Ghost; of
which it were to be wished al Divines showed themselves possessed, by a Life
conformable to that of the Holy Jesus. But without doubt there will be enuff
found to undertake this calling, on these terms, tho seemingly difficult.

By this course, there is a provision made for the Incontinency of such of the
Priests as find themselves Flesh and Blood; which if don in the Church of Rome,
would free it from great Scandal.

That a book of Homilies be compiled; for variety four for every Sunday, and
two for each festival or holy day. That nothing be inserted, but Dehortations
from Vice and Exhortations to Virtu, neither Controversies nor State Affairs so
much as oblicly glanced upon. That a Catechism adapted to the meanest Capacity
be composed, showing the Duty of Christians according to the express Words of
the Text of Scripture, without straining or misapplying any one, (as is don in
two many of those now extant), and without touching upon any one disputed
point. That, all the Books of Controversial Divinity, as well those in private
hands, as in Booksellers, be bought up by the State, and placed in the
Kings-Library, or burnt. That, all the Commentaries on the Bible be reviewed by
sober, moderate and learned Men; and as many of them as contain more than what
directly tends to the Illustration of the Text, by recounting the Language,
Customs and Ceremonies of the Times and places it was writ in, follow the fate
of the others. And because it is reasonable to believe, There is no such entire
Work extant, in imitation of the Septuagint Translation, there may be seventy
appointed for this to be in Latin, and for the Homilies and Catechism in
English: which being don, let all the present Expositions be sent to the
Library, or the Fire. That the same Persons or others be ordered to pick out of
the Scripture al such Passages as tend to the encouragement of a Holy Life, and
to put them into one piece in English for common use.

I have heard some sober Men wish, that English Bibles were not so common, that
the ignorant and unwary might not wrest the hard texts to their own
destruction, nor to that of the Public Peace: But you know, I have often told
you, I looked upon the variety of Translations out of the Original into the
vulgar Languages, as the best Comment.

These things being don, To take the Printing of Books into the state; it is as
necessary as the Mint; false Coynage of Books has don England more mischief,
than ever that of Money did, or will do; The Licensing of Printing, or importing
from Beyond Sea, will not otherwise prevent great Evil to Church and State. That
there be but a convenient number of book - sellers permitted; Those to be under
obligation, to vend no other books, then such as are Printed in this allowed
Printing House, where foreign books with advantage to the Public may be
reprinted. The hindering foreign Coin from being current, is not so useful and
advantageous, as the care in this will prove, to the Kingdom.

When Things are thus far settled, the Bishops (who are not to be chosen under
forty) are to see, that al Ministers, Schoolmasters and Churchwardens, do
their respective Duties; going about, and visiting Parish by Parish, as was the
Ancient Practice, Confirming, after Examination, and exhorting al to continu
obedient to the Laws of God and Man; reprehending and suspending such as they
find faulty without favor or affection, the Ministers and Schoolmasters, from
Office and benifice; the people from the Sacraments (which is every where
monthly at least to be Administered) til after Repentance expressed in the
reformation of their Lives.

As for the Jurisdiction of Ecclesiastical Courts, because it is a kind of
imperium in imperio, and that through the greatness of the Bishops other Charge,
they cannot officiat in this, to take away and prevent abuses it is to be laid
aside; and other, or the same Punishments for the crimes there usually tryable,
inflicted in the ordinary Courts, upon the Bishops, or the Minister and
Churchwardens Certificate of the Matter of Fact; in whom alone the Power of
Examination shoud reside: And, because the office of Bishops, Ministers, and
Schoolmasters will be of great Labor, none shoud continu in them beyond Sixty,
nor so long unless they are found fitting: After that Age, al of'um to have a
handsome decent Retreat in Colleges purposely built; where the superannuated of
each province, the emeriti in the Christian warfare, may spend the Remnant of
their days without Care, in quiet and Devotion.

To assist and ease the Bishop, there should be, as formerly, Rural Deans over
every ten or twenty Parishes. Part of the Ministers Business should be to
instruct the Boys every Saturday in the Schools, in all the Duties of Religion;
To Catechize and read the Prayers and Homilies on Sundays in public; The rest
of the Week, between the times of Prayer to be celebrated twice a day, to go
from House to House, exhorting and dehorting, as occasion requires, visiting
the Sick, and examining the Needs of the Poor, reconciling Differences between
the Neighbors, and taking care, that in every Family the Children, such as are
found fit, by the Electors appointed, not by the Parents blind Fondness, be
constantly sent to School.

After the continued Practice of this course, Christianity will again flourish;
The years of the Minister will make him sober and grave, fit to give Counsel,
which from young Men is now despised. There will then be no need of spending
time in writing Controversies, or studying Sermons, which as now Preached are
rarely understandable or useful to the People; of whom it may be said, the one
is always teaching to no purpose, and the other ever learning, and never coming
to the Knowledge of the Truth.

The Schoolmasters are not only to be learned, but sober and discreet Men; to
be obliged never to whip, or beat the Boys; whose Faults are to be punished by
Exercises, by standing mute or kneeling for certain spaces, or by fasting from
their Victuals, etc. Those that are good, to be encouraged by Priority of
Places, by commendatory Verses made by the higher Forms, etc. The Boys that
need beating, are as unfit to be taught, as the Man is to teach who uses that
tyrannical way, which too much debases the Meek-spirited, and makes the Sullen
more stubborn and ilnatur'd. That whatever any Persons bestow on the Masters be
converted to public Charitable Uses. The Method of Teaching to be drawn up by
some of the Members, (who, it is presumed, will mix Things with Words) and
approved by the whole Royal Society; that confirmed and al others prohibited by
Law.

That in the Universities, none be suffered to continu beyond the Age of
fortyfive, nor above two in any one House or College after thirty-five. That a
new Method be likewise framed by the same Persons for all the Liberal Arts and
Sciences; and that new Academies be built for training up young Noblemen and
Gentlemen in those Exercises, which to the shame and loss of England are now
learnt in France.

That handsome and sufficient Salaries be fixed, and paid out of the public
Revenu, according to every Man's Quality: Bishops equal to one another, Deans to
Deans, Ministers and Schoolmasters to each other: and these to be chosen
gradually, as the pure Consideration of Merit shall invite the Electors. And to
enable the Public as well in paying these Salaries, as in building of Schools,
Churches, Colleges and Hospitals, the whole Revenues of the Church,
Free-Schools, Universities, and Hospitals shoud at the highest valu be annexed
to the Crown, or sold to others that will give more; The Overplus saved by this
new Model, and the Money they would yield beyond any other Land of England, in
regard the Annual Rent is not a Fourth of the real Valu, and yet may be ordered
equally advantageous to the Tenants, as the Fines now make them, would complete
this Work. Thus converting the Patrimony of the Church would be no Sacriledg,
the Pious Use is carried on to the good of Al; and perhaps as first desin'd by
the Donors, when Provision for Wives and Children, not in being, coud not be
thought of; the Care of whom distract many from their Duty, and dis-able them
from keeping in decent Repair the ancient Monuments of Piety built by our
Ancestors. But all these things to be don, without the least prejudice to the
present Incumbents.

When Education is thus settled, the Duty and Interest of Churchmen, and their
Care of Wives and Children removed, Plurality of Livings, and Simony prevented,
as well that of Friendship, of the Smock, marrying of Cousens Neeces, crooked
Sisters, or Lady's Women, as that of the Purse; al which in themselves are
equally Criminous, none but good Men will undertake the Charge: And then the
Objections will vanish which loose Education has infused into the wild and
foolish, viz. That Religion is a Cheat, a tric of State; that the Parson
follows Christ for the Loaves; speaks as does the Lawyer in his Trade, not that
there is any Truth in it, but because he has bosin lingua, etc. To do this, is
neither so strange, nor so difficult, as was the greater alteration made by
Henry the Eighth; who had not in story bin so infamous tho he had seized on the
whole temporalities of the Church, had he but thus disposed of some part. And by
the way you may take notice, that the house of Commons in this point had been
Cromwels in the sixth and eleventh Years of Henry the Fourth, who upon their
advice had seized the Churches Patrimony, had they not by friends and money
prevented the blow; and that de facto, several Bishoprics and livings were
enjoyed by some of his predecessors, which appears not only from History, but
from printed Acts of Parliament.

That it will be no hard Matter, from Graunts Observations, and the Bills of
Mortality, to make a Computation of the Numbers necessary to be sent Yearly to
the Universities, for Divinity, Law, and Physic: The last of which ought so to
be regulated, as not to suffer any to Kill (rather than Cure,) which is daily
don in London, and other parts of the Kingdom, to the prejudice and scandal of
that honorable and sometimes useful Profession, to the loss of the peoples Money
and Lives, to the maintaining of many idle, and ignorant Mountebancs, and
impostors, who to the greater advantage of the Commonwealth, might be
employed, in more safe and beneficial Trades or ways of Living.

This Course will also prevent such evil consequences in Church and State, as
formerly attended the Superfaetations of the Clergy, and the breeding up of
Servitors and poor Scholars (as they well call them) in the Universities; who
being generally of mean Birth, and no less mean Parts, and the attendance upon
their Masters not suffering them so well to attend their Studies; and their
subsistence by Service failing them after they had stayed at the University, no
longer than to incapacitat and unfit them for any other way of Living, and yet
not to qualify them for turning Preachers, However, having chopped a little Logic
and disputed of Ens Rationis, and so fancying they coud Build Castles in the
Air, they assume the confidence to conclude, they cannot Miss of Habitations
on the earth, and so from the Lowest of the People, getting to be put into the
Priests Office for a piece of Bread, they become a great cause of, as well as
they are in Effect, The contempt of the Clergy. And those for want of Knowledge,
lay their foundations in Erroneous Doctrines, in which Nevertheless they coud
not succeed, but by pretending an extraordinary mesure of Saint-ship or
Holiness, Railing at the sins and abuses of the times, which themselves have
occasioned. Thus they creep into houses, and first lead silly Women, and then
their Husbands Captive, as Adam by Eves persuasion eating the forbidden fruit
til he Surfited and died, so these ignorant Zelots not content in King James
his time and the beginning of King Charles the first, to rob the Kingdom of
many Families, til at last, they made themselves the boutefeus of the late
horrid Rebellion; which tho it may be said, to have been principally
occasioned, by such as these, yet not without some Episcopal men's having a
Finger in the Pie: For, to say truth, I know not whether the too great Stifness
in the one, for their Old, or in the other, against those Forms, was most
blameable. But This I know that by the Collision of both parties, as of Flints,
a Fire was kindled not unlike that in the Tails of Samsons Foxes, which proved
as Destructive of the Expectations of profit each had of their own crop, as the
other did to the Philistines corn; Yet had the evil of that, not extended to
any others, but those of the Pulpit, we might now have talked on it without much
regret. What ever such violent disputes, have formerly been able to do, it is my
duty to wish, and Yours to endeavor, that England be no more the Stage of such
Tragedies. Refrain not Counsel when it may do good, and be not backward in
advising that Toleration is the First step, and Education the next that
perfectly leads the way to peace and happiness. This Course being taken, we shall
have no cause to despair, but that Religion will again resume its Naked Truth,
That the Doctrines of men will be judged better or worse, as they more or less
incline to holiness of living; and thus being reduced to a Calmness within our
selves, we need not fear the Designs of Forrainers.

Of whom none, but France, can be supposed to have any upon England; and if
that be The Interest of England, in refrence to France
granted, why may it not be prevented, by observing still the same Rules of
Policy, which this Crown formerly practiced; that was, so holding the Balance
between the then two contending Powers of Spain and France, that neither shoud
be able to obtain their Aims, The universal Monarchy of the West? But now the
Case is altered, in that Spain being much weakened by the accession of the
West Indies, and grasping more than it coud well hold in other Countries, has
quitted the Field, and left France without a Rival: So that the present
Interest of England seems to be the same with that of al Europe, viz. to oppose
by all possible means the growing Greatness of France; and reduce that Crown to
such a condition, as may not leave it in his Power to hurt his Neighbors. By
what they have already compassed, one may guess they will ere long bring about,
if not timely stopped, their long designed Ambitious Purposes: In the prosecution
of which, they were in the late times of Usurpation, the underhand Instrument
of the War with Holland, as they were of the two following, in sixtyfive and
seventy-one, blowing up the Feuds on both sides, pretending to take part with
each, but not really purposing it with either. Having the same Desine of
weakening both Parties, as the Britains formerly had, in throwing a Bone of
Contention between the Picts and Scots, that they might in the end be the
better able to overcom both; In the mean time the French King gained an
opportunity of building Ships of War, and training up Seamen, of which he was
before destitute; so that had not these Quarrels, and our late Civil Wars given
him a pretense of increasing his Maritin Power, we might still, even by threats
of burning the Ships upon the Stocks, or in the Harbors, as did Queen
Elizabeth, have kept that People under, and our selves from fear: But since by
unavoidable Accidents, the Dice are so thrown, as that the Fore is lost, let us
use the best of our art and skill, to retreive an After-Game. There is no need
to attempt the proof of what is as evident as the Sun at Noonday, That the
French King has a Power great enuff, considering the present Circumstances of
Europe, to make him hope, and al others dread his effecting that old Define,
which has bin the end of al Actions of that Crown for many years past; which
before he coud put in Execution, his great Obstacle and Rival the Spaniard was
to be removed out of the way; in order to which he judged necessary to fortify
himself with some Allies, and engage others Newters; But foreseeing it was the
interest of England and Holland to oppose the one and assist the other, and
therefore despairing to prevail upon either, he contrived to make both fall out;
not long after he took the advantage of unexpectedly invading the Spanish
Netherlands, even while his Agent then in Spain was persuading that Crown of
his Masters good intentions to continue in entire Peace and Amity with them.
The consequence of which we wisely foreseeing, occasioned our setting on Foot
the Tripple League in the year 1668. by which a stop was put to his further
Progress.

And now perceiving himself disapointed, he makes various Attempts in the Years
1669 and 1670, to invite England to break that Alliance; But finding his
fineness Vain, he oblicly endeavors it, by renewing the old, and inventing new
grounds of Quarrels, by such Agents and Pensioners in the State of Holland, as
his wealth had purchased; which at last made them commit such insolence,
against the Honor of this Crown, and the Interest of the People in point of
Trade, as brought upon 'um the last fatal War, into which he no sooner drew the
Hollanders, than he rushed into the very Heart of their Country. This sudden
event made them confess their Error, and our King the sooner to conclude a
Peace. The Parliament was then and since very desirous His Majesty shoud engage
with the Dutch and Spaniards against France; and without doubt he knew it would
be his interest so to do; but not at that time; For tho the undoubted
Prerogative of the Kings of England entitle them to make War and Peace, he did
not wave the former, because the Parliament urged it, as the malicious suggest,
but because he saw it not convenient. It Is true the Kings of England have bin
pleased, to advise in such matters with their Parliaments; But that was an Act
of Grace, and condescension, and ought not now (if at al) to be insisted on, so
as to deny the King that liberty, which as a Man he cannot want, that of
examining and approving or disapproving what his great Council shoud advise:
For no man in his Wits will dream, the Lords and Commons have a power of
imposing what they please upon the King, when without his Assent, they have
neither Power nor Right to make any Act. The King considered, That Peace is the
happiness of a Kingdom; That War being a real evil, is never to be undertaken,
but to avoid a greater; That his Treasures were exhausted by the War just
finished; That his People had not recovered their losses, by the Plague, Fire,
and Wars, and therefore were unable to bear the Burden of heavy Taxes, which of
necessity must have bin imposed, to carry on a new one; for which great
preparations ought to be made, both of Men, Money and Shipping; the former were
no less wanting, than the last much impaired and diminish't. He considered,
That the French King had not only bin amassing great Treasure for many, but had
also bin three years training up an Army in all the Disciplines of War, That it
was necessary, before one King entered into a War, to compare his own and the
others strength, whether with Ten he were able to meet him with Twenty
Thousand: That he ought to make Alliances, and to have cautionary Towns, before
we declared our selves Enemies; That so great a desine was not to be made
public, before things were Ripe, least the Dutch and French might clap up a
Peace, and that potent King turn against us the fury of his Arms, for whom
certainly in those circumstances, we shoud have bin a very unequal match. I am
persuaded, That these, with other much wiser considerations not obvious to
every man, convinced the King A War was on no score at that time seasonable:
And to this Opinion I am moved, by my sense, That the King coud not but
reflect, That when the French King had subjected all the rest of Europe, he would
not fail to ad England to his Conquests, in which our Kings loss must needs be
greater than his Subjects; For it is unreasonable to think, that true Policy
would let the French King suffer any of the Royal Family, especially the King of
England and France (at whose Title and Arms-bearing he is not a little
offended) to outlive the loss of the Crown; since he coud not but believe, they
would be perpetually endeavoring, the regaining their own Right: For tho
subjection be unequal to al, it is not so intolerable to any, as to those used
to govern: And therefore it is an idle and and senseless inconsiderat fancy, to
imagine the King and Duke coud forget their own Interest, or be Frenchifi'd upon
any promise or bargain, as is maliciously insinuated, that they might be more
absolute, which cannot possibly be in their thoughts or wishes. Who know that,
between Kings or States, Covenants are binding no longer than convenient; that
the French King has ever shown, that his Interest only or his Will is the Rule
of convenience. That he that makes War for his Glory, has more ambition to put
his Chains upon Princes, than on the People: his thoughts are as large as any
of the Roman Emperors, and they esteemd it a greater Glory to lead one King in
Triumph, than many thousands Subjects of several Kingdoms. And it is not to be
supposed that the natural strength and situation of England, can be a
sufficient Defense against the Power of France, when to that he has already, is
added that of all the rest of Europe, unless you can dream they may have a
Fleet greater than all, and may at once resist, by those Walls, the Invasion of
others, and defend their Merchantmen at Sea; which if not don, without an
Invasion, by spoiling the Trade, England will be destroyed, or which is
altogether as bad, be rendered very poor and inconsiderable. And that this has
bin his Majestyes sense, may be guessed by the Progress he has made since the
War, mediating a Peace as best became a good King, and giveing his Subjects an
opportunity of enriching themselves, and inabling them to bear the necessary
Taxes, by engrossing most of the Trade of Europe, and at length finding his
endeavors ineffective, he prepared himself to resist the French desines by
force, by providing a Fleet, and knowing that he that fights with another must
have skill at the same Weapons, he suffered such of his Subjects as were willing
(but on capitulations to return when he pleased) to serve either the
Confederates or the French, not only to be fitted to lead others, but also to
understand the new Arts of fighting, which are greatly altered from what they
were in former times. The King having thus prepared things, I hear he is so far
from being backward to declare War with France, that he will gladly do it, if
his Parliament will but find out a sufficient means for carrying it on
effectually: which I apprehend must not be ordinary, for that the War, if
undertaken, is like to be of long continuance,

And you will guess that it is no longer to be delayed, if you will but bring
before your Eyes, the danger we and all Europe are exposed to, by comparing the
present Power of France with what it was in the Days of Francis the First, and
observing what he was then able to do, when assaulted by Charles the Fifth, who
was not only Emperor, but had all the Power of Spain, the Seventeen Provinces,
of Naples, Sicily, Sardinia, the Dukedom of Milan, and the Riches of the
West Indies, who was as Wise, Courageous, and Fortunat a Captain, as most Ages
of the World have known; one who managed his own Councils, and like Alexander
in every Action appeared at the Head of his Army; who had above a hundred
Thousand well disciplined Men, led by many great and experienced Commanders; who
was able, by a mighty Naval Power, to begirt France on both sides, from
Flanders and from Spain. Yet at that time France Courting the same Mistress,
the universal Monarchy, was so powerful a Rival, that he durst not attempt his
removal out of the way of his Ambition, without the aid and assistance of Henry
the Eighth, the Pope, and several Princes of Italy; nor even then did he think
himself secure, til he had drawn to a defection, Charles Duke of Bourbon, the
most considerable Prince of France. And yet after all, he was forced to clap up
an Accommodation, on Terms sufficiently advantageous to that Crown.

If so mighty a Power, and so united, coud not prevail against Francis the
First, How unlikly is it to resist Lewis the Fourteenth, a much greater Prince,
when that Power is now so much lessened, by being broken and divided into
several Hands? When the Emperor gives himself up more to Devotion, than Martial
or State Affairs? When the King of Spain is a Youth of Sixteen, and when the
Seventeen Provinces are cantoned between the Spaniard and the States General?
When these several Divisions and Interests occasion long Debates, different
Opinions, and slowness in Preparation and Action? When all that was formerly
managed by one single Head, is by these Accidents brought under the Conduct of
several Governors, of whom, it is possible, some may prefer their private
Advantages to the Interests of their Masters? This has made some Conjecture, the
French King has opened more Gates with Silver Keys, than by Force of Arms; and
has induced others to conclude, That the Confederates will hardly be able to
defend the Remainder of the Spanish Netherlands, another Campaign, if not
assisted by the joint Power of the rest of Europe: This you will easily believe,
not to be ill grounded, if you consider the present Greatness of France; Lewis
has about four times the Revenu Francis had, and at least four times the Army:
Nay rather, all his People are now in a manner Soldiers; It Is not only
scandalous, but a vain attempt, for any Gentleman there to make Court for a
Wife, before he has served a Campaign or two, nor are any of the Nobless
sufferd to live at ease in the Country, that do not go, or send some of their
Sons to the War. These practices enabled him last summer, in fifteen days to
send forty-five Thousand Gentlemen, with their Servants, at their own Charge to
raise the Siege of Charleroy. And to make the Monarchy more absolute, Matters
have bin so ordered, that their Parliaments are become ordinary Courts of
Justice, and have no other Laws than the Edicts of the Prince's will; And if at
any time, he condescends in Formality to assemble the three Estates (who had in
Francis the First's time the Power of Parliaments) it is but to tell them by his
Chancellor, the King Wills you do thus or thus, you are not to advise or
dispute, but immediately ratify his Commands, which accordingly are obeyed, as
the Effects of a Despotic Power.

In the beginning of the Year 1665, he was not able to man out twenty Ships of
War, and now he has about two hundred; He has not only vast Treasures heaped
together, but the Strings of all the Purses of his Slaves rather than Subjects
in his own hands. If without any Assistance he has already gained Lorrain,
Franche Comte, a great part of Flanders, and no inconsiderable Footing in
Germany and Sicily, and in the beginning of the last Campaigne three such
strong Holds, as Valenciennes, St. Omer, and Cambray; the weakest of which,
most men thought, would at least have made him whole a Summers work, what will he
not be able to compass, against the rest of Europe, when he has got the
accession of Germany, and all the Low-countryes, to that already too boundless
Power by which he has fettered his own People, and subjected them to an
absolute Vassalage? Will other Nations expect better Terms, than he has given
his own? It Is well if he will allow them even Canvas and Sabows. But above all,
what can England hope, having for many years forced him to check the Reins of
his Ambition, and is, I presume at this time ready to put on the Caveson. Books
have already bin printed showing his pretentions to this Country, which, tho
weak and silly, may help to spur him on in the pursuit of his Glory. Nor can
less be expected from those, who by a Confederacy with the late Usurpers, gave
an opportunity of taking away the Life of the first Charles, and of pursuing
that of the Second, to whom his own Cousin German unhospitably denied the
continuance of a retreat, when the vicissitudes of human affairs, to make him
afterward appear more glorious, veiled him in Clouds of misfortunes. What can
be hoped from him who contrived that never to be forgotten affront of burning
our ships at Chattam, and who is said to have had no small hand in the firing of
London: Who tho styled the most Christian, declares as an unalterable Maxim, no
Treaty binding longer than it consists with his Interest, not founded on
Religion, or Reason, but on Glory? The very Heathens were anciently, and the
Turks at this day are more punctual to their Oaths and Promises, The falsifying
of any thing confirmed by the Adiuration of their Gods, or Mahomet, was, and is
accounted infamous. But what Treaties, or Capitulations can be reckoned which
the French Ministers have not violated? Have they not broken the famous
Pyrenean Treaty, confirmd by Oaths and Sacraments? And contrary to a solemn
Renunciation and the double Ties of Blood and Marriage, before a breach
complained of, or a War declared, invaded the Territoryes of an Infant King?
Have not they by address, and Cunning, by Bribes and Rewards, endeavored to
corrupt most of the Ministers of Europe? Such practices amongst private
Christians would be abominable, and much more so, between any Kings not styled
the most Christian. Do they not publicly abet the proceedings of the Rebels in
Hungary against their lawful Prince? And whatever the Pope may be induced to
believe, not for the Propagation of the Romish Religion (for they are
Protestants) but to serve his own ambitious purposes of enslaving the World; of
which, rather than fail, he has decreed to bring in the Turk, in whose Courts
also he has found Arts to make his Coin current. Nor is the Infallible Man whom
he has already Pillard to escape him, at least as to the Temporal part of his
Power, for not thinking that affront great enuff, and concluding, he has not as
he ought, employed it for the French Interest, he is said to have privately
vowed not only the lessening, but the abrogating of that great Authority, in
which his Predecessors Pepin and Charlemain's Charity had vested him. Nor is
his Countenanceing the Iansenists, a Sect more dangerous to the Sea of Rome,
than that of Luther or Calvin, a small Argument, that he intends to pull down his
spiritual Grandeur, by fixing it in a Gallican Patriarch. But to com nearer
home, have not the French had a main hand in our Civil Wars, and were they not
since the secret Instruments of spilling the Blood of many thousands of our
fellow Subjects? To some of whom, tho now they pretend civility, it is not to
give them a share in their Glory, so much as to hazard their Lives, making them
steps to the Throne of an unjust Empire; in order to which, they have exposed
them on all occasions, in hopes by weakening us, to remove out of their way the
greatest block which has already given them check, and will now I hope stop
their Carreir and mate them. And is it not time think you, that all the Princes
in Christendom, for their common safety, shoud unite, not only to Chase the
French King out of his new Conquests, but confine him to his ancient Dominion
and manner of Government? If this be not speedily put in Execution, I may
without the spirit of Prophecy foretell, some of the Princes of Germany and Italy
who now seem unconcerned, will when it is too late repent the oversight: The fire
is already kindled in their Neighborhood, and if they do not help to quench the
flame, they will quicly see their own dwellings laid in Dust and Ashes. Every
new acquist and accession of Power inlarges our desires, and makes the
ambitious man think, that which before seemed not only difficult, but
impossible, to be very plain and feasible; The success of the French has
already made them think no enterprise too hard, and and still prompts them to
push on their good Fortune, which nothing can withstand but a general
opposition of other Princes.

You see then, it is not so much honor nor friendship, nor a desire of
succorring the injured and oppressed, that invites the rest of Europe, to the
assistance of the Netherlands, but the care and preservation of their Laws and
Liberties, their Glory, and their Fortunes: And tho I am apt to believe on
Englands entering into the League, the French King would gladly conclude a Peace:
Yet I cannot but think the doing so, would be against the common interest, on any
other Terms, than quitting all his new Acquisitions, and even then the
Confederats will be out in Policy, if they do not still continue in a posture of
defense, both by Sea and Land. The Dutch paid dear for the contrary practice,
and their sufferings in 1672 will convince them and others, that so long as
Lewis the fourteenth lives, his Neighbors must not expect to sleep in quiet;
they cannot prudently hope, his future Practices will be more just, than his
former; he that has already broke through so many Obligations of Oaths and
Treatyes, is likely to do so again; whoever cannot be kept within bounds by the
sense of Reason and Justice, will despise the weaker ties of forced Oaths; For
he that avows Power to be the Rule, and strength the Law of Justice, will not
stick to say, This Peace was an imposition, an unjust restraint of the lawful
pursuit of his Greatness. And therefore as soon as he gives his wearyed Armies
a breathing time, and sees the Confederates dispersed, and their Troops
disbanded, he will like an unexpected Torrent break-in upon some of his
Neighbors. The Common Inscription of his Cannons Ratio ultima Regum, is by him
inverted to a contrary sense, and made a public Warning to Mankind, that he
desines, as God did of old, to give Law to the World in Thunder and Lightening,
to scatter by the Flames of his Artillery al those Clouds of the Confederat
Forces that intercept and eclipse the Rays of his Glory. He makes the Power of
his Arms his first and last Reason: He does not only pursu, but commonly wounds
his Adversary before he declares him such, or gives him leisure to draw. First
invades a Prince's Territories, and after sets up his Title and Cause of the
War; is not concerned that all the World observes the Pretense is false and
trifling, vain and unjust, warranted by no other Reason than that of absolute
and unbounded Will, That he will do so, because he will; which is the Foundation
and Conclusion of all his Actions and Wars abroad, as well as of his Laws and
Edicts at Home, expressed in these imperious Words, Tell est nostre plaisir. He
does not only tread in the Steps, but out-go one of his Predecessors, who in a
Quarrel with his Holiness, sent him word, That what he coud not justify by
Cannon-Law, he would by the Law of the Cannon.

His Device the Sun in its Meridian with his Motto Non pluribus impar,
sufficiently shows his Intentions for the Universal Monarchy, and the haughty
Opinion he conceives, of his being the only Person qualified for the Government
of more Worlds than one, declares his Resolutions of admitting no Rivals in
Soverainty, looking upon all other Princes but as so many smaller Stars, or
wandering Planets compared with him the Sun; from whom after the antiquated and
justly exploded Opinion of some Philosophers, they are to receive their borrowed
Light or Power, as it shall please his Mightiness to dispense: So that Crowned
Heads, Princes and Republics, as well as their Subjects, are to expect the same
meat that of Slavery; and tho that be not sweet, yet the sauce will be sorer,
poinant to all, tho perhaps a little differenced; The former may be allowed
Golden, while the later are to be manacled with Iron-Chains. In order hereunto,
his Ambition has made him resolve the Conquering of the World after the Example
of Alexander, whose Title of Great as an earnest of his future Hopes, he has
already assumed. He has vowed to make himself as Famous to Posterity, by his
Sword, tho not by his Pen, as Caesar has don: That Paris shall give Law to the
Universe, as Rome once did, and that the Ocean shall yield no less to the Seen,
than formerly it did to Tyber. Now if England, which alone is able to do it,
prevents the Execution of these vast Purposes, what can we expect, but that one
time or other, he will seek a Revenge; and notwithstanding his Promises and
solemn Confirmations of Peace, try against us the success of his Arms, and by
numbers endeavor for this mighty Insolence, to chastise those, for whom even
their own Histories will convince them, they are Man to Man a very unequal Match.

The dis-banding his Forces for the present, is far from being a security,
since he may raise them again at his Pleasure. Nor indeed do I imagine, he will
discharge his Armies, since that were to give them an opportunity of Rebelling,
for which he is sensible, his People are sufficiently prepared, and only want
either Domestic Heads and Partisans, or Foreign Assistance, to rescu themselves
from Tyranny and Oppression. And is it fit, while so potent and so near a
Monarch is in Arms, that we sh^ud stand with our hands in our Pockets? No, I am
persuaded, tho a present Peace shoud be concluded, that the King and his
Ministers, will think it for the common safety, and the particular Interest of
England, not only to enter with the Confederats into a strict Alliance
offensive and defensive, but also, to put themselves into a Posture of War both
at Sea and Land. The end of War is Peace, but a Peace with France seems to me
to be the beginning of War, or (at least) a Preparation for One; and I must
ingenuously profess, tho War be a great Evil, yet from all Appearances, I dread
the Consequences of a Peace more, for that without great care, it will be of the
two, the most fatal to England: But this Consideration, as most fit, I leave to
my Superiors, and will only ask You, whether before we engage in a War abroad,
it be not fit, To secure a Peace at home? To reconcile by Toleration, our
Differences in point of Religion, That the French Emissaries, or others, may
not be able to strike Fire into the Tinder already prepared for the least
Spark. It must not be forgot, That, to divert or disable Queen Elizabeth from
assisting France, or def^nding Holland, Phillip the Second of Spain encouraged
and assisted Tyrone, to Rebel in Ireland; That in the long War between Us and
France, it was the frequent Practice of that Crown to incite the Scots to make
Incursions upon us; And I presume, it will be considered, Whether some ambitious
Men of that Kingdom may not influence the People to favor or side with a Prince
who maintains great numbers of their Nation, by the Considerations that they
are now but a Province, that England denies them an equal Freedom in Traffic;
That they may have better Terms from the French in that and Religion, in which
by denial of Liberty they seem dis-satisfy'd.

Tho such persons cannot possibly work on the Wise, the considerative of the
People, yet sure it were not improper to study a course, to prevent the
unthinking Crowd, the Rabbles being deluded by such falls and groundless
pretensions; which in my Opinion are with more care to be provided against in
Ireland, where it is said those and other Motives may be urged: For there are
computed to be in that Kingdom about eleven hundred thousand persons, of which
800000 are Irish, and of them above 10000, born to Estates, dispossessed; these
for their losses, and others for restraint in matters of Religion, are
discontented, not considering their own Rebellion occasioned their Ruin: (by
their Murmurings I perceive let the Sentence be never so just, it will not
hinder the condemned from railing against the judge:) That, besides their
suffering in Estate and Religion, they are yet further beyond the Scots renderd
incapable of enjoying any Office or Power Military, or Civil, either in their
native, or any other, of their Princes Countries; Their folly having thus
reduced them to a condition more like that of Slaves than Subjects, many of the
Gentry go frequently into other Kingdoms, but most into France, who may
possibly be encouraged to return to move the People to a new Sedition,
especially if they can give them assurance of foreign Assistance. The King
wisely foreseeing this, directed in 1673. his late vigilant and prudent
Vicegerent the Earl of Essex, to disarm the Irish Papists, and netwithstanding
the exact execution of that command, its said that his Majesty intends to put
himself to the further Charge of increasing his Army in that Kingdom, beyond
what now it is, and to appoint a considerable Squadron of Ships to guard and
defend its Coasts from any Attempts of Invasion, without which there is not the
least fear of any intestine Commotions.

This, with the charge he has bin at in Erecting a new Fort in the Harbor of
Kinsale, the most likely place to prevent the entering of any Foreign Power into
that Country, shows he has bin watchful to secure himself and People against
the French desines. And now I touch upon Ireland, I have heard some say, that it
is not only convenient but necessary, to unite that Kingdom to this, To make a
new division of Shires, To send only so many Members to Parliament, as coud no
more join to out-Vote us, than Cornwall and Devonshire with two or three other
Countyes: But I see not if they were thus made one, wherein their interest would
be different from ours; many rather think they would be losers by the Bargain.
Others fancy Pointings Act shoud be repealed, that at first, tho a trick, it
was necessary; but now is not, all the power and almost all the Land, being
devolved upon such as are mediatly or immediately English, and Protestants; And
that by an easy contrivance, they might be still obliged to a dependence on the
Crown of England; by which, its said, if they are always so kept under, as to
be no more than hewers of Wood and drawers of Water, they may in future Ages be
encouraged to a defection, and either set up a Power of their own, or invite a
forreiner, which might prove of ill consequence to England; For the harbors
and situation of Ireland lying more convenient for Trade, makes it that way, or
otherwise, a ready inlet to the conquest of England.

The People there, stomach the prejudice, in point of Commerce, desined, tho
not effected, by the Acts against their Cattle, Navigation, and Plantation
Trade; by the first they are said to have gaind vastly, by an increase in
Woollen and Linen Manufactures, in Shipping and foreign Traffic, to the great
prejudice of England: And I have bin credibly informed, by a person who
examined it, that they have gaind Communibus annis, forty thousand Pounds
Sterling yearly, by the Exported Commodities of Beef, Tallow, Hides, Butter,
and Wool, yielding so much more, after the passing that Act, than they and the
Cattle did before, when transported together. And if the Irish, of which there
are few pure Families left, have some pretense to the Kings Favor, as he is
lineally descended from Fergutius, second Son of the then Reigning King of
Ireland, and first of Scotland, which was anciently peopled from thence, The
English there claim greater share in his Majesty's Grace, and say of Right,
they ought to be accounted but the younger Brothers of England. I coud wish
with all my heart, the story were true, I had from an Irish Gentleman in France,
that his Contrymen were so pleased, that they were at last governed by a
King descended from their own blood Royal, that they had resolved, to pay his
Majesty and the Successors of his Line, the Allegiance due from natural born
Subjects, not from a Conquered People, which they now no more esteem
themselves, nor desire to be accounted by others: How much of this may be true
you and I know not, but this I think, If all the Natives were obliged to speak
English, and all called by the Name of the English of, Ireland, and allowed
equal Privileges in Trade, the same usages and customs, begetting a Harmony in
Humor, that Rancor might in time be removed, which from a sense of being
Conquered renders them now troublesome and chargeable to this Kingdom.

This was designed in part by Queen Elizabeth, and King James, and perhaps had
bin effected for the whole, but that the Irish coud not be said to have bin
fully Conqer'd before the tenth year of his Reign, which was after the making
of those Statutes. It would be, I confess, an advantage to England, to be freed
from the Charge and necessity of keeping that Kingdom under by a constant Army;
and considering the inconveniences this Nation has suffered, by their frequent
Wars and Rebellions, Their gain would be more, if they had never Conquered the
Country, in which the losses of the English coud perhaps be never better
compensated, than by sinking it, if possible under water. The accession of so
much people unto England, might make some Reparation, for the greater number
which to our own impoverishment we have sent thither. I have dwelt the longer,
upon the considerations of Scotland and Ireland, to show the Frenchman may be
mistaken, who, about ten or twelve Years since, published a Book of Politics,
Chalking out the way for the French Kings gaining the Universal Monarchy (in
immitation of Campanella to Philip the second on the same subject) wherein,
after several insufferable slights and indignities, intolerable base, false and
malicious Characters thrown and fixed upon the English, he tells it will be an
easy task to overcome them (but in the last place) by sowing divisions among
the King of Englands Subjects, especially those of Scotland and Ireland; By
false insinuations, jealousies and fears of Popery and Arbitrary Government,
etc. the prevention whereof will be his Majestyes particular Care, and the
Parliaments, to enable him to carry on this great Work of our common safety,
against the common Enemy the disturber of the Peace of Christendom by finding
out an easy and sufficient fond, which naturally brings me to the Consideration
of Taxes, allowed by all understanding Men, as Of Taxes.
absolutely necessary for the support of the Body politic, as Meat and Drink for
the natural: But what kinds are best, has been much disputed: Before I descend
to particulars, it is not amiss to observe in general, That no Taxes can be
just or safe, which are not equal. All Subjects, as well the meanest, as the
greatest, are alike concerned in the common Safety; and therefore shoud,
according to their respective Interests of Riches or Enjoyments, bear the
Charge in equal Proportions: The contrary Practice must of necessity beget
Murmurings and Discontents, which seldom ending in Words, proceed higher to
Blows, dividing the Oppressed against the others, which will certainly disquiet
and disturb, and may probably ruin both.

That all Taxes shoud be proportioned to the necessities of State; That in
computing these, the Error, if any must be, is safer on the right hand, than in
defect; because the Overplus may be ordered to other good Public Uses.

That when Taxes are made equal to the People, and proportionat to the Charges
of the Public, It Is much more for the Subjects ease, and the common Safety,
That they be made Perpetual, than Temporary: For, if the Means of securing our
selves against all the Dangers to which we are exposed, be not sufficient, we
must undoubtedly yield our selves up to the Mercy of our Enemies, or suffer
much Vexation, in parting with further Supplies from time to time, out of that
Substance, which Nature or our own almost equally binding Customs, have made
but just enuff for the support of our Selves and Families; either of which is
very grievous: and because the Event is uncertain, it is hard to determine, which
of the two is most Destructive to the Pleasures of Life; for he that says, The
Choice is easy, in that your Enemies may take away your Life, the other Course
does but render it Miserable; is in my opinion much mistaken, it being more
eligible to have no Sense at all, than to have it only to endure Pain: For Life
is in it self a thing indifferent, neither good nor bad, but as it is the
Subject of pleasing or unpleasing Perceptions; and is then better or worse, as
it has more or less of the one or the other: So that the proper Question is
not, Whether it be better to live or not to live? but, Whether Misery be
preferable to no Misery? To which, not only Reason but Sense is able to give a
satisfactory Answer. You see then, that if the Taxes fall short of their end, we
are exposed to great Miseries; and therefore to exceed is fafer, especially when
things may be so ordered, that after the occasions are supplied, the surplusage
may be refunded, or employed in the way of a Banc or Lombard, or public Trade,
as Fishing or Clothing, etc.

The first as an unexpected Gift, will be very grateful to the People, and the
other will not be less benificial because it must increase their Riches, and be
a fond without new Taxes for any future Emergencies.

That perpetuating the Revenu is most easy for the People, and most convenient
for Public Ends, will farther appear from these following Considerations; That
an equal Tax tho greater than is needful, so the Money be not hoarded up to
hinder Trade, but issued as fast as it comes in, for necessaries within the
Country, however it may for the present make some Alterations in particular
Families, does not impoverish the Whole: For Riches, as Power, consisting in
comparison, All, equally retrenching some part of their Expenses, remain as Rich
as they were before. This Retrenchment may at first seem unpleasant and
stomacful to those who think what they have little enuff for their private
Expense; But such ought to consider, if they refuse to part with some, they will
infallibly lose all; That instead of being a free People, they may become
Slaves, and will not then have it in their Power to keep ought of what they call
their own; have no Liberty or Property, but at the pleasure of their conquering
Tryumphant Lord and Master: That then they will be dealt with like Beasts, now
they have the Liberty of Rational Men, i. e. of choosing with the wise Merchant
in a Storm, to throw some of his Goods overboard, to secure his Life, and the
rest of his Fortune. When by prudent Rules of Economy and Temperance, they
have pared off those great Extravagancies men are now given to, in Clothes, in
Meat and Drink, etc. to the decay of their Healths, and shortning of their
Lives, and have proportioned their Layings-out to their Comingsin, what for the
present seems so hard, will become very easy, and be hereafter no more felt, than
the payment of Tithes now; which without doubt wrought the same Effect at
first, as this may be supposed to do. But what is yet much better, they will
make us Rich; for I am Convinced, that the great Taxes in the united
Netherlands have bin the chiefest Cause of their great Wealth; and tho this be
no small Paradox, and perhaps a new one, I am fully persuaded it contains a
great Truth; for their great Taxes necessitated great Industry and Frugality,
and these becoming Habitual, coud not but produce Wealth; especially
considering that the Product of Labor is more valuable to the Kingdom than the
Land, and all other Personal Estate, which I will show under the particular of
Trade. When the Taxes are less than serve, or to last but for a time, those who
do not make their Expenses short of their In-comes, but think they may without
prejudice make both Ends meet; or if they exceed so soon as that Proportion
which now goes to the Public comes in, it will make things even again; do not
consider, how difficult it is to fall, and that in the mean time an Accident may
happen, that not only requires the continuance of the Temporary, but also of
imposing new and greater Taxes: Then, when perhaps it is too late, they cry out,
They are ruined, and undon; and indeed, the Case seems hard, yet cannot be
avoided. Therefore to answer our present Needs, and prevent for the future such
great Evils, the Taxes are to be made perpetual; So we being under a necessity
of adjusting our Private Affairs accordingly, a little time will make them
Habitual to us, and insensible to our Posterity: For, that if they be not
perpetual, but to determine at certain or uncertain Periods of Time, they do not
only become uneasy to the Subject, but inconvenient for the Public Security,
which may suffer much at Home and Abroad in the interval, before new Supplies
can be legally raised.

I do not doubt, but You and your Fellow Members, have it in yout Thoughts,
that all the Customs and half the Excise cease upon the death of our Soverain,
for whose long Life every good Subject is bound by interest no less than duty,
heartily to Pray; but is it not to be remembered, that the Period of humane Life
is uncertain, tho that of our evil which may thereupon ensue, be not; the
occasions of our expense continuing, tho the means of supporting them fail;
That before a Parliament can be convened, those others may be increased,
because in the mean time the Merchants will fill the Kingdom with goods, and sell
them at the same rates they now do, reckoning that a lucky hit, and so
anticipate the Markets for two three or more years, with all manner of Staple
Commodities, Linen, Silk, Salt, etc. which they have near at hand; and with
what perishable Commodityes, they can procure, for as long a term as they will
last, and perhaps covetously and foolishly for a longer; Thus the People will
pay and lose, and yet the State grow poor, as well for the present, as future,
while the Merchants only, the overhasty and immature, will have the profit: And
tho they talk loudest, the consumptioner still pays the Duty, and that with
Interest.

In proportioning of Taxes, we must have recourse to the necessities of the
Charge, which in my sense of things ought to extend to all that relate to us as
single persons, in matters of right or wrong, as Law, etc. as well as to what
concerns us, with reference to the whole in our public occasions, as of Peace
or War, foreign or Domestic; For I hold it altogether as reasonable, that the
Public shoud pay all those Officers who promote and distribute Justice, as well
as those others now paid by the State; In proportion to which, I hope our
Governors will consider what will suffice, for the management of all Affairs that
any way conduce to the joint good of the whole Body Politic, and when that is
known and fixed, leave the rest to our own particular disposal.

But in this proportioning of Taxes, we must rather look forward than backward.
Our home occasions are easily judged, but those abroad must be taken by other
measures, the former use of Money compared with its present, the ancient demeans
of the Crown with what they are now, and the strength and power of our
Neighbors, especially the French; concerning whom we are not to forget, That
that Crown is much more potent than it was heretofore, by the accession of
large Territories, which, when Englands, gave it great Aid and Assistance in
their War: That the expense of one years War in this Age, is greater than of
twenty in former times; That then two pence a day would go further than twenty
pence now; That six or ten thousand men were as considerable an Army, as forty
or fifty thousand now; Then a small Castle, Moat, or ordinary Ditch, was a good
Fortification; But mighty Bastians, large Curteines doubly fortified with
Faussbrais, Counterscarps, half Moons, Redoubts and great variety of other
Outworks, according to the Nature and Situation of Places, with exquisite
skill, and vast expense made and defended, together with the strongest
Cittadills, are now taken: Then the charges of Arms and Ammunition, Bows and
Arrows serving instead of fire Arms, were inconsiderable: That now France has
in constant pay above a hundred and twenty some say above two hundred thousand
fighting Men, whose standing Army in former times exceeded not ten thousand,
nor so many but on particular occasions; Then a single Battle, or at most a
Summers expedition put an end to a War, no long nor formal sieges to spin out
the Quarrel. Now the whole seen is changed, from what in those days it
consisted in; Courage and Strength of body, into that where Patience in
Fatigue, Dexterity in Wit, and Money in Purse shall make the Coward and the Weak
an equal Match at least, for sinewy and gigantic force. There is no doubt but
as many of the English, as luxury and idleness have not softened into
Effeminacy, have still as great Valor and Resolution: but they are to consider,
that their old Enemies, the French are not the same they formerly were: That
they finding their first Sa Sa, or brisk onset would not do the Feat, and
wanting Courage to rally, Nature having denied them bodily strength, but to
supply that defect, having given them Wit to use Stratagems, have quite changed
the Scene of War, and taken their leave of the old way of venturing body to
body.

That in Queen Elizabeth's time, thirty Ships, such as perhaps exceeded not our
third and fourth rate Frigates, were the Fleet which gave Law to the biggest
part of the World, the Sea; and without the help of Storms, doubted not to have
overcom the too arrogantly styled Invincible Armada. That in those days few
besides the Kingdom of Spain, and State of Venice, had any Ships of War: That
France and Holland were then very weak, and all four unable to contend with us:
That now the Swedes, Danes, Hamburghers, Ostenders, and Algerines, etc. have
considerable Fleets. That the States of the united Provinces have much more
Shipping than the French King, who yet has upwards of two-hundred Men of War,
and many larger than most in Europe, and is every day building more; and lest
he shoud yet have further need, I have an account, he has lately countermanded
about fifty Sail of St. Maloes and Haven de Grace, Merchantmen, of
considerable Force, bound to Newfound-Land. If then his Power be so vastly
increased, that as he gives out, he has Cash for five years Charge, and
Provisions and Forage for two. That his ordinary Revenu in France, not to
speak of his new Acquisitions, amounts by the most modest Computation to above
nine Millions sterling per annum; and his Country being Rich, and the Power in
his own Hands, he may at any time raise what more he pleases: Is it not then
necessary to consider our own strength, and by sufficient supplies at Home, as
well as Allies abroad, secure our Necks against that Yoke with which he
threatens to inslave all Europe?

Nor will it be amiss for the Subject to observe, That the French by fomenting
our Quarrels foreign and domestic, have bin the main occasions of the great
Taxes and Impositions (necessary Appendages of the former) under which the
English Nation has groand for these last forty Years, even the Ship-Mony had
its Rise from the Affronts their Pride and Insolence threw up on us, and they
will yet oblige us to suffer more, unless by the joint force of our Arms and
Money in a round and larg supply for the War, we speedily enable our selve's, to
revenge our past injuries and their present desines, and so put it out of their
power, either by this or any other of their crafty Practices, to disturb or
hurt us for the future.

And it is to be considered, That as the Expenses abroad are much greater, so
they are likewise at home; That an hundred Pound before the eighteenth of
Edward the third, was equivalent in intrinsic valu to three hundred Pound of
our now current Money; their Groat being raised to our Shilling. That our
Expenses are not only far greater than they were in those Days, but that our
necessary Uses require ten times as much as they coud be then suply'd for;
perhaps no less occasioned by the discovery of the West Indy Mines (the plenty
of every Commodity making it cheap) than by our own much greater extravagance:
Whence it is plain, that the present Re-venu of the State, even for necessary
occasions, ought to exceed the ancient, as thirty does one. And since our great
Intrest, no less than honor, lies in securing the Dominion of the Seas, and by
that our Trade; our Fleet must be answerable to that of our Neighbors; It will
then, allowing the English, man to man, to be a third stronger than the French,
seem reasonable, to have an Hundred and fifty Ships of War in constant
readiness. And comparing the charge of the Admiralty, by taking an estimat of
what it was in Queen Elizabeth's time, 30000 and in the beginning of King
James's 1604. 40000, with what it has bin since this Kings Reign, which if I
mistake not, I have bin told by more than your self, was offered to be made out
in Parliament, to have bin 500000 per annum. But granting it was but 400000, it
must follow, that our Fleet has bin ten times bigger, than that of King James,
or that the Charge is now ten times more; That if it be yet necessary to
enlarge it treble, to make it strong enuff, that will increase the ordinary
Annual Charge by the first Account to 1500000, by the last to 1200000. And if
the Building of thirty Ships require near 600000 p. how much more will be
wanting to complete the Fleet 150 Sail, and to continu building every Year,
with an allowance of one third less, in proportion to the French Kings? By
which we can not yet reckon our selves secure from the common Foe, without a
strict Alliance with the Germans, Dutch and Spaniards. If then the ordinary
occasions of our Fleet require thus much, and the extraordinary a vast
addition, the common Expenses in every particular above thirty for one, more
than in Edward the Thirds time, when the Crown had a large Revenu in Lands,
what will all need in the extraordinary Accidents of War, etc. now when these
are almost dwindled into nothing? But these considerations I leave to the
proper Persons; yet, by the by, give me leave to tell you, they were never
thought of, by those Mal-contents, who have talked loud of the great supplies
this King has had: This alone Cancels the Obligation; he that brags of having
don another good turns, pays himself, and does not only free but disoblige the
Recever: It would have argued more ingenuity, not to have compared the Subsidies
of this Kings Reign, with those of his Predecessors, without taking notice,
that perhaps his occasions required more, than all theirs did. That dureing the
eighteen Years He and his Father were kept out of their Rights, he must have
contracted vast debts, for the support of himself, his Army and his followers;
That the great Revenu of the Crown was in a manner gone; That other Kings had
squees'd vast sums from their Subjects, by Loanes, Monopolies, etc. of which no
mention was made in the computation; That the building of ships and above four
years of such War at Sea consumed more, than any one hundred years War at Land,
since the Conquest. That the consideration of the vast Charge Dunkirk put the
Crown to, at least three times more than it yielded, occasiond the Advice of
its Sale. That Tangier has stood the King in very great sums. That til of late,
the supporting the Charge of Irelana helped to drein the Exchequer of England;
That the intrinsic Valu of one Million formerly, was equal to that of three
Millions now, and in real use to thirty millions; For the true intrinsic Valu,
or worth of Money, is no otherwise to be computed, than according to what it will
purchase for our present Consumptions; which I have reckond to exceed those of
old but by ten, tho I have heard others say much more. But that which has made
these Complaints so loud, has not bin only inconsideration, or perhaps malice,
but the inequallity of imposeing the Taxes; Those great inconveniences may be
easily obviated for the future, by maki^g and applying to particular Uses, such
sufficient and equal Fonds as are necessary to be settled: I will only instance
in one, That of the Customs, which seems originally to have had its Rise for
that End, and therefore ought to be appropriated to the Use of the Navy; I wish
it were great enuff, for such as our safety requires.

And if this Course be taken in apportioning the Revenu, the Public and Private
Expenses are to be generously computed; the doing so, will remove Iealousies and
Distrusts on all sides, the King will be under no necessity of straining his
Prerogative, by harkening to the devices of Projectors, the People will be quiet
and at ease; and then every Man may safely sit under his own Vine, and his own
Fig Tree, and enjoy with pleasure the Fruits of his Labor. If you look into the
Histories of past Ages, you will find the Disputes of the Prerogative on one
hand, and of Liberty on the other, were always founded on the want of Money;
and he that considers the Evils that have ensued, will soon believe it very
necessary, to prevent the like for the future, by applying to every use of the
Crown or State, (I do not say to the Person of the King, whose greatest Share
is the Trouble, while the Subjects is Security and Ease) a sufficient and
perpetual Revenu. This Act will beget an entire Confidence and Love, and so
unite us to one another, as will make it impossible for any Storms without, or
Commotions within, to shake this Kingdom, so founded on a Rock; against which,
all, who make any attempts, must needs split themselves and Fortunes.

I have, according to my wonted Freedom, given you my Thoughts, why I think it
more convenient, both for Public and Private, That the Revenu were sufficient
and perpetual: against which, I never met but with one Objection, to wit, That
if that were don, the King would not so frequently, if at all, call his
Parliament: As if there were no use for this great Council, but raising of
Money: The altering or repealing the old, and making new Laws; the reforming of
Errors and Abuses, in Inferior Courts of Justice; the deciding the
Controversies, those Courts coud not, and many other things would make their
Meeting necessary; The King would see 'twere his Advantage to call them often,
since besides that there is safety in the multitude of Counselors, all that
happens to be severe and harsh, would light on them, and yet none coud be
offended, because the Act of the whole: Nor coud His Majesty but be sensible
that all Innovations are dangerous in a State; for it is like a Watch, out of
which, any one piece lost would disorder the whole; That the Parliament is the
great Spring or Heart, without which, the Body of the Commonwealth, coud enjoy
neither Health nor Vigor, Life nor Motion, That while they mind their Duty, in
proposeing and advising what is best for King and People, without private
Respect, leaving him the undoubted Prerogative of Kings, of Nature and Reason,
of Assenting or Dissenting, as he is convinced in his Conscience, is best for
the Common Good, which is to be his measure in all Actions, as the Laws are to
be the Subjects Rule; I see not why it shoud not be his interest, to call them
frequently. That none can be supposed to advise the contrary, unless some few
great Men, to avoid, not so much perhaps the Justice, as the Passion, Envy and
Prejudice of some, in that Judicature, to whom they may think themselves
obnoxious: But granting this, it is unreasonable to think, so wise and so good a
Prince, will prefer the Private Interest, of any single Man, tho never so Great,
before the general Good and Satisfaction of his People: I shoud rather think,
He will in the Words of his Royal Father, in a Speech to his Parliament, give in
this, a full Assurance, I must conclude, that I seek my Peoples Happiness, for
their slourishing is my greatest Glory, and their Affection my greatest
Strength. His Majesty well knows, with what tenderness and Love his Subjects are
to be treated; that it is more safe, more pleasing and more easy, to erect his
Throne over their Hearts, than their Heads, to be obeyed for Love rather than
Fear; the Dominion, founded on the later, often meets the same Fate, with a
House built upon the Sands; while that established on the former, continues
firm and immovable as a Rock: He is not ignorant, That as the multitude of the
wise is the welfare of the world, so does the Being and Wel-Being of the
English Nation, consist in the frequent Counsels, Deliberations and Acts of
King and Parliament; in which Providence has so blended the King and People's
Interests, that, like Husband and wife, they can never be sunder'd, without
mutual inconvenience and unhappiness. The sense and observation of this, makes
our King's Reign prosperous, and gives Him a more Glorious Title than that of
King, viz. The Father of the Country, and the great God-like Preserver of his
Children's Rights and Liberties, who, out of a deep sense of Duty and
Gratitude, must own and remember who tells them, That a wise King is the
upholding of his People; and therefore, cannot but pay him even for their own
Interest, all imaginable Loyalty, Deference, and Respect, giving up their Lives
and Fortunes for His (or which is all one, their own) Safety, who studies
nothing so much as their Good and welfare. Besides, the King has already past
an Act, that a Parliament shall sit at least once in three Years, and in several
Speeches he has declared himself ready to do what further we shall desire, for
the better security of our Liberties, Properties, and Religion; why then shoud
any think, He would not esteem it his own, as well as People's Interest, to
consult often, and upon all sudden occasions, with his Parliament? For my own
part, I shoud rather believe, by continuing this so long, that he would not be
against their Assembling thrice a Year, as, by the Grace of former Kings, was
accustomed, for many Years, before and after the Conquest. But to put all
Iealousies to silence, The Parliament, in settling and appropriating the
Revenu, to particular Uses, may (as they have already begun to do, in the Act
for building thirty Ships) Grant it under a kind of Condition, or Proviso, viz.
That the respective Officers, give a full Account, of the Employment thereof,
unto the Parliament, at least, once in every three Years; Otherwise, all
farther Leavies of the same to cease, etc.

Having said thus much, in general of Taxes, I com now to the partic^lar
Branches; I have already showed the Inconvenience of the Customs, etc.
determining with the King's Life; I will further add, That the Book of Rates
ought to be Reviewed, and in the new one, a greater Consideration had of the
Usefulness and Necessity of the Commodities, in placing the Imposition on them;
viz. rating all the allowed Commodities of France, much higher than they are,
raising the Duty of their Wines, to be at least equal, with that, on those of
Spain: I never yet coud be satisfied, what induced the Compilers of that Book,
to rate Spanish Wines higher, than those of France; since the height of Duty is
a sort of Prohibition, which ought to be more taken care of, in the Trade with
France, by which we are vast Loosers; than in that with Spain, which is a
gainful one: The best Reason I could find, is, That they did it inconsideratly,
taking it as they found it left, by the long Parliament, who by the sense of
Revenge for the War, were induced so to treat the Spaniard. One might have
thought the last Impost on French Wines, would have lessened their Importation:
which Colbert the Financer observing it had not don (I was assured at my Return
in August by Fontainbleau, that) in his Measures for the next Years Charge, he
valued his Master 100000 on that Account, not doubting but the Parliament would
take off that Duty of Wine, which would give him opportunity to put so much on;
That at this, the French King smiled and said, For such a kindn^ss he shoud be
obliged, and would no more call them Petite maison; But I hope notwithstanding
his scornful quibble, he will find such sober resolutions in that house, as will
set him a madding, and that, instead of taking off that duty, he may perceive
more put on; which is indeed the only effectual way to prohibit the
importation, of these vast quantities of French goods, by which England is
greatly Impoverisht. To lessen the Trafic of his People, is the first step to
lower him; which I am persuaded is best don, by imposing an excessive high
duty, upon all the commodities, and contriving the Act so, that nothing shoud
pass duty free; this course would be a better restraint, than absolute
prohibition: And it is the method he himself has taken in the trade with us,
which he had long since wholly forbid, but that upon examination, he found, it
was driven to above 1600000 l. Advantage to his subjects, and loss to those of
England; this, rather yearly increasing, than decreasing, will at length quite
ruin us, if not prevented; and yet notwithstanding, he imposes upon our clothes
four shillings an Ell, as a sumptuary law, to oblige his Subjects, to the use
of their own manufactures.

The next is the Excise, which, if equaly imposed, were the best and easiest of
all taxes; To make it so, after the manner of Holland, it ought to be laid upon
all things ready to be consumed. This puts it into the Power, of every Man to
pay more or less, as he resolves to live loosely or thriftily; by this course
no Man pays but according to his Enjoyment or actual Riches, of which none can
be said to have more, than what he spends; true Riches consisting only in the
use. But the present Excise is grievous, because heavyer on the poor Laborers
and meaner sort of People, than on the Rich and Great; who do not pay above a
Tenth, of what the others do; and considering, that most of the Noble and
Private Families, out of London, Brew their own Drink, it falls yet heavier on
the Poorer sort, and will at last on the State; for, the common Brewers do
already complain, that they daily lose their Trade, many of their Customers,
even in London, Brewing for themselves, to save the Imposition. To speak the
Truth, In good Conscience, this Branch ought to have been imposed on the Nobles
and Estated-Men, rather than on the Artificer and Laborers, who were very
slenderly concerned in the Grounds of it, viz. the taking away the Wardships
and Purveyance, which was so great an Advantage to the Public, especially the
Richer, That that Act of Grace and Condescension in his Majesty, which freed us
and our Posterity, from great Inconveniences and greater sines of Subjection,
ought never to be forgotten.

This Act gave us a greater Propriety and Liberty, than ever we had before; and
must the Poor chiefly pay, for the benefit of the Rich? Let it not be told to
the Generations to com, that an Act so unequal was contrived by those who study
only the public Interest; let it then be reviewed, and either made general, on
all public and private Brewers, by which the Rich will still have advantage of the
Poor, according to the difference between strong and small Beer, (For to allow
Public Brewers, and prohibit all private ones, as is practiced in the low
Countries, would never be endured in England;) Or rather let it be placed on
Malt, or taken quite off, and laid on the Land as a perpetual Crown Rent; Or
let there be a general Excise (the most equal Tax that possibly can be devised)
on all consumed Commodities of our own growth, or imported: which ought to be
managed by proper Officers; the Farming of any part of the Revenu being of evil
Consequence, as I coud show at large, both to the State and People.

The Hearth - Money is a sort of Excise, but a very unequal one too; the smoke
on it has offended the eyes of many, and it were to be wished, that it were quite
taken away, and something in lieu thereof given to the Crown less offensive to
the peoples senses; I have heard many say, That an imposition on Licenses for
selling of Ale, Strong Waters, Coffee, Syder, Mum, and all other Liquors, and
for Victualling-Houses, might be as beneficial to the Crown, and so ordered as
might prevent or discover High-way-Men, etc. I have read among the Irish
Statutes one to this purpose, obliging among other things the Innkeepers, etc.
to make good all Horses stolen out of their Stables or Pastures. An Imposition
on all Stage-Coaches, Carts, Wagons, and Carriers, set aside for the well
ordering the Roads, would be of general Advantage; as would a Tax upon Periwigs,
forving in part as a sumptuary Law. A year, or half a years Rent charged upon
all the new Buildings since 1656, would not only much oblige the City of London,
enabling them by the Difference of Rents to Let those many wast Houses, which
now to the Ruin of Trade remains un-tenanted, and also gratify the Kingdom, by
easing them from the common thredbare, Land Tax.

I do not question but, in this Conjuncture, the Wit of Men will be contriving
new Ways to supply the present occasions of a War; for that a Land Tax is slow
and unequal; and I am apt to fancy, that of the Poll-Mony will be pitched upon,
as the most speedy Levy, but must not be too great. As to my self, I am not
sollicitous what Course they take, but wish it such as may be equal, and so will
be pleasing to most: But be it great or small, the King, as formerly, will be
again defrauded, unless there be special care taken; The way I apprehend is,
That for twenty-one Years to com, neither Plaintiff nor Defendant be allowed the
Benefit of the Law, without producing an authentic Acquittance or Discharge,
that they have paid this Pol-Mony, and averring the same in their Actions or
Pleas. That the Ministers be forbid to Marry within that space any, who do not,
Women as well as Men, produce such Certificats. That none be admitted to any
Office or Command, Civil or Military, Administration or Executorship, Freedom
or Privilege in Town, City, or Corporation, or received into any of the Public
Schools, Inns, or Universities, if of the Age limited by the Act, except they
make out the said Payment; which in three months after ought to be Registered,
with the persons Names and Qualities.

Now, in regard that England is already very much under-peopled, and will be
more so if there be a War: To provide against those Evils, and to obviat in some
measure the Looseness and Debauchery of the present Age, I have thought of a
sort of Tax, which I believe is perfectly new to all the World, and under which
it is probable, if it takes, I have made Provision for my own Paying the Crown
no inconsiderable Sum, during my Life.

It Is a Tax upon Caelibat, or upon unmarryed People, viz. That the Eldest Sons
of Gentlemen and other Degrees of Nobility upwards, shoud Marry by twenty-two
complete, all their Daughters by Eighteen, and Younger Sons by Twenty-five: All
Citizen's Eldest Sons (not Gentlemen) by Twenty-three; all other Men by
Twenty-five. All the Daughters (not Servants) of all Men under the Degree of
Gentlemen, to marry by Nineteen; all Maidservants by Twenty.

That all Widdowers under Fifty Marry within Twelve Months after the Death of
their Wives; all Widows under Thirty-five, within two Years after their
Husband's Decease, unless the Widdowers or Widows have Children alive. I allow
the Women, as the softer and better natured, more time to lament their Loss.
That no Man marry after Seventy, nor Widow after Forty-five. That all Men
cohabit with their Wives.

That the Eldest Sons of Gentlemen, and all other Degrees of Nobility upward,
and all other Persons not Married by the times limited, as aforesaid, shall pay
per annum a piece these following Rates, viz.

Dukes, Marquesses, and their Eldest Sons Forty pound, other Lords and their
Eldest Sons twenty Pound, Knights, Barronets, ten Pound, Esquires eight Pound,
Gentlemen five Pound, Citizens three Pound, all other Retailing Tradesmen two
Pound. The Younger Brothers or Sons of all the foregoing Persons (respectively)
half so much; and likewise the Maiden Daughters, or rather their Fathers or
Gardians for them. All Servants, Laborers, and others six Shillings eight Pence.

All the abovesaid Widdowers or Widows, not marrying again under the Age
aforesaid half; but marrying again after the Ages above limited, double
according to their Qualities respectively; and all married Men not cohabiting
with their Wives to pay quadruple.

You may perceive I do not forget, in this Scheme, to practice some of the
Courtesy of England toward the Women; That in regard it is not fashionable for
them to Court (an hardship Custom and their own Pride has foolishly brought
upon them) they are Taxed but at half what their Elder Brothers are.

These things I do not set down with a Design of giving People a Liberty of
playing the Fool as now, in Matters of Fornication under those Penalties. For
all single Persons that do so, I would have obliged under an indispensible
Necessity, to Marry one another: And coud wish a further severity of Punishment
were inflicted upon Adultery by the State, since it is so much neglected by the
Church.

It would also be of great and public Advantage, that all Marriages were
Celebrated openly in the Church, according to the Canon or Rubric, and the
Banes three several Sundays or Holy Days first published; But if this must be
still dispensed with, that then all Dukes and Marquesses, and their Eldest Sons
shoud pay twenty Pound, all Noblemen and their Eldest Sons fifteen Pound, every
Knight and his Eldest Son seven Pound ten Shillings, every Gentleman or others
five Pound, to the King as a Public Tax for such License, over and above the
present established Fee in the Consistory Court. That if all Children may not be
Baptized openly in the Church, the Births of all even of the Non-conformists,
may be duly Registered; the knowing the exact Numbers of the People would be of
great Advantage to the Public-Weal, and conduce to many good and noble
Purposes, which (for Brevity sake) I omit to mention.

This Course may perhaps prevent many Inconveniences that young Men and Women
bring upon themselves and the Public: And since the Concubitus Vagus is
acknowledged to hinder Procreation, the Restraint thereof will be one Means of
advancing Trade, by adding more People to the Commonwealth, which perhaps in
the following Particulars you will find to be the greatest occasion of its
Decay: An Inconvenience by all possible means to be removed; For that Trade is
the Support of any Of Trade.
Kingdom, especially an Island, enabling the Subjects to bear the Taxes, and
showing them ways of living more agreeable than those of the Savage Indians in
America, whose condition is but few Degrees distant from that of Brutes. Since
then it is so necessary, it deserves the Parliaments best Care, to restore it
to what it has been, or make it what it shoud be. The first thing to be don is,
The Erecting a Council or Committee of Trade, whose Work shoud be to observe
all manner of things relating thereunto, to receive Informations of all
Tradesmen, Artificers and others; and thereupon make their Observations; To
consider all the Statutes already made, and out of them form such Bil or Bills
as shall be more convenient, and present them to the Parliament to be enacted.

There are already many Discourses publisht^ some of them would be worth their
view, and did they Sit constantly, many would bring their Remarks, and I my
self shoud be able to give some Notions on this Subject, which for want of time
I cannot now give you.

The two great Principles of Riches are Land and Labor; as the later increases,
the other grows dear; which is no otherwise don, than by a greater Confluence
of industrious People: For where many are cooped into a narrow Spot of Ground,
they are under a necessity of Laboring; because in such Circumstances they
cannot live upon the Products of Nature, and having so many Eyes upon them they
are not suffered to steal; Whatever they save of the Effects of their Labor,
over and above their Consumption, is called Riches; and the bartering or
commuting those Products with others is called Trade: Whence it follows, that
not only the greatness of Trade or Riches depends upon the Numbers of People,
but also the Deerness or Cheapness of Land, upon their Labor and Thrift.

Now, if Trade be driven so, that the Imports exceed in valu the Exports, the
People must of necessity grow poor, i. e. consume the Fundamental Stock, viz.
Land and Labor, both falling in their price. The contrary Course makes a
Kingdom Rich. The Consequence is, That, to better the Trade of England, the
People (which will force Labor) must be increased, and Thrift encouraged: For,
to hope for a vast Trade where People are wanting, is not only to expect Bric
can be made without Straw, but without Hands.

The great Advantage a Country gains by being fully peopled, you may find by
the following Observation, viz. That the valu of the Labor is more than the
Rent of the Land, and the Profit of all the Personal Estates of the Kingdom,
which thus appears. Suppose the People of England to be six Millions, their
annual Expense at twenty Nobles, or six Pound thirteen and four Pence a Head,
at a Medium for Rich and Poor, Young and Old, will amount to forty Millions;
and, if well considered, cannot be estimated much less. The Land of England and
Wales contain about twenty four Millions of Acres, worth one with another,
about six and eight Pence per Acre, or third part of a Pound; consequently the
Rent of the Land is eight Millions per annum. The yearly Profit of all the
Peoples personal Estate is not computed above eight Millions more; both
together make sixteen Millions per annum; this taken out of the forty Millions
yearly Expense, there will remain twenty-four Millions, to be supplied by the
Labor of the People; Whence follows, that each Person, Man, Woman and Child
must Earn four Pound a Year; and an Adult laboring Person double that Sum;
because a third part or 2 Millions are Children, and Earn nothing; and a sixth
part or one Million, by reason of their Estates, Qualities, Callings or
Idleness, Earn little; so that not above half the People working, must gain one
with another, eight Pound per annum a piece; and at twenty Years Purchase, will
be worth Eighty Ponnd per Head. For, tho an Individuum of Mankind be recon'd,
but about eight Years Purchase, the Species is as valuable as Land, being in
its own nature perhaps as durable, and as improveable too, if not more,
increasing still faster by Generation, than decaying by Death; it being very
evident, that there are much more yearly Born than Dye. Whence you may plainly
perceive, how much it is the Interest of the State, and therefore ought to be
their care and study, to fill the Country with People; the Profit would not be
greater in point of Riches, than in Strength and Power; for it is too obvious to
be insisted on, that a City of one Miles circumference and ten Thousand Men, is
four times stronger and easier defended, than one of four Miles with double the
Number.

Now, there are but two ordinary ways of increasing the People; that of
Generation, and that of drawing them from other Countries: The first is a Work
of Time, and tho it will not presently do our Business, yet is not to be
neglected; I have shown how it may be hastened by obliging to Marriage, and
more might be added, by erecting Hospitals for Foundlings, after the manner now
used in other Countries, and practiced with great Advantage in Paris, by the
Name of L'hostel pour les enfants trouves; where there are now reckoned no less
than Four Thousand. This in all parts of England, especially London, would
prevent the many Murders and contrived Abortions now used, not only to the
prejudice of their Souls Health, but that of their Bodies also, and to the
general Damage of the Public; This would likewise be an Encouragment to the
poorer sort to Marry, who now abstain to prevent the Charge of Children.

Strangers are no otherwise to be invited, than by allowing greater advantages
than they have at home; and this they may with more ease, receive in England
than in any part of Europe, where natural Riches do much abound, viz. Corn,
Flesh, Fish, Wool, Mines, etc. and which Nature has blessed with a temporature
of heathful Air, exceeding al Northern, and not inferior to most Southern
Countries; has given it commodious Ports, fair Rivers and safe Channels, with
possibilities of more, for water carriage; these, with what follows, would soon
make England the Richest and most powerful Country of the World. Naturalization
without Charge, plain Laws, and speedy Justice, Freedom in all Corporations,
Immunities from Taxes and Tols for seven Years, and lastly, Liberty of
Conscience; the Restraint of which has been the greatest Cause at first of
unpeopling England, and of its not being since repeopled; This drove Shoals
away in Queen Mary's, King James, and King Charles the First's Days; it has
lost the Wealth of England many Millions, and bin the occasion of spilling the
Blood of many Thousands of its People. It Is a sad Consideration, that
Christians shoud be thus fooled by obstinat Religionists, in whom too much
Stiffness on one side, and Folly and Perverseness on the other, shoud have bin
equally Condemned, being indeed the Effects of Pride, Passion or private
Interest, and altogether Foreign to the Business of Religion; which, as I have
already told you, consists not in a Belief of disputable things (of which if
either part be true, neither are to us necessary), but in the plain Practice of
Piety, which is not incompatible with Errors in Judgment. I see not therefore,
why the Clergy shoud be wholly heark'nd to in this Affair, since it is really
impertinent to the Truth of Religion; and I dare appeal to all the sober
understanding and considerative Men of the Church of England, Whether the
Opposition of this be not wholly founded upon Interest, which being but of
particular Men, ought not nor will not (I hope) weigh more with the Parliament,
than that of the Public, which is so highly concerned in this matter.

And tho it may be objected, That as Affairs of Religion now stand, none need
leave England for want of Toleration; yet certain I am, without it none will
return or com in anew. And if our Neighbors thrive, and increase in People,
Trade and Wealth, we continuing at a stay, or growing still poorer and poorer,
by that means rendered unable to resist a Foreign Power, are like to fall into
such Hands, as will force us to Worship God after the way which almost all of us
now call Heresy, and many Idolatry. Which induces me to conclude, That nothing,
but Inconsideration, can move even the Clergy to oppose this thing, on which
their own as well as the safety of all others does so very much depend.

But in regard the Defects of Trade cannot presently be supplied by bringing in
more People, because a work of time, it is necessary to make those we have
useful, by obliging the Idle and unwilling to a necessity of working, and by
giving the Poor that want it a full Employment: This will in effect be a great
increasing of the People, and may be easily compassed if Work - Houses be
Erected, in several Parts of the Kingdom, and all Persons forced into 'um, who
cannot give a satisfactory Account of their way of Living; This would prevent
Robbing, Burglary, and the Cheats of Gaming, Counterfeiting of Hands, Money
clipping, etc. by which our Lives and Fortunes would be much better secured;
This would put Men's Wits upon the Rack, Hunger which eats through Stone-Wals, would
make them in getting their Livings by the Sweat of their Brows, Masters of
Arts; a Degree Magister artis ingeniqque largitor venture --
perhaps more useful to the Common - Wealth, than those of the University. This
would put them upon the Invention of Engines, whereby their Labor would not only
become more easy, but more productive of real Advantages to the Whole; rendering
the Poet's Fable of Briareus his hundred Hands, a certain Truth; one Man doing
more by an Instrument, than fifty or a hundred without it. Wit will, thus in some
measure, make amends for the want of People; Yet so dull and ignorant, so
insensible of their own Good are the Vulgar, that generally instead of being
pleased, they are at first almost implacably offended at such profitable
Inventions. But it appears, the Parliament had another sense of Things, in that
they allowed the Advantage of fourteen Years to the Inventor: which Law, with
Submission, might be altered to better purpose, if instead of a fourteen Years
Monopoly, some Reward out of the Public Stock were given to the Ingenious. That
the many Supernumeraries in Divinity, Law and Physic with which the Kingdom
(especially London) swarms; all Mountebancs and pretenders to Astrology,
together with the Supernumeraries in all manner of Retailing Trades (even the
Trade of Merchandising has too many Hands) especially all Pedlers or Wanderers,
that carry their Shops on their Backs, Lap-Women, etc. who contribute little or
nothing to the Charge of the State; be pared off and made useful to the Public;
to which, by the vast increase of These, and the great number of Idlers and
Beggars, not above two Thirds even of the ordinary sort can be looked upon as
bringing in any real Advantage; the other Third, but like Droans, living on the
Labor of the rest.

And to speak more freely, it is unreasonable and impolitic, especially in a
great and overgrown City, to suffer any Retail-Trades to be managed by Men,
when Women, with the help of a few Porters, about the most cumbersom things,
may do it much better; They will invite Customers more powerfully than Men can,
and having nothing to do in the way of their Shop-Trades, will not be idle,
their Needles employing them; while the Men perhaps, from two, three or four,
to seven lusty young Fellows, sit idle most part of their time, with their
Hands in their Pockets, or blowing their Fingers; few of these sort of Trades
finding one with another, above two Hours work in the whole Day: The Men would
study some more beneficial Employments; and the Women having by this means
something to do, would not as now, induced by Idleness, more than Want, be
occasions of so much Wickedness and Debaucheries, to the general Prejudice of
the Commonwealth, and the particular Ruin of many good Families.

To set on foot the Fishing Trade, and to allow to all such as will undertake
it, Strangers or Natives, the same Benefits and Privileges I have mentioned
for the bringing in of the former; and I think, if beyond that, Houses were
built for them in Linn, or Yarmouth, etc, at the Public Charge, Rent-free for
seven Years, every Man would say, it were for the general Good, who considers
that this Trade is the only basis of the Grandeur and Power, that the States of
Holland are no less Lords of, in Europe, than in the East Indies; to which it
has raised 'um in less than an Hundred Years, from the Poor and distressed
States, to be one of the Richest and Mightiest of the known World: This I coud
at large make appear, but that it having bin don already, with the want of
time, hinders me. I will only say, That Holland has not the tenth part of those
Natural Conveniences for effecting this, England, Scotland or Ireland have.
That the same Encouragements be given to all such, whether Natives or
Forreiners, that shall jointly carry on the particular Manufactures of Iron,
Tinn, Earthenware, and Linen, etc. in the last, at three Shillings four Pence
an Ell one with another, is reckoned consumed by us above six hundred thousand
Pound; all which might be saved and the Poor set at work, by promoting that
Trade within our selves. To restore the Woolen Manufactures almost decayed, and
to take the same Care in that, and all other, as the Dutch have don in that of
the Herrings; The neglect in this has been a main Reason, that our
Cloathing-Trade is much lessened; Reputation in Commodities is as necessary, as
in the Venders: which makes the Dutch, even at this Day, put on English Marks,
and thereby for the ancient Credit (now in a manner lost) ours were in, they
have gained for their own Manufactures the Markets we want. The Decay of our
Cloathing-Traffic has been occasioned by several Accidents; One, and no final
one, is that of Companies, which indeed are as much Monopolies, as if in one
single Person; They ruin Industry and Trade, and only to enrich themselves,
have a Liberty, by which they impoverish the rest of the Commonwealth.
Whatever Reason there was for first Erecting them, viz. to begin or carry on
some great Undertaking, which exceeded the Power of particular Men, there
appears less or none now for their Continuance. The Enjoyment of Liberty and
Property requires that all Subjects have equal Benefit in Safety and Commerce;
and if all Subjects pay Taxes equally, I see no Reason why they should not have
equal Privileges.

And if part of those Taxes be imposed for guarding the Seas, I do really
believe it would be more Advantage to the King, to send Convoys to the
East Indies and to Guinea, with any of his Subjects trading thither, than to
allow these two Companies the sole Benefit of engrossing those Trades; tho I
think no others, but they, being at considerable Charge and Expense, ought to
be continued.

And since the East India and African Companies, especially the first, impose
what Rates they please upon their Commodities, why shoud not they pay, for that
Power of Taxing the Subject, a considerable present Proportion for carrying on
the War, and a yearly round Sum to the State, to ease the rest of the People,
who are debarred those Advantages? In my opinion, Gratitude to the King, as well
as Justice to the Subject, should invite them to give a considerable standing
yearly Revenu to the Crown. This may be policy too; for then perhaps, they need
never fear their Dissolution, notwithstanding the clamors and many mouths now
open against them.

But if it shall be not thought fit, to take away all Companies, why shoud it
not be lawful once a Year for any one, that pleased, to be made a Member,
paying in his quota? This, I confess, would make it useful to the Public,
because the Trade would be managed by fewer Hands, consequently to more Profit,
and every one being concerned, there coud be no Complaint.

But whatever is don in point of Trade, particular Corporations of Artificers
ought to be broke; they, as now managed, are Encouragements to Idleness,
Impositions upon the rest of the People, and an unreasonable enslaving of
Apprentices, who in three Years, for the most part, may be as well Masters of
their Trade, as in seven: But the Advantage is, that when they com to Set up
for themselves, they commonly turn Gentlemen, and cannot afford to sell a
Cabinet under fifteen Pound, because they must eat well and drink Wine; tho they
own a Dutchman or a Frenchman, that does not so, may afford as good a one for
twelve Pound: This of the Cabinet is a late and a true Story, and to my own
Experience, it is the same in most, if not all other Trades.

The Fish-monger's Company is of all others, the greatest Nuisance to the
Public, to the most useful Part thereof, the poor Artificers and Laborers; I
was credibly informed at my last being in London, by two substantial Citizens,
That they throw part of their Fish away, to inhaunse the valu and price of the
Remainder.

That for these, and many more Reasons I coud give, it were convenient, that
every City and Town corporate consisted but of one Company, into which, without
Charge or Formalities of Freedom, every man Native or Alien, ought to be
admitted, that pays his propotion of Taxes and Assessments.

And in order to the bringing in Forreiners, our Native unmanufactur'd
Commodities ought to be strictly prohibited to other Countries; more
particularly that the Exportation of Wool from England and Ireland be
restrained; which will be better don by imposing a vast Duty upon it, as of
thirty or forty Shillings a Stone or Tod, than by making it Felony; adding over
and above great Pecuniary Mulcts, if shipped without Payment of Duty; If this
were Enacted, many would turn Informers, who now out of tenderness of Men's
Lives, forbear the discovering this injurious Practice; for prevention whereof,
great Care ought to be taken; since the vast quantities of Wool exported from
England and Ireland into France and Holland, have in a manner destroyed the
great Staple of England, the Woolen-Manufacture, lowered the Rents of Land, and
beggared thousands of People. By this the Dutch and French are enabled to make
useful both their own and Spanish Wools, which would otherwise be insignificant
and ineffective of any considerable Purposes; one being too Fine, the other too
Course, without Mixtures of English or Irish Wool.

Those, by greater labor and frugality, who heretofore were furnished by us, do
now not only supply themselves, but also undersel us abroad; and as if that
injury were too little, we are content, by wearing their Stuffs, to give them
an opportunity of undermining us at home. If you consider these things
seriously, you will with me be persuaded, it is not the great increase of Wool,
in England and Ireland, that makes it a Drug, but the Practice of carrying it
abroad; and our not being satisfied to ape and Mimic the French Modes, but
further to wear their Stuffs, tho far inferior to our own.

I have heard it demonstrated, by knowing men, that it would be Englands great
interest, to work up all their own and Irish Wool, tho they shoud afterward
burn it when in Stuffs and Cloth; and I am convinced their doing so one year,
would not only maintain the Poor and habituat them to Labor, but be as great an
advantage in the sale of that Manufacture, both at home and abroad, for the
future, as the burning part of their Spices, is to the Dutch. But I am of
Opinion there would be no need to burn any, for that which is now useful in
Wool, would not be less so in Cloth. I have seen a computation by which it
appears the working up all our own and Irish Wool, which England can do to
better purposes than a part, while the remainder is Transported to other
Countries, would be many Millions in the Wealth of the People, and as many
Hundred thousand Pounds Sterling in the Kings Coffers. For if we kept this
Commodity at home, we shoud not only give a full employment to our People, but
necessitat those who now in France and Holland maintain themselves by this
Manufacture, so soon as their stocks were spent, to find new Arts of living, or
else convey themselves hither, which of the two, is certainly the most
probable. Thus we shoud doubly increase our Wealth and our People; the latter
by Consequence raising the Rents and valu of Lands, in duplicat proportion (as
I coud demonstrat) to what they now yield. For a short instance observe, That
if there be a thousand People in a Country, the Land whereof is worth a
thousand pound Per Annum; and at twenty years purchase twenty thousand pound.
If they be increased half as many more, or to one thousand five Hundred People,
the Rent of the Land will likewise be half as much more viz. one Thousand five
Hundred pound, and the number of years purchase not only twenty, but half as
many more, viz. in all thirty; which makes the valu of the inheritance amount
to thirty times one thousand five hundred or forty five Thousand Pound. The
reason of which is founded on this undeniable Maxim, That Land is more or less
valuable, as it is more or less Peopled. When heretofore all the Wool of
England was Manufactur'd in Flanders, it yielded but six pence a pound; but
soon after the restraint of it in Edward the Thirds time, the manufacturing all
at home, raised it to eighteen pence a Pound, and brought in to the Kingdom
great numbers of Flemmings and Walloons. To encourage this further, all persons
whatsoever shoud wear nothing but Stuff and Cloth of our own make; the Ladies
to have liberty to wear Silk but in Summer. I am told that within these six
months, to encourage a Woollen Manufacture newly set up in Portugal, no man,
Native or Stranger, is suffered to appear at Court in any other.

That useful neglected Act, of Burying in Woollen, shoud be strictly put in
execution; not prohibiting the People, if they will be so foolish (but probably
a little time will make them wiser, than) to throw away linen too, which if
they would make at home, might be the more tolerable: The way I conceive by
which it may be easily don, is, to enjoin the Minister under penalty of
deprivation, with allowance of Money to the Informers, not to bury any one,
whose Corpse or Coffin, they do not see covered with Flannel. And since Death is
said to be the Sister of Sleep, or rather since Sleep is the representation of
Death as our Beds are of our Grave, or indeed, that Death is but a very long
Night, if we shoud not only Bury, but ly in Flannel Sheets, at least the long
cold Winter Nights, I have bin assured by our old Friend -- That this Practice,
after a little use, would be found no less for the health, if not some
voluptuousness of our natural Bodies, than the other would prove for the Body
Politic; and I am the more induced to believe this assertion, because
Physicians prescribe Flannel Shirts to some persons for their Health; I am
certain the more ways are found for the Consumption of this Manufacture, the
Richer our Country would grow, by lessning the use of Foreign Linen, so greatly
advantageous to our Neighbors of France; whom we love so dearly, that we study
how to serve and enrich them, tho to our own impoverishment and Ruin.

Besides this Course, not a lock of Wool shoud be permitted into the Islands of
Iersy, Guernsey, Aldarney or Sark; under color of what is allowed, they are
enabled, to supply their own occasions, and carry much more (of which I am well
assured) to France; which reaps the benefit of the great industry of those
populous Islands; to make them beneficial, at least not hurtful, to England, is
to deny them Wool; if that would bring the People thence into this Country, it
will prove a double advantage. And lastly, I think the only certainty of keeping
our Wool from Forreiners, is to erect a Company by the Name of State Merchants,
or Oblige the East India Company, whose Stock and Credit will enable them with
ease, to buy up at good rates yearly, all the Wool of England and Ireland which
manufactur'd at home, would bring them in a little time, as profitable returns,
as those from Bantam, etc be many Millions in the Riches of the People, by
raising the Rents, etc. an^ Hundred Thousands in the Kings Ex^chequer, employ
Thousands of our Poo^ now starving, and invite in many o^ other Nations to the
great increase of our Strength and Wealth, and so prove no less a particular
than an universal good.

That all Forestallers, Regrators and Higlers be prevented, who now do as much
mischief to the City of London, as formerly purveiance did the Kingdom.

That the present confused business of weights and measures, which appears by
many statutes to have bin the care of our ancestors, be fully ascertained and
adjusted. And because this does greatly tend to the regulation of trade and
administration of Justice, it were convenient particular persons were
empowered, who shoud receive complaints and correct abuses, in those and all
other penal statutes referring to trade, by some more speedy course than that
of information or indictment, etc.

That no particular Person or Incorporations have any places priviledg'd
against the Kings Writs.

That the Parliament would be pleased to redress the great Obstruction of
Justice by Protections, of which no less than sixteen Thousand are said to be
given in and about London. I am persuaded that either the Report is a Mistake,
or that the Member's Hands are Counterfeited; for it is very unreasonable to
believe, the Makers of our Laws would prevent their Execution; But be the Case
one way or other, the Evil may be easily remedyed by the Members registring the
Names of their servants in the House, at the beginning of the Sessions and upon
the Alteration of any.

That all manner of Courts in Corporations, whether by Grant or Prescription,
be taken away, because of the many Abuses daily committed: and in every
Corporation a Court of Merchants Erected, for the quic dispatch and
determination of all Controversies relating to Trade and Commerce; every Man to
be obliged to tell his own Story, without Charge or the Assistance of Atturneys
or Lawyers. The Judges to be annually chosen five in number, together with two
Registers, one for the Plaintiff, the other for the Defendant, out of the most
experienced and best reputed Citizens, or Tradesmen; no Salary or Fee to be
paid to Judge or Officer.

To retrench, by Sumptuary Laws, the excessive wearing foreign Silks,
Embroideries and Laces; to prohibit absolutely the use of Silver and Gold-Lace,
Gilding or Lackering Coaches, etc. When Riches are thus not so much used as
abused, it is no wonder they do not only moulder into Dust, but take wing (in
Solomon's Phrase) and fly away: Our wiser Neighbors in France and Holland
prevent this Evil: the First make a Show, but at an easy and cheap Rate; the
later leave off their Clothes, because they are worn out, not that they are out
of Fashion: Our contrary Practice in imported Commodities make us complain,
That Trade is decaying; in which our Folly has made us a Byword among the
French, As a People that consume our All on the Back and the Belly; and if none
spent more, the Mischief were but particular; But many are not contented to run
out their own Estates, but resolve to have the Pleasure of undoing others for
Company. So long as we indulge our selves in this Vanity, we may indeed have
the satisfaction (if it be any) to talk of mending Trade: but in spite of our
Chat, it will still decay, we shall Buy and Sell more and more, and yet live by the
Loss, til at last we are wholly Broke. How long that will be a doing, we may
guess by the Fall of the Rents and Valu of Lands, not to be avoided while the
Balance of Trade is so much greater on the Imported side than the Exported.
The way to make us Rich, is to manage our Trade in the same manner it was don
in Edward the Thirds time; To make the Proportion of our Exports, exceed our
Imports, as much as they then did; by an Account taken in the Seven and
Twentyeth Year of that King (as Cotton says) our exported Commodities amounted
to 294184 Pound, the Imported but 38970 Pound; so that, the Kingdom got clear
in that Year 255214 Pound: By which it appears, that our present Trade is about
thirty times greater than it was then, tho we complain of its Fall: It Is our own
Fault, we are so imprudent as to consume more of Foreign Goods, than we sell of
our own; this I am convinced we do in our French Trade, it is well if we do not
likewise play the Fool in others. By the way, you may observe, That if we would
but moderate our Expenses, we might very well bear our Taxes, tho they were near
thirty times greater than in that Kings Reign, even with Allowance for the
Alteration of Coin.

That the Exportation of Money in specie, is so far from being a Loss to the
Kingdom, that it may be gainful, as it is to Legorn and other places: That tho
we did not export any Coin, yet we shoud not be the Richer; since the
overballance would still lie as a Debt upon our Trade, which it must sometime or
other pay in that or another Commodity, or otherwise Break.

And that the Council or Committee of Trade may find out the Wealth of the
Kingdom, which would serve to many good Purposes, by making a yearly Account of
the Goods imported and exported (best known by the Customs, and has been
Calculated by a Friend of mine in another Country) These ought at least every
seven Years to be reviewd, (supposing the Life of Commodities not longer than
that of Man). And, according to their Alterations of usefulness or necessity,
to our selves or others, the Impositions to be changed.

And here I must take leave to assert, That all imported Commodities are better
restrained by the height of Imposition, than by an absolute Prohibition, if
sufficient Care be taken to oblige the Importers to a full and strict Payment;
for this would be a kind of Sumptuary Law, putting a necessity upon the
Consumer, by Labor to enlarge his Purse, or by Thrist to lessen his Expense.
And I am the more induced to this, by my observation, that notwithstanding the
several Acts, prohibiting the Importation of many foreign Commodities; yet
nothing is more worn or used, especially the French, in which Trade, if the
overballance (which is said to be above 1600000 Pound) were loaded with the
Charge of eight Shillings in the Pound, it would make the Consumption of those
Commodities 640000 pound dearer; and if that would not restrain our Folly, it
would help to ease us in the public Taxes; whereas now they are all imported
without any other Charge, than what is paid for Smuckling, to tie up the
Seamen's Tongues, and shut Officers Eyes. To prevent this, it were fit, that
Men were undeceived of the Notion they have taken up, That the Law does allow
'um their Choice, either to pay the Duty, or the Penalty if taken; which sure
cannot be the End of any Law, which designs Obedience and active Compliance
with what it injoins, not a Disobedience or breaking what it positively
commands. If Penal Statutes be only conditional, then the Traitor, the Murderer
or the Thief, when he suffers the Punishment of Disobedience, may be called an
honest Man, and in another Signification than that of the Scotch Phrase, A
justified Person. But the idle and unwarrantable Distinction of Active and
Passive Obedience has don England greater Mischiefs. The Revenu Acts give not
the same Liberty, that those Acts do, which oblige the People to go to Church,
or to Watch and Ward under pecuniary Mulcts. In these a Power of Choosing was
designedly left, which by many Circumstances appears otherwise intended by the
other. And indeed, the Practice is not only unjust, but abusive to the whole
Body of the People, who pay as dear for what they buy, as if the Duty had bin
paid to the King, not put up in a few private Men's Pockets. It may likewise
hinder Trade; for if the Smuckler please, he may undersel his Neighbor, who
honestly thinks, it is a Cheat and a Sin, not to give Caesar his Du: Therefore,
a Seal or some private Mark shoud be contrived, for all sorts of Commodities, and
Power given to seize them when and wherever met, in Merchants, Retailers or
Consumptioners Hands. And to prevent the passing foreign Commodities, as if
made at Home, for which lest any of these last shoud pass, they shoud in the
Town where they are made, or exposed to Sale, be first marked or sealed, in an
Office purposely erected, without any Delay or Charge to the People.

That, that part of the Act of Navigation be repealed, which appoints three
fourths of the Mariners to be English: why not Scots, Irish or any of the Kings
Subjects, or even Forreiners, so the Ships do really belong to owners resident
in England? We want People, therefore ought to invite more, not restrain any.
This Act is a Copy of that made by the Long Parliament and their General, the
Usurper, who being in War with Scotland and Ireland in rebellion, thought fit
to deny them equal privileges in commerce. But this Loyal Parliament will, I
hope, consider, that the three Kingdoms are not to be thus divided in
Interests, while under one Monarch. That his Naval Power, their joint strength,
is increased by the growth of shipping in any of 'um. If the sense of this will
not prevail upon them, to allow 'um the same freedoms, yet sure I am, they must
from thence perceive, England will have a great advantage by suffering all the
Kings subjects of Ireland and Scotland, to enjoy the benefit of this Act.

That there be two Free Ports appointed; one in the South, another in the
North, with convenient rules and limitations That the duty imposed upon any of
our exportations, whether of our own growth or manufacture of foreign
materials, be not so high as may either wholly restrain those abroad from
buying, or enable others to furnish them cheaper.

That education of Children in foreign parts in Colleges or Academies be
prohibited, and Provision found or made at home for Teaching Languages and the
exercises of Rideing, Fencing, etc.

That Banks and Lombards be speedily Erected; this in a little time would make a
Hundred pound to be as useful to the Public, as two Hundred real Cash is now.
But in order thereunto, let there be a voluntary Registry of Land, etc. which
in a few years will raise their valu considerably. By this way no man indebted
or whose estate is encumbered is obliged to make discoveries. Yet if he has but
half free, the Registring of that, will the better enable him to discharge the
other part. If a Registry must not be obtained, that, at least, the selling or
morgaging over and over, secret conveyances, Deeds of trust or any other Trics,
by which the Lender or Purchaser is defrauded and abused, be made Felony,
without benefit of Clergy; and the cheating person obliged to pay the sufferer
treble Damage, and as much more to the Public. This, which certainly, all
honest men judge as reasonable, as what is practiced for far smaller evils or
offenses, will, without any innovation in the Laws, or other alleged
inconveniences to the People, secure us in our Rights, and perhaps answer all the ends of a Registry; of which, tho very convenient, I am not so fond, as to
think or believe, it will so suddenly, or to that height, as is said, raise the
Rents and Valu of Lands; To this it can contribute but by accident, as it
invites Strangers into the Kingdom (for I have already told you, that the
greater or smaller number of People is the only true cause of the dearness or
cheapness of Land and of Labor or Trade) yet even this it cannot do, without
abolishing the Law, disabling Aliens to purchase and hold before
Naturalization, necessary without dispute to be immediately taken away.

Nor would it a little contribute to the general good, that all Merchants and
Tradesmen breaking shoud be made guilty of Felony, their goods to the
Creditors, if they did not plainly make appear, by their true Books, their
losses and discover what ever they have left, and without the unjust and
cunning Artifices of composition, give way for an equal Divident among the
Creditors. And that the many abuses of the Kings Bench Prison be reformed,
which, as now managed, is made a Santuary and place of Refuge and Privilege,
for all Knaves that desine their own private Interest, to the ruin of others,
whose confinement is no narrower than from the East to the West Indies.

That all Bonds and Bills obligatory, statute Merchants and of the staple,
Recognisances, Judgments, etc. be enacted transferable and by Indorsement to
pass as current as Bills of Exchange, and made recoverable by a shorter course
of of Law, than now practiced. That is to say, that upon actual proof of the
perfecting and last assigning of the Deed, Judgment and Execution be obtaind.
This would wonderfully enliven trade, make a new species of Coin, lower
interest, secure in a great measure dealers from breaking, and find money to
carry on the trades of Fishing, Linen, Woollen, etc.

That til the proposed regulation of the Laws can be effected, to avoid the
trouble and charge of Iuries in many cases and other unjust vexations, the
meets and bounds of the denominations of all Lands, Manors, Parishes, Commons,
Hundreds and Countyes, all prescriptions, usages and customs, and the
Jurisdictions of all inferior Courts be fully inquired into, and truly
registered in one Book or Books; copies to be Printed and the Original to be and
remain of Record, as the Doomsday book in the Exchequer: By which all disputes
concerning the premises may be speedily and cheaply decided.

There are but two Objections against this public good, and were they
unanswerable, yet since they are but particular and selfish considerations,
they ought not to take place; The first is, That the useful and laudable
Calling of the Lawyers, will be prejudiced. The next, that, the many, who now
live upon Credit, will be undon. As to the first, by this work the present
Lawyers will be so far from suffering, that for ten years to com rather than
lessen, it will increase their business; which according to the ordinary
computation of men's Lives, or their hopes of being promoted, will be a greater
advantage to them, than if things continued as they are: and for those, who
propose to themselves this way of living, there will be still grounds enuff for
the Practtise of some and many new employments for others. So that if these
Gentlemen's present great Practice would give them leave to look forwards, they
would find they are more Scared than hurt. As to the second sort, who likewise
believe they may be damnifi'd, that fancy will also vanish, if it be considered,
That it will enlarge rather than destroy Credit. For we will suppose, that a
young Merchant or Tradesman, who has 500. pound stock, does not trade for less
than 2000. pound, the Merchant that sells him the Commoditys upon the belief of
his being honest, industrions, prudent and sober, gives him Credit, and takes
his Bond payable at a certain day; this Person, that he may be able duly to
discharge his obligation, in like manner, trusts another, whom he supposes able
and honest; for all receive credit as they really are or appear such; as soon
as his bond becomes du, he takes up his own, and gives that he received to his
creditor, who perhaps gives it to another to whom he is indebted; At last the
money is called for, from the Country Gentleman; the Country Gentleman gives him
an assignment on his tenant, who either is or is not indebted; if the tenant
owes the Money, he pays it in specie, or assigns him upon some Merchant, for
the valu of commodities sold him, the fond enabling him to pay his Landlords
Rent; and thus perhaps by a Circulation of traffic, for all Men from the
highest to the lowest are one way or other Merchants or Traders, the first man
is paid with his own paper: If the tenant does not ow the Landlord the Money,
and therefore will not pay, the Landlord is immediately necessitated to sell or
Morgage some part of his estate; which if he refuse, the Law forces him, and the
Credits of the rest are secured. The Consequences are plainly these; That Men
must be careful, with whom they deal; That they must be punctual and thrifty,
lest they first lose their Credit, and afterward become Beggars: For, he that
rightly considers, will be convinced, That every Man in a Society or
Commonwealth, even from the King to the Pesant, is a Merchant, and therefore
under a necessity of taking care of his Reputation, not seldom a better
Patrimony, than what descends to us from our Parent's Care. That by this
Practice, the Kingdom will gain an inexhaustible Treasure; and tho there were
not a hundredth part of the Money, be able to drive ten times a greater Trade,
than now it does. A Man thus enabled, to Live and Trade without Money, will be in
no need of running-out his principal in Interest, by which too many for want of
Consideration, are insensibly undon, involving many more in their Ruin. Without
these, or some other new Courses, you may be assured, That our Trade,
consequently our Power, will every Day decay, and in a few Years com to nothing.

But some imagine, that we need not trouble our selves in this Matter, it will
shortly fall in of Course to our Country; for that as Learning took its Circuit
through several parts of the World, beginning at the East, so must Trade too: but
who-ever believes this will com to pass without Human Means, Labor and Art,
entertains wrong Notions of Providence.

I do believe the great Wheel is always in Motion; and tho there be a constant
Circumgyration of things, yet it is idle to fancy, that any thing, but Troubles
or War, Oppression or Injustice, Wit or Industry makes Trade or Learning shift
their Places in the same Country, or alter their abode from that to any other.
If we look into Histories, we shall find these have bin the Causes of their
Migration; and that Trade and Learning, usually go hand in hand together.

Having already asserted, that Trade and Commerce are to be improved and
carried on, the more vigorously, by how much the more Labor and Thrist are
increased; and that the making Idlers work, is in effect, an increasing the
People: And that all such shoud be forced into several Workhouses, which tho
the Parliament has taken into consideration, yet for want of Stock, is not
hitherto put in any forwardness, I will now give you my Thoughts, how this may
probably be brought about, with little or no Charge, but to such only, as upon
prospect of Advantage, do change the Scenes of their Lives, as by Marriage,
Employments, Callings, etc. or by assuming new Titles and Degrees of Honor; and
consequently as their respective Proportions, or Payments are here proposed,
they cannot account them burdensome or grievous. To perfect this, I think it
necessary, That all Hospitals, Almshouses and Lands for charitable uses, be
sold, and more stately and convenient Ones erected; into which, none but
diseased Persons, or others perfectly unable to Earn their Living, shoud be
received. And to the end they might the sooner be Restored to Health, a
convenient number of Physicians, Nurses and Tenders ought to be appointed, and
sufficient Salaries established; England, to Her great shame, is in this
Instance, much behind Her Neighbors of France and Holland; in the Practice of
which, I know not whether there be more of Charity, or of Policy, of Heavenly
or of Earthly Interest.

That the several Directions of the Act, for raising a Stock, be strictly put
in Execution. That all Fines for Swearing, Drunkenness, Breaches of the Peace,
Felons Goods, Deodands, etc. for a certain number of Years be converted to this
Use; This would bring in twenty times more than is now received on these
Accounts and may perhaps prevent the late much practiced trick of finding all
Felo's de se mad. That all Contributions for maintenance of the Poor (which are
so considerable, that I have bin told, in some single Parishes in London, they
amount communibus annis, to Five thousand Pound a Year) be added to this Stock.
And that it be further enacted, That every Man at his Admission to Freedom, pay
one Shilling; upon Marriage, what he thinks fit above one Shilling. Every
Clergyman at Ordination, ten Shillings, at Instalment into any Dignity, twenty
Shillings; Archdeacons, three Pound; Deans, five Pound; Bishops, ten Pound;
Archbishops, twenty Pound. Gentlemen upon Admittance into the Inns of Court,
ten Shillings; upon their being called to the Bar forty Shillings; when made
Sergeants, or King's Council, five Pound. Every Man upon Admission into the
Inns of Chancery, three Shillings four Pence; when Sworn Attorney, ten
Shillings. Lord High Chancellor, Keeper, Lord High Treasurer, and Lord Privy
Seal, twenty Pound. Chief Justice, Chief Baron, Chancellor of the Exchequer,
Master of the Rolls and Attorney General, twelve Pound a piece. Every of the
other Judges and Barons, the Sollicitor-General and the Six Clerks, ten Pound a
piece. The Masters of Chancery and other Officers not named in that or other
Courts, any Sum not exceeding six Pound a Man, as shall be thought convenient,
by the respective Judges. All Knights, five Pound; Baronets, ten Pound; Barons,
Vice Counts, Earls, twenty Pound; Dukes and Marquesses, fifty Pound. All
Aldermen of London, twenty Pound; of other Cities and Corporations, three
Pound. Mayors, ten Pound. All Masters of Arts in Universities, twenty
Shillings. Doctors of Law and Physic, forty Shillings; of Divinity, four Pound.
Heads and Masters of Colleges, five Pound. All Executors and Administrators,
that undertake the Charge, two Shillings. All Persons entering into Estates,
either by Descent or Purchase, one Shilling, over and above one Shilling, for
every hundred Pounds per annum of such Estate. That every Sunday, there be
Collections in all Churches of the Kingdom, which with what shall be received at
the Communion, are to be thus appropriated: And that all Street, Door, and
other Charitable Doles, in broken Meat or Money, as the great Encouragements and
chief occasions of Idleness and Vice, be forbid under severe Penalties; That
Briefs be issued through the Kingdom, for voluntary Contributions; That the Names
of such as shall be eminently Bountiful, be conveyed to Posterity, by placeing
their Coats of Arms, and registring their Munificence in the respective
Workhouses of the City, Corporation or County, where they live. I do not doubt,
but in a very short time, a Stock would be thus raised, sufficient to employ all
the idle Hands in England. And tho I believe, that after a little while, there
would be no need of using Art, or Severity in bringing People into these
Nurseries of Labor and Industry: The Sweets of gain and trouble of Idleness,
which certainly is not the least of toyls to such as have bin inured to Labor
or Business, being of themselves strong Allurements; yet to lay the first
Foundation with success, I conceive it necessary, That both Men and Women, who
have no visible ways of Maintenance, Criminals of what Quality soever, punished
as before in the Discourse of Laws, the Children taken out of the Foundlings
Hospital, as soon as able to do any thing, be all sent to these Workhouses.
That the great numbers of People going out of this Kingdom, Scotland and
Ireland, to other Parts of Europe, be restrained, and none be spirited into the
West Indies, or suffered to go abroad, unless to trade. That such as by
Infirmity or Age are absolutely disabled, among which neither the Lame nor the
Blind are to be reckoned, be maintained and confined within the public
Hospitals. That every Constable, in whose ward or Precinct any Beggar is found,
forfeit twenty Pound; and the Person or Persons entertaining or lodging any,
five Pound, to the Use of the Work - House.

That those who are commonly sent to the House of Correction, or Bridewel, and
those found Guilty of Petty Larceny, be sent to the Workhouse; For that indeed
Whipping, the Punishment intended for their Amendment, does but take away the
sense of Shame and Honor, rendering them Impudent and Incorrigible in their
Iniquities. But granting its operation so forcible, as to be able to reclaim
them, yet certain it is, that its best effect is, but to hinder them from doing
further Mischief; whereas by this Course, not only that will be avoided, but a
considerable profit redound to the Public. To these also shoud be added all
Prisoners for Criminal matters tho acquitted, if by Circumstances they appear
suspicious; it being reasonable to conclude some, Rogues and Vagabonds, tho the
evidence required by strictness of Law, be not strong enuf to Convict them.
Hither likewise are all to be sent, who for trivial inconsiderable causes, and
sometimes out of pure Malice, are thrown into Prisons, and there forced to spend
the remainder of their miserable Lives; the exorbitant extortion of Fees, and
the merciless rage of their Enemies, swelling their Debts beyond the power, or
hopes of Satisfaction; whereby they become not only useless, but a burden to the
Commonwealth. And because the Benefit of Clergy was introduced, for the
advancement of Learning in the ruder days of our Ancestors, and that there is
now no such need, the Kingdom being so far from wanting, that it is rather
Overstockt in every Faculty, with such as make Learning a Trade: and the
intercourse of our Affairs almost necessitating all others to Read and Write, I
hold it convenient to take it quite away; not only because useless, but because
it is an encouragement to many, to trangress the bounds of the Law. That all of
what degree or condition soever, Men or Women, literat or illiterat, convicted
of any of the Crimes for which Clergy is now allowed, be condemned to the
Workhouses for Seven Years, or pay to its Use sixty Pounds or more, according
to their Qualities.

By what I have already said, you see I am no friend to Pardons; but if any
must still be granted, that then any not a Gentleman obtaining one, pay Twenty
Pound, a Gentleman Forty Pound, an Esquire Sixty Pound, a Knight-Batchellor
Eighty Pound, a Baronet or other Knight One Hundred Pound, a Lord Two Hundred
Pound, a Marquess or Duke Four Hundred Pound. The Eldest Sons of every of these
to pay equal with the Fathers. And in case after all this People shoud be
wanting, Ireland may furnish yearly, Hundreds or Thousands of its Children;
which will prove not only advantageous for Increasing the Wealth of England,
but also for securing the Peace and Quiet of that Kingdom; by making so many of
the Natives one and the same People with us, which they will soon be, if taken
away so Young, as that they may forget their Fathers House and Language. And
if, after seven, eight or nine Years, when Masters of their Trade, returned
into their own, or suffered to abide in this Country.

I will not trouble you with recounting in particular, the many advantages that
would soon flow through all the Tracts of this Land, from this source of Industry,
if thus supplied with Money and Hands. All Trades and useful Manufactures of
Silks, Linen, Canvass, Lace, Paper, Cordage for Ships, Iron, Tin, etc. may be
there set on foot, and carried on to a far greater profit, than single men can
drive them. In this Workhouse shoud be Taught, the knowledge of Arms, and the
Arts of War, on all Festivals and Holy Days; and the lusty young Fellows sent
by turns to Sea, for a year or two of the Time of this their
State-Apprentiship. By this means the King would be enabled at any time without
Pressing, to draw out of this great Seminary a sufficient Army, either for Land
or Sea-service.

The ways, methods and orders for Regulating the several Workhouses I coud
fully demonstrat, did I not think it needless at present. It Is enuf that I here
Promise to do it at any time when the Great Council shall think fit to take
this matter into Consideration, or when you please to impose your further
Commands. But give me leave to say, That laying aside all other Reformations of
the State, this alone would secure our Lives and Fortunes, from Violence and
Depredation, not only increase our Wealth and Power beyond what now it is, but
make them far exceed, whatever any of our Neighbors are possessed of; and
consequently establish a firm and lasting Peace at Home, and make us terrible
to the Nations abroad. This great Happiness is the Wish of every true
Englishman, but can only be effected, by the Care and Wisdom of the King and
Parliament; to whom I most passionatly recommend and humbly submit it.

I have now at length run through all the parts, of my uneasy Task; you will say, I
doubt not, very Slubberingly; to be before hand with you, I do confess it; I
never undertook any thing more unwillingly, and therefore have performed it,
not only il, but carelessly, studying nothing so much, as to com quicly to an
end; which indeed was my greatest Labor; the fields you commanded me to take a
turn in, were so spacious, that being once entered, considering how short a
while you obliged me to stay, I coud not easily find my way out again; which
put me to a necessity of running, and the have not giving me leave to see the
Rubbs in my way, forced me to stumble: What I have don can serve to no other
purpose, than for hints to enlarge your better thoughts upon.

Had these Papers bin Worthy, I would have presented them by way of Newyears
Gift; but that was not my fault; most of what you meet with here, we have often
discoursed with our -- You must not read them to any other: For I am persuaded
they would tell you the Man was Mad: Perhaps I was so for Writing, but I am sure
I have yet madder thoughts, For I do seriously believe all I have here said is
true; and this to boot, That, the World is a great Cheat; That an honest man, or
a good Christian is a greater Wonder, than any of those strange ones, with
which Sir H. B. has often entertained us. This you are sure of, I have spoken
nothing for Interest; I am but a bare stander by, no Better, and therefore
neither win nor loose, let the Game go how it will. But to trifle no more, I am
not concerned what any think; I live to my self, not others, and build not my
satisfaction, upon the empty and uncertain Vogue, or Opinion of men; If I did,
I should put into their Power, to make me unhappy, when ever they please.

To conclude, The Result of all I have here said is, That England might be the
happiest Country in the World, if the people would be content to make a right
use of their Power; that is, to Act by the Rules of Reason, on which their own
Constitutions are founded: For since they have the power of Reforming the old
and enacting new Laws, in which every man (the poorest that is worth but forty
shillings per annum) has his Vote, no man can be offended, with his own Act;
But if he be, the Remedy is at hand. So that here every one living according to
Reason, and that making every man a Judge, all must see to their great Comfort,
That the Interest of the King and People is really one and the same; That the
Common good is every single man's; And that who ever disturbs the Public,
injures himself; which is to the whole the greatest security imaginable, and to
every private man a lasting Happiness.

That the Laws are not exact, because the Parliament harken to the Counsel
that, not the Lawyers, but their Interest dictates; neglecting to follow that
advice, which they may have for nothing, viz. Let the Counsel of thine own
Heart stand, for there is no Man more faithful unto thee than it: For, a Man's
mind is wont to tell him more, than seven Watchmen, that sit above in an high
Tower. That is, consult with no Man who advises with regard to himself; which
is plain from these Words. Every Counselor extolleth Counsel; but there is
that counsels for himself; beware therefore of a Counselor, and know before
what need he has, for he will Counsel for himself; lest he cast the Lot upon
thee and sar unto thee Thy way is good, and afterward he stand on the other
side to see what shall befall thee. Whether this be a Prophecy of what the
Lawyers will do; or a bare Narration of matter of Fact, what they daily
Practice, I leave to every discerning man's Judgment.

The Short of this, is to advise, That in making of New Laws, or in altering or
repealing the Old, the Members trust not the Gentlemen of the long Robe, unless
they promise to join the Law and the Gospel; To give their Advice without Money,
or the Hopes of Gain: And yet if their Charity or Generosity shoud persuade
them to undertake the Cause thus in forma Pauperis, That they give sufficient
security, not to starve it; That is, not to be back-ward in their giving Advice
according to Conscience, not Interest.

When this is don, we are not secured unless the Parliament provide That no
infringer of the Laws be Pardoned; that is to say, That equal Justice be
distributed, making no distinction between the Persons of the highest and the
lowest, when their Crimes have made them equal. Which cannot probably be
otherwise effected, than by constituting, as is don in Venice, a new Magistracy
of public Censors, who shall have inspection into the actions of all the Courts
of Judicature, and public Offices whatsoever; whose Account shall by the
Parliament be received as Authentic, and make the Offenders Obnoxious to
degradations and pecuniary Mulcts, to the satisfaction of the injured and a
farther overplus to the Public, unless in their judgments the accused fairly
acquit themselves.

That Religion, as now managed, is made an Art or Trade to live by, and to
enable the Professors to abuse the Credulous and Unwary. That if Intrest be not
removed, and not Opinions, but a good Life be the Character to distinguish real
Christians, from those who pretend themselves such, we shall never have Peace
here, nor assurance of Happiness hereafter. That in granting Liberty of
Conscience Clergy Men's Advice is not to be harkn'd to, unless they will resine
their Livings and Dispute only for Truth. That Toleration is at this time, more
especially, for three great Reasons absolutely convenient; First, to unite us
at Home; next to enable us now and hereafter to resist the Power of France;
This certainly requires all our Strength which without Union we cannot have:
The Third and great Reason, To Advance our Trade.

That the French are to be stopped in their Career; That to do so, it is
necessary, a large and sufficient Revenu, for ever (if it be don wisely) be
fixed and settled on the Crown, on the State; I do not say, on the Person of the
King, for He is indeed, if rightly considered, but God's Steward, and has so
great a share in the trouble, that it is an unresolved Question,
notwithstanding all his Glory and Power, Whether the Roses of the Crown make
amends for its Thorns, and, Whether the Softness of any Lining can ease the
weight of the Burden He undergoes; whose Nights and Days are made restless, by
the Pressures of that mighty Care, to which, by the safety of three Kingdoms,
He is continually solicited. If half a Loaf (as they say) be better than no
Bread, it is more eligible to part with some, than to expose all to the Mercy of
an Enemy and Conqueror; from whom the greatest Favor we can expect, is to
become, not a subordinat Kingdom, but an enslaved Province.

That Trade, is to be promoted, by all possible Care and Diligence, because by
that we must be enabled to pay our Taxes; without which, we cannot withstand
Foreign Violence. That Trade is to be bettered, by inviting more People into
the Kingdom and employing all the idle Hands we already have: That this is to
be effected, by proposing Advantages and Rewards to Strangers; fit Employments,
Threats and Punishments to Natives, by ascertaining all, Ease and Security in
their Persons, Estates and Purchases, by an uninterrupted and speedy course of
Justice, firmly establishing the three great satisfactory Desirables, Liberty,
Property and Religion.

Salus Populi Suprema Lex.

From -- this 4th. of January, 1677/8. SIR, I am, etc.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
The Reader is desired, before he runs through this Discourse, to mend with his
Pen, these few Errata's, which are all that alter the Sense.

IN the Title Page for (Member in) read Member of. p. 2. to the Reader l. 2. r.
unfashionable rigid Virtue. p. 21. l. 15. r. destructive. p. 28, l. 3. r. Grace
or Policy. p. 63. l. 3. r. actual Summons. p. 69. l. 4. r. arising. p. 91. l.
19. r. a Red Sea p. 118. l. 20. r. finess. p. 122. l. 10. for (unequal) r.
uneasy. p. 145. l. 7. r. claim a greater. p.149 last Line, for (make) r. may.
p. 190. l. 9. r. many many.


