AN ANSWER TO THE REQUEST TO PROTESTANTS, To produce Plain Scriptures directly
Authorizing these Tenets.

LICENSED,

December 16. 1686.


LONDON: Printed for Tho. Basset, at the George, near St. Dunstan's Church, in
Fleetstreet, MDCLXXXVII.

An Answer to the Request to Protestants,
(a) To produce Plain Scriptures directly Authorizing these their Tenets.
(a) Ans. WE do indeed make the Scripture the Rule of our Faith, because we
believe God gave us the Scripture to be our Rule, and we know not where to meet
with a better; and therefore we do not quarrel at this Request to produce plain
Scripture proofs for what we believe; but we may justly quarrel at the
fallacious or unskilful way of stating it, as if we pretended to own no
Doctrines, but what are contained in the express Words of Scripture; and
therefore, to understand this matter, we must consider the several kinds of
Doctrines professed in the Church of England, and what kind of proof from
Scripture, they are capable of.

1st, The positive Articles of Faith, such as are contained in the Creed, and
expressly taught in Scripture, we prove from plain and express Testimonies of
Scripture, and are ready to give our proofs of them, when they are demanded.
But besides these, 2ly, we have a great many Negative Articles, opposed to the
Corruptions and Innovations of the Church of Rome: Now to believe a Negative,
is only to believe that such a Doctrine is not taught in Scripture; and it
would be a very wise Request, to desire us to prove by plain and express
Scripture, that such a Doctrine is not taught in Scripture. We believe it is
not there, because we cannot find it in Scripture, and those who pretend it is
there, cannot show it there; which is proof enough, and all that the thing is
capable of. 3ly, There are other Doctrines, which, it may be, are not in a
strict Sense, Articles of Faith, but great and useful Truths, which cannot be
proved by express Words of Scripture, but by immediate and necessary
Consequence; and it is ridiculous in these Cases, to demand a direct Proof, if
by that he means the express words of Scripture, for we never pretended to that
in such matters, but think it very reasonable to believe an evident
Consequence, as well as express Words. Since our Savior proved the
Resurrection it self by Consequence, Matthew. 22. 32. Having premised this, I
shall examine, what it is he would have proved, in which also he has betrayed
great want either of skill or honesty, as will appear from particulars.

I. Scripture is clear, in all Necessaries, to every Sober Enquirer.

A. He begins well with demanding a Scripture proof; That the Scripture is
clear in all Necessaries; as if we Protestants wanted a Scripture proof, that
the Sun shines, when we see it. Can there be any better proof, that the
Scripture is clear and plain, than its own plainness? And therefore, every
plain Text proves its own plainness? If this Proposition, Scripture is clear in
all Necessaries, to every Sober Enquirer, were contained in express Words in
Scripture; yet if we could not find it plain, we should rather question,
whether those Words are plain, than believe the Scripture to be plain, when we
do not find it so. But if I find the Scripture plain, the plainness of the
Scripture proves it self, and needs no other proof. And yet this is one of
those Propositions, which may be proved by plain and necessary Consequence from
the Scripture. For if the word of God be a Light unto our Feet, and a Lamp unto
our Paths, then it must be clear, if Light be clear, Psalm. 119. 105. If it be
able to make men wise unto Salvation, 1. Tim. 3. 15. then it must be plain and
intelligible in all things necessary to Salvation.

II. The Secular Prince has all Spiritual Jurisdiction and Authority,
immediately, from and under God.

A. What Authority the Church of England grants to Kings in matters of
Religion, which he here calls all Spiritual Jurisdiction, and Authority, we are
taught in the 37th Article of Religion: The Kings Majesty has the chief power
in this Realm of England, and other his Dominions, unto whom the chief
Government of all Estates of this Realm, whether they be Ecclesiastical or
Civil in all causes does appertain, and is not, and ought not to be subject to
any foreign Jurisdiction. Which is further explained, That we give not our
Princes, the Ministering of God's Word, or of the Scraments, -- but that only
Prerogative which we see to have been given always to all Godly Princes in Holy
Scriptures by God himself, that is, that they should rule all Estates and
Degrees committed to their charge by God, whether they be Ecclesiastical or
Temporal, and restrain with the Civil Sword the stubborn and evil doers. Which
signifies no more, than that the King is supreme in his own Dominions, and
therefore there is no Power, neither Secular nor Ecclesiastic above him; for
if there were, he were not Supreme; Must we then prove by express Scripture,
that the King is Supreme? Do men want Scripture to prove, That Supreme Power is
Supreme? Thus some men are always in the Extremes, either the Scripture
signifies nothing, or it must be every thing, Grammar, and Dictionary and
Logic, and Statute-book, and all; but can they prove by express Scripture,
that the King has the Supreme power in Civil causes? Then I will prove, That he
has the Supreme power in Ecclesiastical causes; and I think Romans 13. 1. Let
every Soul be subject to the Higher Powers, is a sufficient proof of both.

III. Justification by Faith alone ( viz. a Persuasion that we are justified)
is a wholesome Doctrine.

A. Our Church does teach, That Justification by Faith only is a most wholesome
Doctrine, and very full of comfort, Article II. but she does not teach, That
justifying Faith is a persuasion, that we are justified; and sure we are not
bound to prove that by Scripture, which we do not believe.

IV. The Substance of Bread and Wine remains after, what it was before,
Sacerdotal Consecration.

A. Our Church teaches, That Transubstantiation (or the change of the substance
of Bread and Wine) in the Supper of the Lord, cannot be proved by Holy Writ,
Art. 28. But she does not teach, That the Bread and Wine remain after, what
they were before Sacerdotal Consecration. Their substance is the same, that is,
they are Bread and Wine still, but by virtue of Christ's Institution, after
Consecration they are not mere Bread and Wine, but a Sacrament of our
Redemption by Christ's death, and to such as rightly, worthily, and by faith
receive the same, the Bread which we break, is a partaking of the Body of
Christ, and likewise the cup of blessing is a partaking of the Blood of Christ.
The substance of Bread and Wine is the same, but the Institution gives it such
a new relation and use, as is equivalent to changing its nature, and makes it
the Sacramental Body and Blood of Christ. And this the words of Institution are
an express proof of, This is my Body; for if it be not his Natural Body, as
sense and reason tell us it cannot be, then it must be only his Sacramental
Body, or his Body by Institution. Christ was visibly present with his Apostles
in his own Natural Body, when he instituted this Sacrament, and therefore they
could not understand, and our Savior could never intend they should believe,
that the Bread which he blessed and brake, was his Natural Body, which they saw
before their eyes; that they ate their Lord, when they are the Consecrated
Bread, that they swallowed him down into their stomachs, and yet all this while
saw him, and conversed with him, as they did at other times. The Bread is the
Body of Christ, but it is his broken Body, which it could not be at the
Institution of this Sacrament; for Christ was not then Crucified, his Natural
Body was not yet broken, and therefore the broken bread, though it was his
Sacramental, could not be his Natural Body; his Blood was not then shed, and
therefore though the Wine was his Blood of the New Testament, it could not be
his Natural Blood which is shed for the remission of sins, unless his Natural
Body was broken, and his Blood shed before he was crucified. Now I take that to
be the express sense of Scripture, which is the only sense that can be made of
it; for a sense in which it is impossible, is none at all.

V. Our Lord's Presence in or with the Eucharist is merely gracious and
influential; and, if more, only to the Faithful.

A. There is no such Proposition as this taught by the Church of England, that
I know of; we own the influences of the Divine Grace to accompany the external
administration of the Lord's Supper; and this I suppose, they will not put us
to prove. We own the Sacramental Body and Blood of Christ, that is, the
Consecrated Elements, to be really present upon the Altar, and verily and
indeed eaten of the Faithful; for so our Savior expressly tells us, This is my
Body, and This is my Blood; and this is somewhat more than to say, that our
Lord's Presence in or with the Eucharist is merely gracious and influential:
for so he is present in all other Religious Duties; but here he is so present,
that his Body and Blood, with all the benefits of his Death and Passion, are
exhibited to worthy Receivers, as much as they could have been, had we eat his
Natural flesh, and drank his blood. And therefore whatever difference they
would allow, between Christ's gracious and influential presence in the
Eucharist, and eating his Natural flesh and blood, had that been possible, the
same we allow between his gracious Presence, and eating his Sacramental Body,
which is to all the ends and purposes of a Sacrament, the same by his own
Institution, with his Natural flesh and blood; for the carnal feeding on
Christ's flesh, is not a Sacramental eating of him

But if by more he means, that Christ is corporally present in the Eucharist,
that his natural Flesh and Blood is contained under the Species of Bread and
Wine, this we deny, and it being a Negative Article, it is ridiculous, as I
observed before, to demand express Scripture, to prove that it is not in the
Scripture; let those, who affirm it, prove by express Scripture, that it is
there; for this is my Body, and this is my Blood, will not do it: We own, that
it is the Body and Blood of Christ, as well as they; and therefore they must
prove, that it is Christ's natural Body and Blood, and it is well for them,
that they have something else than Scripture to trust to.

VI. Adoration of the Eucharist ( i. e. of our Savior under the Species of
Bread and Wine) is Idolatry.

A. Nor is there any such Proposition as this taught in the Church of England.
We teach indeed, that Bread and Wine in the Eucharist, remains Bread and Wine
after Consecration, and that to adore Bread and Wine is Idolatry, as Romanists
themselves confess, and is easily proved from Scripture, if to give Divine
Worship to Creatures be Idolatry. To adore our Savior is not Idolatry, but to
adore Bread and Wine for our Savior may be as much Idolatry, as to worship the
Sun for God. But this Author puts a fallacy upon his Readers, by an explanatory
Parenthesis, Adoration of the Eucharist (i. e. of our Savior under the Species
of Bread and Wine) as if they only worshipped our Savior under the Species of
Bread and Wine; whereas they teach that the Species themselves (whatever they
be, See the late Disscourse of the Adoration of the Host, p. 8, 9. etc.
to be sure, not Christ himself) are to be worshipped together with Christ; and
therefore, according to their own Doctrine, they must worship something which
is not Christ. And let them consider, what name to give this.

VII. All Christians, whenever they communicate, are obliged to receive in both
Kinds.

A. And why does he not ask us to prove, That all Christians, whenever they
communicate, are obliged to receive the bread? For there is the same
Institution for the Wine, that there is for the Bread. There is no other rule
in matters of Institution, but to observe the Institution; and since the
Sacrament was instituted in both kinds, and neither Christ nor his Apostles
have told us, that it is sufficient to receive in one kind, we think this
reason enough to assert, that all Christians when they do communicate, must
communicate in both kinds. And indeed this Sacrament is not complete without
it; for if we consider it as a spiritual Feast, Wine as well as Bread, to drink
as well as to eat, is essential to a Feast; if we consider the End of the
Institution, to be a commemoration of the Death of Christ, and the expiation of
his Blood, how can we commemorate Sacramentally the expiation of his Blood,
without drinking his Blood, which is shed for the remission of sins? For to eat
his Blood together with his Flesh, as they pretend, does not represent his
broken Body, and his Blood shed, but his whole Body with Flesh and Blood
together, which contradicts the very Institution of this Supper. And if we
partake of no benefits in the Sacrament, but what we Sacramentally commemorate,
I would desire this Author to tell me, how those who do not drink the Blood of
Christ, this blood of the New Testament, obtain the remission of their sins? A
very material thing for those to consider, who would be sure of their Salvation.

VIII. Chastity, deliberately vowed, may be, inoffensively, violated.

A. This is no Doctrine of our Church, nor are Protestants now concerned in it,
though some of the Monks and Nuns at the beginning of the Reformation were.
There was no such thing known as vowing Chastity, as that signifies a Vow
against Marriage; neither under the Law, nor in the times of Christ and his
Apostles; and therefore we cannot expect in Scripture an express decision of
this matter, but must argue from the nature and obligation of Vows. And if he
please to consult the Writings of the first Reformers, who were concerned to
vindicate themselves in this point, he will find it easier to condemn what they
did, than to answer the reasons, whereby they justify it. These Vows were
never thought so Sacred, but that the Pope can dispense with them; and what is
dispensable, necessity will dispense with on course; and that they themselves
knew best. These Monastic Vows were undertaken as the most excellent state of
Religion, as meritorious of pardon and justification, which is a fulsom
superstition and corruption of Christianity, and therefore are void and null as
all other superstitions are. And if Monastic Vows, as such, do not oblige, as
no superstitions can; then they were free to use that liberty, which God and
Christ had allowed them. But who taught him to call a Vow against Marriage, a
Vow of Chastity, when Marriage it self is a state of Chastity? And though it be
lawful to vow Chastity, which is a necessary duty, let him prove, that it is
lawful for any man, nay a boy, or girl, to vow not to marry, when our Savior
himself tells us, this is not in every man's power; and nothing can be a lawful
matter for a Vow, but what is in our power. Christ indeed tells us of some, Who
made themselves Eunuchs for the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 19. 12. that is, who
voluntarily chose a devout coelibacy, not who obliged themselves against
Marriage by the Religion of a Vow. But if the Vow of Chastity is so sacred, I
hope, they keep it better now, than some of their Predecessors have done;
unless they think the Vow of Chastity only obliges them not to marry, but does
not restrain them from a vagrant lust.

IX. All Christian Excellencies are commanded.

A. This I think St. Paul has determined, Phil. 4. 8. Finally Brethren,
whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are
just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever
things are of good report, if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise,
think on these things. If these general Expressions do not comprehend all
Christian Excellencies, I know not what does. And indeed, whatever Virtues are
commanded, we must always reckon that the heights and perfections of those
Virtues are commanded, for God can command nothing less than a perfect Virtue;
and it is apparent, he has annexed no Limitations to his commands; for we are
required to be perfect, even as our Father, which is in Heaven, is perfect. Not
that every man shall be damned, who does not attain to the highest Perfections;
for through the Merits and Intercession of our Savior, God will accept of a
sincere, tho imperfect Obedience; but sincerity it self requires our endeavors
after Perfection, which could not be our duty, if it were not commanded; and
tho a sincere Christian shall be saved notwithstanding his many defects, yet
our reward shall be proportioned to our several Degrees and Seize in
Virtue. Nothing is a Christian Excellency, but what is an instance of some
Virtue, which is commanded, which will throw a great many meritorious Works,
which our Author had an eye on, out of this number, and every degree and act of
Virtue becomes more or less necessary to us, according to our different
Qualifications and Circumstances of Life, according to our Saviors rule, to
whom much is given, of them shall be much required. These uncommanded Christian
Excellencies are what the Church of Rome call Works of Supererogation, which
our Church has condemned, Art. 14. in these words. Voluntary Works besides,
over and above Gods commandments, which they call Works of Supererogation,
cannot be taught without Arrogance and Impiety. For by them men do declare,
that they do not only tender unto God as much as they are bound to do, but that
they do more for his sake, than of baunded duty is required; whereas Christ
says plainly, When ye have done all that are commanded to you, say, that we
are unprofitable Servants.

X. Every Soul, as soon as expired, is conveyed to Heaven or Hell.

A. The Scripture gives us no account of any other places of rewards and
punishments in the other World, but Heaven and Hell, and therefore we know of
no other. Our Church has expressly determined, Art. 22. That the Romish Doctrine
of Purgatory, is a fond thing, vainly invented, and grounded upon no warranty
of Scripture, but rather repugnant to the Word of God. Now, that there are no
other places of rewards and punishments but Heaven and Hell, and that there is
no such place as Purgatory, where the Souls of Men, who have any Sins to
expiate, are purged and tormented with Fire, are Negative Articles, and
therefore not to be proved by express and positive Testimonies of Scripture.
But that every Soul, as soon as expired, is conveyed to Heaven or Hell, is only
an inference from this Doctrine, that we know of no other place they should go
to after Death, the Scripture having not told us of any other, and Christ's
parable of Dives and Lazarus, and St. Paul's desire to be dissolved, and to be
with Christ, looking fairly that way. And yet our Church has not positively
determined this, in reverence, I suppose, to many of the Ancient Fathers, who
did assert an intermediate state between Death and Judgment, not a Purgatory,
where the Souls of good Men were punished for their Sins, but a state of ease
and rest, tho not the highest Heavens.

XI. Desiring the Intercessions of the Blessed, is more Superstitious, and
Derogatory to our Lord's Mediatorship, than entreating the Prayers of Holy Men
Militant.

A. This is as plain in Scripture, as that Christ is our only Mediator in
Heaven, who alone (like the high Priest under the Law, who was his Type) is
admitted into the Holy of Holies to make Expiation, and to interceed for us. As
great a difference as there is between the mutual Prayers of good Men for each
other on Earth, and the Intercession of Saints for us in Heaven, by so much
more does the Intercession of Saints in Heaven invade the Office and
Mediatorship of Christ, than the Prayers of good Men on Earth. Good men on
Earth pray for each other as humble Supplicants, as Members of the same Body,
as subject to the same Temptations: Saints in Heaven intercede as powerful
Favorites, who by their merits and interest with God, obtain Blessings for us;
and any meritorious Intercession is inconsistent with the only Mediatorship of
Christ in Heaven. But suppose we could not prove, that the Intercession of
Saints in Heaven, is any more inconsistent with the Mediatorship of Christ,
than the Prayers of good Men on Earth are; does this prove, that we may pray to
Saints with all the Solemnities of Devotion, that we do to God or Christ, which
is to give Divine Honors to Creatures; tho he minces the matter, and calls it,
desiring the Intercessions of the Blessed; and might with as good reason call
his Prayers to Christ, only desiring the Intercessions of Christ; and his
Prayers to God, only desiring some Blessings of God, as he does of his Frinds
on Earth. The sum of what we teach about this matter, is this. That we must
worship none but God, and therefore must not pray to Saints and Angels, as our
Savior teaches, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou
serve. That there is but one Mediator between God and Man, the Man Christ
Jesus, and therefore we must not make more Mediators to our selves, nor put our
trust in the Intercession of Saints and Angels. Thus far we have plain
Scripture proof. And then we think common Sense teaches us the rest. That it is
an Injury to an only Mediator, to set up other Mediators with him. That good
Men on Earth are not Mediators, but Supplicants, which is no encroachment of
Christ's Mediatorship; and that Saints in Heaven, according to the Church of
Rome, pray as Mediators and Intercestors, who appear in the Presence of God for
us; and this is not reconcilable with Christ's only Mediatorship in Heaven.

XII. Honoring the Cross, the Relics and Representations of our Lord and his
Saints, with that degree of Reverence as we do the Gospels, (commonly kissed
and sworn by) Altar, and other Sacred Utensils, is Idolatry.

A. This is a very reasonable Request, to require us to prove that by Scriture,
which we do not believe! Papists indeed would excuse that Worship, which they
pay to the Cross, to Relics and Images, by saying, that it is no more than
that Reverence, which we allow to the Gospels, and Religious Utensils, which is
no more than an external Respect; but do those, who charge them with Idolatry
in worshipping the Cross, and Relics, and Images, charge them only with
giving some external Respects to them, or with giving them formal acts of
Worship and Adoration? As both the Decrees of their Councils, and the visible
Practice of their Church proves: And if he would have this proved to be
Idolatry, he may meet with some Protestants, who will be ready to oblige him.

XIII. The Pope is Antichrist.

A. This indeed has been affirmed by some Protestants, but is no Article of our
Church, and therefore we are not bound to prove it, but when we have a mind to
it. No man ever pretended that there is any such Proposition in Scripture, as
that the Pope of Rome is Antichrist, but some think that the Characters of
Antichrist and the Man of Sin, are much more applicable to him, than the
Universal Headship and Infallibility.

XIV. Every Prayer, used in Divine Offices, must be in a Language vulgar, and
intelligible to every Auditor.

A. Why he should put us upon proving this from Scripture, I cannot tell, when
he knows that St. Paul has a whole Chapter to prove it, 1 Cor. 14. unless he
has some reserve in expressing it by every Prayer. For that indeed, St. Paul
does not say in Words, but his Reason says it. For if the Reason he assigns
against Prayers in an unknown Tongue, extend to all Prayers; then it proves,
that every public Prayer should be in a Language understood by the People. But
what is this to the Church of Rome, who has all public Offices in an unknown
Tongue? Yes, if they could prove it lawful ever to pray in an unknown Tongue,
they would presently prove it lawful always to do so; and thus St. Paul's
discourse against praying in an unknown Tongue is confuted for want of saying
that we must never pray in an unknown Tongue. But whether it be not more
reasonable to conclude from St. Paul's discourse against praying in an unknown
Tongue, that we must never do so, than from his not saying, that we must never
pray in an unknown Tongue, that we may always do so, let any man judge, who has
not renounced his own understanding.

XV. A Company of Christians, voluntarily separating from all other Christian
Societies, condemning their Doctrines and Rites, destitute also of any visible
Correspondence with them in the Eucharist, in any Religious Assemblies or
Solemn Devotions, can, notwithstanding this perverse, entire, and manifest
Separation, be a mystical Member of Christ, in Catholic Unity, and a
Charitable Part of the Catholic Church.

A. If he applies this to us, it is manifestly false; for though we do not
communicate with the Church of Rome in her corrupt Worship, yet there are many
Christian Churches, with which we can and do communicate, and separate our
selves no farther from any society of Christians, than they separate themselves
from the Primitive and Apostolic Churches. But to gratify him, Suppose that
all the Communions of Christendom were corrupted in their Worship, so that we
could not safely communicate with any one of them but our own; yet if the
Church of England be a true Apostolic Church, in Faith and Worship, and
Government, and separates from others only upon account of such corruptions, as
will justify such a separation, what should hinder her from being a mystical
member of Christ, in Catholic unity, and a charitable part of the Catholic
Church? The true Apostolic Faith and Worship does certainly make us the
mystical members of Christ's Body, or else I desire to know, what does?
Catholic Unity is not violated by a just separation, and dangerous corruptions
in Faith and Worship are a just cause of separation: Come out from among them,
and be ye separate, says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will
receive you, 2 Cor. 6. 17. and where there are such corruptions, so fatal and
dangerous to men's souls, how far soever such corruptions have spread, it is a
greater act of charity to separate, than to communicate with them, as it is
greater charity to reprove men for their sins, and forsake their company, than
to join with them in a wicked confederacy. This is the true state of the case,
and this we can prove either from the express words of Scripture, or from easy
and necessary consequences; and this shows that it is possible, that a company
of Christians, (not) voluntarily (but necessarily.) separating from all other
Christian Societies, condemning their (corrupt) Doctrines and Rites, destitute
also of any visible correspondence with them in the Eucharist, in any Religious
Assemblies, or solemn Devotions, (upon account of such corruptions) can
notwithstanding this (not) perverse (but just and necessary) separation, be a
mystical member of Christ, in Catholic unity, and a charitablt part of the
Catholic Church, which is not merely the present Church of one age, but the
whole Church, from the times of Christ and his Apostles to the end of the
world. For could we suppose at any time all the Communions of Christendom to be
corrupt but one, that one incorrupt Church must forsake the communion of all
others, and yet it would be a member of Christ, and a charitable part of the
Catholic Church, unless it be only numbers, not the purity of Faith and
Worship, which makes the Catholic Church.

XVI. The whole Clergy of the Catholic Church may apostatize from Fundamental
Truth and Holiness; whilst part of a National Laity may preserve both, discover
the Clergies Defection, and, depriving them, heap to Themselves Teachers of
their own sending and instruction.

A. What he intends by this, I cannot well guess; I suppose, he would have his
Readers believe, that the whole Clergy of the Christian world did at the time
of the Reformation maintain the Doctrines of the Church of Rome, which were
rejected and condemned only by the major vote of a Parliament of Laymen in
England, which how false it is all the world knows. For,

1. There were many other Churches, and better parts of the Catholic Church,
than the Church of Rome, which did not own those Doctrines and corruptions,
which we reject.

2. Nay the whole Clergy of the Roman Church did not. For were not our English
Bishops and Clergy as Zealous in the Reformation, as any Laymen? And were not
they Bishops in Communion with the Roman Church? Were not the German Reformers
of the Clergy? And was the whole Clergy then against the Reformation? These are
admirable things to be proved by direct Testimonies of Scripture.

3. Nor do we say, that the Roman Church her self has Apostatized from
fundamental Truth and Holiness. We do grant, that they have retained the true
Faith and Worship of Christ, tho they have fatally corrupted both, by Additions
of their own.

4. If the first discovery of this Defection had been made by Laymen, and
afterward acknowledged by the Clergy, who joined in the Reformation, I should
not have thought the Reformation ever the worse for it. For if the Clergy
corrupt Religion, we have Reason to thank God, if he opens the Eyes of honest
and disinterested Laymen. But is not this Author very modest in his Requests,
who would have us prove his own Calumnies, and spiteful Insinuations from
Scripture?

This, I think, is Answer enough to his Request. And as for his following
Harangue, there is little in it to be answered, but some spiteful and senseless
Reflections, which are better despised then answered. But let us briefly
consider some of them, lest he should think they cannot be answered.

1. He says, In these positive Propositions, our Religion chiefly consists.
And truly it is a very sorry Religion, if it does. But why does not our
Religion consist in believing the true Catholic Faith contained in the ancient
Creeds? In worshipping God through the Mediation of Jesus Christ, according to
the Rules of the Gospel? In obeying all those holy Laws our Savior has given
us? In observing the Sacraments of his own Institution, and as he has
instituted them? This is all the Religion we own, and know no other; and why
then is not this our Religion? No, This is the Churches peculiar, and claimed
by her against all Novel and Unjust, both Foreigners and Outlaws. But if this
be our Religion, and the Religion of the Catholic Church, how come we to be
Foreigners and Outlaws? Why does not the Catholic Faith and Worship, make us
Members of the Catholic Church? And then we have as good a claim to the Creed
and Sacraments as they. No, says our Author, Whatever they have invented and
chosen, that belongs (as sin to a depraved will) properly to them; thence they
derive their Title, and thereto must we precisely confine their Religion. But
now if we have invented and chosen nothing else, what then? How do we lose our
right to the Creed and Sacraments, etc. because we will allow of no new
Inventions and Additions to it? And yet this is the plain case. Our only
Dispute with the Church of Rome, is about those corrupt Additions they have
made to the Catholic Faith and Worship, without any Foundation in Scripture,
or Reason, or true Antiquity; and therefore our Religion is precisely confined
to the old Catholic Faith and Worship of the Christian Church, and therefore
is properly ours (if they will allow us to have any) because it is all we have.
The German Reformers indeed, were called Protestants* from protesting against
the Corruptions and Innovations of the Church of Rome, and this only shows what
they do not believe, and what they will not practice; but they have a better
name than this, and that is Christians, which shows what their positive Faith
and Religion is, viz. that Faith and Worship, which was taught by Christ and
his Apostles, and owned and practiced by the Primitive Church, before these
Corruptions and Innovations were heard of; and therefore, this is precisely our
Religion; what we protest against, we declare not to be our Religion; so
ridiculous is it, precisely to confine our Religion to it.

2ly, The next subject of his Harangue, is our demands of Scripture-proofs from
the Church of Rome for their new Faith and Worship, which I confess is a very
hard Request, because they have none. However, he says, this makes it just for
the Catholic Church (as they will needs call themselves) to retort this demand
upon us, and to demand our Scripture-proofs; and I confess, there is great
reason for it, and I hope, have done him justice; for I suppose, he would not
ask more of us, than we do of them. Now we only demand either the express words
of Scripture, or plain and evident consequences, or the silence of Scripture,
to prove that a thing is not revealed; and this we are ready to return them as
to any Doctrines which we profess; and whether we adulterate Scriptures by
corrupt Translations (such as the vulgar Latin) or Sacrilegious mutilations (as
by leaving out the second Commandment) or blasphemous misapplications (as
applying the Psalter of David to the Virgin Mary, by changing Lord into Lady)
or gross wrestings and false interpretations (as proving Supremacy and
Infallibility by Tu es Petrus, and Pasce oves) shall be left to every Impartial
Reader.

3ly, In the next place he reproaches us with the Socinians, whom he calls our
Brethren by descent and iniquity who steering by the blast of a private spirit,
the Chart of clear Scripture, and Compass of Humane reason, have made shipwreck
of faith. This is intolerable to say, that to follow Scripture and Reason, is
the way to make shipwreck of Faith; which can never be, unless Scripture and
Reason be contrary to Faith, which indeed they are in many things to the Faith
of the Church of Rome; but God forbid they should be to the true Christian
Faith. But have not the Socinians made shipwreck of Faith by following clear
Scripture and Humane reason? And will he then say, that Scripture and Reason
are on the Socinian side? If they be, how can he know that they have made
shipwreck of Faith? if they be not, then they make shipwreck of Faith by not
adhering to clear Scripture and Reason; and is this a reason for us to be
ashamed of following Scripture and Reason, because the Socinians err by the
abuse of both? There is no doubt, but men who pretend to Scripture and Reason
may err; and it is demonstrable, that men who renounce Scripture and Reason,
must err, and we have so many instances of this in the Church of Rome, that it
is no great encouragement to us to rely on Church Authority without Scripture
and Reason. They dare not say, that we must believe contrary to Scripture, or
that the Scripture is not the Rule of our Faith; but they will allow no body to
interpret the Scripture but the Church of Rome, which is the most certain way
to make her infallible; for to be sure she will not interpret the Scripture
against her self; she must be always in the right, if what she says be the Rule
of Faith. But we who cannot believe, that God has given us Scripture and Reason
to make no use of them; That he has made the Pope or Church of Rome infallible,
and divested all other Christians of sense and common understanding, have
nothing but Reason and Scripture to steer by, and that will neither make us
Socinians, nor Papists.

4ly, His parting-blow is about the Supremacy of the King, which he calls
Hobbism, as if we ever thought, that all men must be of the Kings Religion, as
the sole and Sovereign Judge of all Causes Spiritual? What we mean by the Kings
Supremacy, I have already explained. He has no Spiritual Jurisdiction properly
so called; can neither ordain, nor administer the Sacraments, nor has the power
of the Keys, but is (...), as the Church is incorporated into the State, so he
has the Government of all Ecclesiastical Persons and Causes. Whatever Secular
Authority the Church has, is derived from the Prince, and depends on Secular
Laws, and this may be enlarged, retrenched, suspended, by the same Power that
gave it; but the Church as a Spiritual Society has Rights of its own, can teach
the true Faith, administer Sacraments, inflict Church Censures, though without
any Temporal effect, by an inherent Authority: We thank God, when our Prince,
who has the Supreme Authority, does countenance true Religion; But whenever it
is otherwise, we are taught to submit all our Temporal Concernments, our Lives,
and Bodies, and Estates, to the will of our Prince, but to defend our Church
and Religion by a modest, but resolute profession of the true Faith, and meek
and patient suffering for it.

FINIS.

