THE SHERIFFS CASE.
Whether, and How they may lawfully Qualify themselves for their holding the
Office, according to the Act for Corporations?
IN this Act there are two things imposed; an Oath, and a Renunciation of the
Covenant: And we must lay down this To this Rule there is a double Extreme. The
one, is of those who think a man must take every Imposition in the strict
literal construction, and can submit to it no otherwise. The other, is of such
who suppose that if a man can frame any interpretation of his own that is but
reasonable, he may take the words in that sense and be satisfied. The first of
these is so rigid, that there is nothing can be imposed, but we shall strain at
it; and the last so loose, that nothing can be imposed, but we shall swallow
it. The true Medium is this, we must sit down and consider what we believe to
be the meaning of the Lawgiver, and if we can submit to an Imposition in that
sense or meaning which we believe theirs, we must do it; but if we believe
their sense to be such, as we cannot take it in that sense, we must forbear it
and suffer.
Rule at first, That all Impositions of of our Superiors must be taken in the
sense and meaning of those that Impose them (there need be no scruple else in
submission to any thing enjoined.) The bottom is this, because the Law is the
Will of the Lawgiver, and it is the Lawgiver's Meaning, which is his Will,
howsoever the words of a Law is expressed. The Parliament here (we know) is the
Lawgiver, and this Oath then must be taken, and Renunciation made in the sense
and meaning of the Major part of the Parliament which passed the Act: Where we
must also premise thus much, that it is not for any Sheriff, Alderman, or other
person upon whom this Oath is Imposed, (for we must begin with That) to put a
meaning of his own upon it, which is to be taken only in Theirs that passed the
Act; but to consider verily what he believes to that Meaning, which is indeed
the Lawgivers. Not to determine neither and say, This is the meaning, but to be
able to say, I believe this to be their Meaning, which is necessary to every
one that takes it, to determine for himself, that he may act in Faith in what
he does.

We must add, That when we say the Parliament is the Lawgiver, we understand by
the Parliament, the King, Lords and Commons; and consequently, that the sense
of the Law, (and so of this Oath) must be always that sense wherein the House
of Lords did concur with the House of Commons, and the King with both. If there
be any sense therefore of an Imposition which may be supposed to be the meaning
of the King, and not of the Houses, or of One of the Houses, and not the Other;
or a lesser part of either House, and not the majority of both, that sense must
be still looked on as too narrow, and ought not to scruple the Conscience, the
true sense obliging the Subject, being the concurrent sense of the King, Lords
and Commons, who as assembled jointly to this end of Legislation, not one
without the other, but all three together, as One Corporation (and otherwise)
are the Lawgiver.

Neither is this sense to be collected from the first floating apprehensions of
any one that moves a matter in the House, but from the digested thoughts of
both Houses, after a mature debate, and the thing has thrice passed in them
both, so that no sense of any Imposition but that which is agreeable to Reason,
and more especially to the fundamental Laws of the Constitution, must be
received as the Meaning of a Parliament, the Reason being, because the nature
of the Constitution is such, as it cannot be infringed by an Act or Law for the
Administration; which is a Note to be laid in here, that by-and-by will be
needful. Thus much therefore farther, and no less being premised, we proceed.

By taking Arms, Let us suppose the Sheriffs believe the Parliament meant the
raising an ArArmy, or War; and by the King, the King's own Sacred Person, as
there is nothing else indeed can be meant: And we can see no The only
objections here which are of weight, may be reduced to two Cases. One is the
Case of Private violence, as suppose a Prince should go to ravish a Virgin, and
she catches up the next Weapon or Instrument to defend herself. In this Case,
or the like, we answer, this Defense is not to be accounted taking Arms in the
sense of this Act. The other is a Case of Public violence; as suppose a Prince
should go about to alienate his Kingdom, or ruin his Country, or the like. We
answer, we are not for all that to return violence upon his Person; and as for
his Officers, Followers, or Armies, the solution must be attended in the next
Clause of the Oath.
Objection which may not be answered from this Little, in the first Clause of
the Oath. I A. B. do swear, That I hold it unlawful to take Arms against the
King (or his Rightful Government) upon any Pretense whatsoever.

If David's heart smote him for cutting off but Readiness Skirt, when he was
actually in Arms to defend himself against Readiness Forces, only because he was
the Lord's Anointed. It is not in this first Clause (any one may conjecture)
but in the ensuing, where the Chief Scruples against the Oath are to be removed.

In the second Clause, By those Commissionated by Him, let us suppose they
believe the Parliament meant, and could mean, no other than such as have a due
Authority from Him, and exercise it only according to Law: And so long as the
King's Authority, and such Commissions are one, (or the same,) we can see no
more difficulty remaining in the second Clause, than in the former: And I do
abhor (that is, disown or disclaim) that Traiterous Position, of taking Arms by
His Authority against His Person, or against any Commissionated by Him in the
pursuit of such Commissions: That is, Legally Commissionated by Him, in the
Legal pursuit of such Commissions.

It is not to be imagined that the Parliament, when they passed this Act, (that
is, the Major part of them) should design the setting up an Arbitrary
Government in the Nation: But if the meaning of those Commissionated by Him, be
otherwise than thus, they must design it. An Arbitrary Power, as soon as they
passed this Clause in any Act, must be accounted to Commence. A thing most
absurd to be believed, and in the contrary belief whereof the most scrupulous
man (we thank God) may resolvedly take this Oath.

In the third Clause, we distinguish an Endeavor to change or reform any thing
in Church or State, which we think conducive to the good of the Nation in a
Parliamentary way only, as is allowed by the fundamental Law and Course of the
Realm, from an Endeavor in any other away that is not warranted by the same,
to wit, in a seditious way, or in such manner as they did in the late Times,
when they endeavored the Extirpation of Prelacy by force against and without
the King's consent in Parliament, (which may be believed to be the assured
sense of the Majority in the Houses, when they passed this Act,) and so long as
to do so That the meaning of the Parliament in this Oath and Declaration was,
that we should declare it to be unlawful for us to do that now, which they did
then (or as of late has been practiced, to use the words of the Militia Act,)
we are out of doubt; but whether in the peculiar case of those times there was
any thing might be lawful. or any way justifiable to be done then (when the
King and Houses (the One Corporation) were divided, and he had passed an Act
not to Dissolve them without their consent, which is a case never like to
happen any more, and so no danger to put it) which now is certainly unlawful,
is a question we have nothing to do with, and interpose nothing to offend any.
now, may be acknowledged (as assuredly) to be unlawful, and what ought to be
disclaimed, the offense must be over in the last part of the Oath also: And
that I will not endeavor any Alteration of Government either in Church or
State; to wit, in any manner not warranted by the Constitution of the Land, or
any otherwise, than by Act of Parliament.

We confirm this Exposition with one clear Reason. The great thing intended by
this Oath, is the preservation of the Government in the fundamental
Constitution against all Alteration. But the Constitution of our Government
being such in the foundation, that whatsoever is needful or convenient to be
altered, it may be proposed to that end in Parliament: to take away that
Liberty which is universally radicated in the whole Nation in order thereunto,
were a piece of the greatest Alteration that could be, and consequently never
to be understood as intended by the Lawgiver.

As for the Solemn League and Covenant (the Renunciation whereof is the second
thing here imposed,) it is an Oath so long since in Being, that, it is two to
one but both these Sheriffs (as well as the last) never took, so that they may
safely say, there lies no obligation upon them at all from it; And as for
others that did, we humbly conceive, that being taken in its Complex
Consideration, as it was pressed and used at that time, for the engagement of
People to the Extirpation of the Bishops, and change of Church Government
without the King, against His Consent, and Public Declarations, and by Force,
it must needs be Unlawful, and could not bind any body to do so: and
consequently we trust, that such Gentlemen shall not offend God, or any good
Men, if they farther subscribe this Declaration, which is also required: I A.
B. do declare, That I hold there lies no Obligation on me, or on any other
Person, from the Oath commonly called, The Solemn League and Covenant, to
endeavor any Change or Alteration of Government either in Church or State; And
that the same was in it self an unlawful Oath, and imposed on the Subjects of
this Realm, against the known Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom.

By some of which last words it appears, that this Oath was framed for the
Subjects of the Realm, (we say, that this Oath was, in the meaning of the
Imposers of this Declaration, the Subjects Oath, and consequently by the words,
or any other Person, they must mean, or any other Subject:) which appears also
manifestly in the Preamble of that League, We, such and such under the King.
There is one part of it moreover express for the preservation of the King; we
do suppose therefore, that though an Oath to the same main effect, or one like
it, was imposed on this King by the Scots, that Oath must be conceived another
than this, and not the very same, being not so in every point, but an Oath
indeed (as they called it) to confirm the Covenant, when He offered this very
Exception against taking the Covenant it self, because it was an Oath for the
Subjects only. And this being enough to save the Conscience in one chief
Scruple, (and chiefest one,) we will gather up again what is said before into
one Argument (which we fix upon) for a fuller satisfaction in regard to all
others. To own the King and his Authority in the same Oath, and yet to swear to
change the Government without His Will, and against it, is (we think) in it
self unlawful. Such an Oath was the Covenant; and Qua unlawful, it must be
unobligatory.

And what indeed shall now hinder these Sheriffs to subscribe, That there lies
no obligation upon them, or others, from the Covenant, to endeavor any
Alteration of Government in that sense as they swear before that they will not
endeavor any, in the third clause of the Oath preceding? For so long as the
meaning of the Lawgiver is no other than That which is made to appear there,
upon the account given, and the Endeavor which is here, and which is there, is
the same out of doubt, we do not see but the Reason which does satisfy any Man
upon the Point about taking the Oath, must be sufficient for the Declaration
also. In short, There lies no obligation upon any from this Oath, to do as they
swear it; It is in it self unlawful to do so; and the Imposition of it was
illegal.

In the Sacred Story concerning Rahab and the Spies, it appears that no body
can be engaged any farther by an Oath, than what he agrees or consents to in
the taking it. Where he declares beforehand he will not be bound, he is free.
We cannot tell how much larger, or how much narrower a compass others may draw
to themselves from that Instance, than we; but this we will say, That upon the
supposal of either of these Sheriffs making a Declaration for himself (if this
Paper will not serve when he takes the Oath, and subscribes the Declaration
enjoined, that he does it in this Meaning, which we have all along expressed,
supposing it true, (and with these explanatory limitations to the Meaning, if
indeed in any thing it be otherwise,) we do apprehend that his Conscience may
receive satisfaction thereby in its compliance with the Law in these
Impositions, which he cannot refuse, without the refusal also of his Duty.

After this, there is an Act of Parliament, entitled, An Act for preserving
His Majesty, ( An. 13. Car. 2. Regis c. 1.) wherein this Covenant is declared
peremptorily to be unlawful and null, that gave one of the Sheriffs last year a
peculiar satisfaction. We argue from thence thus: As we find in the Law of
Moses, when a Wife or a Daughter made a Vow, if the Husband or the Father
disallowed it, that Vow was We lay down this Rule here, that if any man makes a
Vow to God, which he cannot perform without the consent of another, who is his
Superior, (and much more if through him it must be done,) if that Other
Reclaims the thing as soon as he hears of it, the Authority of God by the
equity of this Law given by Moses, does (as we suppose) dissolve the
Obligation, though else it could not be dissolved by the Authority of a
Superior only.
rescinded. So may we apprehend the very same Reason to be here in regard to
this League or Covenant: For the Subject being (quo ad hoc) not sui juris, but
under the power of the Prince, and much more under the most supreme and
absolute Authority of Parliament, and the late King declaring still against
this Oath at the very time, and a Parliament, since the return of this King as
soon as it could be done, having passed an Act on purpose for disannulling the
same, there appears no difference between the Cases, but that the obligation of
this League, as well as of those Vows, must give place to such an Authority
overruling it: And more especially (we must add) because the Alteration of
Government (the sole matter in concern) does belong to the cognizance of the
Higher Powers, (we mean a Parliament) and is not the business of any private
person, unless in order to procuring their Consent and Establishment.

If this reasoning now shall satisfy these Sheriffs, and yet be unsatisfactory
to another person, let us but warn such a man that he does nothing after their
Example, unless he be satisfied with our Reasons, and we care not. If our
Argument satisfy any man, and he follows their pattern, we edify him; if they
do not, and he follows his own judgment, we do him no hurt. It is a man's own
Conscience is the Discerner to him of his Duty, and he is not to regard another
Man's, any farther than to avoid Active Scandal.

We do not mean it, as if every man therefore should lean only to his own
understanding, but rather take advice, and that which is the most serious and
proper he can get. For our parts, we have no more to offer or say, but that we
were particularly beholding for this which is said, to a Book, entitled, This
Book here cited was Printed 1680. and is sold by Tho. Symmonds at the Princes
Arms in Ludgate Street.
A Peaceable Resolution of Conscience touching our present Impositions. In
which Book the Readers (that please) will find the Rule by which we are to
walk, under such Injunctions of our Superiors as these, to be such, or so set
out, as that according to the persuasion of a man's mind about the same, both
he that Conforms to them, and he that Cannot, may see reason to retain a fair
Opinion of one another, and to hope that neither of them depart from a good
Conscience in what they do.

This is the Moderation we desire our selves, and these Sheriffs to follow, In
our Loyalty to our Sovereign, In our Love to our Country, and In our Religion
to God.

The Reasons for Printing this Paper are these.
1. To take the Oath, and subscribe the Declaration in the literal strict
Construction, appears, in our judgment, unlawful; and consequently, unless by
some means or other the sense be made public in which a man does take them,
(and that sense also be justified, or at least be justifiable) he must forbear.

2. The Declaration is against the Consciences of the Nonconformists in
general, insomuch as some men who took the Oath, cannot subscribe the
Declaration; and for any Conscientious men therefore to do it now, and not
declare their Reasons of Satisfaction, were to sin against the Brethren if they
own them, or to disclaim them.

3. By doing this, a man shall give occasion to others to follow his example,
and if he present them not his Grounds or Reasons, Those that follow shall do
it without the same Reasons, and through his knowledge shall such perish. But
when ye sin so against the Brethren, and wound their weak Consciences, ye sin
against Christ.

4. The Episcopal Party are generally apt to think the Nonconformists to be
Hypocrites and Knaves, and say, These men refuse these Injunctions out of
humor, or for their profit, but they will swallow them as well as we for
Honor, or for Advantage. If any considerate Men therefore shall Swear and
Declare, and not give us some rational Account of what they do, (or some others
for them) they must not only wrong themselves, but the whole generation of such
Men, and cause the Name of God (in regard to them) to be blasphemed.

5. It pleased Providence to call two Persons to the Office the last year,
whereof one of them at least (if not both) were the better enabled (to speak
modestly) if not quite, to hold the same upon the satisfaction which is couched
in this Paper; and if it be of great Concern at this time that such Men do hold
Sheriffs, who are willing to deny their own Advantage, (not seek it) for the
sake of the Public; It is yet of greater concern that by the publishing our
grounds for their satisfaction. Many in distress about the Oxford Act, may be
relieved, and a way opened for Many of the like substantial Citizens of known
Piety, Loyalty and Ability, to be brought into Corporations, throughout the
Nation, to the great service of the King and Kingdom.

To conclude, We have here laid down the Rule concerning Humane Impositions,
and applied it to this Oath and Subscription. If any man is persuaded in his
Conscience that the meaning of the Lawgiver was no more than thus he may submit
to them both, and make no stand: but if he believes their meaning was otherwise
(or doubts that it was more than thus,) he cannot Swear or Subscribe, but with
Limitations; and he must declare those Limitations or Forbear. But if he shall
Swear or Subscribe (supposing him one that doubts) with a Declaration in the
words before written [That he does it, in the meaning which is here expressed,
supposing it true, and with these Explanatory Limitations to the meaning, if in
any thing indeed it be otherwise,] and so give (or throw) in this Paper to the
Persons before whom he is to do it, we are persuaded of the In Mr. Baxter's
Funeral Sermon upon that late holy Citizen Mr. Ashhurst, we take notice of this
passage: Some may think that he wanted a Public Spirit, because he avoided
being a Magistrate, and paid his Fine rather than take an Aldermans Place; but
it was only to keep the Peace of his Conscience -- Yet I never heard him speak
uncharitably of those Worthy Men who do what he refused, supposing that they,
in words or writing, declared as openly as they swear and took the Declaration,
that they took it but in such or such a lawful sense; though he could not do so
himself.
Lawfulness in point of Conscience. Whether they receive the Paper, and admit
of your sense or not, it is no matter; for they have no power in it, and the
thing will be alike known. And thus have we lent our hands to get the concern
over these blocks, and yet so, as to deliver also our souls. For, as this Sheet
was printed the last year, there is one of us having been since something
dissatisfied, does hereby recall it: But as it comes out now with this last
Paragraph added to it (which then was wanting) we do ( Nemine contradicente, he
and all) acquiesce in it.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Snowden. 1681


