A SERMON PREACHED AT A Visitation, HELD AT WARRINGTON IN LANCASHIRE May 11.
1669.

By Ric. Sherlock D. D. Rector of Winwick in Lancashire.

IMPRIMATUR,

June 18, 1669. Tho. Tomkyns, Reverendissimo in Christo Patri ac Domino, Dom.
Gilb. Arch. Cantuar. a Sacr. Dom.

LONDON, Printed for Rich. Royston, Bookseller to the Kings Most Excellent
Majesty, 1669.

A SERMON PREACHED AT A VISITATION.
Act. 20.28. Take heed to your selves, and to all the Flock --


IN the context we have S. Paul upon his Visitation at Miletus, verse. 17. And
the Visitation, as this which is now holden with us, is Provincial, all the
Clergy of the Province of Ephesus, being convened by this great Visitor, and
appear before him, verse. 18.

The Text presents you with a part, but it is the principal part of the
Visitation Sermon, or as I may rather call it, The Visitors Charge to the
Clergy of the Province. The first part of which charge is:

1. Take heed to your selves: To you my Brethren of the Clergy, is this Charge
more strictly given, then to the Laity: For to the people God has appointed
Pastors who are commanded in the text to take heed to the charge committed to
them: But who shall feed and Guide the Shepherds, who shall watch over the
Watchmen, or Teach the Teachers? Ye are the salt of the earth, but if the salt
have lost his savor, wherewith shall it be salted, it is thenceforth good for
nothing, but to be cast out, and trodden under foot of men, Mat. 5.13.

2. Take heed to your selves, is the first part of the Charge, And secondly to
your Flock: The order observed in this Double Charge, is the next thing
observable, which is the same observed by our Lord himself, in his charge to S.
Peter, and in him to all Pastors of the Church, saying Luc. 22.32. When thou
art converted, then afterward stringthen thy Brethren, and John 21.15. Simon
son of Jonas; love thou me, and if so, it then follows, Feed my Sheep:
Implicitly commanding all Pastors of his Flock: First to be themselves truly
converted unto God, and their souls inflamed with the sacred fire of Divine
Love, and then they may hope that their pains will be succesful for the feeding
and strengthening the Sheep of Christ: That rule of Righteousness and Charity
which is the sum of the second Table of the Law, Thou shall love thy neighbor
as thy self, commands this order to be observed, To love thy self aright in the
first place, and then thy Neighbor as thy self: St. Be^nard thus bespeaks every
Shepherd of fouls: Tu frater cui nondum est firma satis propria salus, cui
Charitas adhuc nulla est, aut adeo tenera and arundinea, ut omni statui cedat,
omni credat spiritui, omni circumferatur vento doctrinae, quanam dementia
quaeso, aliena curare, aut ambis aut acquiescis? And upon Cant. 1.6. They have
made me the keeper of the Vineyards, but mine own viney ard have I not kept; he
severely checks and reproves himself, that he had taken on him the Cure of
other men's souls, having not sufficiently cared for and cured his own: Et miror
-- I do much wonder (says he) at the Impudence of those persons, that thrust
themselves to be Laborers in the Lords Vineyard, whilst their own Vineyard is
overgrown with Briars and thorns: The Leper under the Law was commanded to
have a covering upon his upper lip, Lev. 13.43. ut non docere alios praesumat
-- says Hesychius: that no man presume to open his lips in the Congregation,
for the instruction of others, who is himself infected with the Leprosy,
either of sinfulness or error: for non est cadentis alium erigere: Plutarch: It
is not for a man that lies in the dirt, to raise up another thence; not for
that a man that is a sleep in his sins, to awake others from that spiritual
sleep of death; That Proverb remembered by our Lord, Physician heal thy self,
Luc. 4.23.18. chiefly appliable to the Physician of souls, who must begin at
home, if he will work any cure upon the Souls of others.

3. But this is not all, for thirdly the Cure of a Pastors soul, is a more
difficult task; as being to be persected in a higher degree, then ordinarily
can be expected from any of his Flock: For as our office of Priesthood, is more
high, more eminent, more holy, so should our Conversation be, (...) -- St.
Chrysostom, De sacerdotio, As Angels above men, as Shepherds above their flock,
as Masters above their Scholars, so should a Bishop a Priest a Pastor excel
and transcend the people in wholesome doctrine and holiness of life: so the
great Gregory, Tantum debet actionem populi, actio transcendere praesulis,
quantum distare solet a grege actio transcendere praesulis, quantum distare
solet a grege vita Pastoris, -- with much more to the same purpose, De cura
Pastorali: A book which was once translated by the wisest and greatest of our
Saxon Princes; King Alfred, and by him commended to the Clergy of this Nation;
and a happy Clergy should we be, an holy Priesthood, if the Instructions in
that Golden Book, were well observed amongst us.

4. Take heed to your selves and to all the Flock] and both these jointly and
severally. To your selves: As to the Innocence and Holiness of your Lives, as
becomes good Christians: And to your Flock, as Shepherds and Guides of souls.
Under the Law, the Priests and Prophets of the Lord are frequently called the
Angels of the Lord of hosts, Jud. 2.1. Mal. 2.7. And under the Gospel, the
Angels of the Church of Christ, 1 Cor. 11.10. Rev. 2.1.8.12. -- And as we read
of the Angels on Jacobs Ladder, ascending and descending from heaven, Genesis
28.12. so the Priests of the Lord should first take heed to themselves by
ascending with the Angels into heaven, having their hearts and affections,
their meditation and Conversation in heaven, Phil. 3.20. And withal take heed
to the stock, by descending with the Angels from heaven enriched with the word
of Life, breaking unto them that bread which comes down from heaven, and
gives life unto the world, John 6.33.

But this joint charge is sadly disjoined and perverted, by such as take heed
to themselves indeed, but it is not with the Angels to ascend, but descend, only
grovelling in the dust, and wallowing in the mire of Luxury, Riot, and Excess,
Pride and Covetousness, the Pomps and vanities of the world, and the sinful
lusts of the flesh, which every one, even the meanest of their Flock, has
solemnly abjured, when by holy Baptism admitted into the Fold of Christ. By
such as take heed to themselves, but it is not in a spiritual but carnal sense;
who will look narrowly to themselves, as to their worldly concerns, their
Revenue and Income; but are too careless to the spiritual concerns both of
themselves and their Flock, Who seek their own, not the things which are Jesus
Christ's, Phil. 2.21. Caring more for their Families at home, then for the
Family of Christ, more for their bodily then for their spiritual relations,
providing better for their natural heirs, then their spiritual successors in
their respective places: And in a word, by all such as mind more the Benefice,
then the office, more the Fleece then the Flock: All such do falsely wrest, and
wickedly pervert, this double charge of the great Visitor in the Text: Take
heed to your selves and to your Flock: To your selves, by being examples of
holiness to your Flock; And to your Flock; as Shepherds, to feed and guide
them, as Fathers to admonish and reprove them, and as Mothers to nourish and
cherish them: For these are the four Essentials of a faithful Pastor: Holiness
of life, soundness of Doctrine, Christian courage, Christian Charity.

5. To all the Flock] not to the flock at random, not to this, or that
particular Sheep, that fawns upon the Shepherd, nor to this, or that Party or
Sect, which agrees with his Humors and Opinions; but, To all the Flock
impartially, and without Hypocrisy, and this first affirmatively, to instruct
the Ignorant, to strengthen the weak, to confirm the wavering, to reduce the
erroneous, to visit the sick, to comfort the afflicted, to bind up the broken
in heart, to reprove the sinful, and to testify against the stubborn and
disobedient: Secondly Negatively, not to break the bruised reed, and quench the
smoking flax, Mat. 12.20. not to sow pillows under all Armholes, Ezekiel. 13.18.
Not suffer them to settle with ease, and without reproof, upon the Lees of
their sins, and the errors of their ways: Not to claw the scabbed sheep, and
scratch the itching ears not to tickle and foment the petulant humors of the
Factious, not to please those squeazy Palates, who nauseate the solid food of
Gods Public solemn standing worship, under the profane and scurrilous name of
Porridge, and for no other cause, but because it is like it self, ever the
same, constant to it self: Like the Glorious Sun in the Firmament, which shines
every day the same; which renders it a worship acceptable, as being herein most
agreeable to the Immutable nature of God, the Father of lights, with whom is no
variableness nor shadow of turning, Jam. 1.17. But the Itch after novelties in
the Flock, and the Itch of popular applause or filthy Lucre in the Pastor,
whilst the one scratches the Itch of the other: Hence the putrid Scabs of
Schism and Heresy in the Church, of Disobedience and Rebellion in the Kingdom,
are engendered.

Against all such sinful Compliance, Take heed to your selves, my Brethren take
heed to your selves, and to your vows and promises, Sacerdotal and
Ecclesiastical, confirmed by your respective Subscriptions to the Articles and
Canons of the Church, to the Injunctions of your Metropolitan and Diaecesan, to
the Approbation and constant use of the Liturgy of the Church, and of that
only in public: In which last particular, wherein the greatest part of the
Ministerial Function consists, I cannot but testify in this Assembly, so much
concerned therein: That there is utterly a fault amongst us; In that those
Divine and excellent Prayers, and heavenly inspired Prayers of God, and that
ancient and Constant way of Gods worship in Public, is by many too much
slighted and neglected, by many irreverently and indevoutly celebrated, by many
mangled and maimed, curtailed, abbreviated, and by the Additions of others
implicitly vilified: And generally almost by all secretly undermined; enervated
and subverted by each man's private prayer in public: The which private prayer,
whether before Sermon, or at any other time in the Congregation, does not only
secretly imply a defect in the Public Prayers of the Church, which must
(forsooth) be supplied by men's private conceived prayers: but also, it is a
disorder and confusion in the service of God; for thus public and private
prayer are confounded, which our Lord Christ has distinguished and commanded
to be separately observed, to avoid Hypocrisy and vainglory limiting the
private prayer to the private closet, Mat. 6.5, 6. and for avoiding Tautologies
and impertinent bablings after the manner of the heathen, he prescribes a set
form to be used in public, verse. 8, 9. We are commanded when we call upon the
Lord, to pay our vows to the most High, and then he will hear, Psalm. 50.14. But
can any man think it probable, that God will hear their prayers, who
sacrilegiously break their vows when they pray, by praying otherwise then they
have vowed and promised? those promises also being agreeable to the Commands of
Christ, and the orders of his Church?

And this undoubtedly amongst many others, is not the least cause, of so many
stray and wandering Sheep in every Flock, of so many giddy headed and factious
minded men in every Congregation, of so many separate Congregations or
Conventicles in every Parish: one great cause hereof is the falsehood and
treachery of the Shepherds, who in compliance with the noxious humors of the
diseased part of their Flock, take no heed to themselves, nor to the vows and
promises they have made in order to the right and regular execution of their
Function, in feeding of their Flock: so for the iniquity and irregular carriage
of the Priests, the sons of Eli in the sacrifices of the Temple; Men abhorred
the offering of the Lord, 1 Samuel 2.17.

6. But should not the Flock take heed to the Shepherd, as well as the Shepherd
to the Flock? The duty of the one to the other (undoubtedly) is reciprocal, and
the mutual Relation respectively binding. Take heed to thy self (said the Lord
to his people) that thou forsake not the Levite, as long as thou live upon
the earth, Deuteronomy. 12.19. and Chap. 14.27. Eccl. 7.30. There is nothing more
plainly asserted and more punctually commanded in the book of God, then that
the people should take heed to their Priests, the Flock to their Shepherds,
especially such as are orthodox and holy, that they should hear and obey their
voice, and make their Application and recourse unto them, in all cases of
ignorance or doubting: For the Priests lips should keep knowledge, and they
(the people) should seek the Law at his mouth, for he is the messenger (or the
Angel) of the Lord of Hosts, Mal. 2.7. Haec sunt initia haereticorum, ut sibi
placeant, and praepositum superbo tumore contemnant, Cypr. lib. 3. Epist. ad
Florent. Hence the Rise of Heretics in the Church, when the people swelling
with presumption of their own knowledge, and pleasing themselves in their
fancies and opinions, proudly neglect and scorn to submit to their directions,
whom the Lord has appointed to be their Shepherds and Guides of their Souls:
And thus even thus; the people of God fell into Idolatry, even that gross and
infamous Idolatry of the Golden Calf, when slighting Moses, and overawing Aaron
the high Priest, they commanded him, who should have commanded them, saying,
Make us Gods to go before us, for as for this man Moses, we wot not what is
become of him, Numb. 22.1.

When the same people were weary of the Government of Samuel the Prophet, and
desired a King, the Lord said unto Samuel, They have not despised thee, but
they have despised me, 1 Samuel 8.7. Whereupon St. Gregory: Quam neverendi sunt
Pastores optimi Sanctae Ecclesiae -- how reverendly to be esteemed are the
Pastors of holy Church, who whilst they faithfully serve the Lord in the
Execution of their function, they are so closely joined unto him in the bond of
love, that the least slight disesteem or neglect, that is cast upon them, the
Lord takes it as an injury to himself: So said the Lord to his Apostles, and in
them to their Successors: He that hears you, hears me; and he that
despises you; despises me, and he that despises me, despises him that sent
me, Luc. 10.16. And this duty, that the people should take heed to their
Priests, is commanded under a severe penalty, Deuteronomy. 17.8. If there arise a
matter too hard for thee in Judgment, thou shall arise and come unto the
Priests, the Levites, and that man that will do presumptuously, and will not
hearken unto the Priest, that stands to Minister -- even that man shall dye.
And under the Gospel also the same command is given, Heb. 13.17. Obey them that
have the Rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch for your Souls.

But notwithstanding these and many more commands, in the sacred sheets of
either Testament, yet is this Christian duty slighted and generally omitted,
and especially by such as pretend most to the sole Authority of the holy
Scriptures, without any Relation to the doctrine and Authority of the Church in
the Interpretation thereof: There being many amongst us in every Flock; who
presume to direct their Shepherds, guide their Guides, and teach their
Teachers; who if they teach not, preach not, pray not, as they would have them,
and consonant to their humors and opinions; they will censure their doctrines,
contemn their directions revile their persons, scandalize their profession,
and even snatch the holy Oracles out of their mouths, and separate themselves
into Conventicles, where they may heap to themselves Teachers after their
lusts, having itching ears, and they turn away their ears from the truth, and
are turned unto fables; believing and delighting in lies, and vain empty
prophesyings which profit not, as was foretold of such, 2 Timothy 4.3, 4.

And having mentioned Conventicles, I cannot but add a word or two of the
danger of them, not in order to the disturbance of the peace of the Nation,
leaving that to the Secular Magistrate, but in order to the seduction of unwary
and unstable souls into falsehood and errors in Religion; Verily verily I say
unto you, he that enters not in by the door into the sheepfold, but climeth up
some other way, the same is a thief and a robber, Joh. 10.1. It Is the practice
of subtle thieves when they seize on the honest Traveller to drag him out of
the high road-way into hedges and by-places, the more securely and without
interruption to robb and spoil him; so the spiritual thieves, false Prophets,
ringleaders of faction and sedition, do more easily seduce, and robb poor silly
men and women of the in estimable treasures of truth and obedience, by drawing
them from the open and Public Assemblies of Gods people in his houses of
prayer, into By-places and lone houses, where they may more securely breath
forth the spiritual Infections, sow the seeds of Schism and Sedition, and
whisper their irreligious Treasons, under the mask of Religion. In such places
they may to their advantage vent and put off their counterfeit ware, their
false glosses, and misinterpretations of holy Writ, and make their Apocryphal
Comments upon Canonical Scripture, making the holy Word of God to speak not
what the Spirit of God intends therein, but what their factious spirits and
wild fancies would have it: That there should be such false Prophets in desert
places and private houses, our Lord has foretold, commanding all his disciples
not to believe or follow them, Mat. 24.26. Wherefore if they shall say unto you
behold he is in the desert, go not forth; behold he is in the secret chamber,
believe it not. St. Augustine observes of the man that fell among thieves, and
was robbed and wounded, Luc. 10.30. Si non descendisset -- If he had not been
going down from Jerusalem, the place of Gods Temple, to Jericho a profane and
common place, he had escaped that sad disaster: To teach all people to beware
how they leave the place which God has chosen to put his name there, the
Temple and house of God, to convene in any common or profane By-places, under
pretense of Religion, and the performance of holy duties in such places: 'Twas
otherwise with the man after Gods own heart, Psalm. 5.7. As for me I will come
into thine house even upon the multitude of thy mercies, and in thy fear will I
worship toward thy holy Temple. And with him resolves the whole body of Gods
people, Psalm. 132.7. We will go into his tabernacle, and fall low on our knees
before his footstool: And not only this under the Law, but under the Gospel,
Mark. 11.17. My house (not the houses of men) shall be called the house of
prayer of all Nations: Not of the Jews as under the Law, but of the Gentiles
also under the Gospel, and it is there especially in Gods own house, that he has
promised to meet his people, to be in the midst of them, to hear their prayers
and bless them, To teach them his ways by his faithful and true Pastors, and
there (in a word) to dispense all the blessed means of grace and salvation to
them, Deuteron. 12.5.6.11, 12, 13, 14. 1 Kin. 8.29, 30. Mat. 18.20. Luc. 19.46.
1 Cor. 11.20.

7. But the grand excuse of the wandering sheep, and the cry of many Orthodox
also, is, The division of the Shepherds, who being divided amongst themselves,
do lead their flocks into several divided ways of divine worship: And the
generality of the flock being not wise enough to know what way to take; or whom
most securely to follow, they hereupon heap to themselves Teachers after their
own Lusts, and with the Schismatical Corinthians 1 ep. 1 cap. 12. verse. Every
one says, I am of Paul, I am of Apollos, and I of Cephas, and I of Christ, one
man, or Sect of men, liking this man's way of preaching and praying, another
another way, and others none at all, but independently rely upon the immediate
teaching of Christ by his Spirit. And thus Sects and Divisions are multiplied.

This complaint is too true, and such sad effects thereof too evident, and if
not stopped will prove bitterness in the end.

But would you know who be these divided Pastors or Preachers, or Sect-masters
rather, the corrupt springs from whom all our polluted streams of divisions
flow? They are such (in a word) as first divide from the Church of Christ in
general (wherein they all agree) and then divide amongst themselves, into
particular Sects, and Factions, wherein they all differ: There is but one body
and one spirit, Ephesians. 4.4. one mystical body of Christ, which is his Church, and
one spirit of truth, quickening this our body, and its members, and them only:
And as it follows, One Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and father of
all, who is above all, through all, and in you all, verse. 5, 6. In you all,
that are members of this one body, and quickened with this one spirit, and
endeavor to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, which is the
duty enforced from the premises, verse. 3. Contrariwise then such, that divide
from this one body the Church, into several Sects and Factions, and (which
necessarily follows) such as are not quickened with this one spirit, but each
with the foolish Prophets follow their own spirit, Ezekiel. 13.3. which they
mistake and mis-term the Spirit of God; such as worship, not this one Lord, as
we are all commanded, with one mouth and with one mind, Romans 15.6. Such as
hold not the Articles of this one faith, with one joint unanimous consent of
truth; Unto the unity of which faith, till we all come, we cannot be perfect
men in Christ Jesue: but are like children tossed to and fro, and carried about
with every wind of doctrine, Ephesians. 4.13, 14. Such are all false Prophets,
treacherous Shepherds, or in the Language of Saint Paul, 2 Corin. 11.13, 14.
Such are all false Apostles; deceitful workers, transforming themselves into
the Apostles of Christ, and no marvel, for Satan himself is transformed into an
Angel of Light: I may call them according to the metaphor of the text, The
Bellweathers of the Flock, the Ringleaders of those numerous Sects, and daily
increasing divisions amongst us.

And although each sect and division must necessarily be false and erroneous,
because there is but one Truth, and one true way of Divine worship, which is
ever constant to it self, yet has each division its numerous followers of the
divided Flock: as silly sheep when a gap is opened, follow one another to the
breach to stray from their Pasture: So flock the people (if not restrained)
into the ways of division and error, if any Sect-master but open a gap, and
lead them the By-ways of straying from the Sheepfold of Christ, which is his
Church: For such alas, is the sad condition of man's corrupted and depraved
mind, as naturally to be more affected with error, then with the Truth; more
prone to believe lies, and more zealous in the maintenance of falsehood, then to
believe and maintain the Truth: 'Twas ever so, When the Prophets prophecy
falsely, the people love to have it so, Jer. 5. ult. but a sad question follows,
What will ye do in the end thereof? When the Prophets prophecy Lies, or (which
is the same) do make and foment divisions, and the people withal are affected
with their lying prophesies, and side with them in their respective divisions:
it is easy then to prophecy and foretell the end thereof to be ruin and
confusion: If a kingdom be divided against it self, that kingdom cannot stand,
and if a house be divided against it self, that house cannot stand, Mar. 3.24,
25. Not the house of God, not the family of Christ, in what Kingdom or Nation
soever established: All the Kingdoms and Nations in Christendom, ancient and
modern, from the first to these last and worst of times, have felt, by sad
experience, the bitter effects of divisions and errors in Religion; and none
more then our own, so lately bleeding, even to the last gasp of death, and
almost buried in her own confusions; which took beginning from the prophesying
of Lies, and overspreading of mistakes and errors in Religion, sowing the seeds
of Schism, Faction and Sedition, in separate and divided meetings, or
Conventicles in private; joined with a sacrilegious vow-breaking performance of
holy duties in Public: All which are now as much, if not more practiced then
ever; some of whose Factors and Followers, do really intend, all do certainly
tend to involve this Church and Kingdom, into the sad condition of intestine
war, blood and Confusion, from whence by the great mercy of God, we so lately
escaped.

And now to you, the Reverend persons, who are come to visit us in our
distempers and infirmities, to you it belongs, as much as in you lies, to give
stop to our overflowing Divisions: To restrain our licentious exorbitancies,
both in doctrine and practice, in Praying and Preaching, and this, whether in
the house of God, or in the houses of men: Et fiat Justitia, ruat coelum.

FINIS.

