A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL Of the RIGHT HONORABLE, Sir MAVRICE EVSTACE;
Knight. Late Lord Chancellor OF IRELAND.
At St. Patrick's Dublin the fifth day of July 1665.

Together with a short account of his Life and Death.

By W. S. B. D. sometimes Chaplain to his Lordship.

Memorare novissima and in Aeternum non peccabis Seirach. Dublin, Printed by
John Crook Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, and are to be sold by
Sam. Dancer in Castle-street. 1665.

TO THE Most Reverend FATHER in GOD, JAMES by Divine Providence, Lord
Archbishop of Armagh. Primate, and Metropolitan of all Ireland, His Grace.
May it please Your Grace,
AS Your Graces Commands for publication of this ensuing Sermon, has put it
beyond my power to conceal that from your Eye, which I thought very unwothy of
your Ear; (though your Grace was pleased out of your great respect to my
deceased Lord, to Honor it with Your presence, when it was deliverd) so the
small opinion I have of its worth, and the no advantage which (I am sure) it
will add to my reputation, (being designed for a Country Auditory, where the
Funeral was intended to be Selemnis'd) forces me to prefix Your Graces Name
unto it: that I may not only by its being owned by Your Grace, be secured from
the many censures which (I have cause to fear) shall pass upon me; but also,
that the thing it self may be rendered the more considerable, and carry the
greater authority with it. I know (my Lord) Your Grace cannot be offended at
this presumption: because it makes for the vindicating of of a person; who (I
am certain) was no less Your Grace; friend, then Your Grace most justly
deserved: for that now your Grace has given the most convincing proofs of your
Freindship, by Your endeavoring (seeing he cannot be his own compurgatour) to
wipe of that dirt which some (...) out of malice and others for the supporting
of their tottering interest bave cast upon him to which if what I have here
said, may give but the least assistance, I have (next unto your Graces pardon
for this my confidence) all I desire: because I thereby discharge my duty unto
my honored Lord, and have this opportunity offered, of publishing to the world,
that I own my self to be in the deepest sense of duty, and gratitude imaginable.

May it please Your Grace,

August 22. 1665. Your Graces most obedient and most obliged Humble Servant,
William Sheridan.

2 KINGS 20.1. ISA. 38.1. Set thy house in order, for thou shall dye, and not
live.


LIfe and Death are the two Poles, on which all the Creatures roll. Life is the
first act moveable and continual of the living thing; and Death is the
cessation of the same act: And there is such a mutual successive change of the
one into the other, that the whole World has no other employment, but to
conform it self to their respective commands; and Man himself, though his soul
be, as it were, a little god within him, and therefore might be thought not to
need any other help for the preservation of his being, than what flows from his
own essence, yet lives not but by the groans of Creatures, and they are forced
to sacrifice their lives to preserve his; yet at last, he finds, that the same
day that lengthens his life in the morning, shortens it in the evening, and in
the end, he is reduced to the common fate of Mortals. And God has decreed that
this should be so, because he has designed man for noble things, and ordained
this life, only for a passage into another; in which, rewards and punishments
are irreversibly adjudged, with respect to his actings: And being that Eternal
happiness is the ultimate end, which every man should propound to himself, it
ought to be his chief care, to perform all that is requisite for the attainment
thereof; and that is, to live and die well: The latter whereof, which does also
implicitly comprehend the former, cannot better be learnt, than from the
example of King Hezekiah, to whom God sends a Message by the Prophet Isaiah,
admonishing him of his death in the words of the Text; which does naturally
divide it self into these two parts, an Admonition, and a Reason: The Reason is
first, in order of nature, Thou shall dye, and not live; and the Admonition
last, Set thy house in order.

First, of the Reason, Thou shall dye: Where, to omit speaking of the
changeable state of our life, now sick, and now well; now delivered out of one
trouble, and now entering into another, which is the lot of all; but especially
of the godly, otherwise Hezekiah might have pleaded an exemption: I shall first
enquire, what death is; yet not so, as to seek an exact definition of it, but
to limit my Discourse with these particulars:

First, its cause. Secondly, its effects. Thirdly its attendants: Which being
discovered, will assist us to conceive more rightly of it.

First then, God is the cause of death, though he did not in the first order of
nature appoint it to have a place in our kind; for notwithstanding that the
body of man was of corruptible matter, dust of the earth; yet had he continued
in his obedience, the Tree of life, as a supernatural remedy, perhaps also, as
a Sacrament of the immediate communicating of life to mankind, had preserved
him from death; but in his secondary intention, in case man should break his
allegiance, God ordained it; as by the words, Genesis 2.17.
In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely dye, does appear; for then
came death by Gods appointment, in right, though not in event, upon Adam and
his whole off spring: which is also confirmed by S. Paul, Romans 5.12.
By one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin; so that man was the
wilful bringer in of death on himself, by the permission and appointment of
God, who left him in the hands of his own choice, to live by obedience, or dye
by sin.

Yet you are to take notice, that this death is not in us, as in other living
creatures, a final destruction of the soul; nor is it fully understood by the
names of sleep, Joh. 11.13. 1 Cor. 15.26.
and of enemy, given to it in scripture; for they are not of its common and
universal nature; but are attributed unto it by way of similitude; both in
respect of our bodies which are in sleep, as without sense, and of the mind,
which does after sleep, more freely exercise its functions; as the minds of
good men shall after the resurrection.

It is called an enemy, for that it destroys the being of the Creature; and is
therefore hateful, and hated, even where no sin was, as appears by our Saviors
Agony before his death; yet this enemy does Gods Saints a good turn, for that
it brings them to everlasting rest: though that it does so, is not from its
self, but from the grace of Christ, Heb. 2.14.
who by his death has overcome death, and the Devil, who had the power of death.

But that description which the Wiseman gives of it, does best express its
nature; where after he had set down the several incommodities and weaknesses of
old age, and coming to speak of the end of our life, he says, Then shall the
dust return to the earth, Eccle. 12.7.
as it was, and the spirit shall return to God that gave it: Whence it appears,
that death is the dissolution of the body and spirit, before joined together in
one hypostasis, they both remaining still the one in the matter of which it was
made; and the other in reserve with God from whom it came at first.

Secondly, Its effects are these; first, It ends this life, and all the
thoughts, actions and possibilities thereof: The dead know not any thing,
neither have they any more a reward; Eccl. 9.5, 6.
their love, and their hatred, and their envy is now perished: neither have
they any more a portion for ever in any thing that is done under the Sun: And
this is to be understood of Supernatural and Religious, as well as of natural,
and civil actions, and possibilities; for this life is the day; death brings
the night, wherein no man can work: John 12.
The wickedest man in the world, is in this life convertible; Heb. 10.27.
but after death, there is no more hope, but a fearful looking for of judgment.

Secondly, it begins an unchangeable state, both to the g dly, and to the
wicked; for that to the one it is the end of all joy, the beginning of sorrow,
an everlasting night, the gate of hell, the locking up of the door of comfort,
and a sad farewell for ever, and ever, with the joys of eternity.

But to the other it is a step to blessedness, the close of mortality; and as
Seneca says, Transitus a labor ad refrigerium: a passage from labor to rest;
from expectation, to a reward; from a combat to a Crown; from death, to life;
from faith, to knowledge, from a pilgrimage to a Country; and, from the world,
to a Father: A gate of glory to the servant of God: S. Bernard. Greg. Naz.
August. Ambr. de bono mort.
A deposition of this burden of flesh, which presses down the free soul: And
a journey to the city of God: The Midwife and birthday of a better life; a
rest from labor, a death of misery, and a burial of sin.

I cannot here, though I have a fair temptation offered me, insist longer in
confuting the dream of Purgatory (which the Romanists so stiffly maintain, that
they will sooner renounce their share of heaven, then quit their portion in
that) then while I tell you, that it was first hatched by Plato in his Gorgias,
or Phaedo, and afterward adopted by the Council of Florence, about 1400 years
after the death of Christ; during which time it suffered many Metamorphosies
and Transmutations, as it met with several Merchants: Discredited by the
Scriptures, wherein some of their own side confess it has no ground; thrust out
of doors by the Greek Church, and so much discountenanced by them, that the
Council of Basil published an Apology, directly disallowing the Roman Doctrine
of Purgatory; and how little they yet regard Pope Eugenius his pressing them to
receive it, is so notoriously known, that it needs no further declaration; and
though it was entertained by some Ancients as a stranger, yet it was but upon
trial of its good behavior, and was never made a free Denizon by the Latins,
until they found how profitable this Heathenish Brat was like to prove.

Neither the ancient forms of Prayer for the dead, which were rather
Commemorations or Thanksgivings, or a convoy to accompany the Saints into
Heaven; or had reference to their secret Receptacles, which too many Fathers
favored (but is diametrically opposed, to Purgatory) or to their public
acquittal at the day of judgment; or to the Consummation of their happiness at
the Resurrection, or to the time of their transmigration out of this life,
Origin. S. Ambr. S. Basil. S. Hill. S. Hier. and Lactan.
which it seems we do not abhor from, at our Anniversary Feasts of Christmas,
Easter, and the like, as if Christ were that day to be born, to suffer, or to
rise again, will warrant their Purgatory; no, nor the Purgatory fire in sundry
Fathers, by which they meant no other, than the fire of Conflagration, which
shall consume this world, through which they held, Bibloh. l. 5. annot. 171.
as Sixtus Senensis affirms from their own words, that all men both good and
bad should pass, Christ Jesus only excepted.

All this (I say) can no way prove their Purgatory, especially seeing the
Scriptures know no other purgation for sin, John. 1. Heb. 1. Rev. 14.13. Heb.
9.27.
then the blood of Jesus Christ; and calls none blessed, but those that dye in
the Lord; for, they rest from their labors, and after death follows judgment;
that is, the particular judgment of every individual, at the hour of his
departure; and the general, of all at the last day. Where observe by the way,
that it is appointed for all men once to die; yet the hour is uncertain, and
kept from us, that we might beware of security, and not defer our repentance to
the last stage of our life, when happily the custom of sinning shall have so
hardened us, that it is ten thousand to one, whether we shall find place for
repentance.

I shall not now dispute, whether death may be hastened, or prorogued: because
that if this were granted, it would argue a mutability in Gods unchangeable
decrees; and yet if it were not, the Scriptures would seem contradictitious to
themselves; as, The blood thirsty man shall not live out half his days; Psalm.
55.23.
and this, of Adding fifteen years to Hezekiahs life. Only this I shall make
bold to offer by way of Solution of this difficulty, and reconciliation of this
seeming dissonancy of Scripture, That without all doubt, according to the
course of nature, many might live long who by intemperance and ungodliness, cut
off their days; and many, who are sometimes in mercy taken away before their
time from future evils.

Yet this is not against Providence, because that as it appoints the end, so
likewise in that appointment it foresees and includes the means leading
thereunto; otherwise the same Objections would be in force against prayers, and
the obedience of children to their Parents, on which condition, long life is
promised. Exodus 20.


Now it only remains to enquire, Whether death be good or evil: Which cannot
be easily resolved, without some distinction of some persons, or some respects;
for Gods appointment is good, the punishment of sin, is like sin it self, evil;
an enemy is neither loved, nor lovely: Sleep is no evil thing, the entrance of
life is desirable, the determination of the life of grace is dreadful; we must
therefore, before we can resolve the question, know of whom, and of whose death
the demand is made; for the death of the Righteous is to be wished for, witness
Balaam; and the death of the wicked is wretched: And though Solomon seems to
say absolutely of all, That the day of death, Eccle. 4.2.
is better that of life; yet he must be understood to speak there, as
presupposing sin, and the vanities, and miseries that are annexed, and
consequent thereunto; and so (indeed) a speedy death is much better than a
sinful life; and that because it is unfit to act that long, which is very ill
done; and since life is often so desperately used, it is expedient, not being
good, that it be short, that the shortness of the time, may render the evil of
it less hurtful: But yet this does not absolutely prove, that death is good, or
better than life in all respects; for that an evil life may have, and without
the greater grace, must have a worse death.

Death then in it self, considering the state of man fallen, unless we add the
quality of the death of the righteous, is evil; but considering man in a state
of grace, and as he is restored to the favor of God by Christ is good; for
that it is an entrance into everlasting joy.

And thus have I done with the first part of the Text, or the Reason, Thou
shall dye, and not live. The second part (which is the Admonition) follows, Set
thy house in order: But before I speak of this; give me leave to mind you of
Isaiahs severe manner of delivering this Message, Thou shall dye. Had he stopped
there, Hezekiah might have comforted himself with finding out some allay; as,
Thou shall dye at last; or, thou shall dye, and yet be miraculously restored
again to life, as the man was by touching the bones of Elisha; 2 Kings 13.21.
but he cuts off all such hopes by peremptorily adding, Thou shall not live:
Which clearly shows, that the Prophet told him this by special appointment,
otherwise his prudence might be justly questioned; for that so abrupt a
declaration might so far deject him, that though his sickness were not in it
self mortal, yet it would take away all possibility of his recovery. And it
likewise shows, that even good men themselves, such as Hezekiah was, can hardly
be beaten from hopes of life: What we much desire, we are loath to despair of;
and you shall meet with very few, though never so desperately sick, but they
still reserve hopes of life; Men are loath to take the sentence of death, 2
Cor. 1.9.
as S. Paul speaks; and there is scarcely any so old, but he hopes to live one
year longer: Nay, Grace it self does not without some difficulty expel nature;
for S. Paul, though he desires to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, Phil.
1.23.
yet sindes himself in a straight between two: But however, by occasion of this
special manner, not used to us in any particular sickness, as it was to
Hezekiah, it will not be amiss for us, both for the crossing of our fond hopes,
and the convincing us of the uncertainty of our lives, to fancy that this
Message, Thou shall dye, and not live, is now sent to every one of us in
particular; nay more, to consider, that though we should equal the life of
Methusalem; or the Ancients before the Flood, yet we shall die at last; and
that if Xerxes, when he was mustering his Army of more than two millions,
Herodot. Polymneia.
wept upon this reflection of his thoughts, that not one of them should be
alive a hundred years after: how much more cause have we to weep, and to be
concerned, for that every one of us who are now in this Church, shall not only
die within a hundred years, but a far shorter time; nay, for ought we know,
before we get out of this place; and therefore this being seriously considered,
ought to make us more attentive to what we shall hear, in order to our
preparations for death. If we had an Enemy that vowed to set upon us where ever
he should meet us, we would do our best to prepare our selves accordingly with
weapons, and skill to encounter him: Mortem optare malum timere pejus. Senec.
Trag.
And being death is such an enemy, nay, not only a sworn, but a mortal enemy
too, it argues the greatest madness imaginable, to be unprovided for its
approach; and the basest cowardice to run away from it.

And truly, he that seriously considers, how many intercepting casualties may
hinder their preparing for death, who defer that work any longer than while it
is called to day (not to mention that the very presumption does much discredit
the purpose) as the uncertainty of health, the suddeness of death, and the
unfitness of the mind to learn to do well in the bodies weakness; and how
horror and amazement, frenzy and distraction, may take away all capacities for,
and possibilities of repentance. I say, he that soberly and sadly considers
this, will easily grant, that then is the fittest time to make provisions for
death, when we are in health and prosperity, and while that is not said, Thou
shall dye, and not live; which shall, or at least may be said to every one of
us in particular at this instant. And therefore that we may be so prepared for
death, as not to be dismayed when this King of terror shall assault us, let us
give heed to the Prophets advice, or admonition, which is the second thing to
be spoken to in the Text, Set thy house in order.

The Text is word for word in the Original; Give charge or Commandment to thy
house, which I account not to be only the making of a Will (though that is a
duty not to be omitted) but also the giving the last charge to his friends and
servants, and the ordering and settling the affairs of his Kingdom; which
Hezekiah was the more concerned to do, because he had no heir ( Manasses being
born three years after his recovery) to whom the Crown might legally descend;
and therefore it was by so much the more necessary for preventing of divisions
and quarrels in his Family and Kingdom after his death, to settle it upon the
right Successor.

But it may seem something strange, that Isaiah should give counsel about that
in the first place, whereas it may be thought to be the duty of a man of God,
rather to advise him to settle his mind and conscience: But the wonder will be
removed, if you consider these particulars:

First, That besides that duty which obliges a man to settle his estate; that
others who have a just right thereunto, either by promise, or otherwise, may
not be prejudiced by his omission, the very settling of temporal affairs in
time of sickness, is no small part of preparing the mind and soul for God; for
that thereby all worldly thoughtfulness being laid aside, he may the more
vigorously betake himself to the making up of his accounts with God, and with
less distraction bend his thoughts on his inward condition: And therefore they
that blame Ministers in visiting of the sick, for advising them to make their
wills, and to set their houses in order (and such mine own experience finds to
be amongst us) do but either discover weakness of judgment; or that which is
yet worse, a selfish design, that the estate of the sick person, for want of
such timely disposals, being divided into fractions, by the claims of several
pretenders, they themselves might hope to fish in troubled waters; and with the
Dog in the Apologue, run away with the bone, while others are contending for
it. But to return to our purpose.

In the second place you are to take notice, that it is not improbable, but
that the Prophet knew, that Hezekiah was not unprovided for his soul. Or,

Thirdly, Perhaps, the Scripture gives us here only the sum, or chief scope of
his advice: But whether this will satisfy or not, yet this is most certrin,
that as our Savior first bids, Seek the Kingdom of God; Matthew. 6.33
so it ought to be our chiefest care, for the attainment of that, to order our
souls and consciences aright; because that imports more than all the world
besides, and every one is interested therein, though every one has not outward
estates and houses to settle; and that the rather too, because the Will cannot
be made, until the conscience be rightly informed, for that some things may
appear to be unjustly gotten, which cannot be bequeathed, but must be restored:
Wherefore if there be not some tolerable preparation of the Conscience before,
that must above all things be our first main care and business. And all that is
requisite to be done herein, may be reduced to one of these two intentions:

First, To bring a man to dye in the favor of God: or,

Secondly, To give a man comfort and assurance: thereupon in the very conflict
it self, and that a man may dye in favor of God, he must first get it; and
then secondly keep it.

First then, Gods favor is to be gotten; for all mankind is fallen from it,
and so are liable both to temporal and eternal death; and until the offense
committed against God be removed, death is armed with sin, as with a sting;
which being taken away, it has no more power to hurt. Hear then, that which is
first taught, is how a sinner may be justified, and reconciled to God, which
for order sake, I reduce to two heads: First, Repentance from dead works. And
secondly, Faith toward God, Heb. 6.1.
both which are joined together by the Apostle.

I understand here by Repentance, that which has to do with sin, both before,
and in conversion: And it includes these four things;

First, Knowledge of sin, not only in general, that we are sinners; but also
in particular, how, and wherein: Which knowledge is by the Law, because that is
the rule of our life, Romans 3.20.
by which we are to square our particular actions; and the glass, which being
looked into, clearly shows us our selves: And it is very advantageous in order
to repentance, to examine our selves by this Rule, and to look into this glass,
that if not all (for who can do so, seeing no man knows how often he offends)
yet (at least) we may discern as many of our sins as we can.

Secondly, as it includes the knowledge of our sins, so likewise it includes
our abhorrence and hatred of them, which must be accompanied with grief, and
shame, and confusion of face; for that we have offended so bountiful a Father,
and sinned against all the obligations of duty and gratitude imaginable. Not
that this kind of sorrow is in it self simply necessary, or pleasing unto God;
for he only requires our amendment, and delights not to afflict willingly,
Lam. 3.34.
nor to grieve the children of men, but because there is such a strict
coherence between this grief and amendment of life, that the one (as the
needle, makes way for the thread) serves to usher in the other; though if we
consider the constitutions of our nature, we have otherwise also just cause to
be grieved for our sins; for that we are made thereby not only deformed in our
selves, but also odious in Gods sight, and deserving of his just wrath, and
subjected to the extremest severities of the Divine Vengeance.

And this kind of sorrow is called Contrition and Compunction; both which seem
to be one and the same thing, in different forms of expression: But if there be
any difference between them, Contrition implies more than Compunction; for that
by the one, is usually meant the honor of punishment, and the sting of
Conscience, which ensues upon the committal of sin; and by the other is
understood, sorrow for the offense, without respect to the punishment.

Thirdly, This Repentance includes likewise confession of our sins, Psalm.
32.51. Dan. 9.
that so we may not only see what we have done, but what we have merited
thereby, giving glory to God, before he cause darkness, and before our feet
stumble on the dark mountains.

I shall not here start that Question so much controverted betwixt us and the
Papists, Whether we be bound to confess our sins to men. The Romanists
themselves acknowledge, that we are not bound to confess them before Baptism;
and the truth is, we are not bound to confess them after, as to the obtaining
of forgiveness from, and reconciliarion with God, especially after such a
Sacramental, plenary, particular, enforced manner, under pain of damnation, and
by virtue of Christ's institution, which they have in these last ages obtruded
on the world; though indeed, as to the obtaining forgiveness from men whom we
have injured, and for the making of public satisfaction to the Church, for a
notorious scandal given, and sometimes for obtaining counsel and direction in
the anxieties and scruples of an erroneous Conscience, and how to lead our
lives in a penitential way of pleasing God, it is very expedient to confess
them unto men; but most especially in the distresses of mind for sins
committed, when the conscience gives a man caeca verbera, blind blows, like the
vulture that continually gnawed upon the liver of Titius, Vir. Aeneid.
that so the Ministers unto whom God has committed the Word of Reconciliation,
might assure the Conscience of pardon, and procure peace by pronouncing a
Sacerdotal Absolution, a power which God neither gave to Angels nor Archangels:
Chrysostom. de Sacerdotio.
But herein lies the wonder (says a Father) that men inhabiting the earth,
should dispense those things which are in heaven, forgiveness of sins.

Fourthly, This Repentance must not stay here, but must carry us further, to
beseech the Lord for his mercy, and promise sake, to forgive us our sins: But
because this presupposes Faith, which is the next point, I shall reserve it
until I speak of that; and indeed faith and repentance are so linked together,
that I only separate them for Doctrines sake: For never can true and complete
Repentance, be without Faith; nor true Faith be without Repentance. I confess
that some degree of Repentance may be only in a sight of sin, and sorrow for
it; and some kind of Confessions, like that of Cain and Judas: But such a
Repentance is not with hatred of the sin; but horror of the punishment. And
thus I come from speaking of Repentance, which is the first particular
requisite for obtaining the favor of God, to speak of Faith, which is the
second; wherein we must consider, first, What it is: and secondly, how it may
be obtained.

First, As touching what it is. You are to take notice, that the Scriptures
sometimes call by the name of Faith, that credit which we give to Gods Word;
sometimes power to work, or to have a miracle wrought; sometimes trust in God,
as in a storm, Christ rebuking the fear of the Disciples, asks, Where is your
Faith; sometimes persuasion that we shall receive something from God, as when
he bids us ask in faith, without wavering; and sometimes as if it would exclude
nothing, that the word signifies: But that Faith which reconciles to, and
justifies before God, and which is here principally meant, as it must be a
Faith working by Charity, so it has for its next and immediate object, Christ
the Redeemer; and for its final and ultimate, the whole Trinity: Yet it is
confessed, that this Faith presupposes credit to be given to Gods Word,
especially to the Doctrine of the Gospel, that it is Divine and true, and it
produces a persuasion of receiving the accomplishment of Gods promises upon
performance of the conditions; but the former, not only evi men; but the
Devils themselves may have; for they believe and tremble: And the latter, many
times they that are reconciled to God have not, especially in their first
Conversions, or Relapses into grievous sins before their restoration; which
happens, because it is a consequent of the former, and a fruit then only
present, when God vouchsafes to grant it: For as we see the Rose tree bears
flowers, but not in Winter, or it may be the first year it was planted, yet is
apt to do so in convenient time; so this justifying Faith is apt to produce
persuasion, though it does not always do so.

Secondly, As to the obtaining of Faith: It is most certain, that we have not
power of our selves to deserve or acquire it; yet God has appointed some means
in order to the attainment of it, which he usually assists by his Spirit; and
in the conscientious practice whereof, he gives it in certain degrees: as,

First, By hearing the Word preached, he opens the understanding, and so
illuminates it, that it may see what is delivered.

Secondly, he convinces the judgment, that attends and considers well what is
said, and from the Majesty, Holiness, Power and Consonancy of the Doctrine,
concludes it is from God.

Thirdly, When a man is thus convinced, he is not far from the Kingdom of
heaven; for that he only then lacks time to deliberate, Whether it be not most
fit for him (all things being considered) to submit unto, and obey this
Doctrine: Whereupon being moved by Gods Spirit, he desires Christ, which is the
first degree of faith in him; and prays the Lord for his sake to have mercy on
him: Which Faith thus gotten, receives new additions of growth and strength, by
the practice of pious exercises; as, the familiar hearing of Gods Word, Prayer,
Meditation, and the frequent and holy use of the blessed Sacrament of the Lords
Supper; and this Faith being added to the remorse for our sins, will be imputed
to us for righteousness, God thereby giving us Christ, and the life which he
has in him given to the world. John 5.13.


And when the sinner is thus reconciled to God, the great care must be, to
secure his favor: For the doing of which, he must,

First, Abstain from his former sins; for God pardons sinners, as Princes do
Rebels, on condition they rebel no more: Go thy way (says Christ) and sin no
more: John 8.11.
For as when the wicked turns from all his sin which he has committed, and
does that which is lawful, and right, God will not remember his former
wickedness: So when the righteous turns away from his righteousness, Ezekiel.
18.24
and commits iniquity, and does according to all the abominations that the
wicked man does, all his righteousness that he has done, shall not be
mentioned; but in his trespass that he has trespassed, and in his sin that he
has sinned, in them shall he dye. Therefore we must not think it enough to
have repented of our former sins, unless we so repent as to forsake them; and
so forsake them, as never to return to them again: But we must mortify the
flesh by the Spirit, and not consent unto the lusts thereof; that so we may
evidence the reality of our repentance: Which while we do, though our
infirmities will not suffer us to give a perfect and impartial obedience to the
whole Law, yet this shall not be imputed unto us; for that we have a Law of
liberty, whereby our actions are favorably interpreted, according to the
sincerity of our endeavors, and the uprightness of our intentions, and not
according to the rigor of Justice, and the measures of our weak performances:
And while we walk in this light, so as our hearts condemn us not, we have
communion with God, and the blood of his Son cleanses us from all sin.

Secondly. We must walk circumspectly, considering our actions, weighing our
words, and watching over our thoughts, ere we give consent unto them; setting
our selves in Gods sight continually, desiring him to direct us, and to lay out
the way before us, doing all the good we can, not conforming our selves to the
world; but transforming our selves by the renewing of our minds, that we may
prove, Romans 12.2.
what is that good, that acceptable, and that perfect will of God. And though
we may through the frailty of our nature, and the prevalency of a temptation,
fall again after reconciliation into Gods disfavour, we must not altogether be
disheartened thereby; but renew our faith and repentance, being assured, that if
while we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, Romans
5.
we shall much more be saved by his life.

And this done, the great care must be, that we die well: In order whereunto it
is observable, that oftentimes it so falls out, that the state of the person is
not always discerned by himself; and that though he is in favor with God, yet
he is not assured thereof: Therefore it would be worth your inquiries to know,
how the Conscience may be ascertained of Gods favor, presupposing that we now
speak of such as are in Christ, and have a right thereunto.

1. Then this is general, That whatsoever the cause of the doubt is, it is
requisite to evidence the truth of Repentance, and Faith, and to lead the party
so affected, to the renewed exercise of them, and to an earnest invocation of
God; whereto may be added the special use of the Ministry of Reconciliation,
and the power of the keys, after the party is examined of the sincerity of his
Repentance, and Faith, and purpose of new obedience. Besides, special remedies
are to be applied to special cases; as if it should happen, that the Conscience
is perplexed through its apprehensions of the greatness, and number of its
sins; then this Consolation is to be applied, that nothing is unpardonable, but
final impenitence; and that the hainousness and number of sins, is no bar to
the favor of God, provided they be forsaken; as appears by the example of the
Prodigal, and Christ's own words, who came not to call the righteous, but
sinners; and that they are those very men whom Christ came to call, and that
there is a special favor to such, and joy in Heaven for their conversion. And
lastly, that oftentimes such prove the worthiest instruments of Gods glory; as
Paul, who from a Persecutor of the Faith, became a Propagator of, and a Martyr
for the Faith.

2. If the cause of doubt proceed from sore and continual afflictions, which
are oftentimes magnified by fancy, or are but the products of passion; or
melancholy; it is to be intimated, that afflictions are not signs of Gods
disfavour, but rather tokens of his love, Heb. 12.12.
if they be born with patience, and that they give good advantage against
death; for that they serve to make weary of life.

3. If the dying person (because he finds himself assaulted with many
blasphemous temptations) doubts of his salvation, and concludes that God has
given him over, and is not at hand to help him; he is to know, that temptations
not consented to, are not sins, but crosses; and that he is made no more guilty
thereby, than a good Subject is for being tempted by a Traitor to kill his
Prince; or a chaste wife by an Adulterer, to defile her husbands bed; and that
he is therefore to complain to God, and to beseech him to rebuke the Devil; and
that he would give him grace and strength to resist the temptation, and to
endeavor to avoid all occasions as much as he can.

4. Sometimes Gods children are so discouraged by their relapses into some
gross sins after reconciliation, and through the sense of their corruptions,
and wants, that they not only doubt, but pronounce of themselves, that God has
cast them away, and they charge themselves with the sin against the Holy Ghost:
In this case they are to remember, that while they carry flesh and blood about
them, they must not think to be exempted from its appendant inconveniences; and
that Justification does not carry with it perfection, and freedom from all sin;
that many of Gods children, as Noah, David, and Peter, have committed grievous
sins, and yet have been forgiven; and that Christ's Prayer, teaches the Apostles
to pray for pardon; and therefore if they have fallen, they must confess their
sins, and Christ who is their Advocate is just and faithful, and ready to
forgive them, and cleanse them from all iniquity; and that being he will not
censure them according to the Law of Bondage, but of Liberty, their defects
shall not be examined in rigor, but pitied in mercy.

Lastly, Sometimes Gods children find themselves forsaken to such a degree,
that they are not only deprived of the least gleam of comfort, but their very
devotion seems for a time to be extinguist, which so terrifies them, that they
anticipate the very torments of Hell: In which case they are to take notice,
that their trouble affords them matter of comfort; because that their being
perplexed by his absence, is from the support of his Spirit, maintaining love in
their hearts; which yet further appears, for that they would give the whole
world to be restored again to the comforts of his salvation; and that though
heaviness endures for a night, yet joy comes in the morning; for he will at
length return, and quicken them, and therefore they must earnestly entreat him
so to do, and learn to live by faith, not feeling; and with Abraham, Romans 4.18.
against hope, to believe in hope; remembering that Christ our Lord, was in this
very condition, when he cried out, My God, my God; learning from his example in
the greatest desertions, still to depend upon him; and this being done, the
most difficult part of fitting us for death is at an end; for that then the
soul has great boldness with God, and can confidently cry out with old
Hilarion, Egredere anima, egredere quid pertimescis! and with S. Chrysostom,
Give me to be assured of the joys of heaven, and then if thou will, kill me
presently; and I shall give thee thanks for thy pains; for that thereby thou
sendest me out of hand, into the possession of those good things. Here it may
be seasonable for a man to make his will, and to dispose of his Estate; which I
account not only necessary, for that this may be a means (as I intimated
before) of entailing peace on his Family, and of the better qualifying of him,
for the making his particular peace with God; but also, because that the
reviewing of his estate, (which is necessary in order to the settling of it)
will happily give him occasion to remember somewhat that he may have unjustly
acquired, whether of things dedicated to God, or usurpt from men, and so be
induced to make restitution of it, as he is bound by the Law: Lev. 5.15.
Where the Law, that a fifth part should be added to it, binds not (as I
conceive) to that just proportion at this day, but only enforces a complete
restitution; and indeed, since Gods blessing and favor is the best inheritance
that can be left to children, and that none can hope for his blessing, either
upon the robbery of him or man (not to mention the sting of Conscience that
ensues thereupon) such ill gotten goods are but a foolish and bad provision for
posterity: Mich. 6.10.
Are there yet the treasures of wickedness in the house of the wicked, and the
scant measure that is abominable? Certainly, when God comes to visit for these
things, he will consume both these ill gotten goods, and their nest together;
How much better were it for us to separate them from what we have justly
acquired, by restoring them to the right owners, than thus to run the certain
hazard of Gods displeasure? Here I cannot without injustice, omit praising our
Ancestors; for that they used in their last Wills, to make restitution of their
Tithes negligently paid, or forgotten: This sin I am sure is not yet left by
some; but the amends making, nay the Tithes themselves are left out of their
Testaments: It would be for their credit, to follow the example of that
Honorable Person, whose Funerals we now solemnize in this particular; and
though they were not conscious to themselves of the least defailance herein,
yet they would do well to make mention of them in their Wills, for a president
to others. Neither can this consideration, that a man by making such
restitutions, will happily expose his wife and children to misery, and all the
inconveniences of poverty, be a sufficient plea against it; for that Gods
friendship (which is entailed upon the childrens children of them that fear
him) is a far better provision than the Mammon of unrighteousness: For he is
the Father of the fatherless, and the defendor of the Widow; and the
committing of them to his care, is a kind of obligation upon him to provide for
them; and therefore since his blessings make rich, and that many from small or
no beginnings, have been raised by him to great fortunes and preferment in the
world, that should fortify them against such solicitudes, and induce them to
busy their thoughts in studying how to make them virtuous, and religious, and
to leave it to God to make them rich, or at least to provide food and raiment
for them. And to this end, it is very necessary that they give them a charge
touching the fear of God, as Moses, Joshua, and David, and others of the Saints
of God have done. The last words (you know) of our dying friends make the
deepest impressions, and are usually best remembered; and this being the
weightiest point, on which the happiness of our whole life depends, ought not
to be forgotten.

And thus having conducted the dying man (as well as I could) through all the
streights and duties necessary to be performed by him, in order to his dying in
the favor of God, and to give him comfort and assurance thereupon in the very
conflict it self: I shall now before I come to any particular application, or
to the performance of the saddest part of my task, prescribe a few such tame
and gentle Cordials, as may only help to keep up his spirits, and in some
measure allay the pains of death in its more immediate, and nearer approaches;
and that is, to mind him of the instances of Gods presence and faithfulness in
trouble, that he will not suffer any to be tempted above his strength: And
being there are many who suffer more from the fears of losing their reason for
want of rest, and their patience through the extremity of pain, and so offend
God; they must know, that the favor of God cannot be forfeited by the
distempers of the brain, or such accidents as are occasioned by the disease;
and if while the body is free from such distempers, they do for prevention
hereof, settle and confirm the Conscience in the love of God, they may be sure,
that those passions of idleness, raving, swearing, or blasphemy it self, shall
not be laid to their charge; because that they are not of their own election:
For as a Father pitieth his son, Psalm. 103.
so does the Lord those that fear him.

As touching the pain of death (I am verily persuaded) it is not near so great
as men apprehend; nor comparable to a fit of the Cholick, Gout, Stone, or
Toothach it self; and that for this reason, because that in such diseases as
are long and sensitive, strength so much forsakes the body before death fecks
it, that a man cannot feel himself dye: Whereas in sharper sicknesses it is
otherwise; for that nature not being wasted, is able to make resistance, and so
renders its pain more pungent: But yet the shortness of them, makes them more
supportable; for that a man is cut off (as it were) at a blow, and surpised by
death before he has time to consider of it: However, though this be so, yet to
encourage and fortify the dying person against death, it will not be amiss to
have recourse to the assistance of God in it, as that of the Psalmist, Though I
walk through the valley of death, Psalm. 23.
yet will I fear no evil; to Christ's Victory over death, who by his death has
taken away its sting; to the assurance of glory which shall succeed; to the
presence of Christ, and of his Saints and Angels; and lastly, to oppose the
very rest from labor, which death shall shortly bring to the sharpness of the
present pain. And in the agony it self, when the party is at the last gasp, and
the soul hovering in a trembling quandary, between its desires of being freed
from a Prison, and its unwillingness to part with its old lodging: Then the
great business must be to recollect the miscarriages of his life past, that so
he may rally his forces, to consummate his graces, and to perfect his
repentance; and calling to mind that Christ sits at the right hand of God to
be his Advocate, he may confidently commend his spirit unto him, as into the
hands of a merciful Creator: And when through the loss of his speech, or
senses, he is rendered incapable of such pious performances, then they that are
about him are to supply his inability with earnest prayer unto God, for the
pardon of his sins, for the grace of Christ, for the rebuking of Satan, and for
the guard guard and transport of the holy Angels, and lastly, when the soul is
parted, as we pray, Thy will be done, so we must rest satisfied therewith when
it is done; comforting our selves with S. Paul's Doctrine concerning the
Resurrection, and the coming of Christ, And his bringing them that dye in him,
with him again in glory.

As touching the Funeral, though it may seem neither agreeable with my title,
or purpose, to speak any thing of it at this time; yet I must needs say, that
as we are not on the one hand to bring in hired mourners, like so many
Tisiphones out of S. Ratricks Purgatory, to fill the Church with howlings,
which has been deservedly condemned by the primitive Bishops, as disagreeing
with the Doctrine of the Resurrection, and the life to come: So on the other
hand we must take heed, that we run not into a contrary extreme with some
Fanatical Innovators; and instead of a Christian burial, bring in a dumb show,
having not so much as the least expression of a Christian faith, or hope:
Though it be true, that it was no prejudice to the blessed Martyrs, that their
bodies were consumed to ashes, or devoured by ravenous beasts, or drowned in
the sea; for the sea shall give up her dead: And in this case that of the Poet
holds true,

Coelo tegitur qui non habet urnam. Yet in an ordinary way, there is a respect
due to the bodies of the Saints deceased, as to the Temples of the Holy Ghost,
the organs that he used to all good, washed in the laver of Regeneration; whose
members were the weapons of Righteousness, which did partake of the body and
blood of Christ, by which they glorified God in their bodies, and which being
raised again in due time, shall be made conformable to the glorious body of
Christ. Hence are those offices we owe them, to wait upon their Hearse, Luke
7.12.
as David upon Abner, and the Citizens upon the Widows Son, to inter them
decently in the earth, our common Mother: And some respect is likewise to be
had to a consecrated place; for Joseph desired that his bones should be buried
in the Land of promise, where the Temple was to be erected; and if their state
require it, Matthew. 23.
to adorn their Sepulchers, to commend them in a Funeral Sermon, 2 Samuel 19.1.
or Oration, for the exciting others to their imitation; and howsoever the
recital of such godly Lessons, Prayers and Exhortations, as may serve to
moderate our grief for their loss, confirm our hopes of the Resurrection,
admonish us of our own mortality, and to prepare us for our end, may be blamed,
yet without reason; for that by this, we not only provide for their honor,
but also satisfy our own minds. This has been the practice of the Church of
Christ in all ages, witness Dionysius the Areopagite (or whoever else it was,
certainly a most ancient Author) in his Ecclesiastical Hierarchy; Cap. 7.
where he sets down their several Rites, their bringing the dead to the Church,
their coffening of him, their salutations, their Hymns, their Prayers, and
their Commemorations. He that will oppose his own fancy against reason, the
authority and practice of the Church in all ages, I leave him to put on a coat
which Solomon long since shaped for him and his fellows, He that is wise in his
own eyes, there is more hopes of a fool than of such a man.

I have now finished my Text, and spent a great deal of time in telling you in
a dull, flat, and unpolished manner, how you should prepare your selves for
death: And indeed the only Apology for my self, and satisfaction which I shall
make to you for my offense herein, is to tell you, That death cannot be charmed
with a smooth tongue, nor kept off with a quaint expression; and that it is the
special duty of every one of you to believe, that what was here particularly
said to Hezekiah, Thou shall dye, and not live, reaches also to you: And
therefore my most earnest suit to you is, that you would for once be but true
to your selves, and know, that in despite of all this Worlds Grandeur, and
your own projects, you must die: Do but consult your own bodies and senses, and
you will find a decay in them; nay, if you will not be convinced by this,
reflect upon those cold Carkcasses, which now lie mouldring away in their
hollow vaults under your feet; and since the eye of sense most affects the
heart, establish your selves in this truth, by this said Representative; and
behold here the Coffin of a person made up of all the Contributions of Nature,
a Man, in whom concurred all that Pythagoras could think to beg of his god, to
wit, Riches, and a firm constitution of body; and thence infer, that there is
no exemption from the grave: For certainly if Greatness, if Learning, if
Riches, if Parts, if Wisdom, if Prudence, if Friends, if care of Servants, if
Attendance of a Wife, if Skill of Physicians, The thanksgiving day for the
victory over the Dutch was the day preceding the funeral. Hora. Pallida mors
aequo pulsat pede pauperum tabernas regumque turres.
nay if the affections of most, and the prayers of many, could have secured him
from death, our yesterdays joy would not be so soon interrupted with this days
sorrow: But alas, no Grandeur can do it, for Death either finds all men equal,
or makes them so. And therefore be persuaded to set your houses in order, your
inward, as well as your outward; your Consciences, as well as your Estates; and
consider, that you who are yet breathing, are but hourly treading upon your own
graves, lingering out a few uncertain minutes, and must necessarily follow; and
that God has given you this little reprieve, that you might prepare your selves
for death; and seeing you are reprieved only during pleasure, and know not how
soon you may be called upon to execution, do not put off this so necessary work
one moment; but even now, betake your selves to the making of your Wills, to
the perfecting of your accounts, and take no rest, until ye get your pardon
sealed; for remember, that God himself, S. Ambro^.
though he has promised pardon to the penitent, has not promised to stay one
day for his repentance: For it is to day, this very day, if you will hear his
voice, that you must not harden your hearts, or else he has sworn in his wrath,
that ye shall never enter into his rest. And if there be any of those here
present, who because they have beauty, and youth sparkling in their veins, so
far despise death, that they will seek it in the midst of dangers, as if they
scorned it should come unsent for, and leave it to be feared only by the aged
and the sickly; let me assure them, that they will find a vast disproportion
between dying in a fit of a Rodomontado, and dying in cold blood, and that
death is not the same thing in the hands of a man, as it is in the hand of God;
and that a Lord have mercy on me an hour or two before we dye, is not probably
a sufficient preparation for it: No, no, it is the Work of works to dye well,
that is, actively and cheerfully to resign life; and they that have spent their
whole time therein, have found it little enough.

But though your necessities, and the importance of this subject tempts me to
insist more particularly on it, yet the interest which the Honorable Person
(whose Obsequies we now solemnize) has in this our meeting, forbids that, and
commands me to beg you attention to as sad a story, which must needs beget a
treble passion of sorrow, joy, and emulation in all that hear it: Sorrow, for
our loss in him; joy, for his gain in our loss; and emulation, in all of his
virtues. But before I come to this, I must needs tell you, that my thoughts
have for some time waved me to and fro, and that I am yet in some suspense,
whether I should speak or not; for that I account it no easy matter, to be
Moderator of the Arguments that are for Speech or Silence; for that on the one
side, whilst the Minister is pouring oil on the face of the dead, to make it
shine, he does but too often cast dirt in his own, and withal, may be very
prejudicial to the living; for that many (whose lives speak nothing for them)
will be apt to draw the example into consequence, and so hope to hire a Hackney
Funeral Sermon, to carry them to Heaven when they dye. And on the other hand,
though common graves have no Inscription, yet marble tombs are not without some
Epitaph: And Heroical examples should not go without a trumpet; but being my
place forbids me silence, all that I shall premise, either for your
information, or for securing my self against the various censures and opinions
which are like to pass upon me in this great Auditory, is to mind you, That we
are not come hither, with intentions to imitate the Egyptian Priests; who upon
recounting the good and bad deeds of their deceased at their Funerals, were
wont to deny them burial, if they found their vices to exceed their virtues;
no! Christianity teaches us more charity, and therefore we are not now obliged
to disclose the frailties or imperfections of the dead, whatever they were; no!
we are rather to deal with'um, as the Painter did with Antigonus, who had but
one eye, he drew his Picture imagine lusca, half faced, and so covered the
deformity from the beholders sight; and to bury them in everlasting oblivion,
as the Israelites did their exerements without the camp; and that the rather,
because (I may speak it with some confidence) God has so buried them, that they
shall never rise up in judgment against him; but whatever was in him Just and
Honorable, Virtuous and Noble, Christian and Religious, Pious and Charitable,
we are bound to remember, because we are bound to imitate.

I shall not take upon me to play the Herald, to rip up his pedigree, or blazen
his Coat of Arms, but only so far, as may increase your esteem of him: for
when Nobility and Virtue grow out of the same stock, they command respect, by
adding mutual luster to each other.

He was descended from an Ancient and Noble Family, many of which were no less
eminent for their parts and employments, than they were signal for their
Loyalty, which justly advanced them to the highest commands in this Kingdom.
And though afterward by the common vicissitude of all Sublunary things, this
ancient Family fell into decay, so that they might put the Moon upon their
shoes, as the old Romans did upon their gates, to show the volubility of all
worldly enjoyments; yet it has now not only received a new life; but also a
new addition of honor and renown from that Worthy Person, who made it his
business to derive his honor more from his own Excellencies, than from the
merits and Grandeur of his Ancestors.

He was admitted a Member of the College adjoining to this City, in the year
1610. where (under the tuition of that Learned and Reverend Prelate, Anthony
Martin Lord Bishop of Mead) after he had taken the degree of Batchelour in
Arts, he was chosen Fellow; and having past the rest of the course of his
studies, and performed all his Exercises with that general applause, which is
usually the reward of hard study, and pregnant wit, he commenced Master, and
was chosen Hebrew Lecturer; and by his accurate knowledge in that Language (a
thing rare in men of his Country) and his great care in instructing his
pupils, he made early discoveries of his future preferment. But after he had
spent full nine years there, in the good esteem and love of his acquaintance,
having by studying of Divinity first learnt to manage his own Conscience (as if
Providence had so designed it on purpose) that he might the better know how to
keep his Majesty's. In the year, 1619. he was (by the persuasion of his
friends) removed to Lincolns Inn; where he made it his business not to learn
the Modes and Vices of the place, but to qualify himself for the service of
his King and Country: And there he has left such surviving Monuments of his
great parts, and greater industry; that it may be disputed, Whether the Society
was to him, or he to the Society the greater ornament. But no sooner did his
own abilities, and the necessities of his Country call him from thence, to
engage in the public practice of the Laws, but the Lord Chancellor Loftus, a
person, who besides his many other extraordinary endowments, was very well able
to judge of men, took him into his particular favor, and not only committed
all his private concerns unto his management, but very much relied on his
advice and opinion in the most intricate matters of Chancery: And having
thereby given sufficient proof of his parts, his great faithfulness and sound
judgment represented him soon after as a very fit person to be of His Majesty's
Learned Council: Whereupon being made Sergeant by his late Majesty of ever
blessed and glorious memory, that did but publish to the world his deserts and
fitness for greater employs; and therefore a Parliament b^ing called by the
Lord of Strafford, a person of great excellency, but far greater misfortunes,
he was by the unanimous consent, and to the general satisfaction of the whole
House, placed in the Chair; where he gave such proofs of his so great abilities
and judgment, of his so great Prudence and Conduct, and managed that affair
with so much advantage to His Majesty's interest, and the state of things then,
that the Lord Lieutenant did not only confer Knighthood upon him, but the
whole House by their several recommendatory Letters to His Majesty in his
behalf, declared their approbations of him, as well as their obligations to him.

But when Pride and Ambition began to contend with Loyalty and Obedience, and
Rebellion had usurpt Authority, and turned Order and Government into Anarchy
and Confusion; then this Mirror of Loyalty was no less serviceable to His
Majesty, by his assisting the now Lord Lieutenant with his private counsel,
than he was before in his public capacity. Then it was, that the Duke of
Ormond was perfectly acquainted with the deep judgment, and great integrity of
Sr. Maurice Eustace; and that Sir Maurice Eustace was confirmed in his belief
of the Duke of Ormonds undaunted courage, and unalterable resolution of running
all hazards for His Majesty's interest; and so by their mutual knowledge of one
another faithfulness, they espoused each others concern, and His Majesty's in
both. But when Rebellion began to get the mastery, and His Majesty's interest
was going down the wind, and the Sword forced out of the hands of His
Lieutenant, and Treason it self became meritorious, this Honorable Person so
far scorned to be tempted to any thing that was base or unworthy, that to the
extreme hazard of his life, to the utter ruin of his estate and fortunes, and
seven years imprisonment in Chester added to all this, he still persever'd in
his adherence to the Royal interest. And when His Majesty's affairs were
accompanied with so many evil circumstances, that the success of the Traitors
made them so secure in their Usurpation, that they set the Prison gates wide
open, and permitted him, Anno 1655. to repair to this his native Country
again, his wisdom added to his faithfulness, begot such jealousies and fearful
apprehensions in the Uusurpers, that they could not think themselves secure,
until they secured him the second time in this Town: Then they rifle his study,
and would fain make his Loyalty to his Prince, and his Vicegerent, many of
whose Letters he had then in his hands, and which were the signal instances of
his innocence, the most aggravating evidences of his guilt: But God, that
designed this Honorable Person for greater services, delivered him this time
also, out of the paw of the Lion, and preserved him for the happiest of times,
that of His Majesty's Restoration.

And here secure your selves (if you can) from being surpised with an Ecstasy
of admiration, and behold and learn the quintessence of all Loyalty from this
Worthy Patriot; nay, such a Loyalty, as is rarely found, drained from all its
baser mixtures of particular interest, or selfish design; for whereas a man
should have thought, that a person so deeply suffering, and highly meriting,
should have been impatient, and greedy of reward; he on the contrary,
acquiesces in the general good of the happy revolution, and accounts himself
more than rewarded, for that he lives to see his lawful Prince restored to his
undoubted Rights. And when His Majesty desires him to be Lord Chancellor, and
one of the Lords Justices of this unfortunate Kingdom, with an Augmentation of
sallery; he not only refused it modestly, and in complement, as some men are
wont to do those things which they most defire, that they might be pressed with
the greater earnestness on them, but uses his utmost power to avoid it: And at
last being convinced, that His Majesty's service should be highly advanced by
his acceptance, he embraces it with this thankful acknowledgement, and
unfeigned protestation, which I hear give you in his own words.

Most Gracious Sovereign, Your Majesty has this day committed to my charge,
the greatest trust in Your Majesty's three Kingdoms, by delivering unto me the
custody of Your Majesty's Great-Seal, which is the grand security of the lives
and estates of Your Majesty's good people there; and which is more, if more can
be, Your Majesty has thereby constituted me to be your own Representive, to
personate Your Self in Your Majesty's most high and honorable Court of Chancery
in Ireland; to distribute Your own Conscience, by moderating the rigor of Your
justice, according to the rules of equity and good conscience, among Your good
people there: And good God! Who is sufficient for these things! as the great
Doctor of the Gentiles said in another case.

Most glorious Sir, I must needs confess my unworthiness of so great an honor,
as well as my inability to make any suitable acknowledgement: But this I
promise, that no man shall discharge that great trust with more faithfulness
then I shall; I will by Gods help, preserve clean hands, no bribes shall stick
to my fingers, no poor man shall be wearied out of his right by long
attendance; and my chief endeavors shall be, to preserve a clear conscience
toward God and man. In a word, to use that Royal expression in Magna Charta
confirmed by Your Majesty in this present Parliament, as it was in thirty
Parliaments before, Nulli Negabimus, nulli vendemus, nulli deferemus jus. And
this I do promise to Your Majesty, in the presence of God, and of Your
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.

And truly, he was so punctual in performing hereof that I dare challenge any,
except those sordid and wayward spirits, who will never learn to speak well of
the dead, to lay the least breach of this to his charge; or to find the least
injustice or partiality in any of his proceedings, unless they will be so
disingenuous, as to accuse him of some slowness in dispatch of business toward
the latter end of his days, which were rather the effects of his age, and
indisposition, and the fear of doing injustice occasioned thereby, than the
products of his choice.

I should too much injure his memory, if I should pass by in silence his great
zeal, and cordial affection for the Church of England; whose both Doctrine and
Discipline he so impartially weighed, that his being a zealous Professor of the
true, ancient, Catholic and Apostolic faith (in no Church in the whole world
so purely taught as in that) was not so much due to his Education, as it was to
his election: And how constant he was in the Public Worship of God, after this
manner which our Adversaries on the one hand call Heresy, and on the other
Popery, most of you are no less eyewitnesses of, than I am of his Family and
private Devotions.

Hitherto you have heard but very little (and that too, very disadvantagiously
related) of the morning and noon of his days; but that is yet behind, which
most concerns you to know, as well for your imitation as his praise: For since
it is the evening that crowns the day, and that all the miscarriages and
defects of a vicious life are expunged by a pious and penitent death, it
concerns you to have a more particular account of his behavior therein. And
therefore, no sooner did God by a fit of the Palsy send him this Message, as
to Hezekiah, Thou shall dye, and not live; but immediately calling for his
Chaplain, he resigns himself up to God with the prayers of the Church; and by
his pious reflections and heavenly ejaculations, proceeding from a soul repleat
with fervor and devotion, he sufficiently proved, that he was better able to
instruct and prepare his Chaplain for death, than his Chaplain was to prepare
him. And then finding his distemper to increase, and little hopes of having
fifteen years added to his days; after this tolerable preparation of his
conscience, he betakes himself to the setting of his house in order; that his
thoughts being wholly weaned from the world, he might with the more advantage
spend the remainder of his time in stating of his accounts with God. And here I
can never sufficiently admire and adore the unspeakable goodness of God toward
him, that although he died of such a disease, in which men are cut off (as it
were) at a blow, yet he had so perfect use of his reason, memory and speech,
though he was sometimes defective in the last, that there is not one word in
his whole will, which is not of his own dictating, or at least of his
approbation; for he very well knew, how advantageous it was to his Family, to
make his Testament so clear, and perspicuous, as that it may draw no Law Suits
after it. And in the reviewing of his estate, he bequeaths not the least part
of it to the Church, but leaves all his Impropriations, amounting at least to
six or seven hundred pounds a year, as a pious Legacy unto it, and twenty pound
a year toward maintaining of an Hebrew Lecturer in the College; by which he
has for ever consigned this great truth to all worthy Personages, That as they
love God, at the same rate they are to make provision for his Priests. And now
after he made such disposals of his estate, as are just and honorable, pious
and charitable, and that can never be questioned, unless by a strange sort of
people, whonever think any thing well done, that tends not to the gratifying of
their own covetous pretensions: He gives his Physicians a dismiss, and summons
all his forces to assist him in perfecting of his repentance, and in trimming,
and snuffing of his Lamp, that it might burn the brighter, and cast the greater
luster, he leaves no sluttish corner unswept in his Soul; nor parlies with any
one beloved sin, but thrusts them all out of doors, to make room for Christ,
whom he confessed they had before so often justled out of his heart. And with
no less abhorrence of himself, then hatred of his sin; while the justice of God
is ready to overwhelm him with despair; he supports himself with the
consideration of his former mercies. Then it was, that he approved himself not
only a good Textuary, but a good Divine: for that as often as his memory, or
they who assisted him in that charitable Office furnished him with Scriptures
suitable to his condition; his own experience enabled him to make the
application: Now he confesses that it is no time to dissemble with God; nor to
cheat his own Soul, And therefore endeavors by his redoubling of his sorrow
for his sin, and by the fervency of his Prayers to evidence the truth of both.
And being alarmed with the brisker approaches of death, and finding a sensible
decay in his Spirit after he had taken as long a time, as his condition would
admit of, to prepare himself, and acknowledged with fear and trembling, that
seeing Christ sent his Disciples to prepare a room for the celebration of the
Passover: How much more need of preparation did he stand in for receiving of
Christ himself. And having added unto this an humble and penitent confession of
his sins, he received the Holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper accompanied with
some especial friends, with a reverence and devotion becoming so Sacred a
Mystery, His own Lady Mrs. Ford Sir Richard Kenedy, the Provest of the College
and others.
and being overtaken with a short nod, he checked himself, with a what? Could
thou not watch with me one hour? The Spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak,
O Lord pardon my infirmity.

And now with old Simeon having taken Christ into his arms, he finds a calm in
his conscience, which without doubt was an antepast of that Everlasting rest
which he now enjoys. He takes a soleme farewell of all his friends; and
addressing himself more particularly to one of them, gives him this last
Charge, and evidence of his persevering Loyalty, fear God, serve your King, and
lead a good life. And then after he had more than once committed his Soul both
actively, and cheerfully into the hands of God, with a sweet Jesus receive my
Spirit, and Come Lord Jesus, come quickly: His speech felt a stop forsome
time, but neither our prayers nor his understanding, for a little after the
bi^d of Paradise being ready to fly out of his Cage gives us notice of his
departure, by singing with a tunable voice, some few verses of the 25 Psalm:
And then his speech quite forsaking him, his hand, and his eyes were faithful
interpreters of his inward devotion.

And thus have we brought this honorable Person to the borders of Eternity, and
have said no more of him then what was requisite for your instruction: And to
the end that what was excellent in him, and therefore imitable, may have the
deeper, and fresher impression on your memories. I shall once more tell you in
a word, that he was a learned Scholar, a profound Lawyer, a wise Statesman, a
just Man, a true Friend, a thankful Person where he was obliged, a munificent
Benefactor to the Church, a loyal Subject to his King, a faithful Servant to
the house of Ormond, a zealous professor, and maintainer of the Doctrine and
discipline of the Church of England, abhorring Popery on the one hand, and
Phanatacism on the other: and that whatever the particular failings of his life
were. (I am confident) he dyed a Penitent, and a good Christian in the
Communion of that Church, in which he accounted it his greatest happyness to
have had his education.

And now if any hereafter, shall out of envy go about to uncover his nakedness,
or to revive the memory of any of his infirmities, or for want of charity unto
me look upon what I have now said, as the products of affection, or
assentation; I shall only make this defense for my self, that I profess in the
presence of God, whom if I speak the truth, I desire may be my justifier, but
if a lie my punisher: that I have given you here, as true and impartial a
relation of his end, as if I were now to make my last account to God; and as
this cannot but satisfy all those, who are able to distinguish colors, and to
discern truth from falsehood: So I shall take no other pains for the
satisfaction of those peevish and perverse dispositions, who are resolved
before hand, not to be satisfied with any thing; then to tell them that I
account it a small thing to be judged by men, for that I must stand or fall to
my own Master, and that it much more concerns them, to amend what they find
defective in themselves, then thus uncharitably to censure others, that so they
may not one^y deserve to be well spoken of here, but at last, be admitted into
that everlasting rest, from labors, which now (as we have good cause to hope)
that honorable person (whose Funerals we have Solemnis'd) is in Possession of.

FINIS.
Oration Funebris HABITA In Aula Collegii S. S. and Individuae TRINITATIS, Coram
Academia, Iudicibus, and clero inter celebrandas exequias Insignissimi viri
MAVRITII EVSTACE EQUITIS AURATI, Hiberniae Cancellarii Ejusdemque olim Regni
Justitiarii, 5o. Julij. 1665.

FRequens hoc dicendi genus (Auditores) Solitaque haec perorandi consuetudo,
and innocua haec cum Manibus colloquia, una cum ipsis creverunt saeculis,
temporique coaeva sunt; adeo ut ne ipsa quidem mors (inter Heroas velim) magis
familiaris sit, quam funerum solennitas: id enim privilegii semper habuerunt
viri Illustriores ut facunde expirarent, and quas hauserunt animas inter
Oratores ponerent, eas (in exitu saltem) ex Harmonia compositas probaturi,
faeliciori, in hoc, fato functi, quod eorum vel exequia inter delicias
numerarentur. Absit itaque hodiernae Pompae invidia, neque is assentandi
libidine lascivire existimetur, qui defunctorum gesta modeste recitat; hoc enim
non tam artis quam pietatis est officium, and inter leviores Rhetoras habendus
est, qui studet cineribus adulari, vel tumulorum umbras captitare; at neque
crescenti nepotum famae haec consecramus encomia, ne Vicarie quidem
adblandientes, sed ut novos ediscant potius quam antiquos vindicent honores,
Egregiae quippe animi dotes nulli haereditario jure devoluuntur, nec in ass
virtus est, Individua haec Aeternitati comes per inexplicabilis gyri ludens
miracula nec incipit nec desinit, sed ultra omnes limitum terminos luxurians,
inse usque and usque redit, suumque sibi complementum est.

Quam imparem subeunt provinciam, quantumque in magnis argumentis laborant
ingenia; vestrum Auditores testor dolorem: Oratorem itaque praesenti quam
apprime utilem negotio nacti estis and Gravitati consonum, ignaris etenim nulli
melius vel obstupescunt vel admirantur: neque tamen ulla Eustacii gloriae vis
infertur quod mutuari lauds non possit; nec ei demptum quid exinde reperitur,
quod in tanto Funere Rhetoricantur inepti, vel muti hactenus eloquuntur. Cum
enim (ut in Cancellario nostro) eo animi Majestas evecta sit; ut ultra arts
sedem posuerit; quolibet a praecone ebuccinatur, in publicas delabitur curas
parilemque omnibus tam scribendi materiam quam licentiam suggerit: licet enim
in tantis Magnitudinis Angustijs loqui ridiculum videretur; tacere tamen nefas
esset, ne a posteris in Illius fati commemoratione silentes, non tam rudes,
quam ingrati haberemur.

Convenistis itaque non unius viri interitum, sed nostri orbis infortunium
ploraturi: in Mauritio enim quicquid grande vel magnificum sonat; quicquid
nominis honestas vel claritudo pollicetur; quicquid denique vel vulgus solet,
vel fama possit fingere, interierunt omnia, and in communi hac urna tumulantur:
tituli nempe illi mortalitatis hami and illecebrae; crebri tumescentesque
plebis plausus, musicae istae magnorum procellae, a populari aura, Syrene nova
blandiusque crudelt excitatae, imo and honores illi, quos veros mentimur, fere
omnes in illius Epitaphio lassati dormiunt: quasi ideo solummodo grandescerent
homines ut Augustius perirent nihilque inter humana magnum and memorabile,
praeter monumenta duraturum sit, tanquam lemniscatis ideo fucis, vittatisque
honoribus ideo induerentur nobiles, ut solenniores tantum fiant victimae, and
opima magis morti spolia exhibituri sint.

At sua nihilominus unguenta virtus habet, suusque sibimetipsi bonus quisque
Marcelianus est; interque aromata spirat Pyramidum capsulis long dulciora, and
Mausolaea consequitur multo certiora, quam quibus vel a Corintho vel a Memphide
possit donari: and hac immortalitate Eustacius noster plusquam felix est, sic
adhuc est superstes, cumque ipsa emorientur sepulchra sibi futurus Rogus est,
ultraque oblivionis invidiam vivet, Illiusque memoria semper recens,
efflorescensque semper, vel cum ipsa temporis senectute juvenescet.

Sed quia nulla sit fortunae amplitudo quantumuis maxima quae sua non habuit
incrementa (aliqua enim in immensis methodus est) pace vestra Auditores liceat
retrospicere, and si de cunis and Eustacio simul loqui non sit piaculum,
cogitemus illum aliquando infantem, aliquando natum, (neque enim par est ut
inter tot virtutes, viri obliviscamur) huic itaque Regno natalitias debet,
familia oriundus antiqua aeque ac nobili, sed quae inter tot tantasque
Illustrium imagines nusquam superbit magis, magisue sibi, quam in Mauricio suo
gratulatur; quanquam etenim Domus illa per tot lustra claruerit, ut dubitari
possit, an Antiquiorem ipse Solnaturae primogenitus, ortum jactaverit; infinito
tamen huic computo addidit Mauricius splendorem, novosque superinduxit radios,
quibus ipsa Claritas perspicua magis and illustris reddebatur.

Iamque (Auditores) indulgete paulisper pietati, mihique copiam facite, ut
inter tot Eustacij insignia, and unum Matri nosirae Tholum suspendam: In illo,
Academia nostra and Viduatur and orba est, filiumque Virumque una amiserat; hic
cunas habuit, eademque ubera quae Vos alunt, illa a quibus Usherus lacteas
coeli Vias, imo ipsos Coelos Exuxerat, Eustacio maturitatem contulerant; nec
erat de Collegij Vulgo, at Juvenis ille Vndiquaque nobilis, inter Sodalitij
proceres adscitus, Socius fuit, and in hoc musarum Regno par habebatur; Neque
enim Ecclesia tantum sed and curia Feliciori hujus loci genio suos debet
Primates: At non aliquorum instar graviter infantescentium, maternos inter
amplexus consenuit, sed ut aetate, ita and cura provectior ad altiora se
accinxerat, totumque se cui natus est Reipublicae impenderat; primaque optimae
indolis sub Straffordio (tum rerum tum hominum aestimatore optimo) specimina
edidit; In Cujus Parliamento Prolocutoris Vice fungebatur, and tantam sibi inde
conciliavit gloriam ut nihil tunc dierum praeter Crumenam deerat quin
Cancellarius audiret. At illi soles nimis eheu candidi erant; illi dies
faelices nimium nimiumque Regii erant quam qui vulgo placerent; tunc fuimus
Troes, tunc Trinobantias and ingens rerum gloria stetit: at in ipsis (credit
mihi) Imperijs aliquid foemineum est, and gravis illa Reipublicae facies ad
speculum componitur, ubi se Fortuna intuetur, si bique eodem momenti turbine
placet, displicetque, brevique novitatis statim inolescentis affecta taedio,
mutatque, corrigitque, perque omnes lasciva metamorphoses transcurrit, nec
eadem vultus Serenitate semper effulget, sed inornatis aliquando sparsisque
capillis videtur squallere: and ea hujus regni tunc facies erat; nec Comis
tantum sed and capite sploliabatur, impiaque fortuna suis devecta rotis,
Carolique quadriga incedens, tria vertigine regna rapuit, in qua ruina cecidit
Eustacius; Neque enim hic stetisse Robur animi sed imbecillitatem denotasset
talemque vel Alexander ambiret casum, elabente mundo; sic perijsse non tam
clades erat quam pietas, nec infortunium sed obsequij munus, sublapsis enim
Regioe domus fundamentis Stantia non poterant Tecta Probare Deos: Hujus Excidij
pars erat Mauricius, qui licet non totus occubuerit, mortuus tamen vixit, and
quamvis tumuli beneficio non redimebatur, pro busto carcerem subivit, Vivusque
tumulabatur, and catenis, mortis compedibus durioribus suo se devinxerat
Carolo: Inter has ille procellas immotus mansit, Ruinae tamen publicae minime
expers, sed infracti erat animi, and tanquam scopulus in mari Britannico
natabat, Insulaeque instar fluitantis, ipse sibi in Diluvio erat Continens, in
tantis ille motibus nihil de animi constantia remiserat, sed maligniorem
ferendo fortunam correxit; Nec cum Caroli occasu erubuit, sed nostrum and in
Occidente Solemn Venerabatur.

Cum vero Platonice nobiscum ageretur, Aureaque lassato ferro Soecula redirent,
and in pristinum omnia statum redintegrarentur; Cui ille loco, quibus honoribus
successit, Vos appello judices: Nostis enim quam aequis mentis ponderibus,
quantis animi libramentis, dubia trutinaverat; quantos legis nodos judicij
acumine loevigavit; quamque in distribuenda justitia caece erat oculatus. Et
quoniam Principibus viris placuisse inter lauds ultimas nunquam censebatur,
Illustrissimo Ormoniae Duci erat Charus, cujus una approbatio aliquem vel
inveniret vel faceret insignem, Vnusq, cujus calculus totam famoe urnam
impleret, nigraque omnia quam foelicissime dealbaret, Habet enim id dignitati
proerogativum Eustacius, ut Invidiosus sit; ipsa quippe Majestas quamvis
venustissima, splenijs decoratur, and nihil plebi nisi quod plebeium, omni ex
part placiturum est.

Ille, and in aetatis suae, and Regni tempestatibus, tribunal ascendit; cum
enim revalescit intemperies attentiore cura and majore art opus est ne
recrudescant vulnera, quam Solertiam ille mirifice praestitit, and inter suos
morbos Reipublicae saluti totus incubuit, quam vigil in obeundis suis erat
munijs, and jam constat, adhuc enim Illius vivit industria, Ejusque labores
catenati dissolutum fere Regni hujus statum etiamnum ligant, and amico
componunt Ordine:

Quodque civilibus non magis quam Ecclesiasticis rebus erat intentus, vel inde
colligimus, ex opulentissimis quibus Ecclesiam reditibus auxit, qui tam prodige
extiterunt largi ut aliqui multo minore pretio inter alios emisse caelos
ferantur, Sed quae Deo damus reddere potius quam donare dicimur, Mau ritius
tamen summa laud dignus est quod debita persolverit: Nihil enim vel in
Religione vel in honestate Supererogatorium est, Nec majorem quis gloriam
potest consequi quam ut vere honestus diceretur. Noluit Eustacius ut haeredes
ulli Christi patrimonium decoquerent, ut Regis instar Babylonici sacra Templi
Vasa inebriarent, aut Coronatas Sanctuarij patinas vel Baccho, vel litarent
Cereri.

Et inter alias ejus munificentias, Nos etiam particulam habemus; ne enim
Orientis literae sub frigidiore hoc Coelo languescerent, Hebraico Praelectori
Stipendium destinavit, and hoc certe in dono de bonis omnibus meretur: Haec
vera est magnificentia, non viros sed Arts ditare, and in Supremis Doctrinam
tabulis haeredem conscribere; At eheu perierunt omnes qui talia meditabantur
beneficia. Nulli nisi morituri Scientiis sunt munifici, and profecto par est ut
tam nobile Heroici Spiritus specimen a talibus solummodo exhiberetur, ab eis
Scilicet vel qui caelos intraturi sunt, vel qui jam intraverant, immortales
enim fovere Scientias, vere Angelicum est; Huic vel illi viro aliqui fortasse
sunt benigni, suaeque non minus ambitioni quam clienti inserviunt, sed sint
munifici, and cum prodigere statutum sit; Cur non Diogeni aeque ac Cinnamo dare
summa haberetur nobilitas; at quis cum Eustacio arts interea obligaturus est?
Quis praelectiones aedificat? in quibus faelicius multo doctiusque quam in
lapidibus Spiraret; O beatas and generosas vere, Margaretae and Savilli animas!
quae in duobus Professoribus bina Aeternitati Collegia erexerant.

Sed ad Cancellarium redimus, and magni illius Viri fata dolemus simul and
congratulamur: mori enim non tam triste sonat ac timores nostri metusque nobis
effingunt; sed idem fere est, ac de Hebraicis Cancellarij donis latin loqui;
Transferuntur nempe pij, and quanquam Omnes ad instar Mosis inter obeundum non
evanescant, Eandem tamen metam repetunt; at Eustacio nostro (Verbis parcite)
haud absimilis contigisse mors videtur, ejus enim inter has Solennitates Corpus
nullibi apparet, nec Mauritium hodierno die sed Sarcophagum ejus sumus
sepulturi, and praesentes hi Exequiarum ritus quam Exactissima morientium
bonorum sunt Emblemata; Non enim viros, sed lodices, non Mauritios, sed
sarcophaga tumulamus: Quid enim aliud corpus est, quam theca animae; quae cum
Sacris pectoribus insederit, Corpus, Aegisue appellatur, cum vero detrahitur,
aut loricae, aut cadaveris, aut abjecto cophini nomine est contentum. Omnia
bonorum sunt immortalia; nihilque praeter Terminum, Mors est: Est secunda inter
Christianos notio, vel si mavultis, est umbra Idaearum intus divinitate quadam
conceptarum, Caelestia contemplantibus gaudia, quae tamen exprimere non valent,
nisi Chimaerae hujus non tam open quam Ministerio utantur: Beatitudinis quippe
scientia, aeque ac caeterae, sua cudit verba, rebus apta magis quam Elegantia,
and talia inter pios mori and Sepeliri sunt. Eis omnibus idem iter est,
eademque calcanda est via, licet alter pedes, Equesque fortasse caelos ascendit
alter, vel cum Elia in quadriga illuc flammea peregrinatur, easdem alij febris
praestat vices. Ille quem amissum nostra deflet ignorantia ab Angelorum choris
excipitur, interque Supinos illos extasiarum plausus nostrae jam ridentur
lachrimae: Sed requiescant pij Cineres, and mortalitatis taedium edormiscant,
discantque a Mauricio posteri. Vt si vel famae, vel immortalitati consulant,
and been Vivant, and Minervalia elargiantur, laudabilique and ingenua hac
ambitione fulti, terraque coeloque sunt futuri Nobiles.

JO. JONES In Art. Mag. Sacrae and individuae Trinitatis Collegij juxta Dublin
Soc. Commit. De Arran Sacel. Domest.


