The DEAN of St. PAUL's APOLOGY FOR Writing against SOCINIANS, etc.

Imprimatur,

Geo. Royse, R. Rmo. in Christo Patri ac Dom. Dom. Johan. Archiep. Cant. a
Sacris Domest.
Jan. 17. 1692/3.
AN APOLOGY FOR Writing against SOCINIANS, IN DEFENSE OF THE DOCTRINES OF THE
Holy Trinity and Incarnation

In ANSWER to a Late Earnest and Compassionate Suit for Forbearance to the
Learned Writers of some Controversies at present.

By WILLIAM SHERLOCK, D. D. Dean of St. Paul's, Master of the Temple, and
Chaplain in Ordinary to Their MAJESTY'S.

LONDON: Printed for Will. Rogers, at the Sun over against St. Dunstan's Church
in Fleet street. 1693.

AN APOLOGY FOR Writing against SOCINIANS, etc.
AFTER a long silence, and patient expectation what the Learned Writers of some
Controversies at present (as a late Author calls them) would bring forth, I
intend by the Assistance of the Holy Trinity, and the Incarnate Jesus, whose
Blessing I most earnestly Implore, to resume the Defense of the Catholic
Faith; which I shall Publish in some few short Treatises, as I can find Leisure
for it, that I may not discourage my Readers by too Voluminous a Work.

But before I venture to Dispute these matters any farther, it is necessary to
make some Apology for Disputing; which is thought very Unchristian and
Uncharitable, and of dangerous Consequence, especially when we undertake the
Defense of the Fundamentals of our Faith, against the rude and insolent
Assaults of Heretics.

Sometime since, A Melancholy Stander-by would be a Stander-by no longer, but
interposed An Earnest and Compassionate Suit for Forbearance, to the Learned
Writers of some Controversies at present. These Learned Writers of Controversy,
are the Socinians, who ridiculed without any Learning or Common Sense, the
Athanasian Creed, and the Doctrines of the Trinity and Incarnation: The
Forbearance he desires, is, That no body should write against them; though Dr.
Wallis and my self are more immediately concerned in this Suit.

Who this Melancholy Stander-by is, I shall not enquire, for my Controversy is
not with Men, but with Doctrines; and I know by experience, that common fame is
not always to be trusted, much less suspicions; but if he be a Divine of the
Church of England, it seems very strange, that he should profess himself a
Stander-by, when the Fundamentals of the Christian Faith are in question; and a
Melancholy Stander-by to see some others undertake the Defense of it. I confess
I am always very jealous of men, who are so very Tender on the wrong side; for
observe it when you will, their Tenderness is always owing to their
Inclination. But to defend our selves, let us briefly consider what he says.

He thinks, The open Dissentions of its Professors a Earnest Suit, p. 1.
great blemish to the Reformation: That is, that it is a great blemish for any
men openly to defend the true Faith, which others openly oppose, or secretly
undermine; but certainly it would be a greater blemish to the Reformation, to
have Old Heresies revived, and the true Ancient Catholic Faith scorned, and no
body appear in the Defense of it. But we know his mind, That it is for the
honor of the Reformation not to Dispute, though it be for the most Important
Truths. Surely our Reformers were not so much against Disputing.

But if these Dissentions be so great a blemish to the Reformation, whose Fault
is it? Theirs who dissent from the Truth, or theirs who defend it? This is a
very plain case; for no body would oppose the Truth, if no body taught it: The
urging too strict an Union in matters of Faith, begets dissentions: That is, to
require an open and undisguised Profession of our Baptismal Faith in Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, as the Terms of Christian Communion, is the Criminal Cause
of our Dissentions. Well: What shall we do then? Renounce the Faith of the
Trinity, for the sake of Peace? This he dares not say, for that would pull off
his disguise; but Christianity must be left in that Latitude and Simplicity
wherein it was delivered P. 2.
by our Lord and his Apostles. This had been a good Proposal, would he have
told us what this Latitude and Simplicity is; for I am for no other Faith than
what Christ and his Apostles taught: But I would gladly know what he means by
the Latitude of Faith: For if the Christian Faith be such a broad Faith, must
we not believe the whole breadth of it? Or has Christ and his Apostles left it
at liberty to believe what we like, and to let the rest alone? To believe that
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are One Supreme Eternal God; or to believe that the
Eather alone is the True God, the Son a mere Man, and the Holy Ghost nothing
but a Divine Inspiration? To believe that the Eternal Word was made Flesh; or
that Christ was no more than a Man, who had no being before he was born of the
Virgin Mary? He can mean nothing else by this Latitude of Faith, but that
Christ and his Apostles have left these matters so ambiguous and undetermined,
that we may believe what we please; and then indeed those do very ill, who
dispute these matters: But this is such a breadth as has no depth; for such a
Faith as this can have no foundation. Can we certainly learn from Scripture,
Whether Christ be a God Incarnate, or a mere Man? If we cannot, Why should we
believe either? If we can, then one is true, and the other false; and then
there is no Latitude in Faith, unless Christ and his Apostles have left it
indifferent, whether we believe what is true, or what is false; what they have
taught us, or what we like better our selves.

In the same manner he leaves us to guess what he means by the Simplicity of
the Faith. He is very angry with the School-Doctors, as worse enemies to
Christianity, than either Heathen Philosophers, or persecuting P. 2.
Emperors. Pray what hurt have they done? I suppose he means the Corruption of
Christianity with those barbarous Terms of Person, Nature, Essence,
Subsistence, Consubstantiality, etc. which will not suffer Heretics to lie
concealed under Scripture-Phrases: But why must the Schoolmen bear all the
blame of this? Why does he not accuse the Ancient Fathers and Councils, from
whom the Schoolmen learnt these Terms? Why does he let St. Austin escape, from
whom the Master of the Sentences borrowed most of his Distinctions and
Subtilties? But suppose these Unlucky Wits had used some new Terms, have they
taught any new Faith about the Trinity in Unity, which the Catholic Church did
not teach? And if they have only guarded the Christian Faith with a hedge of
Thorns, which disguised Heretics cannot break through, Is this to wound
Christianity in its very Vitals? No, no: They will only prick the fingers of
Heretics, and secure Christianity from being wounded; and this is one great
Cause why some men are so angry with the School-Doctors; tho the more general
Cause is, because they have not Industry enough to read or understand them.

He says, The first Reformers complained of this, and desired a purer and more
spiritual sort of Divinity. What? With respect to the Doctrine of the Trinity
and Incarnation? What purer Reformers were these? I Am sure not our English
Reformers, whom he censures for retaining Scholastic cramping Terms in their
Public Prayers: He means the beginning of our Litany: O God the Father of
Heaven: O God the Son, Redeemer of the World: O God the Holy Ghost, proceeding
from the Father and the Son: O Holy, Blessed, and Glorious Trinity, Three
Persons and One God: These are his Scholastic, Cramping Terms, which he would
fling out of our Liturgy, when the season of such blessed Alterations comes. I
hope those Excellent Persons among us, who, I doubt not, for better Reasons did
not long since think of some Alterations, will consider what a foul Imputation
this is upon such a Design, when such a person shall publicly declare, That
they ought to Alter and Reform the Doctrine of the Trinity out of our Prayers.

But the whole Mystery of this Latitude and Simplicity of Faith which he pleads
for, is that plausible Project (which has been so much talked of of late:) to
confine our selves to Scripture Terms and Phrases; to use none but Scripture
Words in our Creeds and Prayers, without any Explication in what sense those
words are to be understood: As he tells us, P. 3.
Certainly we may Worship God right well, yea, most acceptably, in words of his
own Stamp and Coinage. Now at the first Proposal few men would suspect, that
there should be any hurt in this; though it would make one suspect some secret
in it, to consider that Heretics were the first Proposers of it, and that
Orthodox Christians rejected it. The Arians objected this against the
Homoousion, or the Son's being of the same Substance with the Father, that it
was an Unscriptural Word; but the Nicene Fathers did not think this a good
reason to lay it aside: For what reason can there be to reject any words, which
we can prove to express the true sense of Scripture, though they are not found
there? For must we believe the Words or the Sense of Scripture? And what reason
then can any man have to reject the Words, though they be no Scripture-Words,
if he believes the Sense contained in them to be the sense of Scripture? The
Homoiousion, or that the Son had a Nature like the Father's, tho not the same,
was no more a Scripture-Word, than the Homoousion; and yet the Arians did not
dislike that, because it was no Scripture-Word; nor are the Socinians angry at
any man who says, That Christ is but a mere man, who had no Being before he was
born of the Virgin Mary; tho these words are no where in Scripture: And is it
not strange, that a man who heartily believes, or at least pretends to believe,
that Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are One Eternal God, should be angry with a
Trinity in Unity, or Three Persons and one God, which do as aptly express the
Faith which he professes, as any Words he can think of?

It is very odd to be zealous for Scripture-Words without the Scripture Sense.
If the Scripture have any determined Sense, then that which is the true Sense
of Scripture, is the true Faith; and if we must contend earnestly for the true
Faith, we must contend for the true Sense of Scripture, and not merely for its
Words; and when Heretics have used their utmost art to make the Words of
Scripture signify what they please, is it not necessary to fix their true
Sense, and to express that Sense in such other Words as Heretics cannot
pervert?

There are but few words in common speech, but what are sometimes differently
used, in a Proper or Metaphorical, a Large or a Limited Sense; and all wise and
honest men easily understand from the circumstances of the place, in what sense
they are used; but if men be perverse, they may expound words properly when
they are used metaphorically, or metaphorically when they are used properly;
and there is no confuting them from the bare signification of the word, because
it may be, and oftentimes is used both ways; and therefore in such cases we
must consider the Circumstances of the Text, and compare it with Parallel
Texts, to find out in what sense the word is there used; and when we have found
it, it is reasonable and necessary to express the true Christian Faith, not
merely in Scripture words, which are abused and perverted by Heretics, but in
such other words, if we can find any such, as express the true sense in which
the Scripture-words are used, and in which all Christians must understand them,
who will retain the Purity of the Christian Faith. We do not hereby alter the
Christian Faith, nor require them to believe any thing more than what the
Scripture teaches, tho we require them to profess their Faith in other words,
which are not indeed in Scripture, but express the true and determined sense of
Scripture words. And this is all the Latitude of Faith which this Stander-by so
tragically complains we have destroyed, viz. That we have brought the Scripture
words to a fixed and determined sense, that Heretics can no longer conceal
themselves in a Latitude of expression, nor spread their Heresies in Scripture
words, with a Traditionary Sense and Comment of their own.

I would ask any man who talks at this rate about a Latitude of Faith, Whether
there be any more than One True Christian Faith? And whether Christ and his
Apostles intended to teach any more? Or whether they did not intend, That all
Christians should be obliged to believe this One Faith? If this be granted,
there can be no more Latitude in the Faith, than there is in a Unit; and if
they taught but One Faith, they must intend that their words should signify
but that one Faith; and then there can be no Intentional Latitude in their
words neither; and what Crime then is the Church guilty of, if she teach the
true Christian Faith, that she teaches it in such words as have no Latitude, no
Ambiguity of Sense, which Heretics may deny if they please, but which they
cannot corrupt in favor of their Heresies, as they do Scripture words?

It is an amazing thing to me, that any man who has any Zeal, any Concernment
for the true Christian Faith, who does not think it perfectly indifferent what
we believe, or whether we believe any thing or not, should judge it for the
advantage of Christianity, and a proper Expedient for the Peace of the Church,
for all men to agree in the same Scripture words, and understand them in what
sense they please; tho one believes Christ to be the Eternal Son of God, and
another to be but a mere man; which it seems has no great hurt in it, if they
do but agree in the same words: But if the Faith be so indifferent, I cannot
imagine why we should quarrel about Words; the fairer and honester Proposal is,
That every man should believe as he pleases, and no man concern himself to
confute Heresies, or to divide the Church with Disputes; which is the true
Latitude our Author seems to aim at; and then he may believe as he pleases too.

But pray, why should we not write against the Socinians? Especially when they
are the Aggressors, and without any provocation publish and disperse the most
impudent and scandalous Libels against the Christian Faith. He will give us
some very wise Reasons for this by and by, when he comes to be plain and
succinct; in the mean time we must take such as we can meet with.

He is afraid pe^^le should lose all Reverence for the Litany, should* we go on
to vindicate the Doctrine P. 3.
of the Trinity in Unity: I should not easily have apprehended this, and
possibly some of the common people might have been as dull as my self, had he
not taken care before he parted, for fear no body else should observe it, to
teach people to ridicule the Trinity in their Prayers. Dr. Wallis would not
undertake to say what a Divine Person signifies, as distinguished from Nature
and Essence, only says, a Person is somewhat, but the True Notion of a Person
he does not know: This Author commends this as ever held to by all Learned
Trinitarians; for indeed all the Doctor meant by his somewhat is, That Three
Persons signify Three Real Subsistences, and are Real Things, not a Sabellian
Trinity of mere Names. And yet in the very next Page he teaches his Readers to
ridicule the Litany with the Doctors somewhats: O Holy, Blessed, and Glorious
Trinity, Three Somewhats, and One God, have Mercy on us, etc. Was there ever
any thing P. 16.
more Senseless, or more Profane! That because the Doctor would not undertake
to define a Person, but only asserted in general, That a Divine Person was
somewhat, or some Real Being, in opposition to a mere Nominal Difference and
Distinction; therefore in our Prayers we may as well call the Three Divine
Persons, Father, Son; and Holy Ghost, Three somewhats. Nobis non licet esse tam
disertis. I am sure he has reason heartily to pray, That these Three somewhats,
as he profanely calls them, would have Mercy on him.

In the next place he says, He is well assured, P. 3.
that the late (Socinian) Pam^^lets would have died away, or have been now in
few men's hands, had not diverse persons taken on them the labor to confute
them. But did his Socinian Friends, who were such busy Factors for the Cause,
tell him so? Did they print them, that no body might read them? Were they not
dispersed in every Corner, and boasted of in every Coffee-house, before any
Answer appeared? However, were it so; is there no regard to be had to Heretics
themselves? And is it not better that such Pamphlets should be in an hundred
hands with an Answer, than in five hands without one? I should think it at any
time a good reward for all the labor of confuting, to rescue or preserve a
very few from such fatal Errors; which I doubt not but is a very acceptable
service to that Merciful Shepherd, who was so careful to seek one lost and
straggling Sheep. Heresies and Vices dye by being neglected, just as Weeds do;
for we know the Parable, That the Devil sows his tares, while men sleep. But
this is no new Charge; the good Bishop of Alexandria met with the same Censures
for his Zeal against Arius; for it seems that Heresy would have died too, if
it had not been opposed. I doubt this Author judges of other men's Zeal for
Heresy, by his own Zeal for the Truth, which wants a little rubbing and chafing
to bring it to life; but Heresy is all flame and spirit, will blow and kindle
it self, if it be not quenched.

But yet if what he says be true, That by our unskilful way of confuting
Heresy, we run into those very Absurdities which our Adversaries would reduce
us to; This I confess is a very great fault, and when he shows me any of those
Absurdities, I will thankfully correct them; for all the Obloquies in the world
will never make me blush to recant an Error: But before he pretends to that, I
must desire him, that he would first read my Book, which I know some men
censure without reading it. Such general Accusations are very spiteful, and
commonly have a mixture of spite both against the Cause, and against the Person.

His next Argument is very observable: We must not dispute now against
Socinians, because these Controversies about the Trinity have been P. 4.
above Thirteen hundred years ago determined by two general Councils (the
Nicene, and first Constantinopolitan), which are owned by our Church, and their
Creeds received into our Liturgy. Ergo, we must not defend this Faith against
Heretics, because it is the Faith of two General Councils which are owned by
our Church. Did Athanasius think this a good Argument against Writing and
Disputing against the Arians, after the Council of Nice had condemned Arius and
his Doctrines? Did St. Basil, Gregory Nazianzen, Nyssen, St. Chrysostom, St.
Jerome, St. Austin, think this a good Argument, who wrote so largely against
these Heresies, which former Councils had condemned? But this Author thinks the
best way is to let the Matter stand upon this bottom of Authority; that is, let
Heretics ridicule our Faith as much as they please, we must make them no other
answer, but that this is the Faith of the Nicene and Constantinopolitan
Councils, and the Faith of the Church of England. And can he intend this for
any more than a Jest, when he knows how Socinians despise the determinations of
Councils, and particularly with what scorn they treat the Nicene Fathers? Is
this an Age to resolve our Faith into Church Authority? Or would he himself
believe such absurd Doctrines as they represent the Trinity in Unity to be,
merely upon Church Authority? For my part I declare I would not. I greatly
value the Authority of those Ancient Councils, as credible Witnesses of the
Traditionary Sense of the Church before those Controversies were started; but
were not these Doctrines taught in Scripture, were they manifestly repugnant to
the plain and evident Principles of Reason, all the Councils in the World
should never reconcile me to them, no more than they should to the Doctrine of
Transubstantion. And therefore methinks he might have at least allowed us to
have challenged the Scriptures as well as General Councils on our side; and to
have vindicated our Faith from all pretended absurdities and contradictions to
Reason. But would any man of common sense, who had not intended to expose the
Faith of the Holy Trinity, have told the world at this time of day, That we
have no other safe and sure bottom for our Faith, but only the Authority of
General Councils? Nay, That the Council of Nice it self, on whose Authority we
must rest, had little else themselves for their Determinations but only
Authority, That it was Authority chiefly carried the Point. And thus for fear
we should have believed too much upon the Authority of Councils, which is the
only bottom he will allow our Faith, he gives them a secret stab himself, and
makes their Authority ridiculous. That the several Bishops declared, what Faith
had been taught and received in their Churches is true; That this Authority
chiefly carried the Point, is false: Athanasius grew famous in the Council for
his learned and subtle Disputations, which confounded the Arians; and what
Arguments he chiefly relied on, we may see in his Works: And whoever does but
look into the Fathers, who wrote against the Arians in those days, will find,
that their Faith was resolved into Scripture and Reason, and not merely or
chiefly into Authority.

And thus he comes to be Plain and Succinct, and P. 5*
tells us, That of all Controversies we can touch upon at present, this of the
Trinity is the most unreasonable, the most dangerous, and so the most
unseasonable.

It is the most Unreasonable: 1. Because it is on all hands confessed, the
Deity is Infinite, Unsearchable, Incomprehensible; and yet every one who
pretends to Write plainer than another on this controversy, professes to make
all Comprehensible and easy.

I perceive he is well versed in Mr. Hobbs's Divinity; though I can discover no
marks of his skill in Fathers and Councils. For this was Mr. Hobb's reason, why
we should not pretend to know any thing of God, nor inquire after his
Attributes, because he has but one Attribute, which is, that he is
Incomprehensible; and as this Author argues, It is a small favor to request of
Persons of Learning, that they should be consistent with, and not contradict
themselves: that is, That they would not pretend to know any thing of God, whom
they acknowledge to be Incomprehensible, which is to pretend to know, what they
confess cannot be known. Now I desire to know, Whether we may Dispute about the
Being and Nature of God, and his essential Attributes and Perfections; and
vindicate the Notion of a Deity from those Impossibilities, Inconsistencies,
Absurdities, which some Atheistical Philosophers charge on it, notwithstanding
that we confess God to be Incomprehensible? And if the Incomprehensibility of
the Divine Nature does not signify, that we can know nothing of God, and must
inquire nothing about him*; the Trinity of Divine Persons is as proper an
object of our Faith, and modest Inquiries, as the Unity of the Divine Essence,
for they are both Incomprehensible. And to say, That every one who pretends to
write plainer than another on this Controversy, professes to make all
comprehensible and easy, may with equal Truth and Authority be charged on all
those who undertake to vindicate the Notion and Idea of a God, or to explain
any of the Divine Attributes and Perfections. A finite mind cannot comprehend
what is infinite; but yet one man may have a truer and more perfect Notion of
the Nature and Attributes of God than another: God is Incomprehensible in
Heaven as well as on Earth, and yet Angels and Glorified Spirits know God after
another manner than we do. There must be infinite degrees of knowledge, when
the object is infinite; and every new degree is more perfect than that below
it; and yet no Creature can attain the highest degree of all, which is a
perfect comprehension: So that the knowledge of God may increase every day, and
men may Write plainer about these matters every day, without pretending to make
all that is in God, even a Trinity in Unity, comprehensible and easy.

This is a spiteful and scandalous imputation, and is intended to represent all
those who undertake to write about the Trinity, and to vindicate the Primitive
Faith of the Church from the scorn and contempt of Heretics, as a company of
vainconceited, presuming, but ignorant Scriblers; who pretend to make the
Incomprehensible Nature of God, comprehensible and easy. But the comfort is, we
have so good Company, that we are able to bear this Charge without blushing;
even General Councils, and those great Lights of the Church, Athanasius, St.
Hillary, St. Basil, the Gregory's, St. Chrysostom, St. Austin, and many others,
besides all those who in all succeeding Ages to this day, have with equal Zeal
and Learning defended the same Cause; and yet never professed to make all
comprehensible and easy. All that any man pretends to in vindicating the
Doctrine of the Trinity, is to prove that this Faith is taught in Scripture,
and that it contains no such Absurdities and Contradictions, as should force a
Wise man to reject it, and either to reject the Scriptures for its sake, or to
put some strained and unnatural senses on Scripture to reconcile it to the
Principles of Reason; and this, I hope, may be done by those, who yet
acknowledge the Divine Nature, and the Trinity in Unity to be Incomprehensible.

But here he had a very fair opportunity, had he thought fit to take it, to
correct the Insolence and Presumption of his Learned Writers of Controversy;
who will not allow the Divine Nature to be Incomprehensible, and will not
believe God himself concerning his own Nature, beyond what their Reason can
conceive and comprehend: Who deny Prescience for the same Reason, that they
deny the Trinity, because they cannot conceive it, nor reconcile it with the
liberty of Human Actions; and for the same reason may deny all the Attributes
of God, which have something in them beyond what we can conceive: especially an
Eternity without beginning, and without Succession, which is chargeable with
more Absurdities and Contradictions, than the Trinity it self: For a duration,
which cannot be measured; and an eternal duration, which can be measured; and a
Succession without a Beginning, a Second or Third without a First, are
unconceivable to us, and look like very plain and irreconci^^ble
Contradictions. This is the true use of the Incomprehensibility of the Divine
Nature; not to stop all Enquiries after God, nor to discourage our Studies of
the Divine Nature and Perfections: for we may know a great deal, and may every
day increase our knowledge of what is Incomprehensible, tho we cannot know it
all; but to check the presumption of some vain Pretenders to Reason, who will
not own a God, nor believe any thing of God, which their Reason cannot
comprehend; which must not only make them Heretics, but, if pursued to its
just Consequences, must make them Atheists, or make such a God, as no body will
own, or worship, but themselves, a God adequate and commensurate to their
Understandings, which must be a little, finite, comprehensible God.

In the next place, to prove how unreasonable it is to Dispute in Vindication
of the Trinity, he observes again, That this Matter has been sufficiently
determined by due Authority: but having answered this once, I see no need to
answer it again.

To back this he adds, That the present issue shows* that in this World it
never will be better understood: for it seems, as he says, The Master of the
Sentences, and some Modern Writers, have made very sad work of it. And yet he
does not seem to be very intimately acquainted with the Master of the
Sentences, nor some of these Modern Writers. But all that he means is, that no
body can say any thing to the purpose for so absurd a Doctrine, as a Trinity in
Unity; and therefore he plainly adds, The more Men draw the disputacious Saw,
the more perplexed and intricate the Question is; and therefore the only secure
way is, to leave off disputing for the Trinity and let Socinians Dispute
against it by themselves. But such Stuff as this, deserves another sort of
Answer than I can give it.

But he concludes this Argument of Unreasonableness Page 7.
very remarkably. And Lastly, Hereby our Church at present, and the Common
Christianity (it may be feared) will be more and more daily exposed to
Atheistical Men; for this being but the result of the former particulars, and
such kind of Men daily growing upon us, it cannot be believed, they can
overlook the advantages which is so often given them. The sum of which is,
That to Vindicate the Doctrine of the Trinity against Socinians, will make Men
Atheists. This is a very bold stroke for a Christian, and a Divine, and I shall
beg leave to expostulate this matter a little freely with him.

1st, I desire to know, whether he thinks the Doctrine of the Trinity to be
defensible or not? If it be not defensible, why does he believe it? Why should
we not rather openly and plainly reject the Doctrine of the Trinity, which
would be a more effectual way to put a stop to Atheism, than to profess to
believe it, but not to defend it? If it be defensible, and there be no fault in
the Doctrine, but that some Men have defended it ill, would it not much more
have become him to have defended it better, than only to quarrel with those who
have defended it, as well as they could?

2dly, Why does he not tell the Socinians, what injury they do to common
Christianity, by ridiculing the Faith of the Holy Trinity, and exposing it to
the scorn of Atheists? Does he think that they are no Christians, and ought not
to be concerned for common Christianity? Or does he think, that Atheists will
like the Doctrine of the Trinity ever the better, for its being despised by
Socinians as an absurd contradictory Faith, without having any Defense made by
Trinitarians? Or does he think, that the Defenses made by Trinitarians expose
the Faith more than the Objections of Socinians? I wish I knew his mind, and
then I could tell what to say to him.

3dly, How are Atheists concerned in the Disputes of the Trinity? Or how are we
concerned to avoid scandalizing Atheists, who believe that there is no God at
all? Must we be afraid of defending the Faith of the Trinity, lest Atheists
should mock at it, who already mock at the Being of a God? What shall we have
left of Christianity, if we must either cast away, or not defend every thing,
which Atheists will mock at? Surely he has a very contemptible Opinion of the
Doctrine of the Trinity, that he thinks all the Defenses that are, or can be
made for it, so ridiculous, that they are enough to make Men Atheists.

But I can tell him a Secret, which possibly he may be privy to, though in
great modesty he conceals his knowledge, viz. That Atheists and Deists, Men who
are for no Religion, or at least not for the Christian Religion, are of late
very zealous Socinians; and they are certainly in the right of it: for run down
the Doctrine of the Trinity and Incarnation, and there is an end of the
Christian Religion, and with that an end of all Revealed Religion; and as for
Natural Religion, they can make and believe as much, or as little of it as they
please. And this is one Reason, and I am sure a better than any he has given
against it, why we are, and ought to be so zealous at this time in opposing
Socinianism, because it is the common Banner under which all the Enemies of
Religion and Christianity unite. This makes that little contemptible Party
think themselves considerable, that all the Atheists and Infidels, and
licentious Wits of the Town, are their Converts; who promise themselves a
glorious Triumph over Christianity, and particularly over the Church of
England, by decrying and scorning the Catholic Faith of the Trinity and
Incarnation.

II. Thus much for the Unreasonableness of this Controversy about the Holy
Trinity; in the next place he tells us the Danger of it: and he has thought of
such an Argument to evince the danger of Disputing for the Holy Trinity, as, I
believe, was never dreamt of before; Page 7.
and that is, That it is One of the Fundamentals of Christian Religion; now to
litigate touching a Fundamental, is to turn it into a Controversy; that is, to
unsettle, at least endanger the unsettling the whole Superstructure. Now I am
perfectly of his mind, that it is a dangerous thing to unsettle Foundations;
But is it a dangerous thing too, to endeavor to preserve and defend
Foundations, when Heretics unsettle them, and turn them into Dispute and
Controversy? Let us put the Being of God, instead of the Holy Trinity, and see
how he will like his Argument himself. The Being of a God is the Foundation of
all Religion, and therefore it is dangerous to dispute with Atheists about the
Being of God, because this is to turn a Fundamental into a Controversy, that
is, to unsettle, or to endanger the unsetling the whole Superstructure: And
thus we must not dispute against Atheists, no more than against Socinians: And
what is it then we must dispute for? What else is worth disputing? What else
can we dispute for, when Foundations are overturned? What is the meaning of
that Apostolical Precept, To contend earnestly for the Faith? Jud. 3. What
Faith must we contend for, if not for Fundamentals? What Faith is that which
can subsist without a Foundation?

But I would desire this Author to tell me, whether we must believe
Fundamentals with, or without Reason? Whether we must take Fundamentals for
granted, and receive them with an implicit Faith, or know for what Reason we
believe them? If our Religion must not be built without a Foundation, like a
Castle in the Air, it is certain, that the Fundamentals of our Faith ought to
have a very sure Foundation, and therefore we are more concerned to understand
and vindicate the Reasons of our Faith, with respect to Fundamentals, than to
dispute any less Matters in Religion, for the Roof must tumble, if the
Foundation fail.

What shall Christians do then, when Atheists, Infidels, and Heretics, strike
at the very Foundations of their Faith? Ought not they to satisfy themselves,
that there is no force in the Objections, which are made against the Faith? Or
must they confirm themselves with an obstinate Resolution, to believe on
without troubling themselves about Objections, in defiance of all the power and
evidence of Reason? This is not to believe like Men; Christianity had never
prevailed against Paganism and Judaism upon these Terms; for they had
Possession, Authority, and Prescription on their side, which is the only Reason
and Security he gives us for the Faith of the Trinity, That the Established
Church is in Page 8.
possession of it.

If private Christians then must endeavor to satisfy themselves in the
Reasons of their Faith, when Fundamentals are called in question, is it not the
Duty of Christian Bishops and Pastors to defend the Faith, and to defend the
Flock of Christ from those grievous Wolves St. Paul prophesied of? Is not this
their proper Work and Business? And when the Faith is publicly opposed and
scorned in Printed Libels, ought it not to be as publicly defended? When
Heretics dispute against the Faith, must we be afraid of disputing for it, for
fear of making a Controversy of Fundamentals? Thanks be to God, our excellent
Primate is above this fear, and has now in the Press a Defense of that Faith,
which this Writer would persuade all Men to betray by silence; and I hope so
great an Example may at least prevail with him, to let us dispute on without
any more earnest and compassionate Suits.

III. His last Argument is, The Unseasonableness of Page 8.
this Controversy. He says, all Controversies are now unseasonable; and I say
a little more, that they are always so; for there is no Juncture seasonable to
broach Heresies, and to oppose the Truth: but if Heretics will dispute against
the Truth unseasonably; there is no time unseasonable to defend Fundamental
Truths. But why is it so unseasonable in this Juncture? Because under God,
nothing but an union of Councils, and joining Hands and Hearts, can preserve
the Reformation, and scarce any thing more credit and justify it, than an
Union in Doctrinals. To begin with the last first: Is the Union in Doctrinals
ever the greater, that Socinians boldly and publicly affront the Faith of the
Church, and no body appears to defend it? Will the World think that we are all
of a mind, because there is disputing only on one side? Then they will think us
all Socinians, as some Foreigners begin already to suspect, which will be a
very scandalous Union, and divide us from all other Reformed Churches. Let
Union be never so desirable, we cannot, we must not unite in Heresy; those
break the Union, who depart from the Faith, not those who defend it. When
Heresies are broached, the best way to preserve the Unity of the Church, is to
oppose and confute, and shame Heresy and Heretics, which will preserve the
Body of Christians from being infected by Heresy, and the fewer there are, who
forsake the Faith, the greater Unity there is in the Church.

But nothing but Union of Counsels, and joining Hands and Hearts, can preserve
the Reformation. Must we then turn all Socinians, to preserve the Reformation?
Must we renounce Christianity, to keep out Popery? This Stander-by is
misinformed, for Socinianism is no part of the Reformation; and so
inconsiderable and abhorred a Party, when they stand by themselves, that all
Parties who own any Religion, will join Counsels, and Hands and Hearts to
renounce them.

But what he would insinuate is, that we shall never join against a common
Enemy, whose Successes would endanger the Reformation, while there are any
Religious Disputes among us. I hope he is mistaken, or else we shall certainly
be conquered by France, for twenty such compassionate Suits as this, will never
make us all of a mind; and whether we dispute or not, if we differ as much as
if we did dispute, and are as zealous for the Interest of a Party, the case is
the same. But he has unwarily confessed a great Truth, which all Governments
ought to consider, That every Schisin in the Church, is a new Party and Faction
in the State, which are always troublesome to Government when it wants their
help.

But these Disputes about the Trinity make sport for Papists. It must be
disputing against the Trinity then; not disputing for it; for they are very
Orthodox in this point; and never admitted any Man to their Communion who
disowned this Faith, or declared, that he thought it at any time unreasonable,
dangerous, or unseasonable to dispute for it, when it was violently opposed.

I doubt this Protestant Churchman has made more sport for Papists, than all
our other Disputes; for it is a new thing for such Men to plead for Socinians,
but no new thing to dispute against them; and new Sports are always most
entertaining.

But he has himself started an Objection, which if he could well answer, I
could forgive him all the rest. But it will be said, What shall we do? Shall we
tamely by a base Silence give up the Point.

This is the Objection, and he answers, There is no danger of it, the
Established Church is in possession of it, and dispute will only increase the
disturbance. But is there no danger that the Church may be flung out of
possession, and lose the Faith, if she don't defend it? No, The Adversaries to
the received Doctrine (Why not to the true Faith?) cannot alter our Articles of
Religion; but if they can make Converts, and increase their Party, they may in
time change our Articles, and then we shall hear no more of compassionate Suits
for forbearance. But they can dispute everlastingly; and let them dispute on,
we fear them not. But they are Men subtle, sober, industrious; many of them
very virtuous, and (as all must say) setting aside their Opinions, devout,
pious, and charitable. I perceive he is very intimately acquainted with them,
though St. Paul commands all Christians, To mark those which cause divisions
and offenses contrary to the Doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them, 16
Romans 17. But let them be never so good Men, as some of the Heathen Philosophers
were, must we therefore tamely suffer them to pervert the Faith? But they are
very zealous, and the Presses are open, and they will never be silent. They are
zealous against the Truth, and therefore we must not be zealous for it; they
will write and print, and speak against the Truth, and will never be silent;
and therefore we must be silent, and neither write, nor say any thing for the
Truth. Was there ever such a Reason thought of as this? Well! how long must we
be silent? Neglect them till a fit time and place: But why is not this as fit a
time, as ever we shall have, to prevent their sowing Tares, or to pluck them up
before they have taken too deep Root? Can there be a fitter time to oppose
Heresies, and to defend the true Christian Faith, then when Heretics are very
bold and busy in spreading their Heresies, and opposing the Faith? But when
this fit time is come (for I know not what he means by a fit place) what shall
we do then? Will he then give us leave to write and dispute against such
Heretics? This he will not say; but then let that be done, which shall be
judged most Christian and most Wholesome. But what is that? Will it ever be
most Christian and most Wholesome, to dispute for the Faith against Heresy? If
ever it will be so, why is it not so now? If this never will be Christian and
Wholesome, what else is to be done to Heretics in fit time and place, unless
he intends to Physic 'em?

And it seems he has a Dose ready prepared, to lay Page 9.
all these Controversies to an Eternal Sleep; and it is, what he calls a
Negative Belief, a pretty Contradiction, but never the less proper Cure for
Heresy. The Project is this, as far as I can understand him, That the
Socinians shall not be required to own the Doctrines of the Trinity and
Incarnation, but shall so far agree, as not to contradict them, nor teach
contrary to them: Now I should like this very well, that they would not oppose
the received Doctrine of the Church, but I believe he knows some little
clattering Tongues, which all the Opiates he has, can never lay asleep; and had
he remembered what he had just before said concerning their Zeal, and their
Eternal disputing, and that they will never be silent, he would never have
proposed so impracticable a thing, as the imposing silence on them; which makes
me suspect, that he intends something more than what he says, and therefore to
prevent mistakes, I must ask him a Question or two.

1. Whether he will allow us, who, as he grants, are in possession of this
Faith of the Trinity and Incarnation, to keep possession of it, and teach,
explain, and confirm it to our People: we will answer none of their Books, if
they will not write them; but if he expects that we should say nothing of, or for
the Trinity, as he would have them say nothing against it, we must beg his
Pardon; we do not think the Doctrine of the Trinity and Incarnation to be of so
little concernment, as to be parted with, or buried in silence. We believe
Christian Religion to be built on this Faith, and therefore think ourselves as
much bound to Preach it, as to Preach the Gospel; and if they will oppose the
Faith, as long as we Preach it, we can have no Truce with them.

2dly, I hope he does not propose this Negative Belief, as he calls it, as a
Term of Communion; that though we know they deny the Trinity and the Incarnation,
yet if they will agree not publicly to oppose and contradict this Faith, we
shall receive them to our Communion, and fling the Worship of the Holy Trinity,
and of a God Incarnate, out of our Liturgies for their sake. I grant there may
be such things, as Articles of Peace, when Men join in the same Communion,
notwithstanding some less material Differences, while the Substantials of Faith
and Worship are secure, and oblige themselves not to disturb the Peace of the
Church with less Disputes; but to make the Essentials of Faith and Worship mere
Articles of Peace, to receive those to our Communion, who deny the very Object
of our Worship, is as senceless, and as great a contradiction to the Nature and
End of Christian Communion, as it would be to receive Heathens, Jews,
Mahometans into the Christian Church, by virtue of this Negative Belief. This I
know he will not allow; for he says, We are agreed in the other parts of our
common Christianity: whereas it is absolutely impossible, that we should agree
in any thing, which is pure Christianity, while we differ in the Fundamental
Doctrines of the Trinity and Incarnation, the owning or denying of which makes
an essential Difference in Religion. It alters the Object of our Worship, as
much as the Worship of One and of Three Persons in the Godhead, and as much as
the Worship of a God Incarnate, and of a deified mere Man, differ. It alters
the way of our Salvation, as much as Faith in the Blood and Sacrifice of the
Son of God, to expiate our Sins, See the Vindication of the Defense of Dr.
Stillingfleet's Unreasonableness of Separation, page 256, etc.
differs from believing a great and excellent Prophet, and obeying his Laws. It
alters the Motives and Principles of our Obedience, as much as the Love of God,
in giving his Son, differs from his Goodness in sending an excellent Man to be
our Prophet and Savior; as much as the Love, Humility, and Condescension of
the Eternal Son of God, in becoming Man, and in dying as a Sacrifice for our
Sins, differs from the Love of a mere Man, in preaching the Gospel, and bearing
Testimony to it by his own Blood.

It changes the hopes and reliances of Sinners, as much as the Security of a
Meritorious Sacrifice offered by the Eternal Son of God for the Expiation of
our Sins, differs from the Promises of an extraordinary Man sent as a Prophet
from God; and as much as the Intercession of a High Priest, who is the Eternal
Son of God, and intercedes in the Merits of his own Blood, differs from the
Intercession of a mere, though of an excellent Man, who has made no Atonement
for our Sins, and has no other Interest in God, than what an innocent and
obedient Man can pretend to. It were easy to enlarge on this Argument; but I
have directed in the Margin, where the Reader may see it discoursed at large.

Now if this Author, for these Reasons, will allow us to instruct our People in
the Doctrine of the Trinity and Incarnation, and not desire us to receive
Socinians into our Communion, he will do good Service, if he can bring them to
his Negative Belief, and persuade them to be silent; if he cannot, we will try
to make them so in time, if they have Wit enough to understand, when it is fit
to be quiet.

In the next place he takes Sanctuary in the Act of Page 11.
Parliament in favor of Dissenters, which he conceives has done very much, if
not full enough. But had he considered, how severe this Act is upon his beloved
Socinians, he might much better have let it alone. For no Dissenters have any
benefit by that Act, who do not renounce Socinianism: But he pretends to give
Account of Acts of Parliament, as he does of other Books, without seeing them.
But we may see what a hearty good will he has to the Cause: if the Act has
excepted Socinians, it is more than he knew, and more than he wished; for he
hoped it had not been done, and endeavored to persuade the World, that all the
Bishops of England had allowed it; for he cannot believe, that the Body of the
Bishops disallowed, or did not with good liking consent to the Act, viz. To
give Liberty to Socinians, as he supposed. This is such a scandalous
Representation of the Bishops of England, as I Am sure, they don't deserve, and
which in due time they may resent.

And here, without any provocation, he sets up the Authority of Bishops,
against the Lower House of Convocation, who never differed upon this Point, and
I hope never will, nor will ever be tempted by such a forward Undertaker, to
dispute the Bounds of their Authority, but content themselves with the Ancient
Constitution of the Church of England. But if he understands the Practice of
the Primitive and truly Apostolic Church, which he threatens these unruly
Presbyters with, no better than he does K. Edw. VI.'s Reformation, which he
supposes to be made by the Body of the Bishops, in opposition to the Presbyters
(or else I know not how he applies it) he is capable of doing no great good nor
hurt. Only I can tell him one thing, That had he fallen into the hands of K.
Edw.'s Reforming Bishops, they would have reformed him out of the Church, or
have taught him another sort of Compassionate Suit than this.

He concludes with a heavy Charge upon Myself, and Dr. Wallis, (for he mentions
none else) as if we had receded Page 13.
from the Doctrine taught even in our own Church, about the Holy Trinity.

Do we then deny, that there are Three Persons and One God? No, our business is
to prove it, and explain and vindicate it? but he thinks we explain it
otherwise, than it has been formerly explained. And yet that very Account he
gives us of it, out of Mr. Hooker, is owned by myself, and particularly
explained by my Hypothesis. He has given us no just occasion to vindicate
ourselves, because he has not vouchsafed to tell us, why he dislikes either of
us. He has cited some broken passages out of my Vindication, about Three
Eternal Minds, which are essentially One Eternal Mind. And what is the hurt of
this? Is not every Divine Person who is God, a Mind, and an Eternal Mind? Is
not the (...), or the Eternal and Uncreated Word and Wisdom of God, an Eternal
and Uncreated Mind? Is not the substantial Word and Wisdom of God a Mind? Is
not the Eternal Spirit, which searches the deep things of God, as the Spirit
of a Man knows the things of a Man, a Mind? And if I can give any possible
account, how Three Eternal Minds should be essentially One, does not this at
least prove, that there may be Three Divine Persons, in the Unity of the Divine
Essence? And should I have been mistaken in this account, as I believe I am
not, must I therefore be charged with receding from the Doctrine of the Church
of England? As for Dr. Wallis, he has nothing to say against him, but his
calling the Divine Persons Somewhats, with which he has very profanely
ridiculed the Litany, which I gave an account before.

And now can any Man tell, what Opinion this Melancholy Stander-by has of the
Doctrines of the Trinity, and Incarnation? He dares not speak out, but gives
very broad signs, what he would be at. He discourages all Men from defending
these Doctrines, declares, That all new Attempts cannot satisfy the old
Difficulties, which he declares to be unsatisfiable, and unsoluble: That when
Page 7.
we have moved every Stone, Authority must define it. And yet this Authority
extends no farther than to a Negative Belief* which, he says, is all that can
reasonably be required of Men, of such Mysteries as they cannot understand: and
thus far he professes himself bound by our Church Articles for Peace sake. And
this is his Faith Page 6.
of the Trinity, not to believe it, but only not to oppose it. He complains of
the Scholastic cramping Terms of Page 2.
Three Persons, and One God, and thinks the Unity of Page 6.
Three Persons in One Essence, to be only a more Orthodox Phrase; so that he
leaves us no words to express this Doctrine by, and therefore it is time to say
nothing about it. It is a Controversy which exposes our Liturgy, and is not
only unprofitable, but corruptive of, and prejudicial and injurious to our
common Devotion: so dangerous Page 17.
is it to pray to the Holy, Blessed, and Glorious Trinity, Three Persons and
One God.

But then on the other hand, he carefully practices that forbearance, which he
persuades others to, toward his Learned Writers of the Socinian Controversies,
though they were the Assailants: never persuades them to forbear exposing and
ridiculing the Faith of the Church, which would have provoked his Indignation,
had he any reverence for the Holy Trinity, and a God Incarnate; but only thinks
by the Charm of a Negative Faith, that they may be required quietly to
acquiesce in the public determinations. Page 9, 10.


He tells us over and over, how unseasonable and dangerous it is to meddle with
such high matters, or to offer at any Explication of what is Incomprehensible;
but it is no fault in them, to talk of Absurdities and Contradictions in what
they do not understand: nay, he all along insinuates, that these Absurdities
and Contradictions, which they charge upon the Doctrines of the Trinity and
Incarnation, are unsatisfiable, and unsoluble*

He bestows high Encomiums upon these Enemies of the Faith, but speaks with
wonderful Contempt of those who defend it, as far as he dares; the Fathers and
Councils are out of his reach, but the Master of the Sentences, and the
Schoolmen, and all Modern Undertakers, must feel his displeasure: to defend
the Trinity exposes our Liturgy, and corrupts our common Devotion; but to
ridicule it, makes them very pious and devout Men. GOD preserve his Church from
Wolves in Sheeps Clothing.

And now having vindicated our Ancient Rights and Liberties, which the Church
always challenged, of defending the truly Catholic and Apostolic Faith, from
the Assaults of Heretics, I shall apply myself, as I have leisure, to the
Defense of my Vindication of the Doctrine of the Holy and Ever-blessed Trinity,
and the Incarnation of the Son of God.

THE END.

