NATHANAEL BROOK Stationer at the Angel in Cornhil, to the Reader.
The worthy, learned and most accomplished Edward Sherburne Esquire, Clerk of
His Majesty's Ordnance, having been pleased to convert the Ancient Astronomical
Latin Poem of Manilius on the Sphere into a polite and elegant English one,
has moreover interlaced the same with Annotations concerning the Discoveries
and Inventions of the Moderns, and has subjoyned a large Catalogue of
Astronomers and their Writings, amongst which he takes notice of Mr. John
Collins; in the Narrative concerning whom, there is an account of many
excellent Mathematical Treatises lost through want of due encouragement to
print the same, and there being affairs of that nature proposed to my self and
others to undertake, which will be too heavy a burden without the advice,
assistance and encouragement of Learned and Noble Personages; concerning which
perchance there may be particular Proposals hereafter printed: however to show
my willingness to promote such Designs, and the ill consequences of letting
them sink, I have caused so much out of that Book, as concerns the said Mr.
Collins, and the abovementioned Narratvie to be printed apart, as follows:

MAster JOHN COLLINS Accomptant, and a Member of the Royal Society, published
in the year 1658. his Treatise entitled The Sector on a Quadrant, in which
there are very curious Prints of two great Quadrants, and of two small
Quadrants with particular Projections on them, serving for the Latitude of
London; Albeit by Aid of other Lines each of those Quadrants is rendered
Universal for Astronomical Use, as, finding the Hour and Azimuth, and other
Spherical Proportions; The Author's chief Design in publishing such Prints, was
to show the World that the said Prints might be pasted on Copper or Brass, and
so varnished, as to be rendered preservable from Dirt, or sullying, and sold at
a cheap Rate, as now they are.

In 1659. he published his Treatise of Navigation, entitled the Mariners Plain
Scale new Plained. In which, besides Projections of the Sphere, there are
Constructions for many Astronomical Problems, and Spherical Proportions. The
Book has found good Acceptance, and is now like to become a Common Theme to
the Scholars of Christ's Hospital London, whereof forty (by His Majesty's
Bounty, and to His Immortal Renown in Establishing a Lecturer to instruct them)
are constantly to be taught Navigation, and e're long it is to be hoped the
Author will reprint the same with considerable Additions.

The same year he published a Treatise of Geometrical Dyalling, of good Esteem,
both for the Newness and easiness of Method in situating the Requisites, and
drawing the Hour Lines. In which there being Spherical Proportions, and some
Astronomical Problems, it deserves to be remembered in this Catalogue.

In the year 1667. he published in the Philosophical Transactions the Solution
of a Problem concerning Time, to wit, about the Julian Period, with diverse
Perpetual Almanacks in single Verses; a Chorographical Problem, and diverse
other Things since, in the said Transactions, which we mention not, as being
irrelative to the Sphere or Astronomy (viz. concerning Merchants Accounts,
compound Interest, and Annuities, etc.)

We should be injurious to him, if we did not farther enlarge, by telling the
World how much it is obliged for his Pains in exciting the Learned to publish
their Works, and in acting the Part of an Ingenious Obstetrix at the Press, in
correcting and in drawing of Schemes; So that he has been Instrumental in
furnishing the World with the many learned Mathematical Books here lately
published (for which, his chief Reward hitherto has been to obtain from the
Learned the Title of Mersennus Anglicanus) and many more may be expected, if
moderate Encouragements toward Printing such Works, and Leisure for such an
Affair be not impeded through the necessary Avocations for a livelihood, and
though it be besides my Design, yet I cannot but digress in giving him and
others like minded (which are very rate to be found) their due commendations,
in promoting the laudable Design of getting Learned Men to impart their Labors
to be Printed; and exciting others to encourage the same, as being of singular
Use and advantage to the Republic of Learning; through the want whereof many
Learned Men's Works of much worth have been lost, suppressed or long delayed. As
those of Maurolycus, Abbot of Messina, a large Catalogue whereof is to be seen
at the End of his Opuscula, but by the Care of the learned Mathematician
Alphonsus Borellius some of them have been published in this Age, ninety years
after the Author's Death; as his Apollonius at Messina in 1656. containing the
substance of the four first Books of the Apollonius of Commandinus, and two
more Additional Books of Maurolycus, and all in less Room, and at a much
cheaper price. And now by the like Diligence the said Borellius is publishing
Maurolycus his Archimedes in Latin, reputed a Good one, after we have been long
tired with the Common Latin bad one.

Through want of such care the many learned Works of Vernalion of Naples,
Master to Josephus Auria, have not hitherto come to light, as his Commentaries
upon all Archimedes, Apollonius, Serenus, Euclid, Ptolemaeus, and diverse others
of the Ancients; which is much to be lamented; seeing he was, according to the
Testimony of the said Auria, Vir, Divinitate quadam Ingenii Ornatus.

Nor those of the learned Bernardinus Baldus, Abbot of Guastalla, mentioned at
the End of his Comment on Aristotle's Mechanics, amongst which are two Volums
of the Lives of Mathematicians, whereof Bartholinus in his Preface to the
Edition of the Optic Fragments of Heliodorus Larissaeus, Printed at Paris
1657. gives an honorable Elogium.

Varenius could find no Stationer or Printer in Holland to undertake his
Treatise of Conicks and curved Lines. See the Preface to his History of Iapan.

If Sir Charles Cavendish deceased, Brother to the present Duke of Newcastle,
had not (as it is credibly reported) given liberally toward the Printing of
Mydorgius his four first Books of Conicks, they had never come to public view;
the four last, as likewise those of Paschal the Younger, yet remaining
unprinted upon the same Account, of whom Mersennus gives this Censure, quod
Unica Propositione Universalissima, quadringentis Corrolariis armata, totum
Apollonium complexus est. The Manuscript as yet remaining unprinted (as I am
informed) in the Hands, or at the Disposal of Monsieur Du Prez a Bookseller in
Paris; the want whereof is the more considerable in regard the Author (besides
the ordinary method) treats of the Conick Sections, as projected from lesser
Circles of the Sphere-

Erasmius Bartholinus well known by his Additions to the second Volume of Des
Carts, as it is commonly termed; could find none to undertake the Printing of
De Beaunes Treatise De Angulo solido, and other Treatises both of that Authors,
and his own.

Iungius his Phoranomicks, and Treatise De locis Planis, etc. and other
Algebraical Tractates; have remained at Hamborough above ten years since the
Author's Death unprinted, for want of due Encouragement: Albeit a Jesuit, who
writes his Life, makes him, although a Physician, equal in Mathematical
Knowledge to Des Carts.

On the like Reasons we may conceive we want the many learned Algebraical Works
of our famous Countryman Mr. Thomas Harriot, (and of Mr. Warner, into whose
Hands they fell) who is esteemed by some of the most knowing Persons alive to
have been much Superior to all that ever writ; and, that equivalent to what of
his might have been forty or fifty years since known, is not readily to be
expected.

For want of the like Encouragement, we have lost that most excellent Piece of
the incomparable Vieta, his Harmonicon Coeleste; as likewise the Remains of
Alexander Anderson the Scot, as his Conicks, Stereometria Solidorum, and
Triangul. Sphaeric. the want whereof Guldinus much bewails and excites the
ingenious to enquire after them.

On the same Account the Remains of Griembergerus, as his Conicks, Dialling,
and Projections of the Sphere have not come to light; and for the very same
Reason the second Tome of Galilaeus in English does, and is like to remain,
unprinted. And for the same Reason the English Tongue is barren of Mathematical
(and diverse other) Books in respect of the French or Latin, there being little
or nothing yet extant of Catoptricks, Dioptricks, Staticks, Mechanics, etc.
and not much of Perspective and other Kinds, the number of Students in these
Sciences, as yet scarce being sufficient to take off 500 Books, or so small an
Impression as may give a Bookseller a Prospect of moderate gain in a competent
time by his undertaking.

With the like Remora in France, have met the Works of the Excellent Monsieur
Fermat, viz. Euclidis Porismata restituta; his Treatise De Locis Planis Solidis
Linearibus and ad Superficiem, and his Treatise De Contactibus Sphaericis.

As also the Remains of the much knowing Lalovera, as his Geometrical
Dictionary, sive Explicatio vocum Geometricarum, four Books Problematum
Illustrium, four Books Problematum Physico-Mathematicorum, and a Collection of
Letters between him and the learned, containing the Solution of many Problems
of great Curiosity and Difficulty, which seeing they are not like to get
Printed there, they have written over to know if they would be undertaken here;
promising to send the MS. Copies. And having hinted thus much at the Instance
of this Ingenious and Industrious Person, to the Curious, and Generously
learned; I come now again further to acquaint the Reader, that we have more
particularly obtained from him an Account of two of his own Designs, relative
to the Sphere and Astronomy.

The one of Geometrical Dialling, whereby reflex Dyalling is rendered
Geometrical, and reduced to a Method of Calculation; so that if a Glass were
placed at Random, and Lines drawn on the Plain by chance, by either Method,
Points might be found in the said Lines which joined should be the Hour Lines;
and the like when the Glass is so placed, that the Hour Lines may be drawn in
that Part of the Room which is most capable of them; and as a Corollary of this
Doctrine a Dial for any Latitude may be suddenly divided from a Line of
Tangents parallel to any Line proposed, and that without any Calculation for
the Horary Divisions.

The other a Treatise of Projections of the Sphere, and concerning Spherical
Trigonometry; in which many extraordinary Cases will be solved; those
Proportions mentioned before in the Narrative concerning Mr. William Oughtred,
several ways more easily demonstrated, and all Spherical Triangles measured by
a new Method (not by him formerly insisted on) after the manner of Plain
Triangles; all which perchance may be handled in some little Tractates
concerning the Use of Prints of several other Instruments designed to be cut,
pasted, and varnished, as before mentioned; viz. the Analemma, the double
Horizontal Dial, the Logarithmical Serpentine Line, Prints of Logarithmical
Rulers; whereof if there be three, they may be so placed as to lie still all
Day, and as fast as the Height of the Sun is given, shall find either the Hour
or Azimuth universally by bare Inspection.


