Imprimatur,

July 22. 1686. IO. BATTELY.

AN ANSWER TO THE Amicable Accommodation OF THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE
REPRESENTER AND THE ANSWERER.

LONDON: Printed for John Amery at the Peacock, and William Rogers at the Sun;
both against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet. MDCLXXXVI.

AN ANSWER TO THE Amicable ACCOMMODATION, Of the Difference between The
Representer and the Answerer.
IN Answer to the Reply to Papists protesting against Protestant Popery, our
Author has amicably accommodated away the whole Book, excepting one word called
Misrepresenting; and therefore whereas he expects Ten sheets from me in return,
I must be forced to compound with him for a much less number.

We are likely at last to agree about the meaning of Misrepresenting, which is
a very common word, and easily understood when men give their minds to it. Our
Author Printed a double Character of a Papist Misrepresented and Represented;
the first being an accusation on Protestants for misrepresenting Papists; I
examined every part of his Character, and could not find why he called it
Misrepresenting; for it did not appear by his Characters, that we had charged
them with any Doctrines or Practices (excepting some few things) but what they
themselves owned. We charge indeed their Doctrines and Practices with such
guilt as they do not own; but this I told him did not properly belong to
Representing but Disputing; for while we agree about matters of fact, there is
no Misrepresenting on either side, and then we are no otherwise
Misrepresenters, than as all men are who condemn such Opinions and Practices,
as others judge very true and innocent; and thus Papists as much misrepresent
Protestants, as Protestants misrepresent Papists; that is, they equally differ
from each other in their Opinions and judgments of the same things; but who are
truly the Misrepresenters, is not to be decided by Character-making, but by
Reason and Argument.

Well, our Accommodator is very willing out of civility and for the sake of
peace, to yield this point, That the Title of a Papist Misrepresented, Amicable
Accommodation, p. 6.
is not to be taken in its strict and proper sense, as Misrepresenting
signifies downright Lying, or falsely charging of matter of fact; but in its
larger or less-proper sense, as it comprehends both Lying, Calumniating,
Mis-interpreting, Reproaching, Mis-construing, Mis-judging, etc. which I
confess is a very great piece of civility, that he will not charge us now with
down right lying, but only with Lying and Calumniating, and several other hard
words into the bargain.

There needs not many words about this matter, for the short of the case is
this: In order to reconcile our people to the Church of Rome, he thought it
necessary to persuade them, that Popery is quite another thing, than what they
had been taught it is, which would at once remove their prejudices against
Popery, and beget in them a great jealousy and suspicion of their former
Teachers; for men will not easily trust those who have once deceived them.

In order to this, he gives us a double Character of a Papist; one he calls the
Character of a Papist Misrepresented, the other of a Papist Represented; which
any man would guess, should be two very different and contrary things; the
first what a Papist is not, the second what he is; and yet, when we come to
examine them, every thing almost, which can properly be called a Character, or
Representing, is the same in both; only the Character of a Papist
Misrepresented tells you, what opinion Protestants have of Popery, and the
Character of a Papist Represented, tells us, what good thoughts Papists have of
themselves, and their own Religion; now whoever doubted, but that Papists and
Protestants differ very much in their Opinions of Popery, as they do also in
their Opinions of Protestancy. And this is the only pretense for his charge of
Misrepresenting, not that we charge them with believing or practicing, what
they do not believe or practice, but that we think worse of their Faith and
Practice than he thinks they deserve.

And if this be all that he means by Misrepresenting, we readily own the
charge, that we have much worse thoughts of Popery than he has; that we believe
those Doctrines to be erroneous, and those Practices to be sinful, which he
thinks very well of; and because I am resolved, if possible, to be as civil as
he is, in my Concessions, and not to dispute about words, I am contented he
should call this misrepresenting, Lying, Calumniating, or what he pleases, if
he can prove that we condemn their Faith or Worship unjustly; only he must
remember, that this will engage him in a dispute, which he seems resolved not
to engage in. For he must not think, that upon his bare word, we must be
concluded guilty of that misrepresenting, which he calls Lying. He should have
been very much afraid to accuse us of Lying, if he is resolved altogether to
represent, and not to dispute: For certainly no wise man will give his
Neighbor the lie, unless he be well prepared to prove it against him.
Misrepresenting was a civil term, because honest men may through mistake
misrepresent; but Lying is the fault of Knaves, which as it deserves great
punishment, so it ought not to be charged upon men without great proof, much
less with none at all: And therefore he should not have taken up an obstinate
humor against Disputing, just before he thought fit to charge us with Lying,
but have remembered what M. de Meaux says in his Pastoral Letter, p. 29. Those
who bear false and scandalous witness against an innocent person, are condemned
to the same punishment which the Crime of which they bear witness did deserve
had it been found true.

But to clear my self as well as I can; besides this, that I am not conscious
to my self of any misrepresenting, I must tell him once more, that in a strict
and proper sense, to misrepresent relates only to matter of fact, when we
charge men with saying and doing what they never said or did, as our
Accommodater confesses; and in this sense I have already proved, that we are no
Misrepresenters, and at last, if I understand him, he confesses that we are
not; but then he tells us, that to misrepresent, in a larger and less-proper
sense, signifies also to put a false construction on things: As for instance,
to say that to Worship Saints and Angels, and the Virgin Mary, as practiced by
the Church of Rome, is to give the Worship of God to Creatures; and that their
Image Worship is what God has forbid in the second Commandment; that their
denying the Cup to the Laity is contrary to the institution of our Savior, and
their Latin Service is a very unreasonable Worship, and destructive of the
edification of the Church, etc. Now though we do not charge them falsely in
these cases as to matter of fact, for they do Worship Saints and Images, and
deny the Cup to the Laity, and keep the Service of the Church in a Language
unknown to the people, yet if through prejudice and neglect of due
consideration, we should condemn these Practices as contrary to the Laws of
God, and injurious to men's Souls, though they were not so. I grant even this
may be called Misrepresenting, for it is to call good evil, and evil good, light
darkness, and darkness light; and whoever is guilty of this kind of
Misrepresentation, is guilty of a very great Sin, and does great mischief in
the World, not by falsifying matters of Fact, but as much as in him lies, by
changing the nature of things.

And upon these terms the dispute of Misrepresenting may be easily
accommodated: Let him plainly confess, that we are not Misrepresenters in the
first sense; that we do not falsely charge any Doctrines or Practices on the
Church of Rome, which she disowns; that we do not teach our People, that the
Church of Rome believes or practices, otherwise than she does, and we will give
him leave to call us Misrepresenters still, if he can show that we charge their
Doctrines or Practices with such guilt as they do not deserve.

But it is by no means a sufficient answer to this Charge to call us Liars,
which for ought I can see, is all we are like to get in Answer from this man.
Of all the several projects for ending Controversy, the most effectual that I
ever yet heard of, is that which our Author has set on foot: for he would now
insinuate, that he has vindicated the Church of Rome from our Misrepresenting,
not only matter of Fact, but the guilt we charge them with upon those matters
that are confessed by themselves. Now I have shown him as well as I could, that
some of their confessed Doctrines are false, and some of their confessed
Practices are unlawful, and that their best Apologies for them are
insufficient. What says the Accomodator to all this? He answers, that all this
is Misrepresenting, as that signifies Lying. But how the dispute should be
carried on upon these Terms, otherwise then by giving him the Lie back again, I
do not comprehend? And therefore because neither true Religion, or good
Breeding, will suffer me to carry on a Dispute at that rate, the Controversy
should seem even upon this account to be at end; and I give him joy of the
honor that he is like to get by it.

And yet I think an indifferent Reader may observe that his fastening the Lie
upon us, for Misrepresenting them in the less-proper sense, as he pretends we
do, is but an after-game to which he is reduced by the extremity of a bad Cause.

The design of our Author in his Twofold Character of a Papist, was to persuade
our People, that we were Misrepresenters in the first and most proper Sense;
that we had belyed the Church of Rome, with imputing such Doctrines to her, as
she did not own; and this all men, that ever I met with, understood to be the
design of it: But since he cannot make good his Charge against us, he will now
make good his Title of Misrepresenting in a lessproper Sense, not that we
misreport the Doctrines and Practices of their Church, but that we unjustly
condemn them; and though we will rather allow him to call this Misrepresenting,
than dispute about a word, yet if this be all he intended to acquaint the
World, that Protestants think worse of Popery, than Papists do, it was a
wonderful discovery; and he took as notable a way to rectify such
mis-apprehensions. He disclaims all disputing, and thinks to confute Protestant
Misrepresentations, by giving only a true Character of a Papist, with
reference to his Faith and Practice, out of the most authentic Records of
their Church: Now if the Misrepresentation does not concern matter of Fact, but
only men's judgments and opinions about such matters, how can a mere Character
rectify such Misrepresentations? When we know, what the Doctrine and Practice
of the Church of Rome is, and yet think very ill of it; Can the mere relating
what the Doctrine and Practice of the Church of Rome is, cure our ill opinion
of it? And yet this is all the business of a Character to tell us, what a
Papist is, which might indeed reconcile us to Popery, had we disliked Popery
only because we did not understand it, or took it to be something more
formidable than it is, but cannot cure such dislikes as arise from a true
understanding of Popery.

He appeals to the Definitions of the Councils of Trent, and the Bishop of
Condom's Exposition, etc. to vindicate Popery from the Misrepresentations of
Protestants; that is, to show us what the genuine Doctrines of Popery are: And
how can this confute our Misrepresentations, unless by Misrepresenting he
understood Misrepresenting matter of Fact, charging such Doctrines on their
Church as were never decreed by their Councils, nor owned by their most
authentic Expositors? For the Authority of the Council of Trent is nothing to
us, any otherwise than as we own it to be the Rule and Standard of the Romish
Faith; and therefore he can prove nothing against us out of the Council of
Trent, but only that those are not the Doctrines of the Church of Rome, which
we say are, and this cannot confute Protestant Misrepresentations of Popery,
unless our Misrepresentations consist in charging them with such Doctrines as
their Church and Councils do not own.

And therefore, though he is now willing to grant, that we are not
Misrepresenters, as that signifies, downright Liars, who charge the Church of
Rome with Believing and Practicing what she does not, yet it is apparent, that
this was what he intended in his Title of a Papist Misrepresented, to accuse
Protestants of charging Papists with such Doctrines and Practices as they do
not own; and if this be not the intent and design of his Book, there is a great
deal less Sense in it, then I thought there had been.

For if by Misrepresenting he only meant, that we reproach and calumniate the
Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome, and charge them with such guilt
as they do not deserve, not that we charge them falsely with such Doctrines and
Practices as they do not own, (as he now would have it;) though I grant this
may be called Misrepresenting, if the charge be false, yet it is not such a
Misrepresenting as is confuted only by a Character, or by true Representing; it
is wholly matter of Dispute, as I have often told him; for he must not think
that we Protestants shall believe ever the better of Popery, because he
professes to believe very well of it, in his Character of a Papist Represented.

If he will vindicate the Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome from
that guilt, which Protestants charge on it; if he will justify the Worship of
Saints and Angels and Images, Transubstantiation, the Adoration of the Host,
half Communion, Prayers in an Unknown Tongue, etc. and prove us to be
Misrepresenters, he must quit his retreat of Character-making, and fairly
dispute the points in question, which is the way the generous Advocates of the
Church of Rome have always taken, to defend her, by the Authority of
Scriptures, Fathers, Councils, and here we are ready to join issue with them.

And thus, for ought I see, this Controversy is at an end, though he had not
charged us with Lying; for whatever he at first pretended, he grants now, that
we are not in a strict and proper sense Misrepresenters; and thus farewell to
Character-making, since Papists and Protestants, who understand these matters
are in the main agreed, what the Character of a Papist is, though they differ
in their opinions about him, which can never be decided by Characters, but by
Reason and Argument. And yet our Author, after all his pretenses to an Amicable
Accommodation, is unwilling the matter should end thus, at least unless we will
acknowledge our selves very much beholden to his good nature for it: Why, what
is the matter now? Have I not plainly proved, that we are not Misrepresenters
in the strict and proper notion of Misrepresenting? That we do not charge the
Church of Rome with any matter of Fact, with any Doctrines or Practices which
she does not own? And can we Misrepresent them, when we charge them with
nothing that is false; P. 7.
Yes, he says, my principle, that there can be no Misrepresenting, where there
is an agreement in matter of fact, has more of the counterfeit in it than true
standard; is supposed to be certain, but without the support of Authority or
Reason: That is, though we charge the Church of Rome with nothing but what she
her self owns; though we represent a Papist just as a Papist represents
himself, as to his Faith and Practice, yet we may be Misrepresenters; and then
we may indeed be Misrepresenters for ought I know, if we may Misrepresent, when
we say nothing but what is true.

If he can make good this, I must acknowledge him to be a man of Art; and
therefore shall briefly examine how he proves it.

He says, P. 8.
Misrepresenting seems to stand in opposition to Representing, and proper
Representing being nothing more, than the describing or showing a thing, as it
is in its self, as many ways, as a thing can be shown otherwise than it is in
its self, so many ways may it be properly Misrepresented. This I agree to, and
therefore let us proceed: Now (says he) it is certain, that for the description
to bear on exact resemblance with the thing, it must not only agree with it in
matter of fact, but likewise in every other respect, which it pretends to
declare, as in motive, circumstance, intention, end, etc. The agreement in any
one of these being enough to quite change the nature of the thing,
notwithstanding the matter of fact being still the same. And this also I agree
in, that motives, circumstances, intention, end, are all to be considered in
representing; but I want a reason, why he distinguishes these from the matter
of fact: for by matter of fact, I understand an action clothed with all its
circumstances, without which, it is impossible truly to represent any action:
For circumstances alter the nature of actions; As suppose a man be killed, this
may be done by accident, or with design, in heat of blood, or of premeditated
malice, which makes it, either Chance-medley, Manslaughter, or Murder; and
therefore the consideration of these things falls under the matter of fact, and
are the proper matters for a Jury to inquire into, who yet are judges only of
Fact. And thus I understood matter of Fact, when I asserted, that we did not
Misrepresent the Church of Rome in any matter of Fact; that we did not only
charge them with nothing but what they did, but that we truly Represented all
the circumstances of what they did, as far as the moral nature of the action is
concerned in it, and indeed I know not, how we can either Represent or
Misrepresent any action without its circumstances; we may tell what is done,
but the matter of the action is the least thing considerable in Representing,
because it may be either good or bad in most cases, according to its different
circumstances: and we cannot say, which it is, without considering all
circumstances. As for instance, We do not only charge the Church of Rome with
Praying to Saints, and Worshipping Images, but we consider what is the Doctrine
of their Church about these matters, in what manner they do it, and with what
circumstances; we admit of all the excuses and apologies, and fair
representations that they can make of it, and then consider what the nature of
the action is, and what the Scriptures and Primitive Fathers declare it to be.

This, he knows, I did in the Book, which he now pretends to answer. To put an
end to this Dispute about Misrepresenting, I told him, we did not like Popery,
as he and the Bishop of Condom had Represented it, and showed him our Reasons
why we did not like it, as to the Object of Religious Worship, the Invocation
of Saints, and the Worship of Images: And had he thought fit to have considered
these, we might have obliged him so far, as to have confined the Dispute to his
own Characters, and the Bishops Exposition, in the other points of Popery; but
he says not one word about this, but advances a new Paradox, that men may be
Misrepresenters, though they do not Misrepresent any matter of Fact, because
they may Misrepresent the Motives, Circumstances, Intention and End, as if this
were not to Misrepresent matter of Fact? Or as if we had Misrepresented them in
this manner, when he had not, and cannot give any one instance wherein we have
done so?

This short account shows, how impertinent all his examples of Misrepresenters
are, who, as he says, did Misrepresent without belying men in matter of Fact;
for though this is nothing to us, unless he could prove us to be such
Misrepresenters, which he has not once attempted to do; yet the Examples he
produces do not prove what he brings them for, for all their Misrepresentations
are in matters of fact.

Thus the ten Tribes suspected, that the Children of Reuben and Gad, 22 Josh.
and the half Tribe of Manasseh, had built an Altar for Sacrifice in the
borders of Jordan, over against the Land of Canaan, whereas the true matter of
Fact was, that they had built an Altar not for Sacrifice, but as a witness and
memorial of their right to Gods Altar, to offer their Sacrifices and burnt
Offerings in the place which God should choose.

When Eli thought Hannah had been drunken, 1 Samuel 1. 13.
because she prayed in her heart, only her lips moving, this was
Misrepresenting matter of fact, for she was not drunk. And surely he will
grant, that the two wanton Elders did foully belly Susannah, though she was
alone and naked in the Garden, and that they represented the fact, quite
otherwise than it was.

And methinks our Author should grant, that the Jews did misrepresent matter of
fact, when they charged our Savior with being a Sabbath-breaker, a Glutton, a
Friend of Publicans and Sinners, unless he will say that our Savior was all
this; for if he were not, then they did belie him in matter of fact; and so
they did the Apostles and Primitive Christians, when they accused them as
Troublers of the City, and Movers of Sedition, that they murdered Infants, and
eat their Flesh; that they Worshipped the Sun, and adored an Asses head for
God; for I suppose he will grant, that the matter of fact was false.

But still, says the Accommodater, they had some matter of fact, whereon their
Accusations were grounded, and which gave some color and pretense to them.
Sometimes they had, and sometimes they had not: But is not this a pleasant
inference, that because those who tell only a piece of a story may
misrepresent, therefore those who faithfully relate the whole matter of fact,
with all the particular circumstances of it, may be Misrepresenters also? If he
can give any one example of this nature, I will only desire him to tell me the
difference between Misrepresenting and true Representing. Men who have wit and
malice enough, may put very spiteful constructions upon the most innocent and
virtuous Actions, by altering or concealing some circumstances, or the end and
intention of doing them; but this is to misrepresent the fact, to represent a
thing done otherwise, or for another end, than really it was; but if a man who
tells the whole truth, not only what was done, but the end why, and the manner
how it was done, can be a Misrepresenter, the honestest man in the world may be
a Misrepresenter.

When an action is truly and fairly Represented, men may still pass a false
judgment upon that action; may think that evil and forbidden by God, which God
has not forbid, or that allowed and approved by God, which God abhors; but this
is not properly Misrepresenting, but judging falsely, which differ just as
matter of Fact and matter of Law do in Civil Affairs. In all Causes Criminal
and Civil, there are two distinct questions; what the Fact, and what the Law
is, what is done, and what judgment the Law passes on such Actions: To falsify
in matters of fact, is to Misrepresent the person and the action; to give a
wrong judgment, is to Misrepresent the Law: and thus it is in our case: We are
first to enquire, what the Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome are,
and then of what nature they are, whether true or false, good or evil: If we
affix such Doctrines or Practices on them, as they do not teach, or alter any
material circumstance relating to them, then we are Misrepresenters in a proper
sense, as misreporting matter of fact; and this we utterly deny, and they can
never prove that we do thus misrepresent them, that as our Author misrepresents
us, we usher in, with they teach this, they believe that, they say this, P. 12.
they affirm that, and under these preambles charge the Papists for asserting
and believing such Blasphemies, which they would sooner loose their lives than
assent to: Which he has boldly affirmed without giving one instance of it; but
as for judging of their Doctrines and Practices, we do indeed pass such a
judgment on them, as I doubt not but they will call Misrepresenting; but
whether it be so or no, is matter of Dispute, and must be decided by appealing
to Scripture and Reason; and we are not ashamed of being called Misrepresenters
by them, when that signifies no more, than censuring and condemning their Faith
and Practice.

But he has one example more of this Misrepresenting, and that as he thinks a
very nicking one, and that is the Fanatical Misrepresentations of the Church of
England: To this end he brings in a Dissenter charging the Church of England
with Popery, and several other ill things, which is intended to serve more
purposes than one.

Had he first proved us to be Misrepresenters, it had been a very proper way to
make us sensible of the evil of it, to appeal to our own resentments of such
usage. But what if Dissenters Misrepresent the Church of England, does this
prove that the Church of England Misrepresents the Church of Rome? If we indeed
Misrepresent the Church of Rome, we have less reason to complain that the
Dissenters Misrepresent us; but if we are no Misrepresenters, we have reason
doubly to complain, both for being charged with Misrepresenting, and for being
Misrepresented.

And therefore the Answer to this long harangue, is very short and plain;
however the Church of England be Misrepresented, whether by Papists or
Fanatics, we justify our selves either by denying matter of Fact when that is
false, or by confuting the Charge: We are not afraid of Disputing with our
Adversaries when that is needful, but justify the Doctrines and Practices of
our Church by Scripture and Reason, which is a more generous way, than merely
to complain of being Misrepresented, without daring to right our selves; which
is the case of our late Character-makers. If the World will be moved by their
complaints, to believe that they are Misrepresented, all is well, and they have
what they desired; but if you will be so perverse as not to believe that they
are Misrepresented, though they tell you they are, and will needs be a
disputing the point with them, they have done with you; for their business is
not to Dispute, but to Represent. The difference between us in this matter, is
no more but this: We are not afraid of Misrepresentations, because we know we
can defend our selves; whereas they find they cannot defend themselves, and
therefore have no other remedy, but to complain of being Misrepresented.

And yet I must confess, this is as artificial a way of saying nothing, as I
have met with. Our Accommodator is very sick of this talk of Misrepresenting,
and knew not how to get rid of it, but by diverting the Dispute; and therefore
though it be nothing to the purpose, instead of proving that we are
Misrepresenters, he desires us to consider, how the Dissenters Misrepresent us:
but we have considered that enough already, and when there is occasion for it,
will do so again; our business at present is not with Dissenters, but Papists,
and we are not for pursuing every new Game, but will keep to our old scent.

It would be a pleasant Scene, could he at this time of day, engage the Church
of England and Dissenters in a new Quarrel; but thanks be to God many of our
Dissenters are grown wiser now, and I hope more will every day; whatever they
have formerly suspected of our inclinations to Popery, they find now that they
were mistaken in us; and whatever defects they may charge our Worship with, I
believe they will call it Popish and Antichristian no longer; to be sure they
will never think us the more inclined to Popery, because a Papist says so.
While these Gentlemen lay behind the Curtain, and acted the part of a Zealous
Brother under several disguises, there was much more danger of them than now:
They have laid aside their Vizards, and let them now paint the Church of
England how they please, and the worse the better; for how mean an opinion
soever he seems to have of our Dissenters, they are too wise and cautious to
take Characters from open and professed Enemies.

The truth is, he has horribly abused our Dissenters, unless by Dissenters, he
means only his dearly beloved Quakers, with whose Cant he is as well
acquainted, as if he had been either their Master, or Scholar. For he has drawn
up such a charge against the Church of England, in the name of a Dissenter, as
no Dissenter ever made. It is a Popish Character Fathered upon a Dissenter, for
which they are much beholden to him, that when he has a mind to say things so
spiteful and silly, that he himself (though none of the modestest men) is ashamed
to own, he can think of no person so fit to say them as a Dissenter.

Did ever any Dissenter charge the Church of England with making gods of dead
men, because we call our Churches still by the names of those Saints to whom
they were dedicated in the times of Popery? For did not the Dissenters
themselves do so in the late times of Reformation? And do they scruple to do so
now? If there were any difference, it was only in not giving the Title of Saint
to them, and I suppose that does not alter the case; for if it be Paul's, or
Peter's, or Mary's Church, it is much the fame: But they were not so silly as to
think, that names which were used only for distinction, without paying any
worship to Saints, or erecting any Altars to them, in those Churches which were
called by their names, made Gods of dead men. The Bills of Mortality were the
same formerly in the Dissenters time, that they are now, and yet they did not
suspect themselves guilty of placing Mary above Christ, or making a Goddess of
her.

Did ever any Dissenter charge the Church of England with Image-Idolatry, for
having Pictures in their Bibles, or Moses and Aaron painted with the Ten
Commandments, without leaving out the Second against Image Worship? especially
when these are things wherein the Church of England is no otherwise concerned,
than in not correcting the extravagancy of Painters and Printers. And I
confess, I have always suspected, that these men, who now charge us with the
Image-Idolatry, of having Pictures in our Common Prayer Books (which is a very
late invention) did secretly lay the design to reconcile our people by degrees
to the use of Pictures and Images.

The Dissenters indeed were never any great Friends to Holy Days; but they
never charged us with worshipping Saints on those days, which they saw we did
not; nor do they now charge us with worshipping the Bread, when we kneel at
receiving the Sacrament, (which is contrary to the public Declarations of our
Church) but reject it, because it was no Table-posture, and because it had been
abused (as they scruple not to say) to an Idolatrous worship of the Host in the
Church of Rome.

They have indeed objected against our Liturgy, That it was taken out of the
Mass Book, and have been sufficiently answered as to that point; and we know
who they were that first started that Objection, See Foxes and Firebrands.
some Mass-Priests under the disguise of Puritans. But I never heard before,
that they were scared with the very names of Epistles, and Gospels, and
Colects, and Litanies, nor did they ever quarrel with retaining Popish Saints
in our Calendar, when we give them to place in our Prayers, which is only an
evidence what Reformation we have made. I never knew before, that our
Dissenters thought the Mass Book as Ancient as St. Basil and St. Chrysostom, or
that they liked our Common Prayer Book ever the worse, because it came in with
the Reformation of Religion, and has been altered since several times for the
better; whereas their complaint is, that it is not yet altered enough. Much
less are they scandalized at the Thanksgiving for discovery of the Plot, how
great a Chimera soever it be.

Nor is there any dispute, that I know of, between the Dissenters and us about
the Power of Absolution, or the Ministerial power of forgiving Sin. They and we
agree, that Christ has left such a Power in the Church, of remitting and
retaining Sins, of receiving in, and putting out of the Church, which is the
state of Pardon and Forgiveness; and we both deny, that this is absolute and
judicial, or not only Ministerial. They know we oppose the pretense of a
Judicial Power to forgive Sins in the Church of Rome, which we say is reserved
for the great Judge of the World; and it is very strange, they should
peremptorily charge us with giving the Power of God to forgive Sins, to men,
and yet at the same time accuse us of not agreeing what this power of
Absolution is. Tho our Accommodator may make bold sometimes to contradict
himself, yet I doubt the Dissenters will think themselves misrepresented by
such contradictions.

But did ever any Dissenter charge us with encouraging a Deathbed Repentance,
for not obliging men to Confession and Penance (which he calls to Confess and
Repent) in the time of their Health? We teach men to confess their Sins to God,
and to men too when there is occasion for it, either to reconcile themselves to
their Brother, or to receive Ghostly comfort and advice; and we teach them to
Repent of their Sins, and reform them in time of Health, and show them what
great danger there is in a Deathbed Repentance, and how very seldom it proves
true; which is no great encouragement to such delays. But how the Dissenters,
who reject Confession to a Priest, and the Popish Sacrament of Penance,
themselves, should quarrel with us for doing so, is somewhat strange.

But we pretend to a power of giving Absolution, and never enjoin it but in the
last agony, which (he says) is argument enough to conclude, P. 25.
there is no obligation of Repenting amongst us, till death looks us in the
face. But he has not improved this Argument so well as he might; for Absolution
is never enjoined, not so much as in the hour of Death; (for we are only
required to give Absolution, in case the Penitent earnestly desire it) and
therefore, according to his reasoning, it follows, that we think Repentance
never necessary, not so much as in the hour of Death. But other men, who have
common understanding, would hence conclude, that we make a great difference
between the Sinners Repentance, and the Priests Absolution; that the first is
always necessary, the other only in case of Church Censures, or to give relief
to afflicted Consciences, or to dismiss penitent sinners in the peace of the
Church.

Do not Dissenters themselves allow converted Priests, who are under the vow of
Continency, to Marry, if they cannot preserve their Chastity without it? And
has not our Accomodator then, put a wise Objection into their Mouths against
the Church of England; which, if it be any Objection, returns upon themselves?
Neither they nor we pretend to dispense with Vows made to God; but we think no
Vow can oblige men to Sin; and since all men have not the gift of Continency,
as our Savior says, If such Persons are ensnared in a rash Vow, (it may be,
while they were Children, or before they understood their own Temper and
Complexion) since we cannot think the Fornication of Priests a more holy State
than Marriage, we think it more justifyable to repent of a rash Vow, than to
live in a constant state of Temptation and Sin.

It is likely enough, as he says, that Dissenters may complain of Persecution,
tho they themselves have been declared Enemies to an unlimited Toleration; and
it will be hard to find a medium between a general Liberty of Conscience, and
those restraints which are laid on Dissenters.

But it must be considered, whether the Church or the State be chargeable with
this. The several Laws which have been made against Dissenters, have been more
for the security of the State, than of the Church; have been occasioned by a
restless humor which has threatened the public Peace; and have been rarely
executed but at the instance of Civil Authority, to provide for the security of
the State; and I suppose he will not parallel this with some other
Persecutions. But to make the Dissenters quarrel at the Assistance given to the
Low Countries, and proffered to the French in their Rebellion, and the hard
usage of the Queen of Scots, and the late Murder of Charles I. argues, he
matters not much what he says; and to charge these Intrigues of State upon the
Church of England, is to forget that he is in England (and not at Rome) where
Kings make Peace and War, not the Pope with his Council of Cardinals.

And yet our Accommodator has kept the sweetest bit for the last. For he brings
in the Dissenter accusing the Church of England, for giving every man a liberty
of Judging, and yet requiring Obedience to her own Constitutions, which the
meanest Sectaries among them challenge and practice; and it is not very
modestly done of them, to blame that in us, which they do themselves. They all
judge for themselves, and therefore form Churches and Communions of their own;
and they will not receive any into their Communion, without owning their Faith,
and submitting to their Order and Discipline; and this is all that the Church
of England challenges, only with this difference, that being established by
Law, her Communion and Government is enforced by Laws. And what a mighty
Absurdity and Contradiction is this, that men should be taught to use their own
Reason and Judgment in Religion, and yet required to submit and conform to a
Church, whose Faith and Worship is consonant both to Scripture and Reason.

Well, but after all this Liberty granted by the Church of England, Whosoever
will follow her, must shut his Eyes, stifle his Reason, and be led only by the
Nose. Why! What Is the matter now? The charge is no more but this, That in
matters of Order and Decency; and such things as are left to the Determination
of Church Governors, as are neither forbid nor commanded by God, we must
submit to the Determinations of Authority, whatever private Judgment or
Opinion we may have of things. A great fault this, that tho every man must
judge for himself in good and evil, yet every private man's Judgment must be
overruled by the public Judgment in matters of Order and external
circumstances of Religion.

Much of the same nature, P. 31.
is his concluding Charge, That we are a wavering and unsettled Church, subject
to continual Variations, because some Rites and Ceremonies formerly used, are
now laid aside; And what then? Does the settlement of the Church consist in
external Ceremonies? Is it any fault in a Church, which challenges to her self
a Power to appoint, and constitute, and alter external Rites, to exercise this
Power as She shall think most for the Edification of the Church, which is the
only Rule of right and wrong in this Case, which may therefore change with the
Change and Alteration of times and Persons, and other external circumstances of
Affairs?

Now let every man judge, whether there were ever such a Speech made for a
Dissenterbefore, which in every Point of it is directly contrary to his own
Profession and Practice: It is time for our Author to have done with his Trade
of Representing, for no man would know what it was he Represented, did he not
take care with the unskilful Painter to write over his uncouth Figures, what
they are; This is an Horse, and this an Ass. And thus this hopeful design of
Representing and Misrepresenting, ends only in ridiculing the Church of
England; a Liberty, which if we needed it, is not mannerly for us to use at
this time; but we are contented they should ridicule our Church, if they will
permit us truly to Represent theirs.

But to proceed, Our Accommodator grants that he is still in Arrears; and
certainly, never any Bankrupt paid less in the Pound than he offers; P. 35.
and this is his Accommodating, which Merchants call Compounding.

In my Answer to his Reflections, I proved, that what he calls the Character of
a Papist Misrepresented, has nothing of Misrepresentation in it properly so
called; for there was no matter of Fact misreported; in his Answer, which he
calls, Papists protesting against Protestant Popery, instead of justifying his
Character, he seeks out for new Misrepresentations; this in my last Answer, I
enquired the reason of, Why, instead of justifying his own Misrepresentations,
which he had so unjustly fathered upon us, he should hunt about to pick up some
new Misrepresentations for me to Answer. And the Reason he now assigns for it,
is, Because I had little to say against the former, except that they were not
to be called Misrepresentations in a strict Sense. Now, the less I had to say,
it was the more easily answered, tho I know not what more need to be answered
to the charge of Misrepresenting, than to prove that it is false. But he says,
he fathered his Misrepresentations on no Body; and so much the worse for that,
for a general charge includes every Body.

And yet he was as unfortunate in his new Misrepresentations, as in his old
ones. He brings in the Archbishop of York for a Misrepresenter, whereas the
Misrepresentations he Transcribes out of the Archbishop, the Archbishop cites
out of Popish Authors, and names the Authors where they are to be found; but
the Protester to make a Misrepresenter of him, conceals all these Authorities,
and sets down the Words as the Bishops own; and this he did only to consult the
Credit of the Prelate: P. 36.
In what Sir? That he might have the entire Glory of being a Misrepresenter,
without being thought to steal out of Popish Authors.

But he says, The Bishop is still a Misrepresenter, in charging these sayings
of private Doctors upon the Church; But where does he do that? Yes, He says,
He (that is, the Papist) must believe; but does he say, The Church says thus,
or only Stapleton? Stapleton might be a Misrepresenter, in delivering this as
the Faith of the Church, That we must simply believe the Church of Rome,
whether it teach true or false; but the Archbishop does not Misrepresent the
Church in saying, that Stapleton says so. What is the Authority of private
Doctors, is not the Dispute; but, whether Protestants be Misrepresenters for
saying, That such Doctrines are taught by such Doctors of the Church of Rome.

The Case of Mr. Sutcliff (another of his Misrepresenters) is somewhat
different. For, besides what he cites from their own Authors, which is set down
by the Protester without taking notice that he quotes his Authors for it; he
many times charges them with the Concequences of their Doctrines and Practices;
not that he charges them with owning such Consequences, but proves such
Doctrines on them, from what they do profess and own; and such sayings as these
the Protester sets down as charged on the Church of Rome in the first instance,
as her avowed Doctrine: When Mr. Sutcliff only alleges them, as the just
interpretations and Consequences of her Doctrine, which differ just as much as
Misrepresenting and Disputing; as saying what a Church professes to believe,
and what the consequence of such a Faith is. As to show this by an instance or
two: The Protester sets these Propositions down as Mr. Sutcliffs
Misrepresentations. That Papists speak what they can in disgrace of the Holy
Scriptures; That they give the Office of Christ's Mediation to the Virgin Mary,
to Angels, and to Saints; That by the Doctrine of Papists, the Devils in Hell
may be saved. Now indeed, had he said, That the Papists teach this in express
Words, he had been a Misrepresenter in a proper Sense, for they teach no such
thing; but Mr. Sutcliff never charges these Doctrines Directly upon them, but
says, That they say, the Scriptures are obscure and hard to be understood; and
this is, to speak in disgrace of the Holy Scriptures. That they teach, that by
the merits of Saints, Christians obtain their desires, and are delivered out of
Purgatory. And this is to give the Office of Christ's Mediation to the Virgin
Mary, and to Saints. That they teach, that the Devils in Hell may have true
Faith; and yet our Savior says, Whosoever believes in him, shall not perish,
but have everlasting life: So it follows by the Doctrines of Papists, That the
Reprobrates and Devils in Hell may be saved. So that he expressly distinguishes
between what the Papists teach, and what himself concludes from such Doctrines,
and therefore he does not Misrepresent the Papists; for he charges them with
owning no Doctrines but what they do own; but if he be guilty of any fault, it
is in reasoning and Disputing; and there is no way that I know of, to confute
such Consequences, but by Reason and Dispute; the very Name of which is very
uneasy to the Representer, and there is good reason why it should be so.

And this I suppose may satisfy the Accommodator Why I charged him with
setting down these sayings of Mr. Sutcliff, separated from the Reasons of them;
for how little soever he may think himself concerned in his Reasons, yet it is
of great Consequence in the matter of Representing, to distinguish between the
Doctrines of Papists, and what is charged on them, only, as the Consequence of
their Doctrines. To charge them with teaching such Doctrines as they do not
teach, is Misrepresenting* and therefore, had these sayings, which he
Transcribed out of Mr. Sutcliff, been charged upon the Papists as their
sayings, it had been Misrepresenting; and this was the design of the Protester
in quoting these sayings, without giving an account upon what occasion they
were said, to persuade his Readers, that Mr. Sutcliff had directly and
immediately charged these Doctrines upon Papists as expressly taught by them,
and then he had been a Misrepresenter indeed. But since it is otherwise, it is
plain, Mr. Sutcliff was Misrepresented by the Protester, but he did not
Misrepresent Papists, as that signifies charging them immediately with such
Doctrines as they do not own.

In the next place he charges me with translating dishonestly, P. 37.
for not rendering proper Deum, or for Gods sake, in English, in the form of
consecrating the Cross. Now I confess, why this was not translated I cannot
tell, and knew nothing of it, till I was informed by him; had it been in a
dispute about the nature and reason of that worship which they pay to the
Cross, these words had been very considerable; but it relating only to the
manner of consecrating the Cross, they signified nothing, as any one will see,
who consults the place. Especially considering, that the whole design of that
Discourse about the Worship of Images (against which he has not one word to
object, but this Omission) was to show the evil of Image Worship, tho they gave
no Worship to the material Image, but only worshipped God or Christ, or the
Saints by Images; and therefore I had no occasion at all to conceal the English
of propter Deum.

In my Answer to Papists protesting against Protestant-Popery, I took occasion
to examine the Bishop of Condom's Exposition in two very concerning Points, P.
38.
viz. The Invocation of Saints, and Worship of Images; our Accomodator, it
seems, could see no reason why he should engage in this Dispute, and therefore
thinks it sufficient to show, that my Reasons for this Dispute are not cogent,
and he names two, such as they are; 1. That I know no reason for all this
Dispute. But this saying related to the Dispute about the Bishop of Condom's
Authority, not about his Exposition of the Catholic Faith. 2. His second
Reason is like the first; Because I said, He was not satisfied with my bare
telling him, That I was not satisfied with his Religion; and therefore now I
would give him my Reasons for it; which he huffs at, and says, he was never
concerned with my not liking his Religion. What pretty Reasons will serve to
excuse a Man from Answering a Discourse which he knows he cannot answer!

The plain case is this, The Representer made his Appeals, and put great
confidence in the Bishop of Condom's Authority, whose business is to put the
softest sense he can upon the Doctrines of the Council of Trent; and such
Interpretations of the Catholic Faith, as have been condemned by other very
Catholic Doctors. In my Reply to the Reflections, I considered what this
Bishops Authority is; and in my last Answer I examined what the Protester had
returned in the defense of it, which our Accommodator now says not one word to:
But yet I told him, I knew no reason for this dispute, Whether the Bishop of
Condom's Exposition were to be the standard of the Roman Catholic Faith; for
if we should allow this, yet Popery is a very corrupt Religion, tho the Bishop
of Condom were the Authentic Expositor of it. And to show that it is so, I
undertook to examine that Bishops Exposition in those two great Articles of the
Romish Faith, the Invocation of Saints, and Worship of Images; and how this
should be a Reason for our Accommodator to take no notice of it, I cannot
imagine: Had he any zeal for his Religion, and could have answered that
Discourse, I believe all that I could have said would not have hindered him.

To conclude this whole matter, He peremptorily adheres to his first Title of a
Representer, and declines all manner of disputation, tho in vindication of the
Bishop of Condom's Exposition, to which he so often Appeals. The only point he
sticks to is, That to assent to the Catholic Faith, as expounded in his
Character, and by the Bishop of Condom, is sufficient for any Man to be
received into the Communion of the Church of Rome. But both he and the Bishop
of Condom do not merely Represent, but Reason and Argue also; and I should have
thought they had been a little concerned to justify their own Representations
and Reasonings. But whether this Reasoning and Disputing were agreeable to his
design or not, it was very necessary to ours. For when they endeavor to soften
the Doctrines of their Church, and to abate a great deal of Bellarmin's Popery,
to reconcile our people to them; it is necessary for us to warn them of the
snare, and to show them what an ill thing Popery is in its best dress; and
therefore I as little desire that he should answer what I have said to this
purpose, as he cares for doing it: I never writ a Book with a desire to have it
answered; but to inform those, who otherwise might be imposed on. And I suppose
our people will think never the worse of any Book, because Papists decline the
dispute, who were never known to avoid Disputing, when they thought they could
get any thing by it.

And thus I take a fair leave of the Representer; for this matter, I think, is
driven as far as it will go: We have by his own confession, cleared our selves
from being Misrepresenters in the true and proper sense of the Word; for we
have not falsely charged them with any Doctrines and Practices disowned by their
Church; and as for their Character of a Papist Represented, though it falls very
short of what some great Divines among them, of equal Authority with the Bishop
of Condom, have thought to be the Doctrine of the Council of Trent; yet we are
willing to join issue with them upon their own terms, and to show them our
Reasons, why we cannot comply with this refined and new-modelled Popery. But
this is to dispute, and that does not agree with a Representer, whose business
is to make Characters without any concern to defend them: And I am not so fond
of disputing, as to dispute with him whether he will or no.

FINIS.

