THE CASE OF Resistance OF THE SUPREME POWERS Stated and Resolved, According to
the DOCTRINE OF THE Holy SCRIPTURES. By WILL. SHERLOCK, D. D. Rector of St.
George Buttolph-lane, London.

LONDON: Printed for Fincham Gardener, at the White-horse in Ludgate Street.
1684.

TO THE Right Honorable FRANCIS Lord GUILFORD, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal
of ENGLAND, and one of His Majesty's most Honorable PRIVY COUNCIL.
My Lord,
I Humbly beg leave to present to your Lordships hands, a very plain Discourse,
but very necessary in such an Age as this, wherein the principles of Rebellion
are openly professed and taught, and the Doctrine of Nonresistance and Passive
Obedience, not confuted, but laughed out of countenance.

There* have been indeed a great many excellent Books writ upon this Argument
by learned men; but I fear most of them are too learned for ordinary Readers,
who most need instruction, and are most easily poisoned with Seditious
*Doctrines; and therefore there is still occasion enough *for such a small
Treatise as this, which I hope is fitted to the understanding of the meanest
men, who will be so honest, as impartially to consider it: and those who will
not read nor consider, what is offered for their conviction, are out of the
reach of all instruction, and must be governed by other methods.

My Lord, Your Lordships known Loyalty and Zeal for the service of the Crown,
which by the favor of a wise and discerning Prince has deservedly advanced you
to so high as Station, made me presume, that such a present as this, though in
*it self very mean, might not be unacceptable to you, especially when it is
intended as a public acknowledgment (the best which my mean circumstances in
the World enable me to make) of those great favors I have received from your
Lordship.

That God would bless your Lordship with a long Life, and vigorous Age, and
increase of Honor, for the service of the King, and of the Church, is the
prayer of,

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble and most obedient Servant* W. SHERLOCK.

THE CASE OF Resistance OF THE SUPREME POWERS Stated and Resolved, According to
the Doctrine of the Holy SCRIPTURES.
The INTRODUCTION.
I Presume, I need make no apology for the seasonableness of this Discourse at
this time: for if eever it be fit to put People in mind of that Subjection
which they owe to the Higher Powers, no time can be more proper for it, than
when we see the Peace and Security of Public Government disturbed and
endangered by Popish and Fanatic Conspiracies, who like Sampson's Foxes,
though they look very different ways, yet are tied together by the Tail with a
Firebrand between them; and had not the good Providence of God wonderfully
appeared for the preservation of his Anointed, I am sure it had been a very
unseasonable time now to have treated on this Subject* and therefore, setting
aside all Apologies, I shall only give a brief account of the design of this
following Treatise.

There are three ways of proving and confirming the Doctrine of Non-resistance,
or Subjection to Sovereign Princes. 1. By the Testimonies of the Holy
Scriptures. 2. By the Doctrine and Practice of the Primitive Christians. 3. By
the fundamental Constitutions of that particular Government under which we
live. I have considered the last, as much as was necessary to my purpose. The
second I have not meddled with: for whoever has a mind to be satisfied about
it, may consult that admirable Discourse of Archbishop Usher, about the Power
of the Prince, and the Obedience of the Subject; which will not cost much
money, nor take up much time to read it. But the design I proposed to my self,
was carefully to consider the Testimonies of Scripture, which are beyond all
other Authorities, and to vindicate them from the Cavils and Exceptions of the
several Patrons of Resistance. And the whole Discourse is divided into these
following Chapters.

1. The First contains the Authorities of the Old Testament; wherein I have
plainly shown, that God himself set up a Sovereign and Irresistible Power in
the Jewish Nation; and that during all that time, it was unlawful for Subjects,
upon any pretense whatsoever, to resist their Princes. 2. The Second contains
the Doctrine of our Savior, concerning Subjection to Sovereign Princes. 3. The
Third contains an account of our Savior's Example in this matter. 4. The
Fourth considers what Saint Paul's Doctrine was about Subjection. 5. The Fifth,
the Doctrine of Saint Peter. 6. The Sixth contains an Answer to the most
popular Objections against Non-resistance.
In examining the Authorities of Scripture, I have carefully considered
whatever has been plausibly urged in defense of the Doctrine of Resistance, and
reduced it under those particular Texts which have been thought most to favor
it: and I do not know of any thing material, which has been pleaded in this
Cause, which I have wholly omitted. Possibly some may complain, that I have not
observed the exact Rules of Art and Method in this, to propose the Question, to
explain the Terms of it, to produce my Proofs, and then to answer the
Objections which are made against it. Now this I must acknowledge in part to be
true; and I think this Discourse never the less perfect for that. The
Proposition I undertake to prove, is this: That Sovereign Princes, or the
Supreme Power in any Nation, in whomsoever it is placed, is in all cases
irresistible. This is a plain Proposition, which needs no explanation: and the
way I take to prove it, is as plain; by producing the Testimonies of Scripture
both of the Old and New Testament, as they lie in order, and showing what Power
they grant to Princes, and what Obedience they require of Subjects. This is the
fairest way I could think on, to give my Readers a full view of the Doctrine of
the Scriptures in this matter; and this was all I intended to do: for I am
verily persuaded, that were men once convinced that Resistance of Princes is
expressly contrary to the Doctrine both of the Old and New Testament, it would
be no easy matter, by any other Arts or Pretenses, to draw the most fanatical
and factious persons amongst us (who retain any Reverence for God) into a
Rebellion.

CHAP. I. Wherein the Unlawfulness of Resisting the Supreme Powers is proved,
from the Authority of the Old Testament.
TO prove the unlawfulness of Resistance, I shall begin with the Old Testament.
Now there is nothing more evident, than that God set up such a Supreme and
Sovereign Power in the Jewish Nation, as could not, and ought not to be
resisted by the Fundamental Laws of their Government. For this is all I am
concerned at present to prove, That it is never lawful to resist the Higher
Powers; not that the Supreme and Sovereign power is always to be in a single
Person, but that wherever it is, it is irresistible, and that whenever this
Supreme power by the Laws of the Nation, is invested in a single Person, such a
Prince must not upon any pretense whatsoever be resisted.

The first Governor God set over the Children of Israel, when he brought them
out of the Land of Egypt, was Moses; and I think I need not prove how Sacred
and irresistible his Authority was. This is sufficiently evident in the
rebellion of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, against Moses and Aaron, when God
caused the earth to open her mouth and swallow them up, 16 Numbers. And lest
this should be thought an extraordinary case, Moses and Aaron being
extraordinary persons, immediately appointed by God, and governed by his
immediate direction; the Apostle St. Jude alleadges this example against those
in his days, who were turbulent and factious, who despised dominions, and spoke
evil of dignities, that they should perish in the gainsaying of Core, Iud. v.
11. which he could not have done, had not this example extended to all
ordinary, as well as extraordinary Cases; had it not been a lasting testimony
of Gods displeasure against all those, who oppose themselves against the
Sovereign powers. But Moses was not always to rule over them, and therefore God
expressly provides for a Succession of Sovereign power, to which they must all
submit. The ordinary Sovereign power of the Jewish Nation after Moses his
death, was devolved either on the high Priest, or those extraordinary persons
whom God was pleased to raise up, such as Joshua and the several Judges, till
in Samuels days it settled in their Kings. For as for the Jewish Sanhedrim,
whose power is so much extolled by the Jewish Writers, who are all of a late
date, many years since the destruction of Jerusalem, and therefore no competent
witnesses of what was done so many ages before, it does not appear from any
testimony of Scripture, that there was any such Court of Judicature, till after
their return from the Babylonish Captivity.

But yet God took care to secure the Peace and good Government of the Nation,
by appointing such a power as should receive the last Appeals, and whose
Sentence in all Controversies should be final, and uncontrollable, as you may
see in the 17 Deuteronomy. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 v. There were inferior Magistrates and
Judges appointed in their several Tribes and Cities, which Moses did by the
advice of Iethro his Father-in-law, and by the approbation of God, Exodus 18.
But as the Supreme Power was still reserved in the hands of Moses, while he
lived, so it is here secured to the high Priest, or Judges, after his death;
for it is expressly appointed, that if those inferior Judges could not
determine the Controversy, they should come unto the Priests, the Levites,
that is, the Priests of the Tribe of Levi, (who by the 12 ver. appears only to
be the High Priest) and to the Judge that shall be in those days, that is, if
it shall be at such a time, when there is an extraordinary Judge raised by God,
(for there were not always such Judges in Israel, as is evident to any one who
reads the Book of Judges) and of them they should inquire, and they shall show
the sentence of Judgment; and thou shall do according to the Sentence which
they of that place, (which the Lord shall choose) shall show thee, and thou
shall observe to do according to all they shall inform thee. Where the Place
which God shall choose, signifies the Place which he should appoint for the Ark
of the Covenant, and for the Levitical worship; which was the place where the
high Priest, and the chief Judge or Ruler of Israel, when there was any such
person, had their ordinary residence; which was at first at Shilo, and
afterward at Jerusalem.

And what the Authority of the chief Priest, or of the Judge when there was
one, was in those days, appears from v. 12. And the man that will do
presumptuously, and will not hearken to the Priest, (that stands to minister
there before the Lord thy God) or unto the Judge, even that man shall die, and
thou shall put away the evil from Israel. This is as absolute Authority, as the
most absolute Monarch in the world can challenge, that disobedience to their
last and final determination, what ever the cause be, shall be punished with
death: and what place can there be for Resistance in such a Constitution of
Government as this? It is said indeed in v. 11. according to the sentence of
the Law, which they shall teach thee, and according to the judgment that they
shall tell thee, thou shall do. And hence some conclude, that they were not
bound to abide by their sentence, nor were punishable, if they did not, but
only in such cases, when they gave sentence according to the Law of God. But
these men do not consider that the matter in controversy is supposed to be
doubtful, and such as could not be determined by the inferior Courts, and
therefore is submitted to the decision of the Supreme Judge; and as he
determined, so they must do; and no man, under the penalty of death, must
presume to do otherwise: which takes away all liberty of judging from private
persons, though this Supreme Judge might possibly mistake in his Judgment, as
all humane Iudicatures are liable to mistakes; but it seems God* Almighty
thought it necessary that there should be some final Judgment, from whence
there should be no appeal, notwithstanding the possibility of a mistake in it.

So that there was a Supreme and Sovereign, that is, unaccountable and
irresistible Power in the Jewish Nation appointed by God himself: for indeed it
is not possible that the public Peace and Security of any Nation should be
preserved without it. And I think it is as plain, that when the Jews would have
a King, their Kings were invested with this Supreme and Irresistible Power: for
when they desired a King, they did not desire a mere nominal and titular King,
but a King to judge them, and to go out before them, and fight their battles;
that is, a King who had the Supreme and Sovereign Authority, 1 Samuel 8. 6. 19.
20. a King who should have all that power of Government, excepting the peculiar
acts of the Priestly Office, which either their High Priest or their Judges had
before.

And therefore when Samuel tells them what shall be the manner of their King,
11 ver. though what he says does necessarily suppose the translation of the
Sovereign and Irresistible power to the person of their King, yet it does not
suppose that the King had any new power given him more than what was exercised
formerly by their Priests and Judges. He does not deter them from choosing a
King, because a King should have greater power, and be more uncontrollable and
irresistible than their other Rulers were: for Samuel himself had had as
sovereign and irresistible a power as any King, being the Supreme Judge in
Israel, whose Sentence no man could disobey or contradict, but he incurred the
penalty of death, according to the Mosaical Law. But the reason why he
disswades them from choosing a King, was because the external Pomp and
Magnificence of Kings was like to be very chargeable and oppressive to them. He
will take your sons and appoint them for himself, for his chariots, and to be
his horsemen, and some shall run before his chariots. And he will appoint him
captains over thousands, and captains over fifties, and will set them to ear
his ground, and to reap his harvest. And thus in several particulars he
acquaints them what burdens and exactions they will bring upon themselves by
setting up a King, which they were then free from: and if any Prince should be
excessive in such exactions, yet they had no way to help themselves; they must
not resist nor rebel against him, nor expect, that what inconvenience they
might find in Kingly Government, God would relieve and deliver them from it,
when once they had chose a King: Ye shall cry out in that day, because of your
King which ye have chosen you, and the Lord will not hear you in that day, v.
18. That is, God will not alter the government for you again, how much soever
you may complain of it.

This, I say, is a plain proof that their Kings were invested with that
Sovereign Power which must not be resisted, though they oppress their Subjects
to maintain their own State, and the Grandeur and Magnificence of their
Kingdom. But I cannot think, that these words contain the original grant and
Charter of Regal power, but only the translation of that power which was
formerly in their Highpriests or Judges to Kings. Kings had no more power than
their other Governors had: for there can be no power greater than that which
is irresistible; but this power in the hands of Kings was likely to be more
burdensome and oppressive to them, than it was in the hands of their Priests
and Judges* by reason of their different way of living; which is the only
argument Samuel uses to dissuade them from transferring the Supreme and
Sovereign power to Princes. And therefore I rather choose to Translate Mishpat,
as our Translators do, by the manner of the King, than as other learned men do,
by the right of the King, thereby understanding the original Charter of Kingly
power: for it is not the Regal power which Samuel here blames, which is no
other but the very same power which he himself had, while he was Supreme Judge
of Israel, but their pompous way of living, which would prove very oppressive
and burdensome to them, and be apt to make them complain, who had not been used
to such exactions.

And here before I proceed, give me leave to make a short digression in
vindication of Kingly Government, which some men think is greatly disparaged by
this story. For 1. It is evident that God was angry with the Jews for desiring
a King; and declared his anger against them, by sending a violent tempest of
Thunder and Rain in Wheat-harvest; which made them confess, that they had added
to all their sins this evil, to ask a King, 1 Samuel 12. 16, 17. etc. From whence
some conclude, that Kingly power and Authority is so far from being the
Original appointment and constitution of God, that it is displeasing to him.
And 2. that Samuel in describing the manner of the King, represents it as
oppressive and uneasy to Subjects, and much more burdensome, and less
desirable than other Forms of Government.

1. As for the first, it must be acknowledged, that God was angry with the
Children of Israel for asking a King: but then these men mistake the reason,
which was not because God is an enemy to Kingly Government, but because he
himself was the King of Israel; and by asking a King to go in and out before
them, they expressed a dislike of Gods Government of them. Thus God tells Samuel,
They have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me, that I should not reign
over them, 1 Samuel 8. 7. And thus Samuel aggravates their sin, that they said,
Nay but a King shall reign over us; when the Lord your God was your King, 12
Chap. 12. v.

Now the Crime had been the same, had they set up an Aristocratical or
Democratical Government, as well as Regal Power, in derogation of Gods
Government of them. Their fault was not in choosing to be governed by a single
person; for so they had been governed all along, by Moses and Joshua, by their
high Priests, or those other extraordinary Judges whom God had raised up, and
at this very time by Samuel himself; for it is a great mistake to think that
the Jews, before they chose a King, were governed by a Synedrial power, like an
Aristocracy or Democracy, which there is not the least appearance of in all the
Sacred History; for as for those persons whom Moses by the advice of Iethro set
over the people, they were not a supreme or Sovereign Tribunal, but such
Subordinate Magistrates as every Prince makes use of for administering Justice
to the People. They were Rulers of thousands, Rulers of hundreds, Rulers of
fifties, Rulers of tens, 18 Exodus 21. and were so far from being one standing
Judicature, that they were divided among their several Tribes and Families: and
were so far from being supreme, that Moses still reserved all difficult cases,
and last appeals, that is, the true Sovereign power to himself, as it was
afterward by an express Law reserved to the High Priests, and Judges
extraordinarily appointed: and there is so little appearance of this Sovereign
Tribunal in Samuels days, that he himself went in Circuit every year, as our
Judges now do, to Bethel and Gilgal, and Mizpeh, and judged Israel, 1 Samuel 7.
16.

But the fault of Israel in asking a King was this, that they preferred the
government of a King, before the immediate government of God. For the
understanding of which, it will be necessary to consider briefly, how Gods
government of Israel differed from their government by Kings. For when they had
chose a King, did God cease to be the King of Israel? was not their King Gods
Minister and Vicegerent, as their Rulers and Judges were before? was not the
King God's Anointed? and did he not receive the Laws and Rules of Government
from him? yes, this is in some measure true, and yet the difference is very
great.

While God was the King of Israel, though he appointed a Supreme visible
Authority in the Nation, yet the exercise of this Authority was under the
immediate direction and government of God. Moses and Joshua did not stir a
step, nor attempt any thing without Gods order, no more than a menial servant
does without the direction of his Master. In times of Peace, they were under
the ordinary government of the High Priest, who was God's immediate servant,
who declared the Law to them, and in difficult cases, referred the cause to
God, who gave forth his answers by him: when they were oppressed by their
enemies, which God never permitted, but for their sins, when they repented and
begged Gods pardon and deliverance, God raised up some extraordinary persons
endued with an extraordinary spirit, to fight their Battles for them, and
subdue their Enemies, and to judge Israel; and these men did every thing by a
Divine impulse and inspiration, as Moses and Joshua did. So that they were as
immediately governed by God, as any man governs his own house and Family. But
when the Government was put into the hands of Kings, God in a great measure
left the administration of it to the will and pleasure of Princes, and to the
methods of humane Governments and Policy.

Though God did immediately appoint Saul, and afterward David to be King, yet
ordinarily the government descended not by God's immediate choice, but by the
right of Succession: and though some Kings were Prophets too, yet it was not
often so; they were not so immediately directed by God as the Judges of old
were, but had their Councels of State for advice in peace and war, and their
standing Armies and Guards for the defense of their Persons and Government.
They were indeed commanded to govern by the Laws of Moses, to consult the
Oracles of God in difficult cases, and God raised up extraordinary Prophets to
direct them, but still it was in their own power, whether they would obey the
Laws of God, or hearken to his Prophets; good Kings did, and bad Kings did not;
and therefore the government of Israel by Kings, was like other humane
governments, liable to all the defects and miscarriages which other governments
are; whereas while the government was immediately in God's hands, they did not
only receive their Laws, and external Polity from him, but the very executive
power was in God: for though it was administered by Men, yet it was administered
by God's immediate direction, with the most exact Wisdom, Justice and Goodness.

This was the sin of the Jews, that they preferred the Government of an earthly
King, before having God for their King; and this must be acknowledged to be a
great fault, but it is such a fault, as no other Nation was ever capable of,
but only the Jews, because God never vouchsafed to be King of any other Nation
in such a manner; and therefore we must not compare Kingly government, for
there is no competition between them, with the Government of God, but we must
compare Kingly government with any other form of humane Government; and then we
have reason to believe, that notwithstanding God was angry with the Jews, and
this was a case peculiar to the Jews for desiring a King, that yet he prefers
Kingly government before any other, because when he foresaw that the Jews would
in time grow weary of his government, he makes provision in their Law, for
setting up a King, not for setting up an Aristocratical or Democratical power,
which their Law makes no allowance for, as you may see, 17 Deuter. 14.

2. Another objection against Kingly power and Government, is, that Samuel in
this place represents it as very oppressive and burdensome to the Subject. For
what some men answer, that Samuel speaks here only of the abuse of Regal Power,
I think is not true; for the mere abuse of power is no Argument against it,
because all kind and forms of power are liable to be abused, and by this reason
we should have no government at all. And it is evident, that Samuel does not
mention any one thing here, that can be called an abuse of power, nothing but
what is absolutely necessary to maintain the State and Magnificence of an
Imperial Crown. For how can a Prince subsist without Officers and Servants of
all sorts, both Men and Women, both for the uses of his Family, and the service
of his government both in Peace and War? and how can this be maintained, but by
a Revenue proportionable to the expense? and since none of them had such an
estate, as to defray this charge themselves, whoever was to be chosen King,
must have it from others, by public Grants and public Taxes, which he here
expresses by taking their fields and their vineyards, and their olive-yards,
the tenth of their fields, and their vineyards, and the tenth of their sheep,
for himself and his servants, the tenth ^^^ng the usual Tribute* paid to the
Eastern Kings. This is not an abuse of power, though some Princes might be
excessive in all this, but it is the manner of the King, that which is
necessary to his Royal State. There is nothing of all this forbid in 17 Deuter.
where God gives Laws to the King; and indeed to forbid this, would be to forbid
Kingly power, which cannot subsist without it.

Indeed I find some Learned men mistaken in this matter; for they take it for
granted, that what Samuel here calls the manner of the King, is such an abuse
of power, as God had expressly forbid to Kings in the 17 of Deuter. 16, 17. but
why the abuse of Regal power should be called the manner or the right of the
King, is past my understanding. Mishpat, however you Translate it, must
signify something which is essential to Kingly government, otherwise Samuels
Argument against choosing a King had been sophistical and fallacious. For there
is no Form of Government but is liable to great abuses, when it falls into ill
hands: and this they had experience of at this very time; for the miscarriages
of Samuel's Sons, was the great reason, why the people at this time desired a
King* 1 Samuel 8. 3, 4, 5. And if we compare these two places together, what God
forbids the King, with what Samuel calls the manner of the King, we shall find
nothing alike. In the 17 of Deuteronomy. 16, 17. v. God tells them, that their King
shall not multiply horses to himself, nor cause the people to return into
Egypt, to the end that he should multiply horses, for as much as the Lord has
said unto you, Ye shall henceforth return no more that way. God would not allow
them to have any Commerce or intercourse with Egypt, and therefore forbid their
Kings to multiply horses, with which Egypt did abound, that there might be no
new familiarity contracted with that Idolatrous Nation. Neither shall he
multiply wives to himself, that his heart turn not away. Where multiplying
wives seems plainly to refer to his taking wives of other Nations and other
Religions, as appears from what is added, that his heart turn not away: that
is, lest they should seduce him to Idolatry, as we know Solomon's wives did
him, who are therefore said to turn away his heart, 1 Kings 11. 3, 4. Neither
shall he greatly multiply to himself silver and gold. For such a covetous
humor would mightily tempt him to oppress his Subjects. This is all that God
expressly forbids their Kings, when they should have any. But now Samuel in
describing the manner of the King, takes no notice of any thing of all this,
but only tells them, that their King would appoint out fit persons for his
service of their Sons and Daughters, that they should pay Tribute to him, and
should themselves be his servants; not as servants signifies flaves and
vassals, but Subjects, who owe all duty and service to their Prince as far as
he needs them.

But what is it then that Samuel finds fault with in Kingly power, and which he
uses as an argument to dissuade the Children of Israel from desiring a King?
why it is no more, than the necessary expenses and services of Kingly power,
which would be thought very grievous to them, who were a free people, and at
that time subject to no public services and exactions. The government they
then lived under was no charge at all to them They were governed, as I observed
before, either by their High Priest, or by Judges extraordinarily raised by
God. As for their High Priests, God himself had allotted their maintenance
suitable to the quality and dignity of their Office; and therefore they were no
more charge to the people when they were their Supreme Governors, than they
were, when the power was in other hands, either in the hands of Judges or
Kings. As for their Judges whom God raised up, they affected nothing of Royal
greatness, they had no Servants or Retinue, standing Guards or Armies to
maintain their Authority, which was secured by that Divine power with which
they acted, not by the external pomp and splendor of a Court. Thus we find
Moses appealing to God in the Rebellion of Korah, I have not taken one Ass from
them, neither have I hurt any of them, 16 Numbers 15. And thus Samuel appeals
to the Children of Israel themselves, Behold, here I am, witness against me
before the Lord, and before his Anointed; whose Ox have I taken? or whose Ass
have I taken? or whom have I defrauded? whom have I oppressed? or of whose
hands have I received any bribe to blind mine eyes therewith? and I will
restore it, 1 Samuel 12. 3. Now a people, who lived so free from all Tributes,
exactions, and other services due to Princes, must needs be thought sick of
ease and liberty, to exchange so cheap, so free a State, for the necessary
burdens and expenses of Royal power, though it were no more than what is
necessary; which is the whole of Samuels argument, not that Kingly government
is more expensive and burdensome than any other form of humane government, but
that it was to bring a new burden upon themselves, when they had none before.
No humane Governments, whether Democracies or Aristocracies, can subsist, but
upon the public charge; and the necessary expenses of Kingly power are not
greater than of a Commonwealth. I am sure this Kingdom did not find their
burdens eased by pulling down their King; and I believe, whoever acquaints
himself with the several forms of government, will find Kingly Power to be as
easy upon this score, as Commonwealths. So that what Samuel discourses here,
and which some men think so great a reflection upon Kingly government, does not
at all concern us, but was peculiar to the state and condition of the Jews at
that time.

Let us then proceed to consider how sacred and irresistible the Persons and
Authority of Kings were under the Jewish Government; and there cannot be a
plainer example of this, than in the case of David. He was himself anointed to
be King after Readiness death, but in the mean time was grievously persecuted by
Saul, pursued from one place to another, with a design to take away his life.
How now does David behave himself in this extremity? What course does he take
to secure himself from Saul? Why he takes the only course that is left a
Subject; he flies for it, and hides himself from Saul in the Mountains and
Caves of the Wilderness; and when he found he was discovered in one place, he
removes to another: He kept Spies upon Saul to observe his motions, not that he
might meet him to give him Battle, or to take him at an advantage; but that he
might keep out of his way, and not fall unawares into his hands.

Well, but this was no thanks to David, because he could do no otherwise. He
was too weak for Saul, and not able to stand against him; and therefore had no
other remedy but flight. But yet we must consider, that David was a man of War,
he slew Goliath, and fought the Battles of Israel with great success; he was an
admired and beloved Captain, which made Saul so jealous of him; the eyes of
Israel were upon him for their next King, and how easily might he have raised a
potent and formidable Rebellion against Saul! But he was so far from this, that
he invites no man to his assistance; and when some came uninvited, he made no
use of them in an offensive or defensive War against Saul. Nay, when God
delivered Saul two several times into David's hands, that he could as easily
have killed him, as have cut off the skirts of his garment at Engedi, 1 Samuel
24. or as have taken that spear away which stuck in the ground at his bolster,
as he did in the hill of Hachilah, 1 Samuel 26. yet he would neither touch Saul
himself, nor suffer any of the people that were with him to do it, though they
were very importunate with him for liberty to kill Saul; nay, though they urged
him with an argument from Providence, that it was a plain evidence that it was
the Will of God that he should kill Saul, because God had now delivered his
enemy into his hands, according to the promise he had made to David, 1 Samuel 24.
4. 26 chapter ver. 8. We know what use some men have made of this argument of
Providence, to justify all the Villainies they had a mind to act: but David, it
seems, did not think that an opportunity of doing evil, gave him license and
authority to do it. Opportunity, we say, makes a Thief, and it makes a Rebel,
and it makes a Murderer: no man can do any Wickedness, which he has no
opportunity of doing; and if the Providence of God, which puts such
opportunities into men's hands, justifies the wickedness they commit, no man can
be chargeable with any guilt whatever he does; and certainly opportunity will
as soon justify any other sin, as Rebellion and the Murder of Princes. We are
to learn our duty from the Law of God, not from his Providence; at least, this
must be a settled Principle, that the Providence of God will never justify any
action which his Law forbids.

And therefore, notwithstanding this opportunity which God had put into his
hands to destroy his enemy, and to take the Crown for his reward, David
considers his duty, remembers, that though Saul were his enemy, and that very
unjustly, yet he was the Lords Anointed. The Lord forbid, says he, that I
should do this unto my Master the Lords Anointed. to stretch forth my hand
against him, seeing he is the Lords Anointed. Nay, he was so far from taking
away his life, that his heart smore him for cutting off the skirt of his
Garment. And we ought to observe the reason David gives, why he durst not hurt
Saul, Because he was the Lords Anointed; which is the very reason the Apostle
gives in the 13 Romans 1, 2. because the powers are ordained of God; and he that
resists the power, resists the ordinance of God. For to be anointed of God,
signifies no more than that he was made King by God. Thus Josephus expounds
being anointed by God, (...), one who had the Kingdom bestowed on him by God;
and (...), one who was ordained by God. For it seems by this phrase, he looked
upon the external ceremony of Anointing to be like imposition of hands, which
in other cases consecrated Persons to peculiar offices. For this external
Unction was only a visible sign of Gods designation of them to such an
office; and when that was plain, they were as much God's Anointed without this
visible Unction as with it. Cyrus is called God's Anointed, though he never was
anointed by any Prophet, but only designed for his Kingdom by Prophecy, 45
Isai. 1. And we never read in Scripture, that any Kings had this external
Unction, who succeeded in the Kingdom by right of inheritance, unless the Title
and Succession were doubtful; and yet they were the Lord's Anointed too, that
is, were placed in the Throne by him. So that this is an eternal reason against
resisting Sovereign Princes, that they are set up by God, and invested with his
authority; and therefore their Persons and their authority are sacred.

But yet there are some men, who from the example of David, think they can
prove the lawfulness of a defensive, though not of an offensive War. For David,
when he fled from Saul, made himself Captain of four hundred men, 1 Samuel 22. 2.
which number soon increased to six hundred, 1 Samuel 23. 13. and still every day
increased by new additions, 1 Chronicles. 12. 1. Now why should he entertain these
men, but to defend himself against the forces of Saul? that is, to make a
defensive War whenever he was assaulted by him.

1. In answer to this, I observe, that David invited none of these men after
him, but they came Volunteers after a Beloved Captain and General; which shows
how formidable he could easily have made himself, when such numbers resorted to
him of their own accord.

2. When he had them, he never used them for any hostile acts against Saul, or
any of his forces; he never stood his ground, when he heard Saul was coming,
but always fled, and his men with him; men who were never used to fly, and
were very ready to have served him against Saul himself, would he have
permitted them. And I suppose they will not call this a defensive War, to fly
before an enemy, and to hide themselves in Caves and Mountains: and yet this
was the only defensive War which David made with all his men about him: nay,
all that he would make, and all that he could make, according to his professed
Principles, that it was not lawful to stretch out his hand against the Lord's
Anointed. And when these men are pursued, as David was, by an enraged and
jealous Prince, we will not charge them with Rebellion, though they fly before
him by thousands in a company.

3. Yet there was sufficient reason why David should entertain these men, who
voluntarily resorted to him, though he never intended to use them against Saul:
for some of them served for spies to observe Readiness motions, that he might not
be surprised by him, but have timely notice to make his escape. And the very
presence of such a number of men about him, without any hostile Act, preserved
him from being seized on by some officious Persons, who otherwise might have
delivered him into Readiness hands. And he being anointed by Samuel to be King
after Readiness death, this was the first step to his Kingdom, to have such a
retinue of valiant men about him; which made his advancement to the Throne more
easy, and discouraged any oppositions which might otherwise have been made
against him; as we see it proved in the event, and have reason to believe that
it was thus ordered by God for that very end. It is certain, that Gad the
Prophet, and Abiathar the Priest, who was the only man who escaped the fury
of Saul when he destroyed the Priests of the Lord, were in David's retinue; and
that David enterprized nothing, without first asking counsel of God: But he who
had anointed him to be King, now draws forces after him, which after Readiness
death should facilitate his advancement to the Kingdom.

2. It is objected further, that David intended to have stayed in Keilah, and
to have fortified it against Saul, had not he been informed that the men of the
City would have saved themselves by delivering him up to Saul, 1 Samuel 23. Now
to maintain any strong hold against a Prince, is an act of War, though it be
but a defensive War. And I grant it is so, but deny that there is any
appearance that David ever intended any such thing. David and his men, by God's
appointment and direction, had fought with the Philistines, and smote them with
a great slaughter, and saved Keilah from them; and as it is probable, did
intend to have stayed some time in Keilah. But David had heard that Saul
intended to come against Keilah, to destroy the City, and take him; and
enquires of the Lord about it, and received an answer, that Saul would come
against the City. He enquires again, whether the men of Keilah would deliver
him up to Saul, and was answered, that they would. And upon this, he and his
men leave Keilah, and betake themselves to the strong holds in the Wilderness.

But now is it likely, that if David had had any design to have fortified
Keilah against Saul, he would have been afraid of the men of the City? He had
600 men with him in Keilah, a victorious Army, which had lately destroyed the
Philistines who oppressed them; and therefore could easily have kept the men of
Keilah too in awe, if he had pleased, and have put it out of their power to
deliver him to Saul. But all that David designed was, to have staid there as
long as he could, and, when Saul had drawn nigh, to have removed to some other
place: But when he understood the treacherous inclinations of the men of
Keilah, and being resolved against all acts of hostility, he hastened his
remove before Saul drew near. So that these men must find some other example
than that of David, to countenance their rebellion against their Prince: for
David never rebelled, never fought against Saul; but when he had a very potent
Army with him, he and his men always fled, and hid themselves in the
Wilderness, and places of difficult access.

The sum is this: God from the very beginning, set up such a supreme and
sovereign power in the Jewish Nation, as could not, as ought not to be
resisted. This power was at first in the hands of Moses; and when Korah and his
company rebelled against him, God vindicated his authority by a miraculous
destruction of those Rebels: for the earth opened her mouth and swallowed them
up. Afterward, when they came into Canaan, the ordinary exercise of this power
was in their Highpriests and Judges, whom God raised up; whose sentence and
judgment was final, and must not be resisted, under penalty of death* when the
Children of Israel desired a King, this sovereign and irresistible power was
transferred to him, and settled in his Person. Saul was the first King who was
chosen by God, and anointed by Samuel; but for his disobedience, was afterward
rejected by God, and David the son of Iesse was anointed King to succeed after
Readiness death: But in the mean time David was persecuted by Saul, who sought
after his life. And though he himself was anointed by God, and Saul was
rejected by him, yet he durst not resist nor oppose him, nor defend himself by
force against the most unjust violence; but fled for his life, and hid himself
in Caves and Mountains. Nay, when Saul was delivered into his hands by God, he
durst not stretch out his hand against the Lord's Anointed.

But to proceed in the story. Solomon, David's son, who succeeded him in his
Kingdom, did all those things which God had expressly forbid the King to do. He
sent into Egypt for Horses, 1 Kings 10. 28. He multiplied Wives, and loved many
strange women, (together with the daughter of Pharaoh) women of the Moabites,
Ammonites, Edomites, Zidonians, and Hittites, 1 Kings 11. 1. He multiplied
Silver and Gold, 10 chap. 27. contrary to the command of God. For this God (who
is the only Judge of Sovereign Princes) was very angry with him, and threatens
to rend the Kingdom from him; which was afterward accomplished in the days of
Rehoboam: but yet this did not give authority to his Subjects to rebel. If to
be under the direction and obligation of Laws, makes a limited Monarchy, it is
certain the Kingdom of Israel was so. There were some things which the King was
expressly forbid to do, as you have already heard; and the Law of Moses was to
be the rule of his government, the standing Law of his Kingdom. And therefore
he was commanded, when he came to the Throne, to write a copy of the law with
his own hand, and to read in it all his days, that he might learn to fear the
Lord his God, and to keep all the words of this law, and these Statutes to do
them, 17 Deuteronomy. 18, 19, 20. and yet he was a sovereign Prince: if he broke these
Laws, God was his Judge and avenger; but he was accountable to no earthly
Tribunal.

Baasha killed Nadab the son of Jeroboam, and reigned in his stead, 1 Kings 15.
25, 26, 27. and for this and his other sins, God threatens evil against Baasha,
and against his house, 16 Chron. 7. Zimri slew Elah the son of Baasha, and slew
all the house of Baasha; but he did not long enjoy the Kingdom, which he had
usurpt by treason and murder: for he reigned but seven days in Tirzah; which
being besieged and taken by Omri, he went into the Palace of the King's house,
and burnt the King's house over him with fire, and died, v. 18.

This example Iezebel threatened Iehu with: Had Zimri peace, who slew his
master? 2 Kings 9. 31. and yet Nadab and Elah were both of them very wicked
Princes. And if that would justify Treason and Murder, both Baasha and Zimri
had been very innocent.

This is a sufficient evidence, how sacred and inviolable the Persons and
Authority of the Jewish Kings were, during the time of that Monarchy. But it
will not be amiss, briefly to consider what obligations the Jews were under to
be subject to the higher powers, when they were carried captive into Babylon.
Now the Prophet Jeremiah had given an express command to them, Seek the peace
of the city whither I have caused you to be carried away captives, and pray to
the Lord for it: for in the peace thereof ye shall have peace, 29 Jer. 7. Which
made it a necessary duty to be subject to those powers, under whose government
they lived. And accordingly we find, that Mordecai discovered the Treason of
Bigthana and Teresh, two of the King's Chamberlains, the Keepers of the door,
who sought to lay hand on the King Ahasuerus, 6 Esther 2. And how numerous and
powerful the Jews were at this time, and what great disturbance they could have
given to the Empire, appears evidently from the book of Esther. King Ahasuerus;
upon the suggestions of Haman, had granted a Decree for the destruction of the
whole People of the Jews; which was sent into all the Provinces, written and
sealed with the King's ring. This Decree could never be reversed again; for
that was contrary to the Laws of the Medes and Persians. And therefore when
Esther had found favor with the King, all that could be done for the Jews, was
to grant another Decree for them to defend themselves; which accordingly was
done, and the effect of it was this: That the Jews at Shusan slew three hundred
men, and the Jews of the other Provinces slew seventy and five thousand, and
rested from their enemies, 9 Esther 15, 16, 17. Without this Decree, Mordecai
did not think it lawful to resist, (which yet was a case of as great extremity
and barbarous cruelty, as could ever happen) which made him put Esther upon so
hazardous an attempt, as to venture into the King's presence, without being
called; which was death by their Law, unless the King should graciously hold
out the golden Scepter to them, 4 Esth. 11. and yet when they had obtained this
Decree, they were able to defend themselves, and to destroy their enemies;
which is as famous an example of Passive Obedience, as can be met with in any
History. And therefore the Prophet Daniel acknowledges to Belteshazzar, The
most high God gave Nebuchadnezzar thy Father a Kingdom, and Majesty, and Glory,
and Honor: and for the Majesty that he gave him, all People, nations, and
languages trembled and feared before him. Whom he would he slew, and whom he
would he kept alive; and whom he would be set up, and whom he would he pulled
down, 5 Dan. 18, 19. And if these Heathen Kings receive their power from God,
as the Prophet here affirms, St. Paul has made the application of it, That he
that resists, resists the ordinance of God.

This may serve for the times of the Old Testament; and I shall conclude these
testimonies with the saying of the wise man, who was both a Prophet and a King:
I counsel thee to keep the King's commandment, and that in regard of the oath
of God: Be not hasty to go out of his sight, stand not in an evil thing; for he
does whatsoever pleases him. Where the word of a King is, there is power; and
who may say unto him, What do thou? 8 Eccl. 2, 3, 4.

CHAP. II. The Doctrine of Christ concerning Non-resistance.
LEt us now consider, what Christ and his Apostles taught and practiced about
Obedience to Sovereign Princes; whereby we may learn, how far Christians are
obliged by these Laws of Subjection and Non-resistance.

1. I shall distinctly consider the Doctrine of Christ while he lived on Earth:
and here are several things very fit to be observed.

1. We have no reason to suspect, that Christ would alter the rights of
Sovereign power, and the measures of obedience and subjection, which were fixed
and determined by God himself. This was no part of his Commission, to change
the external forms and polities of Civil governments, which is an act of
secular power and authority, and does not belong to a Spiritual Prince. He who
would not undertake to decide a petty controversy, or to divide an inheritance
between two contending brethren, 12 Luke 13, 14. can we think that he would
attempt any thing of that vast consequence, as the changes and alterations of
Civil Power, which would have unsettled the Fundamental Constitutions of all the
governments of the world at that time?

Our Savior tells us, that he came not to destroy the Law and the Prophets,
but to fulfill it, (...), to fill it up, to complete and perfect it, 5 Matthew.
17. that is, to fulfill the ancient types and prophecies in his own Person, to
perfect an external and ceremonial, by a real and Evangelical righteousness, to
perfect the Moral Laws with new instances and degrees of virtue; but he
abrogated no Moral Law, and therefore not the Laws of Obedience and Subjection
to Princes, which has always been reduced to the fifth Commandment. Nay, he
abrogated no Laws, but by perfecting and fulfilling them; and therefore he
could make no alteration in the Doctrine of Non-resistance, which is as perfect
subjection as can or ought to be paid to Sovereign Princes. His Kingdom was not
of this world, as he told Pilate: though he was a King, he neither was an enemy
nor rival to Caesar; but had he absolved his Disciples from their obedience to
Princes, had he made it in any case lawful to resist, (which was so expressly
forbid the Jews by God himself, and which is such a contradiction to the very
notion of Sovereign Power) he had been somewhat worse than a Rival to all the
Princes of the Earth; for though he had set up no Kingdom of his own, yet he
had pulled down theirs. Whereas he took great care, that his Religion should
give no disturbance to the world, nor create any reasonable jealousies and
suspicions to Princes, who had been very excusable for their aversion to
Christianity, had it invaded the Rights and Royalties of their Crowns.

This makes it very improbable that our Savior should make any alterations in
Civil powers, or abridge the rights of Sovereignty; which is so foreign to his
design of coming into the world, and so incongruous to the Person which he
sustained: and yet he could not alter the duties of Subjects, but he must alter
the rights of Princes too; he must take away the Sovereign power of Princes, at
the same time that he makes it lawful for Subjects in any case whatsoever to
resist. We may safely then conclude, that our Savior has left the government
of the world as he found it: he has indeed given such admirable Laws, as will
teach Princes to govern, and Subjects to obey better; which is the most
effectual way to secure the public peace and happiness, to prevent the
Oppression of Subjects, and Rebellions against Princes: but he has not
interposed in new modelling the Governments of the world, which is not of such
consequence, as some men imagine. It is not the external form of Government,
but the Fatherly care and Prudence and Justice of Governors, and the dutiful
obedience of Subjects, which can make any people happy. If Princes and Subjects
be good Christians, they may be happy under most forms of Government; if they
be not, they can be happy under none. Had our Savior given Subjects Liberty to
Resist, to Depose, to Murder Tyrannical Princes, he had done them no kindness
at all; for to give liberty to Subjects to resist, is only to proclaim an
universal license to Factions and Seditions, and Civil Wars; and if any man can
think this such a mighty blessing to the world, yet me thinks it is not a
blessing proper for the Prince of peace to give. But he who instructs Princes
to rule as God's Ministers and Vicegerents, and to express a Fatherly Care and
concernment for the happiness of their Subjects, and that teaches Subjects to
reverence and obey their Prince, as the Image of God, and quietly to submit and
yield to his authority, and that inforces th^se Laws both on Princes and
Subjects in the Name and Authority of God, and from the consideration of the
future judgment, when Princes who abuse their power shall give an account of it
to their great Master, when Subjects who resist shall receive to themselves
Damnation, and those, who patiently and quietly suffer for God's sake, shall
have their injuries redrest, and their obedience rewarded: I say, such a Person
as this, takes a more effectual course to reform the abuses of civil power, and
to preserve good government in the world, than all our wise Politicians and
State-menders, who think to reform the government of the world, by some
Statespells and charms, without reforming those who govern, and those who are
governed. This our Savior has done, and this is the best thing that could be
done, nay this was all that he could do in this matter. He never usurpt any
civil power and authority, and therefore could not new model the governments of
the world: he never offers any external force and compulsion to make men obey
his Laws, and therefore neither forces Princes to rule well, nor Subjects to
obey; but he has taken the same care of the government of the World, as he has
done of all the other duties of Piety and Virtue; that is, he has given very
good Laws, and threatened those who break them with eternal punishments: and as
the Laws and Religion of our Savior prevail, so will the governments of the
world mend, without altering the Model and Constitution of them.

2. But yet we have some positive evidence, what our Savior taught about
Obedience to the higher powers. I shall give you two instances of it, which are
as plain and express, as can be desired.

1. The first is, that answer our Savior gave to the Pharisees and Herodians,
when they consulted together to entangle him in his talk, 22 Matthew. 15. etc.
They come to him with great ceremony and address, as to an infallible Oracle,
to consult him in a very weighty case of Conscience. They express a great
esteem and assurance of his sincerity, and faithfulness, and courage, as well
as of his unerring judgment, in declaring the will of God to them. Master, we
know that thou art true, and teach the way of God in Truth, neither carest
thou for any man, for thou regardest not the Person of man; that is, thou will
not conceal nor pervert the truth for fear nor favor: and then they propose an
insnaring question to him. Tell us therefore, what think thou? is it lawful
to give Tribute to Caesar, or not? They thought it impossible that he should
give any answer to this, which would not make him abnoxious, either to the
Roman Governors, if he denied that the Jews might lawfully pay Tribute to
Caesar, or to the Pharisees and People, if he affirmed that they might: for
there was a very potent Faction among them, who thought it unlawful for the
Jews to own the authority or usurpations of any Foreign Prince, or to pay
Tribute to him, as to their King. They being expressly forbid by their Law, to
set a stranger over them for their King, who is not their Brother, ( i. e,) who
is not a natural Jew, 17 Deuter. 15. and it seems they could not distinguish
between their own voluntary Act in choosing a stranger for their King, [which
was indeed forbid by their Law] and their submitting to a Foreign Prince, when
they were Conquered by him. Our Savior, who knew their wicked intention in all
this, that they did not come with an honest design to be instructed in their
duty, but to seek an advantage against him, expresses some indignation at it:
Why tempt ye me, ye Hypocrites? but yet to return them an answer to that their
question, he bids them show him the Tribute-money, that is, the money in which
they used to pay Tribute, and inquires whose Image and Superscription it had.
For Coining of money was as certain a mark of Sovereignty, as making Laws, or
the power of the Sword. Well, they acknowledge that the Image and
Superscription on the Tribute-money was Coesars; upon which he replies, Render
therefore unto Coesar the things that are Coesars, and unto God the things that
are God's. The plain meaning of which answer is this, That since by the very
impression on their money, it is evident, that Coesar is their Sovereign Lord,
they must render to him all the rights of Sovereignty, among which Tribute is
one, as St. Paul tells us, Render therefore unto all their dues, Tribute to
whom Tribute is due, Custom to whom Custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom
honor. 13 Romans 7. Whatever is due to Sovereign Princes, and does not interfere
with their duty to God, that they must give to Coesar, who at this time was
their Sovereign. In which answer there are several things observable.

1. That our Savior does not examine into Coesar's right, nor how he came by
this Sovereign power; but as he found him in possession of it, so he leaves
him, and requires them to render to him all the rights of Sovereignty.

2. That he does not particularly determine, what the things of Coesar are,
that is, what his right is, as a Sovereign Prince. Hence some men conclude,
that this Text can prove nothing; that we cannot learn from it, what our
Savior's Judgment was in this point; that it is only a subtle answer, which
those who asked the question could make nothing of; which was a proper return to
their ensnaring question. This, I think, is as great a reproach to our Savior,
as they can well cast upon him, that he, who was the wisdom of God, the great
Prophet and Teacher of Mankind, should return as sophistical and doubtful
answers, as the Heathen Oracles, and that in a case, which required, and would
admit a very plain answer. It is true, many times our Savior, when he
discourst of what concerned his own Person, or the Mysteries of his Kingdom,
which were not fit at that time to be published in plain terms, used a mystical
Language; as when he called his body the Temple, or he taught them by Parables,
which were not obvious at the first hearing, but still what he said, had a
certain and determined sense, and what was obscure and difficult, he explained
privately to his Apostles, that in due time they might explain it to others;
but to assert, as these men must do, that Christ gave them such an answer as
signified nothing, and which he intended they should understand nothing by,
shows that they are not so civil to our Savior as these Pharisees and
Herodians were, who at least owned in Complement, Master, we know that thou art
true, and teach the way of God in Truth, neither carest thou for any man,
for thou regardest not the Person of men.

But certainly the Pharisees did believe, that there was something in our
Savior's answer; for they marvelled, and left him, and went their way: and yet
those who had wit enough to ask such ensnaring questions, could not be so dull
as to be put off with a sophistical answer, (an art below the gravity of our
Saviors Person and Office) but would have urged it a little further, had they
not been sensible, that they were sufficiently answered, and had nothing to
reply.

For indeed, can any thing be plainer than our Savior's answer? They ask him,
whether it were lawful to pay Tribute to Coesar; he does not indeed in express
words say, that they should pay Tribute to Coesar, but he gives them such an
answer, as withal convinced them of the reason and necessity of it. He asks
whose Image and Superscription was on the Tribute-money; they tell him
Coesar's; from whence he infers, Render therefore unto Coesar the things that
are Coesar's. Therefore? wherefore? because the Tribute-money had Coesar's
Image on it; therefore they must render to Coesar the things that are Coesar's;
which certainly signifies, that Tribute was one of those things which belonged
to Coesar, and must be rendered to him, as appeared by it is having Coesar's
Image: not as if every thing that had Coesar's mark and stamp on it, did belong
to Coesar, and must be given to him, (as some men profanely enough, how wittily
soever they imagine, burlesque and ridicule our Savior's answer) for at this
rate all the money of the Empire, which bore his Image, was Coesar's; but the
money which was stamped with Coesar's Image, and was the current money of the
Nation, was a plain sign, as I observed before, that he was their Sovereign,
and paying Tribute was a known right due to Sovereign Princes; and therefore
the very money which they used, with Coesar's Image on it, resolved that
question, not only of the lawfulness, but the necessity of paying Tribute: and
this was so plain an answer, that the Pharisees were ashamed of their question,
and went away without making any reply; for they no more dared to deny that
Coesar was their King, than they thought he dared either to own or deny the
lawfulness of paying Tribute to Coesar. And this was all the subtilty of our
Savior's answer.

But then our Savior not confining his answer merely to the case of paying
Tribute, but answering in general, that we must render to Coesar the things
that are Coesar's, extends this to all the rights of Sovereign Princes, and so
becomes a standing rule in all cases, to give to Coesar what is Coesar's due.
And when our Savior commands us to render to Coesar the things which are
Coesar's, without telling us what Coesar's things are, this is so far from
making his answer doubtful and ambiguous, and of no use in this present
Controversy, that it suggests to us three plain and natural consequences,
which are sufficient to end this whole dispute.

1. That our Savior did not intend to make any alteration in the rights of
Sovereignty, but what rights he found Sovereign Princes possessed of, he leaves
them in the quiet possession of; for had he intended to make any change in this
matter, he would not have given such a general rule, to render to Coesar the
things which are Coesar's, without specifying what these things are.

2. And therefore he leaves them to the known Laws of the Empire to determine
what is Coesar's right. Whatever is essential to the notion of Soveraing Power,
whatever the Laws and Customs of Nations determine to be Coesar's right, that
they must render to him; for he would make no alteration in this matter. So
that subjection to Princes, and Non-resistance, is as plainly determined by our
Savior in this Law, as paying Tribute; for subjection and Non-resistance is as
essential a right of Sovereign Power, and as inseparable from the notion of it,
as any thing can be. So it is acknowledged by the Laws and Customs of Nations,
and so it is determined by the Apostle St. Paul, as I shall show hereafter.

3. I observe farther, that when our Savior joins our duty to our Prince, with
our duty to our God, render to Coesar the things which are Coesars, and to God
the things which are God's, he excepts nothing from Coesar's right, which by
the Laws of Nations is due to Sovereign Princes, but what is a violation of,
and an encroachment on Gods right and Sovereignty; that is, we must pay all
that Obedience and Subjection to Princes which is consistent with our duty to
God. This is the only limit our Savior sets to our duty to Princes. If they
should command us to renounce our Religion, and worship false Gods; if they
should challenge divine honors to themselves, as some of the Roman Emperors
did; this we must not do, because it is to renounce obedience and subjection to
God, who has a more sovereign power, and a greater right in us, than our
Prince: But all active and passive obedience, which is consistent with a good
conscience toward God, and required of us by the Laws of our Country, and the
essential rights of Sovereignty, is what we owe to our Prince, and what by our
Savior's command we must render to him. This I hope is sufficient for the
explication of our Savior's answer to the Pharisees and Herodians, which
evidently contains the Doctrine of obedience and subjection to Princes,
enforced on us by the authority of our Savior himself.

2. Our Savior's rebuke to St. Peter, when he drew his sword and struck a
servant of the high Priest and smote off his ear, is as plain a declaration
against resistance, as words can make it, 26 Mat. 52. Then said Jesus unto him,
Put up thy sword into his place: for all they that take the sword, shall perish
with the sword. For the understanding of which, we must consider upon what
occasion St. Peter drew his sword: for we must not think that our Savior does
absolutely forbid the use of the sword; which is to destroy all civil
governments, and the power of Princes, and to proclaim impunity to all the
villainies which were committed in the world. The sword is necessary to punish
wickedness, and to protect the innocent. In the hands of Princes it is an
instrument of Justice, as St. Paul tells us, That they bear not the sword in
vain but are the ministers of God, revengers to execute wrath upon him that
does evil, 13 Romans 4. In the hands of private Persons it may be lawfully used
in selfdefence. Thus our Savior, a little before his crucifixion, gave
commission to his Disciples to furnish themselves with swords, though they
parted with their garment for the purchase, 22 Luke 36. Which we may suppose
was not designed as a mere modish and fashionable thing, but to defend
themselves from the private assaults of robbers, and suchlike common enemies,
who, as Josephus tells us, were very numerous at that time. For no man wants
authority to defend his life against him who has no authority to take it away.

But the case of St. Peter was very different: he drew his sword indeed in his
Master's defense, but against a lawful authority. The officers of the Chief
Priests and Pharisees came with Judas to the place where Jesus was, to seize on
him. This was a lawful authority, though employed upon a very unjust errand;
but Authority must not be resisted, though in defense of the greatest
innocence. Men who draw their swords against lawful powers, shall perish with
the sword. Which does not signify what the event shall always be, but what is
the desert and merit of the action* Rebels may sometimes be prosperous, but
they always deserve punishment; and if they escape the sword in this world* St.
Paul tells us, they shall receive Damnation in the next.

What can be said more expressly against resistance than this? St. Peter never
could have drawn his sword in a better cause, never in the defense of a more
sacred Person. If we may defend oppressed Innocence against a lawful authority,
if we may oppose unjust and illegal violence, if any obligations of friendship,
gratitude, or Religion it self could justify resistance, St. Peter had not met
with this rebuke. What, should he tamely suffer his Lord and Master to be
betrayed, the most admirable example of universal Righteousness and goodness
that ever appeared in the world? Shall one who had done no evil, who had
neither offended against the Laws of God nor men, who had spent his whole time
in doing good, be so barbarously used, and treated like the vilest Malefactor?
Shall he who was so famous for miracles, who gave eyes to the blind, and feet
to the lame? shall he who was the great Prophet sent from God to instruct the
world, shall their dear Master be haled away from them, and they stand by, and
see it, and suffer it? Thus might S. Peter have argued for himself. But though
it was a very unjust action, yet it was done by a just authority: and lawful
Powers must not be resisted, though it were in defense of the Savior of the
world. And if St. Peter might not use the sword in defense of Christ's Person,
there is much less pretense to fight for his religion: for though some call
this fighting for religion, it is only fighting for themselves. Men may keep
their religion, if they please, in despite of earthly powers; and therefore no
powers can hurt religion, though they may persecute the Professors of it: And
therefore when men take up arms to avoid persecution, it is not in defense of
religion, but of themselves, that is, to avoid their suffering for religion.
And if St. Peter might not fight to preserve Christ himself, certainly neither
he nor we might take up arms to defend our selves from persecution. Christ was
the first Martyr for his own religion; his person was infinitely more sacred
and inviolable than any of us can pretend to be. And if St. Peter must not
fight for Christ, certainly we must not fight for our selves, though we
absurdly enough call it fighting for our religion.

And who were these powers St. Peter resisted? They were only the servants and
officers of the High Priest. The High Priest did not appear there himself; much
less Pilate, much less Caesar: and yet our Savior rebukes St. Peter for
resisting the inferior officers, though they offered the most unjust and
illegal violence. It seems, he did not understand our modern distinctions
between the Person and the Authority of the Prince; That though his person be
sacred, and must not be touched, yet his Ministers, who act by his authority,
may be opposed. We may fight his Navies, and demolish his Garrisons, and kill
his subjects, who fight for him, though we must not touch his Person. But he is
a mock- Prince, whose authority is confined to his own Person, who can do
nothing more than what he can do with his two hands; which cannot answer the
ends of Government. A Prince is not merely a natural, but a Political person,
and his personal Authority reaches as far as his commission does. His Officers
and Ministers of State, and commanders, and soldiers, are his hands, and eyes,
and ears, and legs; and he who resists those who act by his commission, may
as properly be said to resist the Personal authority of the Prince, as if he
himself were present in his natural Person, as well as by his authority. Thus
our Savior, it seems, thought, when he rebuked St. Peter for striking a
servant of the High Priest, and smiting off his ear.

And if S. Peter were rebuked for this, how comes the Pope to challenge the
sword in S. Peter's right, when our Savior would not allow S. Peter to use it
himself? And if St. Peter might not draw his sword against an inferior
officer, by what authority does the Pope pretend to dispose of Crowns and
Scepters, and to trample on the necks of the greatest Monarchs? And I suppose
the Presbyter can challenge no more authority than the Pope. Whether they will
allow St. Peter to have been a Bishop or Presbyter, this command to put up his
sword, equally concerns him in all capacities, and ought to secure sovereign
Princes from the unjust usurpations and treacherous conspiracies both of GENEVA
and ROME.

There is but one Objection, that I know of, against all this from the Doctrine
of our Savior, and that is, that he seems to disallow that very authority
which is exercised by secular Princes; and therefore cannot be thought such a
severe Preacher of obedience and subjection: for Authority and Subjection are
correlates, they have a mutual respect to each other; and therefore they must
stand or fall together. There is no authority where there is no subjection due,
and there can be no subjection due where there is no authority. And yet this is
the Doctrine which Christ taught his Disciples, 20 Mat. 25, 26, 27, 28 v. Ye
know that the princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them, and they
that are great, exercise authority upon them. But it shall not be so among you:
but whosoever will be great among you, let him be your minister. And whosoever
will be chief among you, let him be your servant. Even as the Son of man came
not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for
many. This text has been pressed to serve as many ill purposes, as most texts
in the Bible; and therefore deserves to be carefully considered. Some hence
infer, that it is unlawful for a Christian to be a Magistrate, or a King. As if
our Savior either intended that humane societies should be deprived of the
advantages of government, which is the greatest temporal blessing and security
to mankind; or had made it necessary that some men should continue Heathens and
Infidels, that they might govern Christians: which I doubt would be a sore
temptation to many to renounce Christianity, if they could gain a temporal
Crown by it.

Others from hence conclude, that there must be no superiority of degree
between the Ministers of the Gospel, but they must be all equal; as if because
the Apostles were to be all equal, without any superiority over each other,
therefore they were to have no superiority over inferior Ministers. As if
because the Apostles might not exercise such a secular power and sovereignty as
the Kings of the Gentiles did, therefore there must be no different degrees of
power in the Ministers of the Church; that is, that because secular and
spiritual power differ in the whole kind, therefore there are no
different-degrees of spiritual power. As if Christ himself were not superior
to his Apostles, because he did not assume to himself the secular authority of
earthly Princes, but came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, as he
commands them to do according to his example.

Others conclude, that at least Christian Princes must not usurp such a
sovereign, and absolute, and uncontrollable power as the Princes of the
Gentiles did, but must remember that they are but the Public Servants and
Ministers of the Commonwealth, and may be resisted, and called to an account by
their people for the maladministration of government. But how they infer
this, I confess, I cannot tell: for it is evident our Savior does not here
speak one word in derogation to that civil power and authority which was
exercised by secular Princes. He tells us indeed, that the Princes of the
Gentiles exercise dominion over them, and they that are great, exercise
authority upon them: But does he blame the exercise of this authority? Does he
set any narrower bounds or limits, than what the Heathen Princes challenged? By
no means; he says not one word of any such matter. St. Matthew indeed expresses
this power of Princes by (...), and (...), which some think intimates the abuse
of their Authority: but St. Luke renders it by (...), and (...), which only
signifies the exercise of sovereign power. And though most of the Roman
Emperors were guilty of very great miscarriages in government, yet our Savior
only refers to that lawful authority wherewith they were invested, not to the
abuse of it: and therefore he takes notice of that honorable Title which was
given to many Roman Emperors, that they were called (...), or Benefactors;
which certainly does not argue his dislike of civil Authority. But all that
our Savior tells his Disciples is, that it should not be so among them, that
they should not exercise such a secular power and authority as earthly Princes
do. Now is it any disparagement to Kingly power, to tell a Bishop that he must
not exercise such a sovereign authority over the Church, as the Prince does
over the State? which is the whole of what our Savior intended in this place.

For the occasion of these words, St. Matthew tells us, was to check that vain
ambition of Zebedee's two sons, who came to Christ, and employed their Mother
to ask of him, that one might sit on his right hand, and the other on his left
hand, in his Kingdom; that is, that they might have the greatest places of
dignity and power next himself. St. Luke tells us, that it was to compose that
strife and contention which was among them, which of them should be accounted
the greatest; which most likely refers to the same story, though it is plain
they quarrelled more than once about this matter. And the occasion of all these
quarrels, was a mistake of the nature of Christ's Kingdom. They, as well as the
rest of the Jews, expected their Messiah should be a Temporal Prince; and they
being convinced by the Miracles of Christ, that he was indeed the Messiah who
was to come, they lived in daily expectation when he would take the Kingdom
upon himself; and then they did not doubt but that they should be the chief
Ministers of State, and have the greatest places of trust and power in his
Kingdom: and this made them jealous of each others greatness, and so forward to
bespeak preferments for themselves. Now to cure these earthly ambitions, he
tells them, that his Kingdom was no such thing as they dreamt of, and that he
had no such preferments for them as they expected.

Earthly Princes lived in great Pomp and Splendor, and had great Places of
trust and honor to bestow on their servants; but they saw no such thing in
him: he came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, to live a mean,
industrious, and laborious life, and to die as a Malefactor, and give his life
a ransom for many. And they could not expect by being his servants, to be
advanced to secular power and authority, which he had not himself; but when he
came into his Kingdom, they should indeed share with him in his power and
authority; they should sit upon twelve Thrones, judging the twelve tribes of
Israel; that is, they should have the supreme authority in his Church, which
is his spiritual Kingdom. But there was nothing of external state and grandeur
in this, as they expected; but it was a life of humility and modesty, and
contempt of this world, and earthly greatness. The greatest Ministers in his
Kingdom must be as humble as a child, as he elsewhere tells them, and as
diligent and industrious, and condescending, as the meanest servant, and should
very often differ nothing from servants in their external fortune and condition
of life. This is the sum of what our Savior here teaches his Disciples; and he
is a wonderful man, and very quick-sighted, who can discover any reflection on
civil power and authority in all this.

I shall only observe farther, that when our Savior calls them here, the
Princes and Kings of the Gentiles or Nations, he does not speak this in
disparagement of them, that they were only Heathen and Infidel Princes, who
did this: for there were no other Princes at that time in the world. Heathen
and Pagan Princes sounds now as a note of infamy, whereby they are
distinguished from Christian Kings and Princes; but the Kings of the Gentiles
or Nations in our Savior's time, signified no more than Sovereign Princes, who
were invested with civil authority: And our Savior only distinguishes
between that civil power and authority which was exercised by secular Princes,
and that spiritual Kingdom which he was now about to erect in the world; and
the distinction had been of the same force, though there had been at that time
Jewish or Christian, as well as Heathen Princes. Still the difference between
Civil and Ecclesiastical authority is the same; and no Apostle or Bishop, as
such, can challenge the power or authority of earthly Princes, or any share in
it.

CHAP. III. What we may learn from our Savior's Practice about NONRESISTANCE.
HAving seen what the Doctrine of our Savior was, let us now consider his
Practice. And we need not doubt but our Savior lived, as he preached. He taught
his Disciples by his example, as well as by his Laws. His Life was the best
Comment upon his Sermons, was a visible Lecture of universal Righteousness and
goodness; and it is impossible to conceive a more perfect and absolute example
of Subjection and Non-resistance, than our Savior has set us.

When our Savior appeared in the world, the Jews were very weary of the Roman
yoke, and in earnest expectation of their Messiah, who, as they thought, would
restore the Kingdom again unto Israel; and this expectation of their Messiah,
whom they mistook for a Temporal Prince, made them very apt to join with any
one, who pretended to be the Messiah, and to rebel against the Roman
government. Such most likely were Theudas and Judas of Galilee, of whom we have
mention, 5 Acts 36, 37. and it is not impossible but the Egyptian, who led
4000 men into the wilderness, 2 Acts 38. either pretended to be the Messiah, or
some forerunner of him: to be sure, such were those false Christ's, and false
Prophets, of whom our Savior warns his Disciples, 24 Matthew. 23. Then if any
man shall say unto you, Lo here is Christ, or there, believe it not.

This being the temper of the Jewish Nation at that time, so extremely inclined
to Seditions, and Rebellion against the Roman powers, how easy had it been for
our Savior, had he pleased, to have made himself very potent and formidable!
how easy could he have gained even the Scribes and Pharisees to his party,
(whose great quarrel was at his meanness and poverty) would he once have
declared himself a Temporal Prince, and invaded the Throne! But he was so far
from this, that when he perceived the people had an intention to take him by
force and make him a King, he withdrew himself privately from them, and
departed into a mountain himself alone, 6 John 15. and yet I presume, there
might have been as many plausible pretenses to have justified a Rebellion then,
as ever there were in any Nation since. He had at that time fed five thousand
men, besides women and children, with five barley loaves and two small fishes;
and what a formidable Enemy would he have been, who could Victual an Army by
Miracles, and could, when he pleased, conquer by the same miraculous power
also! this the people, whom he had miraculously fed, were very sensible of and
did hence conclude, that he was the Prophet that should come into the world,
and that it was time to take him; and set him upon the Throne: but though our
Savior was indeed the Messiah, yet he was not such a Messiah, as they
expected; he was not a Temporal Prince, and therefore would not countenance
their Rebellion against Coesar, though it were to make himself a King.

It is sufficiently known, that Christ submitted to the most unjust sentence,
to the most ignominious and painful death, rather than resist the higher
powers, though he could so easily have called for Legions of Angels to his
rescue. But he went as a lamb to the slaughter, and as the sheep before the
shearer is dumb so he opened not his mouth: when he was reviled, he reviled not
again; when he suffered he threatened not, but committed himself to him who
judges righteously. He rebuked Peter, when he drew his Sword in his defense,
and tells Pilate the reason, why he was so easily apprehended, and used at
their pleasure, without any resistance and opposition, though he had been
formerly attended with such crowds of his Disciples; Because he was no Temporal
Prince, and therefore did not require his Disciples to fight for him, as other
Temporal Princes used to do. Jesus answered, My Kingdom is not of this world:
if my Kingdom were of this world, then would my servants fight, that I should
not be delivered to the Jews; but now is my Kingdom not from hence, 18 John 36.
Which plainly shows, that our Savior's subjection was not matter of force and
constraint, because he wanted power to resist; but it was matter of choice,
that which was most agreeable to the nature of his Kingdom, which was not to be
propagated by carnal weapons, but by suffering and death.

And when our Savior has set us such an example as this, it is wonderful to
me, that any, who call themselves his Disciples, can think it lawful to Rebel
against their Prince, and defend themselves from the most unjust violence by a
more unjust resistance. But there are few men, who are contented to follow
Christ to the Cross; they do not like that part of his example, and are willing
to persuade themselves, that they are not bound to imitate it. And there are
two things, which I find urged by some men to this purpose, which must be
briefly considered.

1. That it is no wonder, that Christ suffered patiently and quietly without
resisting the most unjust violence, because he came into the world to die, and
to make his Soul an offering for sin. And how could so innocent a person die,
but by the hands of unjust and Tyrannical powers? and it was inconsistent with
his design of dying for sin, to resist and oppose. This is the account our
Savior himself gives of his patient suffering. When St. Peter drew his Sword
in his defense, he tells him, Think thou, that I cannot now pray to my
Father, and he shall presently give me more than twelve Legions of Angels? But
how then shall the Scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be? 26 Matthew. 43.
54. And the cup which my Father has given me, shall I not drink it? 18 John 11.
But what is this now to us? our Savior did not resist the most unjust and
Tyrannical powers, because God had decreed he should die by their hands, and he
came into the world for this very purpose; but has God as peremptorily decreed,
that we must suffer also by unjust violence? were we born for this very end, to
suffer death by Herod's and Pontius Pilates? to be the slaves and Vassals, the
scorn and the Triumph of insolent Tyrants? certainly God had a greater care and
regard for Mankind than so: and then our case is very different from our
Savior's; and though he died patiently, we may defend our Lives, and our
Liberties, which are as dear as our Lives, if we can.

2. And therefore they add, that Christ took upon himself the person not only
of a private man, but of a servant, that he might make us free, and that not
only as to our Spiritual, but as to our Civil Liberties, as the Virgin Mary
sings* He has showed strength with his arm, he has scattered the proud in the
imagination of their heart: he has put down the mighty from their seats, and
has exalted them of low degree, 1 Luke 51, 52. which they think, does not
signify that Christ has established Tyrants in their Thrones, and subjected
Christians to the vilest slavery. As Christ has taught us by his example to
bear servitude and sufferings with an equal mind, when we cannot help it; so he
has not forbid us to vindicate and recover our natural rights and liberties,
when we can, according to the express direction of St. Paul, Art thou called
being a servant? care not for it: but if thou may be made free, use it
rather. Ye are bought with a price, be not ye the servants of men, 1 Cor. 7.
21, 23.

Now in answer to this, we may consider in general, that if all this proves any
thing, it proves, that Christ did not intend, that his sufferings should be an
example to us: and yet St. Peter expressly tells us, that he did; Christ also
suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we should follow his steps: and
wherein we must imitate Christ in suffering, he tells us in the same place,
viz. in suffering wrongfully, in taking it patiently, when we do well, and
suffer for it, 1 Pet. 2. 19, 20, 21. And I think St. Peter's Authority in this
case is better then all the Arguments that can be urged against it; and
therefore whether we could answer these Arguments or no, yet it is evident,
that they are not good, because they prove that which is manifestly false, that
Christ is not our Example in suffering, when St. Peter tells us, that he is:
but yet it is a mighty satisfaction, not only to know, that an Argument is
false, but to discover, wherein the fallacy consists; and therefore I shall
give a more particular answer to these objections.

1. As for their first Argument, that Christ came into the world on purpose to
die as a sacrifice for sin, and therefore it was inconsistent with his design,
and the person he undertook, to resist and oppose, had it been never so lawful
to resist; I grant it is very true, but yet this does not prove, that he cannot
be our example in suffering. For,

1. This is not the only reason our Savior gives of his Non-resistance, and
patient suffering. He gives Peter another reason, Because it is unlawful to
draw the Sword against a just Authority, though our cause be never so just: Put
up thy Sword again into his place, for all they that take the sword shall
perish by the sword; which I have already explained to you at large. So that
our Savior acknowledges it as unlawful to resist a lawful Authority, as it was
inconsistent with his design of dying for the sins of men; and herein certainly
he is fit to be our example, in not resisting a lawful Authority in his own
defense.

2. I grant, it had not been agreeable to the Person which our Savior took, to
have avoided death by a forcible resistance; but then our Savior voluntarily
took such a Person, as was fit to be an example to us. His Person and his
Religion were very well suited to each other; a meek, humble, suffering person,
to be an example of a meek, humble and suffering Religion. His person and
external circumstances of his appearance were on purpose fitted to his
Religion; and it is none of the least wonders of the Divine wisdom, that the
work of our redemption was accomplished in such a mysterious way, as at once
made our Savior the Author of our redemption, and an example of all the graces
and virtues of the Christian life.

Might not these men, if they pleased, by the same Argument prove, that Christ
is not to be our example in meekness and poverty, and contempt of this world,
and forgiving enemies, etc. because he came into the world on this design, not
to be ministered unto, but to minister? He chose a mean and low fortune* and all
the affronts and indignities he suffered, were part of his voluntary
humiliation, and therefore it became him to bear them patiently, and to forgive
them, as much as it did to die patiently by wicked hands; but there is not the
same reason for us to do so: and thus it will be hard to find any thing,
wherein Christ is to be our example, because the very reason of his coming into
the world, the manner and circumstances of his appearance, all that he did and
suffered, may be resolved into the decree and appointment of God, and his
voluntary undertaking, and the accomplishment of ancient Types and Prophecies;
and therefore he is no more to be an example to us, than a man who acts the
part of a beggar or of a Prince, is to be an example to all that see him.

But methinks it is worth considering, why Christ chose such a person as this.
Why he was born of mean and obscure parents, and chose a poor and industrious
life, and an accursed and infamous death? was it impossible for Infinite wisdom
to have laid a more glorious and triumphant scene of our redemption? was there
no possible way, but the condescension and sufferings of his own Son? Let those
say that, who dare venture to determine, what infinite wisdom can do. It is
enough for me to know, that Christ took such a mean and suffering person upon
him, because it was most agreeable to the Religion, which he preached, and of
which he was to be an example; and therefore though Christ suffered for other
reasons, and to other ends and purposes, than we do or can suffer, yet his
sufferings are an example to us, because God chose to save and redeem us by the
sufferings of his Son, not only that he might expiate our sins by his blood,
but also that he might be an example to us of meekness, and patience, and
submission to the Divine will, and subjection to government, even in the most
unjust and infamous sufferings.

3. We may consider further, that Christ's suffering in obedience to the will
and appointment of God, does not make him unfit to be our example. For though
God has not so peremptorily decreed, that all Christians should suffer, as he
did that Christ should suffer, yet whenever we are called forth to suffer, (as
we always are, when we cannot avoid suffering without resisting a lawful
Authority) our sufferings are as much the effects of God's decree and
appointment, as the sufferings of Christ were; and in such cases every
Christian may, and ought to say, as his Lord did, The Cup which my Father has
given me* shall I not drink it? Thus St. Peter expressly tells the Christians to
whom he wrote, and gives it as a reason, why they should suffer patiently, even
for doing well. For even hereunto were you called, because Christ also suffered
for us, leaving us an example, that we should follow his steps, 1 Pet. 2. 21.
Now calling in the New Testament signifies the choice and election of God, and
always supposes a divine decree, appointment, and constitution, as the
foundation of it. Thus St. Paul tells us, that the gifts and calling ((...)) of
God are without repentance, 11 Romans 29. that is, that decree he made to choose
the pesterity of Abraham for his people, which still entitled all those of them
to the blessings of the Gospel, who would believe in Christ. Thus the state of
Christianity is our calling, and holy calling, 2 Timothy 1. 9. 3 Heb. 1. because
it is the way and means God has chosen and appointed for the Salvation of
Mankind: and Christians are often styled the Called, because God has now
decreed to choose all the sincere Disciples of Christ, as he formerly did the
posterity of Abraham, to be his peculiar people; and throughout the Scriptures
of the New Testament, God is never said to call, nor any one to be called of
God, but with respect to some divine decree and constitution; and therefore
when St. Peter tells the Christians, that they are called to suffer, it
signifies that God has appointed them to it, by his positive will and decree.

This St. Paul discourses more at large in his Epistle to the Romans, and
comforts them under their sufferings from this very consideration, that the
sufferings which they underwent, were not the effects of mere chance and
accident, nor of the wickedness and injustice of men, nor barely of Gods
permission, but of his decree and appointment; and therefore they might
certainly conclude, that what ever their sufferings were, they should turn to
their good, 8 Romans 28, 29, 30. And we know that all things work together for
good to them that love God, to them that are called according to his purpose,
(...), to those who are called, that is, to suffer, which is the argument the
Apostle is discoursing of, according to his will and pleasure and appointment.

Sufferings are not for the good of all professed Christians, for they may tempt
Hypocrites to renounce their Religion, and great and severe sufferings may be
too powerful a temptation for weak though sincere Christians; and therefore
when the rage and malice of men boils and swells, God sets bounds to it, and
does not suffer these persecutions and afflictions promiscuously to light upon
all Christians, but exercises a very particular providence in choosing out fit
persons to suffer, in directing the storm and tempest of Persecution to fall
where he pleases, upon such Persons, who are armed with says and patience to
resist its fury, and to bear and conquer its rage. And such persons, who are
thus appointed, who are thus called by God to suffer, shall be sure to conquer,
and to receive the reward of Conquerours. For thus the Apostle adds, For whom
he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the Image of his
Son, that he might be the firstborn among many brethren. This conformity to
the Image of Christ in this place, does plainly signify a conformity to him in
sufferings, as is evident from the whole scope of the place. Some persons it
seems there are, whom God does predestinate or fore-appoint to be conformed to
the sufferings of Christ: for this is not the actual portion of all Christians,
though it is the condition of our Discipleship; and they are those whom he did
foreknow. Now the foreknowledge of God includes his choice and election; he
chooses out of the body of Christians, some fit persons to make his Martyrs and
Confessors, to be examples of Faith and Patience and Courage to the world, And
whom he did predestinate, them he also called; and whom he called, them he also
justified; and whom he justified* them he also glorified; that is, those
persons whom God thus chooses, and preordains to suffer as Christ did, in time
he calls forth to suffer; and when he does so he justifies them, that is, he
brings them off with triumph and victory, and owns and applauds their Faith and
Patience. For so (...) sometimes signifies; and therefore to be justified, is
expounded by to conquer and overcome* 3 Romans 4. That thou might be justified
((...)) in thy sayings, and might overcome when thou art judged. And indeed
this is properly to be justified in any trial or combat, to overcome and
conquer; and that God who gives the victory, gives the reward too; and whom he
justifies, them he also glorifies: which seems to refer not to those rewards
which are common to all Christians, but to some peculiar degree of glory, which
is prepared for such Conquerours, as the Apostle speaks; If so be, that we
suffer with him, that we may be also glorified together, 17 v.

So that though God has not made us slaves and vassals to the humor of every
Tyrant, yet all the afflictions and sufferings of Christians, especially those,
which befall them on the account of Religion, are as particularly ordered and
determined by God, as the sufferings of Christ himself were: and therefore
there is no difference upon this account between the sufferings of Christ, and
the sufferings of his Disciples; and therefore though Christ came into the
world on purpose to suffer in obedience to the Divine will, this does not make
him ever the less fit to be an example to us. Nay, his obedience to the will of
God in suffering the hardest things from the most unjust and Tyrannical powers,
is an example to us of the same patient suffering, and submission to the will
of God.

It is true, none of us in particular can know that God has decreed, that we
shall suffer such or such things, and from such or such hands, as our Savior
did; but yet this we know, that it is God's will and pleasure, that we should
patiently endure those sufferings, which we cannot avoid without sin; and since
he has forbid us by express Laws to resist the higher powers, whatever
sufferings cannot be avoided without resistance, it is God's will and pleasure,
that we should submit to them. And since none of these sufferings, which are
unavoidable to us, befall us without the particular decree and appointment of
God, we have reason in imitation of our great Master, to submit to them with
the same cheerfulness and self-resignation as he did.

There is something indeed in the example of our Savior, which in our
circumstances we are not bound to imitate. For he punctually knowing, what
God's will and pleasure was concerning him, voluntarily chose that condition,
which he so well knew, God had allotted for him. He freely chose a mean and
servile fortune, he chose suffering and death; when his time of offering up
himself was come, he went up to Jerusalem on purpose to die there: but we are
not bound to choose poverty and disgrace and suffering, we are not bound
voluntarily to deliver up our selves into the hands of Tyrants and
Persecutours, who thirst after our Blood. We may and ought to use all just and
honest arts to make our condition easy and comfortable in the world, and to
avoid the rage and fury of bloody men, because we cannot tell, that it is the
will and appointment of God, that we shall suffer, till our sufferings are
unavoidable* and then when we must either suffer or sin, when we must either
renounce our Religion, or resist the powers, we must embrace suffering and
death, as that portion, which God has allotted for us.

I shall only observe, by the way, what a mighty security this is to all good
Christians, how absolute or tyrannical soever the power be under which they
live; that they are safe in God's hands, and all the Powers of men and Devils
cannot touch them, till God by a positive decree appoints and orders their
suffering. There could not be greater nor more absolute Tyrants than the Roman
Emperors were at this time, and yet they had no power over the meanest
Christian, but by an express commission from Heaven. This is the special
privilege of the Christian Church above the rest of mankind, that they are
God's peculiar care and charge; that he does not permit any sufferings or
persecutions to befall them, but what he himself orders and appoints. It is a
great security to the World, that there is no evil happens to men but what God
permits, and that he permits nothing but what he can overruled to wise and good
ends; but it is a greater happiness to have our condition immediately allotted
by God. God may permit a great many evils to befall us in anger and displeasure;
but when he takes us into his immediate protection, and under his own
government, whatever evils he appoints for us, whoever are the instruments of
them, are certainly for our good: and therefore there is no such danger in the
Doctrine of Non-resistance, as some men imagine. How absolute soever this may
be thought to render Princes, sincere Christians can suffer nothing by it: for
they shall suffer nothing, more nor less, than what God appoints for them to
suffer.

2. It is also urged against the obligation of our Savior's example to suffer
as he did, that Christ by his state of servitude and sufferings, has purchased
liberty for us; and that not only a spiritual and internal, but an external
and civil liberty. We are no longer bound to submit to usurping and tyrannical
powers, when we have strength and power to deliver our selves from that
necessity. There is no help for it, but men who are weak and unable to resist,
must obey and suffer; but this is matter of force, not of duty: We are now
bought with a price, and therefore must not choose a state of subjection and
servitude to men.

1. Now in answer to this, we may consider first, that this obedience and
subjection to Sovereign Princes, either was a duty before Christ's appearing in
the world, or it was not. If it were not, then our deliverance from this
subjection to Princes, is no part of that liberty which Christ has purchased
for us, because it was the natural right of mankind before; and therefore there
was no need of Christ's dying to purchase this, which he cannot give us a
greater right to than we had before his death. If subjection and Non-resistance
were our duty before, and ceases to be our duty now, then Christ by his death
has cancelled the obligations of our duty, and purchased a liberty and freedom
not to do that now which by the Laws of God or Nature we were bound to do
before; that is, Christ by his death has abrogated not only the Ceremonial,
but some Moral Laws; which I showed you before was contrary to the nature and
design of his undertaking.

2. It is strangely unaccountable, how obedience to any Law should abrogate and
cancel it. How Christ by subjection to the higher powers, should for ever after
deliver his Disciples from the necessity of subjection, and make them free from
the authority and government of Princes, whenever they dislike their
government. A typical Law may be fulfilled and receive its just accomplishment,
and then its obligation ceases. Thus the death of Christ fulfilled the
Levitical sacrifices, and put an end to them: But the authority of a moral Law
is confirmed and strengthened, not abrogated and disanulled by great examples.
When Christ quietly and patiently submitted to the most unjust sentence, in
obedience to lawful authority, he either did well or ill in it: If he did ill,
his example indeed is not to be imitated; but if he did well, how did his doing
well deliver us from the obligation of doing well? Did his doing well, make it
ill for us to do as he did? Why did not his perfect and unsinning obedience as
well deliver us from the obligation of all the other Laws of God, as from
obedience and subjection to Princes?

The Antinomians indeed are so absurd as to say, that Christ fulfilled all
righteousness in our stead, and that every believer has fulfilled the Law in
Christ; and therefore is not bound to fulfill it in his own person as a
condition of life and salvation. But yet they are not so absurd as to say that
Christ by the righteousness of his life and death, has altered the nature of
good and evil, and cancelled any one Law of God. The Law is in force still, and
the duty is the same; but the Law cannot take hold of them, nor exact a
personal righteousness from them, because they have already fulfilled the Law
in Christ. But now these men must say, that Christ has not only fulfilled the
Law of subjection and non-resistance, as a condition of salvation, but has
cancelled it as a rule of life.

3. The death of Christ could not purchase any civil rights or liberties which
we had not before, nor make any change in the external fortunes or conditions
of men. The death of Christ is represented in Scripture either as an atonement
or expiation of sin, or as the purchase and seal of the new Covenant. Now how
does the death of Christ, by expiating our sins, deliver us from subjection to
our civil Governors? What connection is there between the expiation of our
sins, and our freedom from the authority of Princes, that he who does one,
must be supposed to do the other?

And as for the new Covenant, where does that grant any new franchises and
liberties to subjects? Let them produce their new Charter to justify their
exemption from subjection to Princes; let them show any one saying in the
Gospel of our Savior, if they can, to that purpose. What the Doctrine of
Christ is, you have already heard; and when Christ died to confirm the new
Covenant in his blood, it is absurd to say that he has purchased any liberties
for us, but what he has expressly granted to us in his Gospel.

He does indeed promise liberty and freedom to his subjects, but it is a
liberty of another nature; a liberty from the power and dominion of sin. Ye
shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free, 8 John 32. that is,
the power of the Gospel-revelation should deliver them from the Empire of their
lusts, and give them the true government and masterie of themselves: And
therefore he adds, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Whosoever commits sin, is
the servant of sin. And the servant abides not in the house for ever: but the
son abides for ever. If the son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be
free indeed, 34, 35, 36 v.

But does not St. Paul advise the Corinthians to assert even their civil and
political freedom when they can, and that from this argument, that they are the
freemen of Christ? which seems to intimate, that there is such a connection
between our spiritual and civil Liberties, that it does not become Christ's
freemen to be slaves and servants unto men. 1 Cor. 7. 21, 22, 23 v. Art thou
called, being a servant? care not for it: but if thou may be made free, use
it rather. For he that is called in the Lord, being a servant, is the Lord's
free man: likewise also he that is called, being free, is Christ's servant. Ye
are bought with a price, be not the servants of men.

But what is it they would prove from these words? that our subjection to men
is inconsistent with our freedom in Christ? that the Apostle expressly denies.
For he that is a servont, is Christ's freeman. Or that Christ, when he made us
free, did deliver us from the subjection of men? not that neither. For he does
not advise Christian servants to leave their masters, as he might and ought to
have done, if Christ had bestowed this civil liberty on them; but he was so
far from this, that when Onesimus had run away from his Master Philemon, and
was converted by St. Paul, and proved very useful and serviceable in the
ministry, yet he would not detain him from his Master, without asking his
leave: which occasioned the Epistle to Philemon, as you may see 10, 11, 12,
etc. And in this place he advises the Christian servants not to be concerned at
their being servants; which was no injury at all to their Christian liberty:
But if they could procure their liberty by any fair and just means, they
should choose to do it; which is upon many accounts more desirable, especially
when Christians were servants to heathen Masters, as it often was in those days.

But does not the Apostle expressly tell them, Ye are bought with a price, be
not ye the servants of men? Yes, he does: but sure this cannot signify that
servants should cast off the authority of their Masters. For that is directly
contrary to what he had advised them before, and contrary to his own practice
in the case of Onesimus, whom he sent back to his Master Philemon. But all that
I understand by it, is this; that those Christian servants who could not obtain
their freedom, should yet take care not to be servants to the lusts and
passions of their Heathen Masters. For though a state of civil bondage and
slavery is not inconsistent with their Christian liberty, yet to be ministers
and servants to the vices of men, is: And therefore when they lay under any
such temptation (as Christians who served Heathen Masters could not long escape
it) they must then remember that they are Christ's freemen, who were bought
with a price; and therefore must neither be servants to their own lusts, nor to
the lusts of other men. And the reason why I choose this sense of the words, is
this; because the Apostle opposes being bought with a price, that is, their
being redeemed by Christ, or being Christ's freemen, to their being the
servants of men, as inconsistent with each other. And therefore their being the
servants of men, cannot be understood of civil servitude, which he before had
told them was not inconsistent with their Christian liberty, but of being
servants to the vices of men.

But what now is all this to subjection to Sovereign Princes? Does the Apostle
exhort the Christians too to throw off the civil powers? It was possible for a
Christian servant to purchase his liberty, or to obtain it some other lawful
ways; but how can subjects deliver themselves from the authority of Princes?
unless they go into some Country where there is no government, or resist and
rebel against the higher powers where they are: Neither of which is agreeable
to our Apostles Doctrine, who would not allow servants to run away from their
Masters, much less rebel against them to procure their liberty.

Nor was the case the same between Christian subjects and sovereign Princes,
and between Masters and Servants; and therefore neither is the reason the same,
why subjects should desire freedom from the higher powers. Servants in those
days were slaves and vassals, and were kept in such constant attendance on
their Masters, that it must needs be very difficult; besides the other
temptations they were exposed to, to gain any time or liberty for attending on
Christian Worship, and the instructions of the Church. But Christian subjects
are more at their own disposal, even under Heathen Princes; and have all that
liberty, excepting the case of persecution, which is necessary for the
purposes of Religion; which yet is the only reason intimated here, why the
Apostle advises servants to procure their freedom, if they can.

To conclude this Argument; there were a sort of men, even in the Apostles
days, who boasted mightily of their Christian liberty, and thought scorn for a
Christian either to be a servant or a subject. For this reason St. Paul in this
place instructs servants, that their Christian liberty is not injured by their
being servants: for this reason are there such frequent directions to servants
to obey their Masters. For this reason does St. Peter caution the Christians
against this pretense of Christian liberty, which some abused then, as they do
still, to the disturbance of civil governments; As free, but not using your
liberty for a cloak of maliciousness, but as the servants of God.

CHAP. IV. What St. Paul Preached about Nonresistance of the Higher Powers.
HAving thus concluded what the Doctrine and Example of our Savior was, about
subjection to the higher powers; let us now consider the Doctrine and Example
of his Apostles. Not as if the Authority and Example of our Savior were not
sufficient of it self to make a Law, but stood in need of the confirmation and
additional authority of his own Apostles; but we might justly suspect our
selves mistaken in the meaning of our Savior's words, or in the intention and
design of his sufferings, had none of his Apostles, who were immediately
instructed by himself, and acquainted with the most secret mysteries of his
Kingdom, ever preached any such Doctrine as this, of Subjection to Princes. And
therefore to give you the more abundant assurance of this, I shall plainly show
you, that the Apostles taught the same Doctrine, and imitated the example of
their great Master.

I shall begin with St. Paul, who has as fully declared himself in this matter,
as it is possible any man can do by words, 13 Romans 1, 2. Let every Soul be
subject unto the higher Powers; for there is no power but of God: the Powers
that be, are ordained of God Whosoever therefore resists the power, resists
the ordinance of God; and they that resist, shall receive to themselves
damnation.

This is a very express Testimony against Resistance, and therefore I shall
consider it at large; for there have been various Arts used to pervert every
word of it, and to make this Text speak quite contrary to the design and
intention of the Apostle in it: and therefore I shall divide the words into
three general parts.

1. The Doctrine, the Apostle instructs them in: Let every Soul be subject to
the higher powers. 2. The reason whereby he proves and inforces this Doctrine:
For there is no power but of God; the powers that be, are ordained of God.
Whosoever therefore resists the power, resists the ordinance of God. 3. The
punishment of such resistance: And they that resist, shall receive to
themselves damnation.

1. I shall begin with the Doctrine, That every Soul must be subject to the
higher powers. And here are three things to to be explained. 1. Who are
contained under this general expression of every Soul. 2. Who are meant by the
higher powers. 3. What is meant by being subject.

1. Who are contained under this general expression of every Soul, (...). which
by an ordinary Hebraism, signifies every man. For man is a compounded Creature
of Body and Soul, and either part of him is very often in Scripture put for the
whole. Sometimes Flesh, and sometimes Soul signifies the man; and when every
Soul is opposed to the higher powers, it must signify all men, of what rank or
condition soever they be, who are not invested with this higher power. Popes
and Bishops and Priests, as well Spiritual as Secular persons; the whole body
of the People, as well as every single individual. For when every Soul is
commanded to be subject, without any exception or limitation, this must reach
them in all capacities and conditions.

The design of the Apostle, as you shall hear more presently, was to forbid all
resistance of Sovereign Princes; and had he known of any men, or number of men,
who might lawfully resist, he ought not to have expressed it in such general
terms, as to forbid all without exception. Had St. Paul known the Prerogative
of St. Peter, and his Successors the Bishops of Rome, would he have written to
the Christians of Rome to be subject to their Emperors, without making any
provision for the greater Authority of their Bishops?

The reason he assigns why every Soul must be subject to the higher Powers, is,
because all powers are of God. So that whoever is bound to be subject to God,
must be subject to their Prince, who is in God's stead. And this I think will
reach the Pope of Rome, as well as any private Christian; unless he will
pretend to more authority on earth, than God himself has: for the Prince has
God's Authority, and therefore cannot be resisted, but by a greater Authority
than God's. And by the same reason, if the whole body of the people be subject
to God, they must be subject to their Prince too, because he acts by God's
Authority and Commission. Were a Sovereign Prince the Peoples Creature, might
be a good Maxim, Rex major singulis, sed minor universis, that the King is
greater than any particular Subject, but less than All together; but if he be
God's Minister, he is upon that account as much greater than all, as God is.

And that the whole body of the people, all together, as well as one by one,
are equally concerned in this command of being subject to the higher Powers, is
evident from this consideration, that nothing less than this will secure the
peace and tranquillity of humane Societies. The resistance of single persons is
more dangerous to themselves than to the Prince, but a powerful combination of
Rebels is formidable to the most puissant Monarchs. The greater numbers of
Subjects rebel against their Prince, the more do they distress his Government,
and threaten his Crown and Dignity: and if his Person and Authority be Sacred,
the greater the violence is, which is offered to him, the greater is the crime.

Had the Apostle exhorted the Romans after this manner: Let no private and
single man be so foolish, as to rebel against his Prince, who will be too
strong for him: but if you can raise sufficient forces to oppose against him,
if you can all consent to Depose or Murder him, this is very innocent and
justifiable, nay an Heroical Achievement, which becomes a freeborn people:
How would this secure the peace and quiet of the world? how would this have
agreed with what follows, that Princes are advanced by God, and that to resist
our Prince, is to resist the Ordinance of God, and that such men shall be
severely punished for it in this world or the next? for can the Apostle be
thought absolutely to condemn resistance, if he makes it only unlawful to
resist when we want power to conquer? Which yet is all that can be made of it,
if by every Soul the Apostle means only particular men, not the united force
and power of Subjects.

Nor can there be any reason assigned, why the Apostle should lay so strict a
command on particular Christians to be subject to the higher Powers, which does
not equally concern whole Nations. For if it can ever be lawful for a whole
Nation to resist a Prince, it may in the same circumstances be equally lawful
for a particular man to do it: if a Nation may conspire against a Prince, who
invades their Rights, their Liberties, or their Religion, why may not any man
by the same reason resist a Prince, when his Rights and Liberties are invaded?
It is not so safe and prudent indeed for a private man to resist, as for great
and powerful numbers; but this makes resistance only a matter of discretion,
not of Conscience: if it be lawful for the whole body of a Nation to resist in
such cases, it must be equally lawful for a particular man to do it; but he
does it at his own peril, when he has only his one single force to oppose
against his Prince. So that our Apostle must forbid resistance in all or none.
For single persons do not use to resist or rebel, or there is no great danger
to the Public if they do; but the Authority of Princes, and the security of
public Government, is only endangered by a combination of Rebels, when the
whole Nation or any considerable part for numbers, power, and interest, take
Arms against their Prince. If resistance of our Prince be a sin, it is not the
less, but the greater sin, the greater and the more formidable the resistance
is; and it would very much unbecome the gravity and sacredness of an
Apostolical precept, to enjoin subjection to private Christians, who dare not,
who cannot resist alone; but to leave a powerful combination of Rebels at
liberty to resist. So that every Soul must signify all Subjects whether single
or united: for whatever is unlawful for every single Person considered as a
Subject is unlawful for them all together; for the whole Nation is as much a
subject to the higher powers, as any single man. Thus I am sure it is in our
Government, where Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament own themselves the
Subjects of the King, and have by public Laws disclaimed all power of raising
any War either offensive or defensive against the King.

2. Let us now consider what is meant by the higher powers, [(...)] which
signifies the supreme power in any Nation, in whomsoever it is placed. Whether
in the King, as in Monarchical governments; or in the Nobles, as in
Aristocratical; or in the People, as in Democracies. At the time of writing
this Epistle, the supreme power was in the Roman Emperors; and therefore when
St. Paul commands the Roman Christians to be subject to the higher powers, the
plain meaning is, that they be subject to the Roman Emperor. And thus St.
Peter explains it, 1 Epist. 2 Chap. 13 v. Be subject to every ordinance of man
for the Lord's sake, whether to the King as supreme, (...), the word used in my
Text, as to him who has a supereminent power, and is above all others.

It is absolutely necessary in all wellgoverned Societies, that there should be
some supreme and sovereign Power, from whence there lies no appeal, and which
cannot and must not be resisted. For otherwise there can be no end of disputes,
and controversies; men may quarrel eternally about rights and privileges, and
properties, and preheminencies; and when every man is Judge in his own cause,
it is great odds but he will give Judgment for himself, and then there can be
no way to determine such matters, but by force and power. Which turns humane
societies into a state of War, and no man is secure any longer, than he happens
to be on the prevailing side.

Whoever considers the nature and the end of Government, must acknowledge the
necessity of a supreme power, to decide controversies, to administer Justice,
and to secure the Public Peace: and it is a ridiculous thing to talk of a
supreme power, which is not unaccountable and irresistible. For whatever power
is liable to be called to an account, and to be resisted, has some power above
it, and so is not supreme.

Of late years, whoever has been so hardy, as to assert the Doctrine of
Nonresistance, has been thought an Enemy to his Country, one who tramples on
all Laws, who betraies the rights and liberties of the subject, and sets up for
Tyranny and Arbitrary power. Now I would desire those men, who think thus, to
try their skill in framing any model of government, which shall answer the ends
and necessities of humane society, without a supreme power, that is, without
such a power, as is absolute and unaccountable.

If there be no supreme power in any society, when ever there happens any
difference among the members of such a society, nothing can be done; and such a
society is an arbitrary and voluntary, not a governed society; because there is
no body to govern, and no body to be governed: they may govern themselves by
mutual consent; but if they cannot agree, there is an end of their government.

Where there is any government, there must be somebody to govern, and whoever
has the power of government, must not be contradicted or resisted, for then he
cannot govern; for a power to govern men only when, and in what cases they
please to be governed, is no power. Now place this power where you will, in a
single Person, or in the hands of some select persons, or in the people, and
the case is the same; where ever the power rests, there it is absolute and
unaccountable: wherever there is any government, there must be a last appeal,
and where the last appeal is, whether to a Prince, to a Parliament, or to the
People, there is sovereign and absolute power, which cannot be resisted without
a dissolution of government, and returning to a state of war; which is a direct
contradiction to the first institution of humane societies, and therefore that
which cannot be allowed by the fundamental constitutions of any society.

The result of all in short is this: 1. That in all civil governments, there
must be some supreme and sovereign power. 2. That the very notion of supreme
power is, that it is unaccountable and irresistible. And therefore, 3. whatever
power in any nation according to the fundamental laws of its government, cannot
and ought not to be resisted, that is the supreme power of that nation, the
higher powers to which the Apostle requires us to be subject. And from hence it
is evident, that the Crown of England is an Imperial Crown, and has all the
rights of Sovereignty belonging to it. Since according to the fundamental Laws
of the Realm, the Person and Authority of the King is sacred and irresistible.
The Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, those Laws which declare, and
acknowledge the King to be supreme in his Dominions under God, to have the sole
power of the Sword, that it is Treason to levy War against the King within the
Realm, and without; That both or either Houses of Parliament cannot, nor
lawfully may, raise or levy war offensive or defensive against his Majesty, his
Heirs, or lawful Successors; That it is not lawful upon any pretense whatsoever
to take Arms against the King, and that we must abhor that traitorous position
of taking arms by his authority against his Person, or against those who are
commissionated by him: These, I say, and such like declarations as these, both
formerly and of late, made by both Houses of Parliament, and enacted into
public laws, are a sufficient proof, that the supreme power of these Realms is
lodged in the Prince. For he who is unaccountable and irresistible is supreme.

But to avoid all this, there are some who tell us, that by the higher powers
in the Text, the Apostle means the Law. For laws are the highest and most
venerable authority in any Nation; and we ought indeed to be subject to Princes
who themselves are subject to the Laws, which they are as much obliged to by
virtue of this Apostolical command as meaner Persons. For the law is as much
superior to them, as they are to their own subjects; and therefore when Princes
violate public laws, they are no longer to own them for the Higher Powers, but
may vindicate the laws against them, may defend the legal authority of their
Prince against his Personal usurpations, may fight for the Authority of the
King against his Person.

But in answer to this, we may consider, 1. That it is evident from the whole
context and manner of speaking, that the Apostle does not here speak of laws,
but Persons; not of Imperial laws, but sovereign Princes. Laws were never
before called the higher Powers, neither in sacred nor profane writers; (...)
in the new Testament always signifies the authority of a Person, not of a law.
And hence it signifies the Person invested with this authority. It were easy to
prove this by numerous instances; but it will be sufficient to show, that thus
it must signify in the Text. These are such powers as are of God, appointed
and ordained by God; which I suppose does not signify the laws of every
nation, many of which are far enough from being divine. They are expressly
called Rulers in the 3 v. and are the object of fear; which can punish and
reward: if thou will not be afraid of the power, (...), do that which is good,
and thou shall have praise of the same. Now I think no law, but the Power,
which executes laws, can apply punishments or rewards according to men's
deserts: and in the 4 v. this very power is called the Minister of God, and
said to bear the sword, which does not belong to laws but Persons; and in the
Text the Apostle speaks of resisting these powers, opposing force to force. Now
though laws may be disobeyed, it is only lawgivers and Rulers, who are capable
of resistance.

2. But however, these higher Powers may signify Princes and Rulers, as
governing according to known laws. No, this cannot be neither, because the
Apostle speaks of such powers as were under the government of no laws; as it is
sufficiently known the Roman Emperors were not; their will was their law, and
they made or repealed laws at their pleasure. This Epistle was wrote either
under Claudius or Nero; and I think I need not tell you, that neither of those
Emperors had any great Reverence for laws, and yet these were the higher
powers to whom the Apostle commands them to be subject: and indeed, though
there be a vast difference between a Prince, who by the fundamental
Constitutions of his Kingdom, ought to govern by laws, and a Prince whose will
is his law; yet no law can come into the notion and definition of supreme and
sovereign Powers: such a Prince is under the direction, but cannot properly be
said to be under the government of the law, because there is no superior power
to take cognizance of his breach of it; and a law has no authority to govern,
where there is no power to punish. But I shall have occasion to discourse this
more largely hereafter.

3. Let us now consider, what is meant by being subject, Now subjection,
according to its full latitude of signification, includes all those duties,
which we owe to sovereign Princes; a cheerful and willing obedience to all
their Just and lawful commands; an humble submission to their reproofs and
Censures, Corrections and punishments; to honor and Reverence their Persons
and Authority; to pay custom and tribute, and all legal taxes and impositions,
as our Apostle adds, verse the 7. Render therefore unto all their dues,
tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear,
honor to whom honor. But the principal thing he has regard to in the text, is
Non-resistance, which is the only perfect and absolute subjection we owe to
Princes. We are not always bound to do what they command, because they may
command, what we ought not, what we must not do; but we are always bound to be
subject, that is, never to resist. Though a Prince abuse his power, and oppress
his subjects, we must not take upon us to right ourselves, but must leave our
cause to God, who is the great Protector of oppressed Innocence: for as the
Apostle tells us, He that resists the power, resists the ordinance of God;
and they that resist, etc. This is the doctrine the Apostle teaches, that we
must be subject to, that is, that we must not resist, nor rebel against
sovereign Princes.

2. Let us then now consider the reason, whereby the Apostle proves and
inforces this doctrine of subjection or Non-resistance. For there is no power
but of God; the powers that be, are ordained of God. Whosoever therefore
resists the power, resists the ordinance of God. The plain meaning of which
is this: That sovereign Princes are advanced to the Throne by God, and are his
ministers and vicegerents, invested with his authority and power to govern; and
therefore when we resist our Prince, we resist the ordinance, constitution, and
appointment of God. Such men do not resist, rebel, or fight against man, but
God. As he who resists any subordinate Magistrates, resists his Prince, from
whom they receive their authority and commission. And this is a very forcible
Argument to subjection to Princes: for whatever our Prince be, it is certain,
that God has an absolute and uncontrollable right over us, as being the natural
Lord and Governor of the world; and if Earthly Princes are placed in the
Throne by him, who is at liberty to put the Government of the world into what
hands he pleases, who will dare to oppose God? or ask him, Why have thou done
so? Whoever has any sense of God's dominion and sovereignty, dares not rebel
against him; and he, who believes that Princes are made by God, will no more
dare to rebel against his Prince, than against God himself.

The Patrons of resistance have used all manner of arts to evade the force of
this Text, and to make the Apostles argument signify just nothing; and
therefore it will be necessary to consider briefly what they say.

1. Then some of them own the truth Milton pro Pop. Angl. defensio. p. 68.
of what St. Paul asserts, that Sovereign Princes are of God, are advanced and
set in their Thrones by him; but then they say, Princes are from God, no
otherwise than every thing else is of God. The divine Providence governs all
things; and Plague and Pestilence and Famine, and whatever evil and calamity
befalls a nation, is from God too; but does it hence follow, that when God
brings any of these Judgments upon us, we must not Endeavor to remove them?
No more, say they, does it follow, that we must not Endeavor to break the Yoke
of a Tyrant, because it was put on by God. That is, in plain English, that when
the Apostle proves, that we must not resist Princes, because they are set up by
God, he does not reason truly; for notwithstanding this, we may resist
Tyrannical Princes, as we would do the Plague, though they are both sent by
God: and I suppose these men believe that St. Paul was no more inspired by God,
than Princes are made by him. Otherwise they might as easily have concluded,
that since St. Paul founds no doctrine of Non-resistance upon God's authority
and dominion in advancing Princes, (and his argument must be good, if he were
an inspired man) that therefore there is some little difference between God's
making a King though a Tyrant, and his sending the plague: and any man of an
ordinary understanding might guess, that when God sets up a King with a
sovereign Power, he sets him up to govern; and therefore though he may prove a
scourge and a Plague, yet he is such a Plague, as God will allow no man to
remove, but himself. For it is a contradiction in the nature of the thing, to
give authority to a Prince to govern, and to leave subjects at Liberty to
resist. Tyrants are God's mininisters, though they be but Executioners of his
just vengeance; but an Executioner, though he be as dangerous as the Plague,
cannot be resisted, without resisting the Prince.

2. At other times they tell us, that when St. Paul asserts, that there is no
power but of God, the powers that be, are ordained of God, he means this only
of the Institution of civil power and government, not of every Prince that is
advanced to this power. The institution of civil government they will allow to
be from God, but they think it a reproach to God to own that Tyrants and
oppressors, wicked and impious Kings, are advanced by God. His Providence many
times, for wise reasons, permits this, as he does all other evils; but they
cannot believe, that such men are advanced by his council and approbation, and
positive will and appointment. But this admits of various answers. For,

1. Can there be no wise reason given, why God may advance a bad man to be a
Prince? If there may, then it is no reproach to the divine Providence. The
natural end of humane societies is the preservation of Public Peace and order;
and this is in some measure attained even under the government of Tyrants. But
God has a further end than this, to bless and reward a virtuous Nation, or to
punish a loose and degenerate age; and there cannot be a greater blessing than
a wise and virtuous Prince, nor a greater plague than a Merciless Tyrant: and
therefore the Providence of God is as much concerned in setting a good or a bad
Prince over any people, as in rewarding or punishing them. Upon this account,
God calls the King of Assyria the rod of his anger, whom he raised up for the
punishment of an Hypocritical Nation, 10 Isai. 5, 6.

2. I have already proved, that by the Powers in my Text, the Apostle means the
persons of Sovereign Princes; and therefore according to his Doctrine, those
Princes who were then in being, that is, the Roman Emperors, were advanced by
God; the powers that be, that is, the Princes and Emperors who now govern the
world, are ordained and appointed by God. And that thus it is, God himself
tells us, 27 Jerem. 5, 6. I have made the Earth, and given it unto whom it
seemed meet unto me: and now I have given all these lands into the hands of
Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon my servant. Thus he called Cyrus by name, many
years before he was born, to be his shepherd, and to perform his pleasure in
rebuilding Jerusalem, 44 Isa. 28. 45. chapter 1, 2, 3, 4.

This was the belief of the primitive Christians under heathen and persecuting
Emperors. Tertullian who wrote his Apology under Severus, asserts that Caesar
was chosen by God, and therefore that the Christians had a peculiar Propriety
in Caesar, as being made Emperor by their God. Sed quid ego amplius de
religione atque Pietate christiana in Imperatorem, quem necesse est
suspiciamus, ut eum quem Dominus noster elegit, and merito dixerim, noster est
magis Caesar, a Deo nostro constitutus. Tert. Apol. cap. 33. and this he
assigns as the reason, why they honor and reverence, and pray for him, and are
in all things subject to him.

3. If these men will grant, the institution of civil power and authority by
God is a necessary reason why we must not resist those who have this power, it
shall satisfy me; and I will dispute no further, whether by Powers in the Text
the Apostle means civil government, or the Persons of Princes, so long as the
Doctrine of Non-resistance is secured: but if they will not grant this, then
they must grant, that either the Apostle reasons weakly, or that this is not
the sense of his words.

St. Chrysostom indeed by the Powers that be ordained of God, understands no
more than that civil power and authority is from God, as being afraid to own
that all Princes, though never so wicked are appointed by God; but then he owns
the doctrine of Non-resistance, because the power is from God, whoever have the
possession of it, or however he came by it. But I think the argument for
Non-resistance is much stronger, if we acknowledge, that soveveraign Princes
themselves are appointed by God, and have this power put into their hands by
his peculiar and ordering Providence.

4. Others in plain terms deny, that this is true, that Princes receive their
power from God, and are ordained and appointed by him, though the words of the
Apostle are very plain and express in the case.

But let us set aside the Authority of the Apostle a while, and examine why
they say so. And this they think is very plain in all Nations, that Princes are
advanced to the Throne by the choice and consent of the People, or by right of
inheritance, confirmed and settled by public Laws, which include the consent
of the People, and therefore they receive their power from those who chose
them; which is no more than a Fiduciary power, which they are liable to give an
account of to those who choose them.

Now grant this to be true, that Princes are advanced to the Throne by the
People, which will not very well hold in conquests, nor in hereditary Kingdoms;
yet, I say, suppose it to be true, since it was manifestly the case of the
Roman Empire, when the Apostle wrote this Epistle, their Emperors being chosen
either by the Senate or the Army; yet I would desire to be resolved in some few
plain questions.

1. Whether God does nothing, but what he does by an immediate power? Whether
he cannot appoint and choose an Emperor, unless he does it by a Voice from
Heaven, or sends an Angel to set the Crown upon his head? Whether God cannot by
a great many unknown ways, determine the choice of the people, to that Person,
whom he has before chosen himself? May we not as well say, that God does
nothing but miracles, because every thing else has some visible cause, and may
be ascribed either to natural or moral agents? God may choose an Emperor, and
the people choose him too, and the peoples choice is only the effect of God's
choice; and therefore notwithstanding all this, Princes owe their crowns and
secepters to God: the powers that be are ordained of God.

2. How does it follow, that because Princes are chose by the people, therefore
they derive their power from them, and are accountable to them? This is not
true in humane governments. A City or any Corporation may have Authority to
choose their Magistrates, and yet they do not derive their power from their
fellow-Citizens, who chose them, but from their Prince. Thus the People may
choose, but God invests with power and Authority. For indeed, how can people,
who have no power of Government themselves, give that power, which they have
not? God is the only governor of the world, and therefore there can be no
power of Government, but what is derived from him. But these men think, that
all civil authority is founded in consent; as if there were no natural Lord of
the world, or all mankind came free and independent into the world. This is a
contradiction to what at other times they will grant, that the institution of
Civil power and Authority is from God; and indeed if it be not, I know not how
any Prince can justify the taking away the life of any man, whatever crime he
has been guilty of. For no man has power of his own life, and therefore cannot
give this power to another: which proves that the power of capital punishments
cannot result from mere consent, but from a superior Authority, which is Lord
of life and death.

If it be said, that every man has a natural right to defend his own life by
taking away the life of any man who injuriously assaults him, and he may part
with this power of self-defence to his Prince, and that includes the power of
life and death: I answer,

1. Suppose the Laws of Self-preservation will justify the taking away another
man's life in preservation of our own, yet this is a Personal right, which God
and Nature has given us; and unless we can prove, that we have Authority to
make over this right to another, as well as to use it our selves, our consent
cannot give Authority to the Magistrate to take away any man's life in our
cause.

2. This natural right of self-defence cannot be the Original of the
Magistrates power, because no man does give up this right. Every man has the
right of Self-preservation, as entire under civil government, as he had in a
state of Nature. Under what government soever I live, I may still kill another
man, when I have no other way to preserve my own life from unjust violence by
private hands. And this is all the liberty any man had in a supposed state of
nature. So that the Magistrates power of the Sword is a very different thing
from every man's right of self-preservation, and cannot owe its original to it.
For,

3. The Magistrates power of the Sword is not merely defensive, as the right of
self-preservation is, but vindicative, to execute vengeance on evil doers;
which power no man has over his equals in a state of Nature. For vengeance is
an act of superiority, and supposes the Authority of a Lord and Judge; and
therefore the consent of all Mankind cannot give the power and authority of a
Sword to a Prince, because they never had it themselves. A Prince, as he bears
the Sword, is not the peoples Officer, but the Minister of God, a revenger to
execute wrath upon him that does evil, as our Apostle adds, v. 4. and this is
the true reason of our subjection. Wherefore you must needs be subject, not
only for wrath, but also for conscience sake.

4. There is another objection against what the Apostle affirms, that there is
no power but of God; the powers that be, are ordained of God. For is the power
of victorious Rebels and Usurpers from God? did Oliver Cromwell receive his
power from God? then it seems, it was unlawful to resist him too, or to
conspire against him: then all those Loyal Subjects* who refused to submit to
him, when he had got the power in his hands, were Rebels and Traitors.

To this I answer, that the most prosperous Rebel is not the Higher Powers,
while our natural Prince, to whom we owe obedience and subjection, is in being.
And therefore though such men may get the power into their hands by Gods
permission, yet not by Gods Ordinance; and he who resists them, does not resist
the Ordinance of God, but the usurpations of men. In Hereditary Kingdoms, the
King never dies, but the same minute that the natural Person of one King dies,
the Crown descends upon the next of Blood; and therefore he who rebelleth
against the Father, and murders him, continues a Rebel in the Reign of the Son,
which commences with his Fathers death.

It is otherwise indeed, where none can pretend a greater right to the Crown,
than the usurper; for there possession of power seems to give a right. Thus
many of the Roman Emperors came to the Crown by very ill means, but when they
were possessed of it, they were the Higher Powers; for the Crown did not descend
by inheritance, but sometimes by the Election of the Senate, sometimes of the
Army, and sometimes by force and power, which always draws a consent after it.
And therefore the Apostle does not direct the Christians to enquire by what
Title the Emperors held their Crowns, but commands them to submit to those,
who had the power in their hands: for the possession of Supreme and Sovereign
power is Title enough, when there is no better Title to oppose against it. For
then we must presume, that God gives him the irresistible authority of a King,
to whom he gives an irresistible power; which is the only means, whereby
Monarchies and Empires are transferred from one Nation to another. There are
two Examples in Scripture which manifestly confirm what I have now said.

The first in the Kingdom of Israel: after the ten Tribes had divided from the
House of Judah, and the Family of David, God had not entailed the Kingdom upon
any certain Family* he had indeed by Ahijah the Prophet promised after Solomon's
death ten Tribes to Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, 1 Kings 11. 29. etc. but had
afterward by the same Prophet threatened Jeroboam, to destroy his whole Family,
Chap. 15. 10, 11. Baasha fulfils this prophecy by the traitorous murder of
Nadab, (who succeeded his Father Jeroboam in the Kingdom) and usurpt the
government himself, and slew all Ieroboam's house, 28, 29. v. This Murder and
Treason is numbered among the sins of Baasha; for which God afterward threatened
to destroy his house, as he had done the house of Jeroboam, 16 Chap. v. 7. and
yet he having usurpt the Throne, and got the power into his hands, and no man
having a better Title than his, God himself is said to have exalted him out of
the dust, and made him Prince over his People Israel, v. 2. Elah succeeded
Baasha, who had no better Title than his Father; and yet Zimri, who slew him,
is accused of Treason for it, v 20. Zimri usurpt the Kingdom when he had slew
his Master, but he was only a vain pretender to it, when he wanted power; for
when the people who were encamped against Gibbethon, heard that Zimri had
killed the King, they made Omri King, and went immediately and besieged Tirzah,
where Zimri had taken possession of the Kings Palace; who finding no way to
escape, set fire to it himself, and died in the flames of it. And now Israel
was divided between Omri and Tibni; but those who followed Omri prevailed
against those who followed Tibni; and Tibni died, and Omni Reigned, v. 21, 22.
All which plainly shows, that where there is no regular Succession to the
Kingdom, there possession of power makes a King, who cannot afterward be
resisted and opposed without the guilt of treason: and this was the case of the
Roman Empire, at the writing of this Epistle; and therefore the Apostle might
well say, That the powers that be, are ordained of God. That whoever had the
Supreme power in his hands, is the higher power, that must not be resisted.

But it was otherwise in the Kingdom of Judah, which God himself had entailed
on David's Family, as appears from the example of Ioash, who was concealed by
his Aunt Iehosheba, and hid in the house of the Lord for six years. During this
time Athaliah reigned, and had the whole power of government in her hands; but
yet this did not make her a Sovereign and irresistible Prince; because Ioash
the Son of Ahaziah, the right Heir of the Crown, was yet alive. And therefore
in the seventh year Iehoiada the Priest set Ioash upon the Throne, and slew
Athaliah, and was guilty of no Treason or Rebellion in doing so, 2 Kings 11.
Which shows, that no usurpations can extinguish the Right and Title of a
natural Prince. Such Usurpers, though they have the possession of the supreme
power, yet they have no right to it; and though God for wise reasons may
sometimes permit such usurpations, yet while his Providence secures the Persons
of such deposed and banished Princes from violence, he secures their Title too.
As it was in Nebuchadnezzar's vision; The tree is cut down, but the stump of
the roots is left in the earth. The Kingdom shall be sure to them, after that
they shall know, that the Heavens do rule, Dan. 4. 26.

3. The Apostle adds the punishment of those, who resist the higher Powers:
They that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation. Where, by (...)
judgment and damnation, it is plain the Apostle means the punishments of the
other world. Prosperous Rebellions are not always punished in this world, but
they are in the next. And therefore we must be subject not only for wrath, for
fear of men; but out of Conscience toward God, and a reverence of his
righteous judgments.

The sum of all in short is this. That all men, whatever their rank and
condition be; not only Secular, but Spiritual Persons; not only private men,
but subordinate Magistrates; not only single men, but whole Bodies and
Communities, the united force and power of a Nation, must be subject to
Sovereign Princes; that is, must obey all their just and lawful commands, and
patiently submit even to their unjust violence, without making any resistance,
without opposing force to force, or taking Arms, though it be only in their own
defense. For Sovereign Princes are made and advanced by God, who exercises a
particular providence in the disposal of Crowns and Scepters, and over-ruleth
all external and second causes, to set up such Princes as he himself has first
chose; and therefore he that resists, resists not Man, but God; he opposes
the constitution and appointment of the Soverain Lord of the world, who alone
is our natural Lord and Governor, and who alone has right to put the
government of the world into what hands he pleases; and how prosperous soever
such Rebels may be in this World, they shall not escape the Divine Vengeance
and Justice, which will follow them into another world: they shall receive to
themselves Damnation.

This was St. Paul's Doctrine about subjection to the higher powers; and he did
not only preach this Doctrie himself, but he charges Timothy and Titus, two
Bishops whom he had ordained, the one Bishop of Ephesus, the other of Crete, to
preach the same.

Thus he charges Titus, to put them in mind to be subject to Principalities and
Powers, to obey Magistrates* to be ready to every good work, 3 Titus 1. When he
commands him to put them in mind to be subject, he supposes, that this is a
known duty of the Christian Religion, and a duty of such great weight and
moment, that people ought to be frequently minded of it; that the Bishops and
Ministers of Religion ought frequently to preach of it, and to press and
inculcate it upon their hearers. For it is a great scandal to the Christian
Religion, when this duty is not observed: and yet in many cases this duty is so
hard to be observed, and requires such a great degree of self-denial and
resignation to the will of God, and contempt of present things, that too many
men are apt to forget it, and to excuse themselves from it. And therefore St.
Paul gives this in particular charge to Titus, and in him to all the Bishops
and Ministers of the Gospel, to take special care to instruct people well in
this point, and frequently to renew and repeat their exhortations; especially
when they find a busy, factious, and seditious spirit abroad in the world.

Thus he instructs Timothy the Bishop of Ephesus, 1 Timothy 2. 1. I exhort
therefore, that first of all, supplications prayers, intercessions, and giving
of thanks, be made for all men; for Kings, and for all that are in authority,
that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty.

But you will say, What is this to such an absolute subjection to Princes as
includes Non-resistance in it? cannot we pray for any man, without making him
our absolute and Soverain Lord? are we not bound to pray for all our Enemies
and Persecutors? and does our praying for them, make it unlawful to resist and
oppose their unjust violence? How then can you prove from the duty of praying
for Kings, that it is in no case lawful to resist them? if it were lawful to
resist Tyrannical Princes, yet it might be our duty to pray for them. And
therefore though it be our duty to pray for Princes, it does not hence follow,
that we may in no cases lawfully resist them.

In answer to this, I grant, that praying for any man, nay praying for Kings
and Princes cannot of it self prove, that it is unlawful to resist them, if it
otherwise appear, that resistance is lawful; but if it be our duty to make
supplications, prayers, and intercessions for persecuting Princes, as the
Apostle commands them to pray for the Roman Emperors, who were professed enemies
to Christianity; that is, if they must beg all good things for them, a long and
happy and prosperous Reign, which is included in intercessions and prayers;
this strongly infers, that they must not resist their power, nor undermine
their Thrones. For we cannot very well at the same time pray for the prosperity
of their government, and endeavor to pull it down. The Apostle did not
understand those conditional Prayers, that God would Convert or Confound them;
a prayer, which thanks be to God, was never found in any Christian Liturgy
yet; which possibly is one reason, why some men are no great Friends to
Liturgies. And when the Apostle directs them to pray for Kings and all that are
in authority, that they must live quiet and peaceable lives in all godliness
and honesty, that is, that they might enjoy peace and security in the
profession and practice of the true Religion; this seems to imply, that when
they are persecuted for their Religion, which was the case at that time, they
must pray for persecuting Princes, that God would incline their hearts to
favor his people; but must not fight against them. This is the only direction
the Apostle gives them in the case; and we may reasonably suppose, that had he
known any other, he would not have concealed it. If it is always the duty of
Christians to pray for the prosperous and flourishing state of the Empire, as
by this Apostolical exhortation it appears to be, it could never be lawful for
them to resist the powers* for I cannot understand how any man without mocking
Almighty God, can pray for the prosperity of his Prince, and the good success
of his government, at the same time, when he fights against him. When St. Paul
had so freely and openly declared against resisting the higher powers, which
Timothy, who was his Scholar and Companion, and fellow laborer, could not but
know; what other interpretation could he make of the Apostles exhortation, to
pray for Kings, and all that are in authority, that we may live quiet and
peaceable lives in all godliness and honesty, but only this, that prayer is the
last and only remedy that we can have against persecuting Princes? Had it been
lawful for them to resist, it had been a more proper prayer, that God would
give them strength and courage and counsel to oppose all his and their enemies:
that he would appear as miraculously for their defense, as he formerly did in
fighting the Battles of Israel; that he would set Christ upon his Throne, and
make all the Princes of the earth give place to a more glorious Kingdom. Time
was, when it was all one, whether he saved with many or a few. He knew how to
destroy potent and formidable Armies, without any humane strength and power, or
by such weak and contemptible means, as reserved the glory of the victory
entire to himself: and he is the same still that ever he was, and his power is
the same. But St. Paul very well knew, that it was not lawful for them to pull
Emperors out of their Thrones, to give any disturbance to civil powers, or to
attempt any changes or innovations in government; and therefore since they must
submit to such Princes as they had, there was no other remedy left them, but to
beg of God so to incline the hearts of Princes, that they might enjoy a quiet
and peaceable possession of their Religion, even under Pagan Princes. For as
much as some men of late days profanely scoff at prayers and tears, these have
been always thought the only remedy the Church has against persecuting powers;
and it seems St. Paul thought so too, for he prescribes no other; and yet he
does not allow them to pray against the King neither, but exhorts them to pray
for him, and that they might enjoy peace and security under his Government.

CHAP. V. St. Peter's Doctrine about Nonresistance.
HAving heard what St. Paul's doctrine was, let us now consider what St. Peter
taught about this matter: he had as much reason to learn this lesson as any of
the Apostles, our Savior having severely rebuked him for drawing his sword
against the lawful powers, as you have already heard. And indeed, his rash and
intemperate zeal in this action cost him very dear; for we have reason to
believe, that this was the chief thing, that tempted him to deny his Master. He
was afraid to own himself to be his Disciple, or that he had been in the garden
with him; because he was conscious to himself, that by drawing his sword, and
smiting the servant of the high Priest, he had incurred the penalty of the law,
and had he been discovered, could expect nothing less, but to be severely
punished for it, it may be to have lost his life for his resistance. And
indeed, this has very often been the fate of those men, who have been
transported with a boistrous and intemperate zeal to draw their swords for
their Master and his Religion against the lawful powers, that they commonly
deny their Master, and despise his Religion, before they put their swords up
again.

But St. Peter having by our Savior's reproof, and his own dear-bought
experience learned the evil of resistance, never drew his svvord more, and took
great care to instruct Christians not to do so, 1 Peter 2. 13, 14, 15, 16.
Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lord's sake, whether it be
to the King as supreme; or unto Governors, as to them that are sent by him,
for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well. For
so is the will of God, that with well doing, ye may put to silence the
ignorance of foolishmen. As free, and not using your liberty as a cloak of
maliciousness, but as the servants of God.

This is the very same Doctrine, which St. Paul taught the Romans: Let every
soul be subject to the higher Powers; for the same word is used in the original
(...) and (...), and therefore to submit and to be subject is the same thing,
which, as St. Paul tells us, signifies Non-resistance. Only as St. Paul speaks
only of not resisting the Higher Powers, that is, Emperors and Sovereign
Princes, herein including all those, who act by their Authority; St. Peter, to
prevent all cavils and exceptions, distinctly mentions both, that we must
submit to all humane power and authority, not only to the King as Supreme,
that is, in St. Paul's phrase, to the Higher Powers, to all Sovereign Princes
who are invested with the supreme Authority; but also to those, who are sent by
him, who receive their Authority and commission from the Sovereign Prince.

St. Paul tells us at large, that all power is of God, and that the power is
the Minister of God, and he that resists the power, resists the ordinance
of God; and therefore we must needs be subject, not only for Wrath, that is,
for fear of being punished by men, but also for Conscience sake, out of
reverence to God, and fear of his Judgment. This St. Peter comprises in one
word, which includes it all; Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for
the Lord's sake: for how is God concerned in our obedience to Princes, if they
be not his Ministers, who are appointed and advanced by him, and act by his
Authority, and if it be not his will and command, that we should obey them? and
therefore he adds, for this is the will of God, that with well doing, that is,
by obedience and subjection to Princes, ye may put to silence the ignorance of
foolish men, that is, that you may put to silence those foolish men, who
ignorantly accuse you, as fond of changes, and troublesome and dangerous to
Government. But then St. Peter observing, that Christian Liberty was made a
pretense for seditions and treasons, he cautions them against that also, As
free, but not using your liberty for a cloak of Maliciousness, that is, to
cover and excuse such wickedness as Rebellion against Princes, but as the
servants of God: You must remember, whatever freedom Christ has purchas't for
you, he has not delivered you from obedience and subjection to God; you are his
servants still, and therefore must be subject to those, who receive their power
and authority from God, as all Sovereign Princes do.

This is as plain, one would think, as words can make it; but nothing can be so
plain, but that men who are unwiling to understand it, and who set their wits
on work to avoid the force and evidence of it, may be able to find something to
say, to deceive themselves, and those who are willing to be deceived: and
therefore it will be necessary to consider, what false colors some men have
put upon these words, to elude and baffle the plain scope and design of the
Apostle in them.

As first, they observe, that St. Peter calls Kings and subordinate Governors
an ordinance of man, or a humane Creature, (...). and from hence they conclude
that Kings are only the peoples Creatures; they are made by the people, and
receive their power from them, and therefore are accountable to them if they
abuse their power. In answer to this, we may consider,

1. That this interpretation of St. Peter's words, is a direct contradiction to
St. Paul, who expressly asserts, that there is no power but of God, the powers
that be are ordained of God: but according to this exposition of humane
Creature, or the Ordinance of Man, there is no power of God, but all power is
derived from the People. Kings and Princes may be chosen by men, as it is in
Elective Kingdoms, and as it was at that time in the Roman Empire; but they
receive their power from God, and thus St. Paul and St. Peter may be
reconciled: but to affirm, that St. Peter calls Kings an Ordinance of man,
because they receive their power and authority from men, is an irreconcilable
contradiction to St. Paul, who affirms, that they receive their power from God,
that they are God's and not the peoples Ministers. Now though St. Peter and St.
Paul did once differ upon a matter of prudence, it would be of ill consequence
to Religion, to make them differ in so material a Doctrine as this is: and yet
there is no way to reconcile them, but by expounding St. Peter's words so as to
agree with St. Paul's; for St. Paul's words can never be reconciled with that
sense, which these men give of St. Peter's; and that is a good argument to me,
that is not the true interpretation of St. Peter; for I verily believe, that
these two great Apostles did not differ in this point.

2. St. Peter exhorts them to submit to every ordinance of man for the Lord's
sake; which plainly signifies, that whatever hand men may have in modelling
civil governments, yet it is the Ordinance of God, and Princes receive their
power from him. For it is no act of disobedience to God to resist our Prince,
nor of obedience to God to submit to him, if he does not derive his power from
God, and act by his Authority and commission; especially in such cases, when he
opposes the Government of God, and the interest of Religion; and oppresses not
only God's Creatures, but his most faithful and obedient people, who are his
peculiar care and charge* in such cases as these, if Princes do not receive
their power from God, they are opposite and rival Powers, and we can no more
submit to them for God's sake, than we can submit to a Rebel for the sake of,
that is, out of duty and loyalty to our natural Prince. And therefore when the
Apostle exhorts them, for God's sake to submit to their King, he plainly
supposes, what St. Paul did particularly express, that Kings receive their
power from God, and therefore are God's Ministers, even when they abuse their
power; and he that resists, resists the Ordinance and Authority of God.

3. But suppose we should grant, that when St. Peter calls Kings the Ordinance
of man, he means, that they receive their power and authority from men; yet I
cannot see, what good this will do them: for he plainly disowns their
consequence, that therefore Princes are accountable to the People, as to their
superiors, and may be resisted, deposed, and brought to condign punishment,
if they abuse this power; as will appear from these two observations. 1. That
he gives the King the Title of supreme, (...), who is above them all, and is
invested with the supreme and sovereign power. Now the supreme power in the
very notion of it, is irresistible and unaccountable; for otherwise it is not
supreme, but subject to some superior jurisdiction; which it is evidently
known the Roman Emperors, of whom the Apostle here speaks, were not. And 2.
that he requires subjection to this humane ordinance, which, as appears from
St. Paul, signifies Non resistance. So that though we should grant that the
King derives his power from the people, yet it seems, God confirms and
establishes the Crown on his head, and will not suffer people to take it off
again, when they please.

4. But after all, there is no color for this objection from the Apostles
words: for this (...): humane order or ordination, signifies nothing but humane
authority, such power and authority as is exercised by men for the good
government of humane Societies. And the meaning is only this; that out of
reverence and obedience to God, from whom all power is derived, they should
submit to that authority, which is exercised by men, whether to the supreme
power of Sovereign Princes, or that subordinate authority which he bestows on
inferior Magistrates.

2. It is farther objected, that though St. Peter does command Christians to
submit to Kings and Governors, yet it is with a limitation, as far as they
govern well, while they exercise their authority in pursuance of the great ends
of its institution; for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of
them that do well. And here St. Peter agrees very well with St. Paul, who
assigns this as the reason, why they may be subject to the powers: For Rulers
are not a terror to good works, but to the evil; will thou then not be afraid
of the power? do that which is good, and thou shall have praise of the same.
For he is the minister of God to thee for good. But if thou do that which is
evil, be afraid, for he bears not the sword in vain: for he is the minister
of God, an avenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil, 13 Rom* 3, 4. Now
we cannot be bound to obey and submit, any farther than the reason of our
obedience reaches: and if the reason why we must obey Princes, is, because they
punish wickedness, and reward and encourage Virtue, which is so great a
blessing to humane Societies, then we are not bound to obey them, when they do
quite contrary* when they encourage Vice, and oppress the most exemplary
innocence. Now in answer to this, let us consider,

1. Whether these great Apostles intended to oblige the Christians of that age
to yield obedience to those powers* which then governed the world. If they did,
(as I think no man will be so hardy as to say, that they did not) then it will
be proper to enquire, whether what they here affirm, and assign as the reason
of their subjection, that Rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the
evil, were true of the Roman Emperors and Governors, or not. If it were true,
then I believe it will hold true of all Kings, in all ages of the world; for
there cannot well be greater Tyrants than the Roman Emperors were at this time:
and so this will prove an eternal reason, why we should be subject to Princes,
notwithstanding the many faults and miscarriages of their government. If it
were not true, it is very strange, that two such great Apostles, should use
such an argument to persuade Christians to submit to the powers, as only proved
the quite contrary, that they ought not to be subject to the present powers,
because they were unjust and Tyrannical, and in contradiction to the original
design and institution of civil power, were a terror to good works and not to
the evil.

The Christians were at that time persecuted by Jews and Heathens, by all the
powers of the World. The Apostle exhorts them not to resist the powers, because
they were not a Terror to good works, but to the evil. If by this he only
means, that they should be subject to them, while they encouraged Virtue and
virtuous men, but might rebel against them, when they did the contrary; how
could the Christians of those days think themselves obliged by this to submit
to the higher powers?

For this was not their case. They suffered for righteousness sake; the powers
were a terror to them, though they were innocent, though they could not charge
them, either with breaking the Laws of God or Men; and therefore they were not
bound to submit to them, whenever they could find it safe to resist. So that
either these men put a false comment upon the Text, or while the Apostle
undertakes to deter them from resistance, he urges such an argument as was
proper only to persuade them to rebel.

2. We may also consider, that this interpretation of the words makes the
Apostles argument childish and ludicrous, and wholly useless to persuade any
man to be subject, who needs persuasion. For I take it for granted, that there
is no need to persuade any man, especially the good and virtuous, not to resist
the powers, when he meets with the just rewards and encouragements of Virtue.
The usual pretense for Seditions and Treasons, is to redress public
grievances, to deliver themselves from a state of oppression and slavery; but
all mankind agree, that they ought to obey Governors, who govern well; and no
man thinks it just or honorable to rebel, who has not, or cannot pretend some
cause of complaint. The trial of our obedience is, when we suffer injuriously
for righteousness sake, when our Rights and Liberties are invaded, when we
groan under such oppressions, as are enough to make a wise man mad, and to
transport him to irregular and unjustifiable actions. This was the case of the
Primitive Christians to whom the Apostles wrote, and therefore we might
reasonably expect, that he should urge such Arguments to Subjection, as should
reach their case: but if these men be good Expositors, the Apostle says nothing
to persuade any man to obedience to the powers, who finds the powers uneasy
and troublesome to him; and those who have nothing to complain of* one would
think, should need no Arguments to persuade them to subjection to so easy and
gentle a yoke.

3. Nay, according to this interpretation of the Doctrine of Subjection, that
we are bound only to be subject to those Princes, who rule well, who punish
wickedness and reward virtue; this Doctrine of Subjection gives no security at
all to the best governments in the world. The most Factious and Seditious
spirits can desire no greater liberty, than this principle grants them. For no
humane government can be so exact and perfect, but it may be guilty of great
miscarriages. Good men may suffer, and bad men may flourish under a virtuous
Prince, and therefore ill designing men can never want pretenses to
misrepresent the government, and to foment Discontents and Jealousies between
Prince and People. This unhappy Nation has been a sad example of this, twice in
one Age, under two as just and merciful Princes, as ever sat upon the English
Throne. When there were never fewer real grievances to be complained of, and
never more loud and Tragical complaints: and if Subjects are not bound to obey
any longer than all things please and gratify their humors, it is a vain thing
to name the Doct^^^^ of Subjection; which is of no use at all (...) peace and
security of humane (...)

4. This is absolutely false, (...) are bound to be subject to (...) Princes no
longer than the (...), according to the measures (...) and righteousness. The
Apostle I am sure supposes the contrary, when he tells the Christians, But and
if ye suffer for righteousness sake, happy are ye; and be not afraid of their
terror, neither be troubled, 1 Pet. 3. 14. Thus he commands servants to be
subject to their Masters with fear, not only to the good and gentle, but also
to the froward. For this is thankworthy, if a man for conscience toward God
endure grief, suffering patiently. For what glory is it, if when ye be buffeted
for your faults, ye take it patiently? but if when ye do well and suffer for
it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with God, 2 Chap. 18, 19, 20. And
certainly there is as perfect a subjection due to a Soverain Prince as to a
Master, for he is more eminently the Minister of God, and acts by a more Sacred
and inviolable authority. And that this does extend to our subjection to
Princes, appears from the example of Christ, which the Apostle there recommends
to our imitation, who was the most innocent person in the world, and yet
suffered the most barbarous usage, not from the hands of a private Master, but
of the supreme powers. And therefore when he commands in the same Chapter to
submit to Governors, as to those who are for the punishment of evil doers, and
the praise of them that do well, it is evident, that he did not intend this as
a limitation of our subjection, as if we were not bound to be subject in other
cases; since in the very same Chapter, he requires subjection not only to the
good and gentle, but also to the froward, in imitation of the example of our
Lord, who suffered patiently under unjust and Tyrannical powers.

5. I observe therefore, that the Apostle does not allege this as the reason
of our subjection, but as a motive or argument to reconcile us to the practice
of it. The reason of our subjection to Princes is, that they are advanced by
God, that they are his Ministers, that those who resist, resist the Ordinance
of God, and therefore we must submit for Gods sake, out of reverence to his
authority. But it is an encouragement to subjection, to consider the great
advantages of government, that Rulers are not a terror to good works, but to
the evil. But though this motive should fail in some instances, yet while the
reason of subjection lasts, (and that can never fail, while we own the Soverain
Authority of God) so long it is our duty to be subject, whether our Prince do
his duty or not.

6. But to examine more particularly the meaning of these words. When the
Apostle says, that Rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the evil; that
they are for the punishment of evil doers, and the praise of them that do well;
I see no necessity of expounding this of good and evil works in general, that
all good and virtuous actions shall be rewarded by them, and all evil actions
punished; for this is almost impossible in any humane government; and there
never was any government in the world, that appointed rewards for all virtuous
actions, and punishments for all wicked ones. But these good and evil works
seem to be confined to the matter in hand, to subjection and obedience, as a
good and virtuous action. And so the Apostle enforces this duty of subjection,
not only from the Authority of God, but from the power of Princes: Be subject
to the higher powers; for Rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the
evil. We need not fear the powers, when we obey them, and submit ourselves to
them; but they will punish us if we rebel. The force of which argument is this:
The best way to obtain safety and protection under any Government, is by being
peaceable, quiet, and obedient; such men generally escape under the greatest
Tyrants, for Tyrants themselves do not use to insult over the peaceable and
obedient: but if men be seditious and troublesome to government, then he
bears not the sword in vain, but is the Minister of God, a revenger to
execute wrath upon him that does evil, that is, upon all disobedience and
rebellion; for whatever wickedness escapes unpunish't, Princes for their own
security must not suffer disobedience and rebellion to escape. And that this
is the meaning of it, appears from the next verse, where the Apostle sums up
the whole argument for subjection, which he reduces to Conscience toward God,
and fear of the secular powers: Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only
for wrath, but also for Conscience sake. And that St. Peter by well doing means
subjection to Princes, is very plain. For so is the will of God, that with well
doing, ye should put to silence the ignorance of foolish men; that is, by
obedience and subjection to Princes, which is the duty he there exhorts them
to. And therefore it is very probable that he means the same by well doing in
the verse before, that Governors are for the punishment of evil doers, and the
praise of them that do well; to punish the disobedient and rebellious, and to
reward and protect those, who live in all quiet and peaceable subjection. And
if this be the meaning of it, I think they can find no limitation here of our
subjection to Princes.

7. But let us suppose, that when the Apostle says, that Rulers are not a
terror to good works, but to the evil, he understands by it in general, the
great advantages of civil government, that is, for the suppression of
wickedness, and encouragement of virtue, which is the true end and the best
improvement of humane power; this also is in a great measure true of the worst
and most Tyrannical Princes, and therefore the argument for subjection is good
even under a Tyrant.

Public Justice was administered under the government of Nero, and good men
were rewarded, and bad men punished: And though Justice be not so equally and
so universally administered under a bad Prince, as under a good one; though a
Tyrant may oppress many of his subjects, and be the occasion of great
Calamities, yet while there is any public government maintained in the world,
it lays great restraints upon the unruly lusts and passions of men, and gives
great security to the just and innocent. And therefore good men are concerned
to promote the peace and security of Government, though the Prince be a
Tyrant: for there is more Justice to be had under a Tyrant, than in a civil
War. In ordinary cases it is very possible for good men to live easily and
tolerably under a very bad Prince; and though it should be their lot to suffer,
yet since the peace and quiet of humane Societies is in it self so great a
blessing, and the public good is better consulted by the preservation of
government, than by resistance, it becomes every good man rather to suffer
patiently under a Tyrant, than to shake and unsettle humane government, and
disturb the natural course of Justice by seditions and tumults.

8. Nay let us suppose, that the Apostle here speaks of such an equal
administration of Justice, as cannot be expected under the government of a
Tyrant; yet so the argument holds good against resistance, though our Prince be
never so bad. And it lies thus: we must not resist the powers, because Rulers
are not a terror to good works, but to the evil. This is the great blessing of
humane government, to preserve Justice and righteousness among men. For this
reason God has entrusted the Princes with the power of the sword, for the
punishment of evil doers, and the praise of them that do well; and therefore we
must not resist him, because public Justice is so great a blessing to the
world. But how does this follow, you will say, that we must not resist a
Tyrant, who is so far from administering Justice, that he oppresses his
subjects, because Civil Government and Public Justice is so great a blessing?
what agreement is there between civil government, and public Justice and a
Tyrant? Why the consequence is very plain. Civil government, which is for the
administration of public Justice, is a great and inestimable blessing to the
world: but now there can be no civil government without a supreme and
irresistible power; public Justice cannot be administered, unless there is some
power from whence there is no appeal. It is not necessary indeed, that the
power should always be in the hands of one man; but if God have placed this
power in the hands of a Prince, there it must be irresistible too, however he
uses it: for if once it be made lawful to resist the supreme Power, wherever it
is placed, you dissolve humane Societies, or at least expose them to perpetual
disorders and convulsions. Factious and ambitious men will find pretenses to
resist good Princes as well as the bad, and no government can be any longer
secure, than while ill-designing men want power to resist. Now then, to pass a
true Judgment of this matter, we must not only consider, what present
inconveniences we may suffer from the irresistible power of a Tyrant, but what
an irreparable mischief it is for ever to unsettle the foundations of
government. We must consider whether Civil Government be the greater blessing
to mankind, or a Tyrant the greater curse: whether it be more desirable to
endure the insolence and injustice of a Tyrant, when the power falls into such
a hand; or for ever to be deprived of the security of government, and the
blessings of Peace and order. And therefore there is great reason, why God
should so severely forbid the resistance of Princes, though Tyrants; and why we
should quietly and contentedly submit to this divine appointment, because the
resistance of the supreme power, were it once allowed by God, would weaken the
authority of humane Governments, and expose them to the rage and frenzy of
ambitious and discontented Statesmen, or wild Enthusiasts. This I think is a
sufficient answer to this pretense, that the Apostle limits our subjection to
Princes to the regular exercise of their authority.

3. It is objected also from St. Peter's words, that the inferior and
subordinate Magistrates receive their power from God also, as well as supreme
and Sovereign Princes; Governors are sent by him, that is, say they, by God,
for the punishment of evil doers, and the praise of them that do well; and
therefore though private men may not resist a Sovereign Prince, yet public
Magistrates may, though they be not supreme; for it is their duty also to see
wickedness punished, and virtue rewarded; and therefore it is part of their
Commission to give check to the Sovereign Power, and to defend subjects from
the unjust violence and oppressions of their Prince. And this the Emperor
Trajan learned from the common principles of Justice and Equity, who delivered
a sword to one of his Officers with this charge, to use it for him, while he
governed well, but against him if he governed ill. Now in answer to this, we
may consider,

1. That there is no foundation at all for this in the Text, for this (...) or
by him, cannot by any rules of Grammar be referred to God, but to the King.
Submit to every Ordinance of man for the Lord's sake, whether to the King as
supreme, or unto Governors, as unto them who are sent by him. By him? by whom?
by God? that is not said, but by the King, for that is the next antecedent; and
that is the evident truth of the case. Inferior Magistrates do not receive
their power from God, but from the King, who having the Sovereign power in
himself, commits the exercise of some part of it to others, and takes it away
again, when he pleases. And the very phrase of (...), those who are sent by
him, plainly refers it to those who were sent by the Emperor into foreign
countries, to govern the Roman Provinces; such as Pontius Pilate and Felix
were: and so the meaning is, that they were not only obliged to submit to the
Roman Emperors, but to all those Governors, whom they sent to rule the
Provinces under their Jurisdiction; which is no more than for a Preacher to
instruct the subjects of Ireland, that they must not only submit to the King,
but to all those whom he sent to govern them, with the power and authority of
Deputies, or Lord-Lieutenants.

2. Nay St. Peter, as if he had foreseen this objection, takes particular care
to prevent it, and therefore makes an apparent difference between that
submission we owe to Sovereign Princes, and that which we owe to Governors; we
must submit to the King as supreme, (...) as to him who is above all, whose
power is unaccountable and irresistible; but to Governors, as unto them who
are sent by him: which both signifies the reason of our submission to
Governors, and prescribes the bounds and measures of it.

The reason why we must submit to Governors, is because they are sent by our
Prince, they act by his Authority, and therefore we must submit to, and
reverence his Authority in them. It is not for their own sakes, nor for any
inherent Authority in them, but as they receive their power from our Prince.

And this also determines the bounds and measures of our subjection to
Governors. As that Authority, which they receive from the King, is the only
reason why we must submit to them at all: so we must submit no longer, than
that Authority lasts; when ever the Prince recalls them, and transfers this
power to another, we must obey them no longer. Nay, since we are only bound to
reverence and obey the authority of our Prince in them, we must never submit
to them in opposition to our Prince. Our primarie obligation is to submit to
the King, who is our Soveraign-Lord, and must in no cases be resisted; our
submission to Governors and subordinate Magistrates is only a part and branch
of our duty to the King, as they are his Officers and Ministers: and therefore
eit can never be our duty to obey or comply with subordinate Magistrates, but
only when it is an act of duty and subjection to our Prince; and certainly it
is no act of subjection to our Prince to obey subordinate Magistrates, when
they rebel against their Prince: for, to resist a Prince, or to join with those
who do resist him, is an odd kind of instance of our subjection to him. This
is not to submit to the King as supreme, nor to Governors, as unto those who
are sent by him, and receive their Authority from him; but it is to submit to
Governors, as the supreme and sovereign Judges of our Prince, and the Patrons
and Protectors of the people against their Prince; which is directly contrary
to St. Peter's Doctrine.

It was no new thing for the Governors of remote Provinces to revolt from the
obedience of the Roman Emperors, and to usurp a Sovereign and Imperial
Authority to themselves; and therefore St. Peter expresses their duty to
Governors with this caution and limitation, that though they must submit to
those, whom the Emperor sent to govern them, yet it must be in subordination
to the Imperial Authority, and with a reserve of that more absolute
subjection, which they owe to the Emperor himself, who is their Sovereign
Lord. While Governors are subject to the Emperor, who is their Lord and
Master, we must be subject to them; but if they rebel, we must be subject to
the Emperor still, and oppose those, whom we were before bound to obey.

When St. Peter so expressly commands them both to submit to the King, and to
submit to Governors, it is impossible he could consider the King and
Governous, as two distinct and rival authorities; for then it might so happen,
that they could not submit to both, if ever they should oppose each other: and
therefore when he commands them to submit to both, he must suppose them to be
both one, as the fountain and the stream is one. The Authority to which they
must submit is but one, it is originally in the King, as in its source and
fountain, and it is derived and communicated to Governors; but is the same
power still, which as necessarily depends upon the King, as light does upon the
Sun; and therefore when these powers grow two, when this derivative and
dependant power sets up for it self in opposition to that power which gave it
its being, we are delivered from our subjection to it, because it ceases to be
one with that sovereign power, to which we must be subject*

Once more. St. Peter commands the Christians to submit to the King, and to
Governors, that is, to the King's Ministers, who receive their authority from
him to govern. But when such persons rebel against their Prince who gave them
authority, they cease to be the Kings Ministers and Governors, and therefore
cease to be such Governors to whom the Apostle commands submission. We are to
obey them while they are the Kings Ministers and Deputies; but when they assume
to themselves an independent power, we must submit to them no longer, but to
our Prince: We may and ought to obey our Prince, and those Magistrates whom he
sets over us, but we cannot submit to our Prince and to Rebels; and certainly
when men become Rebels, they are no longer the Kings Ministers, but his Rivals.

3. It is a very ridiculous pretense also, which has no foundation in St.
Peter's words, that Governors or subordinate Magistrates have power to
control or resist their Soverain Prince. The Apostle tells us, that the King
is supreme; but over whom is he supreme? certainly over all in his Dominions,
or else he is not supreme; and therefore he is supreme with respect to
subordinate Magistrates, as well as private Subjects; and then they have no
more power or authority to resist, than any private Subject has. For St. Paul
tells us, the higher Power is irresistible; which would be a strange Paradox,
if every little Officer had authority to resist him.

And yet if men will grant, that it is never lawful for any private man to
resist his Prince, it is not worth disputing, whether subordinate Magistrates
may or not; for if private men must not resist, these inferior Magistrates
cannot, or at least they will resist to no purpose. He may make them private
men again when he pleases; or however, he must be an unfortunate Prince, whom
all his own Officers and Ministers conspire against; and he must be a very weak
Prince, who has not force and power to oppose them. For what does the
discontent of the greatest Ministers signify, who can raise no forces to
oppose their Prince? and yet there are no forces to be raised, if private men
must not resist. When inferior Magistrates must submit, or rebel alone, (as
they must do, if private men must not rebel) whatever authority they have to
control their Prince, they will want force and power to do it. And yet it
would be a lewd way of burlesquing this Doctrine of Non-resistance, to make no
more of it than this, that when St. Paul so severely threatens damnation
against those who resist, his meaning is, that private Subjects must not resist
their Prince, unless they have some discontented and factious Magistrates to
head them.

But how should these subordinate Governors come by this power to resist their
Prince? They must either have it from God, or from their Prince. Not from God.
For Soverain Princes receive their authority from God; and if God have bestowed
the supreme and Soverain Power on the Prince, it is a contradiction to say,
that he has advanced his own Ministers and Officers above him, which would be
to place a superior power over the supreme. Nor is it reasonable to suppose,
that inferior Magistrates receive such a power as this from their Prince,
though it is evident, they have no power, but what they receive from him. For
notwithstanding Trajan's complement, which he never intended should be made a
Law for himself, or other Soverain Princes; no Prince can give such power as
this to a Subject, without giving him his Crown. He gives away his Soverain
power, when he gives any Subject authority to resist; he ceases to be a
Soverain Prince, if he makes any man his Superior: for he cannot give away
Soverain power, and yet keep it himself. And it would be a hard case with
Princes, had they as many Judges and Masters, as they have Officers and
Ministers of State. Indeed, no Prince without parting with his Crown, can grant
such an extravagant power to any Subject: for while he continues Soverain, God
has made it necessary to the greatest Subjects to obey and submit. For as for
Trajan's saying to one of his Commanders, when he delivered him the Sword, Use
this for me if I govern well, and against me if I govern ill, it only signified
his fixed resolution to govern well, and that he would employ it in no ill
services: but it conveyed no more power to him to rebel, if he should govern
ill, than a Father's saying to his Son, that he should forgive his
disobedience, if ever he would prove unkind, would justify the disobedience of
the Son, if his Father should prove unkind. The duties of these relations are
fixed by God, and cannot be altered by men. A Prince may divest himself of his
Kingdom, and royal Power; but while he continues Sovereign, he cannot give
liberty to any man to resist him.

4. There is another objection not only to invalidate St. Peter's authority,
but to answer all the arguments that are produced from the doctrine and
practice of Christ and his Apostles, to enforce this duty of Non-resistance
and subjection to Princes; and that is, that these commands were only
temporary, and obliged Christians while they wanted force and power to resist,
but do not oblige us, when we can resist and conquer too.

I have sometimes thought, that this objection ought to be answered only with
indignation and abhorrence, as an open contempt of the authority of the
Scriptures, and blasphemy against the holy Spirit, by which they were indicted;
but it may be, it is better to answer and expose it, and let the world see,
besides the notorious folly of it, how near a kin the doctrine of Resistance is
to Atheism, Infidelity, and Blasphemy.

1. First then I observe, that this very objection supposes that the doctrine
of the Gospel is against Resistance; for those who evade the authority of the
Scriptures, by saying, that Christians were then forbid to resist, because they
wanted power to conquer, must grant, that resistance is forbid. Which is a
plain confession, that they are conscious to themselves, that all the arts they
have used to make the Scriptures speak their sense, and justify the Doctrine
of Resistance, will not do. And therefore when men are once reduced to this
last refuge, to confess, that the Scriptures are against them, if they have any
modesty left, they ought never to pretend to the authority of the Scriptures in
this cause more. And this is a sufficient answer to all men, who have any
reverence for the authority of the Scriptures, that they cannot resist their
Prince without disobeying the plain and express Laws of the Gospel; for he is a
bold man, who will venture his eternal Salvation, upon pleading his exemption
from any express Law.

2. I would desire all men who have any reverence left for the Religion of our
Savior, to consider seriously how this pretense does disparage and weaken the
authority of the Gospel, and make it a very imperfect, and a very uncertain
rule of Life, which every man may fit and accommodate to his own humor and
inclinations.

Christ and his Apostles do in the most express terms, and under the most
severe penalties, forbid the resistance of Sovereign Princes. But say these
men, this law does not oblige us now, though it did oblige the Christians of
those days; for our circumstances are much changed and altered. The Christians
at that time were weak, and unable to resist, and therefore were taught to
suffer patiently without resistance; but thanks be to God, the case is not thus
now; and therefore we may vindicate our natural and religious rights and
liberties against all unjust violence. Now observe what follows from hence:

1. That the Gospel of our Savior is a very imperfect and uncertain rule of
life; that it absolutely forbids things, which are not absolutely evil, but
sometimes lawful, without allowing for such a difference: that it gives general
laws, which oblige only at certain times, or in some circumstances, without
giving any notice in what cases they do not oblige; which is a mighty snare to
men's consciences, or a great injury to their Christian liberty. It imposes
this hard necessity upon them, either to make bold with a divine law, if they
do resist Tyrannical powers, which is grievous to a tender conscience, which
has any reverence for God; or to suffer injuriously, when they need not, had
they been plainly instructed in their duty, and acquainted in what cases they
might resist, and in what not. And I think, there cannot be a greater reproach
to the Gospel, than to make it such an imperfect and insnaring rule.

2. Nay, this charges Christ and his Apostles with want of sincerity in
preaching the Gospel; for either they knew, that this Doctrine of
Non-resistance did not oblige all Christians, but only those who are weak and
unable to resist, or they did not. If we say they did not, we charge them with
ignorance: if we say they did, with dishonestie: for if they knew, that all
Christians were not obliged to such an absolute subjection to Princes, as in no
case to resist, why did they conceal so important a truth, without giving the
least intimation of it? Did they think this so scandalous a Doctrine, that they
were afraid or ashamed to publish it to the world? and can any thing be a
Doctrine of the Gospel, which is truly scandalous? But was the Doctrine of
resistance more scandalous* than the Doctrine of the Cross? Would this have
offended Princes, and make them more implacable enemies to Christianity? But
would it not also have made more converts? would not a liberty to resist the
powers, and defend themselves, been a better inducement to embrace
Christianity, than a necessity of suffering the worst things for the Name of
Christ? would not this have contributed very much to the conversion of the
whole Jewish Nation, who were fond of a Temporal Kingdom, had Christianity
allowed them to cast off the Roman Yoke, and restored their ancient liberties?
How soon should we have seen the Cross in their Banners, and how gladly would
they have fought under that victorious sign, under the conduct of so many
wonder-working Prophets? and how soon would this have made the Doctrine of
Non-resistance useless and out of date, by making Christians powerful enough to
resist? So that there is no imaginable reason, why Christ and his Apostle
should conceal this Doctrine of the lawfulness of resisting persecuting and
Tyrannical powers, especially at that time, when if it had been lawful, there
was as much use for it, and as great reason to preach it, as ever there was, or
ever can be. And therefore we must either think very ill of our Savior and his
Apostles, or a knowledge, that this is no Gospel-Doctrine, never was, and never
can be any part of the Religion of the Cross. There is no reason, why Christ
should at first plant Christianity in the world by sufferings, if it might
afterward be maintained and propagated by glorious rebellions.

3. If this plea be allowed, it weakens the Authority of all the laws of the
Gospel, and leaves men at liberty to dispense with themselves, when they see
or fancy any reason for it. Non-resistance is as absolutely commanded, as any
other law of the Gospel; but these men imagine, without any other reason, but
because they would have it so, that this law only concerned Christians in the
weak and Infant-state of the Church, while they were unable to resist. Now
should other men take the same liberty with other laws (and I know no reason
but why they may) how easy were it to expound Christianity out of the world?
Meekness, patience, humility, selfdenial, contempt of the world, forgiving
enemies, contentment in all conditions, are parts and branches of this
suffering Religion; and may we not with as much reason say, that these duties
were calculated for the afflicted and suffering state of the Church, when the
profession of Christianity was discouraged in the world, and exposed them to
the loss of all things, and therefore made it impossible for them to enjoy
those pleasures and advantages of life, which other men did; but that they do
not more oblige us than resistance, now the Church is flourishing and
prosperous? And thus men may justify their pride and ambition and
covetousness, and may be as very Idolaters of the riches and pleasures and
honors of the world, as Heathens themselves, when Christianity became the
Religion of the Empire: it did indeed make too great an alteration in the lives
of Christians. But according to this way of reasoning, it made as great an
alteration in Religion it self; at this rate we ought to have two Gospels, one
for the afflicted, the other for the prosperous state of the Church; which
differ as much as Christianity and Paganism in the great rules of life. But we
are hard dealt with, that we have but one Gospel, and that the Suffering
Gospel; and for my part, I dare not undertake to make another. So that this
plea for resistance in opposition to the plain and express Laws of the Gospel,
in the consequences of it, strikes at the very foundations of Christianity,
and becomes the mouth of none but an Atheist or an Infidel.

4. This is a very absurd pretense* that the Apostle forbids the Christians of
those days to resist, only because they were weak, and unable to resist. This
is a great reproach to the Apostle, as if he were of the temper of some men,
who crouch and flatter, and pretend great loyalty, when they are afraid to
rebel, but are loyal no longer than they have an opportunity to rebel. This is
dissimulation and flattery, and inconsistent with the open simplicity of the
Apostolic Spirit; but it is very strange that the Apostle should so severely
forbid resistance, when he knew they could not resist. One would think common
Prudence should teach such men to be quiet and Subject; and therefore his zeal
and vehemence would persuade one, that as weak as the Christians were, yet in
those days they could have resisted. Nay, it is evident, that there were a sort
of men who in those days called themselves Christians, and yet did resist the
powers; such were the Gnostick Heretics, who despised Government, who were
presumptuous and selfwilled, and were not afraid to speak evil of dignities, 2.
Peter 2. 10. Jude v. 8. for to reproach and vilify Government, is one degree
of resistance; and no men are so weak, but they may do that. Nay, though
Christians had not power enough of their own to have rebelled against the Roman
Government, yet they had opportunity enough to join and conspire with those
who had, and to have made good terms and conditions for themselves. They lived
in a very factious age, when both Jews and Heathens were very apt to rebel, and
could both have promoted and strengthened the Faction, if they had pleased, and
have grown very acceptable to them by doing so; and though no man knows what
the event of any rebellion will be* till he tries, yet they might have escaped
as well as other men. This the Apostle knew, and this he was afraid of, and
this he warns them against; and that for such reasons, as plainly show, that it
was not a mere prudential advice he gives them, for that time, but a standing
Law of their Religion.

5. For this Doctrine of Non-resistance is urged with such reasons and
arguments, as are good in all ages of the Church, as well when Christians have
power to resist and conquer, as when they have not. Thus (1.) St. Paul inforces
this duty of subjection to the Higher powers, because all powers are of God;
the powers that be are ordained of God; and therefore he that resists the
powers, resists the Ordinance of God. Now if they must obey the powers,
because they are from God, Subjection and Non-resistance is as much our duty,
when we have power to resist, as when we have not; and is as much our duty at
this day, as it was in the time of the Apostle, if we believe, that God has as
great a hand in setting up Kings now, as he had then.

2. He threatens eternal damnation against those, who resist: He that resists
shall receive unto himself damnation; which supposes, that there is a moral
evil in resistance, and therefore that Nonresistance is an eternal and
unchangeable Law: which cannot be true, if it be lawful to resist, when we can
resist to some purpose, when we can resist and conquer. It is foolish indeed to
resist a Prince, when we have not sufficient force to oppose against him; but
it would be a hard case, if a man should perish etenally, for doing an action,
which is lawful in it self, but imprudently undertaken. These men had need look
well to themselves, how lawful soever they think resistance to be, if every
imprudent and unfortunate Rebel must be damned.

3. St. Paul adds, that we must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but
also for Conscience sake; that is, not only out of fear of men, but out of
Conscience of our duty to God. Now if resistance were not in its nature
sinful, it were a very prudential Consideration, not to resist for fear of
wrath, that is, for fear of being punished by men, if we cannot conquer; but
there would be no conscience in the case, no sense of any duty to God* unless
we think, that Non-resistance is our duty, when we cannot conquer, and
resistance when we can.

4. St. Peter tells us, that this subjection to Kings and Governors is a good
and virtuous action, and therefore he calls it well-doing: For so is the will
of God, that with well-doing ye may put to silence the ignorance of foolish
men; that is, by submitting to Kings and Governors, as you have already heard.
Now the nature of Virtue and Vice cannot alter with the circumstances of our
condition; that which is good in one age, is so in another; which shows, that
Subjection and Non-resistance was not a temporary law, and mere matter of
prudence, but an essential duty of Christian Religion.

5. For it appears by what he adds, that it was a great credit and reputation
to Christianity, that it made men quiet, peaceable, and governable; By
well-doing they put to silence the ignorance of foolish men; by their peaceable
and obedient behavior to their Governors, they shamed those men, who
ignorantly reproach't the Christian Religion. Now hence there are two plain
consequents:

1. That subjection to government is a thing of very good repute in the world,
or else it could be no Credit to Christianity; and this is a good argument that
subjection to Government is a great Virtue, because all men speak well of it.
It is a thing of good report, and therefore becomes Christians, 4 Phil. 8.

2. It hence follows also, that subjection to Government was a standing
Doctrine of the Christian Religion, because it was the will of God, that they
should recommend Christianity to the world by subjection to Princes. But
certainly God never intended they should put a cheat upon the world, and
recommend Christianity to them, by that, which is no part nor duty of
Christianity.

This is abundantly sufficient to confute that vain pretense, that the Doctrine
of Subjection and Non-resistance obliged Christians only, while they were
unable to resist and defend themselves; and this is enough to satisfy us, what
the Doctrine of the Apostles was about subjection to Princes.

As for their examples, I think there was never any dispute about that. It is
sufficiently known, that they suffered Martyrdom, as a vast number of
Christians in that and some following Ages did, without either reproaching
their Governors, or rebelling against them: and this they did, as they taught
others to do, not merely because they could not resist, but out of duty and
reverence to God, who sets Princes on Thrones, and has given them a sacred and
inviolable Authority; and in imitation of their great Lord and Master, who went
as a Lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before the shearer is dumb, so he
opened not his mouth.

CHAP. VI. An ANSWER to the most Popular Objections against NONRESISTANCE.
I Proceed now to consider those objections, which are made against the
Doctrine of Non-resistance; though methinks after such plain and convincing
proof, that Non-resistance is the Doctrine both of the Old and New Testament,
though witty men may be able to start some objections, yet wise and good men
should not regard them: for no objection is of any force, against a plain and
express Law of God. Indeed, when we have no evidence for a thing but only
Natural Reason, and the reason seems to be equally strong and cogent on both
sides, it renders the matter very doubtful, on which side the truth lies: but
when on one side there is a plain and express Revelation of the will of God,
and on the other side some show and appearance of reason, I think there can be
no dispute, which side we choose; unless any man think it doubtful, which is the
most certain and infallible rule, Scripture or mere natural reason. And
therefore till men can answer that Scripture-evidence, which I have produced,
(which I am not much concerned about, for I guess it will take them up some
time to do it) all their other objections, whether I could answer them or not,
signify nothing at all to me, and ought to signify as little to any man, who
reverences the Scriptures. But let us consider their objections* for they are
not so formidable, that we need be afraid of them.

Now I know no body, but will acknowledge, that in most cases it is the duty of
Subjects not to resist their Prince; but they only pretend, that this is not
their duty, when their Prince oppresses and persecutes them contrary to Law*
when their Lives and Liberties and Properties and Religion are all secured by
the Laws of the Land, they see no reason why they should tamely suffer a Prince
to usurp upon them, why they should not defend themselves against all unjust
and illegal violence; and they urge several arguments to prove, that they may
do so; which may be reduced to these five.

1. That they are bound by no Law to suffer against Law. 2. That the Prince has
no authority against Law. 3. That they have a natural right of self-defence
against unjust violence. 4. That otherwise we destroy the distinction between
an absolute and limited Monarch; between a Prince whose will is his Law, and a
Prince who is bound to govern by Law; which undermines the Fundamental
Constitution of the English Government. 5. That if resistance in no case be
allowed, the mischiefs and inconveniences to mankind may be intolerable. I
suppose it will be acknowledged, that these five particulars do contain the
whole strength of their cause; and if I can give a fair answer to them, it must
either make men Loyal, or leave them without excuse.

1. They urge, that they are bound by no Law to suffer against Law. Suppose, as
a late Author does, that a Popish Julian the Apostate.
Prince should persecute his Protestant Subjects in England for professing the
Protestant Religion which is established by Law; By what Law (says he) must we
die? not by any Law of God surely, for being of that Religion, which he
approves, and would have all the world to embrace, and to hold fast to the end.
Nor by the Laws of our Country, where Protestancy is so far from being
criminal, that it is death to desert it, and to turn Papist. By what Law then?
by none that I know of, says our Author: nor do I know of any; and so far we
are agreed. But then both the Laws of God and of our Country, command us not
to resist: and if death, an illegal unjust death follow upon that, I cannot
help it; God and our Country must answer for it. It is a wonderful discovery,
which this Author has made, that when we suffer against Law, we are condemned
by no Law to die^; for if we were, we could not suffer against Law: and it is
as wonderful an argument he uses to prove, that we may resist, when we are
persecuted against Law, because we are condemned by no Law to die; which is
supposed in the very question, and is neither more nor less, than to affirm the
thing which he was to prove. We may resist a Prince who persecutes against Law,
because we are condemned by no Law, that is, because he persecutes against Law.
This proves indeed, that we ought not to die, when we are condemned by no Law
to die; but whether we may preserve our selves from an unjust and violent death
by resisting a persecuting Prince* is another question.

2. It is urged, that a Prince has no authority against Law; There is no
authority on earth above the Law, much less against it. It is Murder to put a
man to death against Law; and if they knew who had authority to commit open,
barefaced, and downright Murders, this would direct them where to pay their
Passive Obedience; but it would be the horridest stander in the world to say,
that any such power is lodged in the Prerogative, as to destroy men contrary to
Law.

Now I perfectly agree with them in this also, that a Prince has no just and
legal authority to act against Law* that if he knowingly persecure any Subject
to death contrary to Law, he is a Murderer, and that no Prince has any such
Prerogative to commit open, barefaced and downright murders. But what follows
from hence? does it hence follow, therefore we may resist and oppose them, if
they do? This I absolutely deny; because God has expressly commanded us not to
resist: And I see no inconsistencie between these two propositions, that a
Prince has no Legal Authority to persecute against Law, and yet that he must
not be resisted, when he does. Both the Laws of God, and the Laws of our
Country, suppose these two to be very consistent. For notwithstanding the
possibility, that Princes may abuse their power, and transgress the Laws,
whereby they ought to govern; yet they Command Subjects in no case to resist:
and it is not sufficient to justify resistance, if Princes do, what they have
no just Authority to do, unless we have also a just Authority to resist. He,
who exceeds the just bounds of his Authority, is liable to be called to an
account for it; but he is accountable only to those, who have a superior
authority to call him to an account. No power whatever is accountable to an
inferior; for this is a contradiction to the very notion of Power, and
destructive of all Order and Government. Inferior Magistrates are on all hands
acknowledged to be liable to give an account of the abuse of their power; but
to whom must they give an account? not to their inferiors; not to the people,
whom they are to Govern, but to superior Magistrates, or to the Sovereign
Prince, who governs all. Thus the Sovereign Prince may exceed his Authority,
and is accountable for it to a superior power; but because he has no superior
power on earth, he cannot be resisted by his own Subjects, but must be reserved
to the Judgment of God, who alone is the King of Kings. To justify our
resistance of any power, there are two things to be proved. 1. That this power
has exceeded its just Authority. 2. That we have Authority to resist. Now
these men indeed prove the first very well, that Princes, who are to govern by
Law, exceed their legal Authority when they persecute against Law: but they
say not one word of the second, that Subjects have authority to resist their
Prince, who persecutes against Law; which was the only thing, that needed
proof: but this is a hard task, and therefore they thought it more advisable
to take it for granted, than to attempt to prove it. They say indeed, that an
inauthoritative act, which carries no obligation at all, cannot oblige Subjects
to obedience. Now this is manifestly true, if by obedience they mean an active
obedience; for I am not bound to do an ill thing, or an illegal action, because
my Prince commands me; but if they mean Passive Obedience, it is as manifestly
false; for I am bound to obey, that is, not to resist my Prince, when he offers
the most unjust and illegal violence.

Nay, it is very false and absurd to say, that every illegal, is an
inauthoritative act, which carries no obligation with it. This is contrary to
the practice of all humane Iudicatures, and the daily experience of men, who
suffer in their lives, bodies, or estates by an unjust and illegal sentence.
Every Judgment contrary to the true meaning of the law, is in that sense
illegal; and yet such illegal Judgments have their Authority and obligation,
till they are rescinded by some higher Authority. This is the true reason of
appeals from inferior to superior Courts, to rectify illegal proceedings,
and reverse illegal Judgments; which supposes that such illegal acts have
authority, till they are made null and void by a higher power: and if the
higher powers from whence lies no appeal, confirm and ratify an unjust and
illegal sentence, it carries so much authority and obligation with it, that
the injured person has no redress, but must patiently submit; and thus it must
necessarily be, or there can be no end of disputes, nor any order and
Government in humane Societies.

And this is a plain demonstration, that though the Law be the rule according
to which Princes ought to exercise their authority and power, yet the
authority is not in Laws; but in Persons; for otherwise why is not a sentence
pronounced according to Law by a private person, of as much Authority, as a
sentence pronounced by a Judge? how does an illegal sentence pronounced by a
Judge, come to have any Authority? for a sentence contrary to Law, cannot
have the Authority of the Law. Why is a legal or illegal sentence reversible,
and alterable, when pronounced by one Judge, and irreversible and unalterable,
when pronounced by another? For the Law is the same, and the sentence is the
same, either according to Law or against it, whoever the Judge be; but it seems
the Authority of the Persons is not the same, and that makes the difference;
so that there is an Authority in Persons, in some sense distinct from the
Authority of Laws, nay superior to it. For there is such an Authority, as,
though it cannot make an illegal act legal, yet, can and often does make an
illegal act binding and obligatorie to the Subjects, when pronounced by a
competent Judge.

If it be said, that this very authority is owing to the law, which appoints
Judges and Magistrates to decide controversies, and orders appeals from
inferior to superior Courts: I would only ask one short question, Whether
the law gives authority to any person to judge contrary to law. If it does
not, then all illegal acts are null and void, and lay no obligation on the
Subject: and yet this is manifestly false, according to the known Practice of
all the known Governments in the world. The most illegal Judgment is valid,
till it be reverst by some superior Power; and the Judgment of the supreme
power, though never so illegal, can be repealed by no authority but its own.
And yet it is absurd to say, that the law gives any man authority to Judge
contrary to law: for, to be sure, this is besides the end and intention of the
law. Whence then does an illegal act or Judgment derive its authority and
obligation? the answer is plain, It is from the authority of the Person, whose
act or Judgment it is.

It will be of great use to this controversy, to make this plain and obvious
to every understanding; which therefore I shall endeavor to do, as briefly as
may be.

1. Then I observe, that there must be a personal power and authority
antecedent to all civil laws. For there can be no laws without a Lawmakers, and
there can be no Lawmakers, unless there be one or more persons invested with
the power of Government, of which making laws is one branch. For a law is
nothing else, but the public and declared will and command of the Lawmakers,
whether he be the Sovereign Prince, or the People.

2. And hence it necessarily follows, that a Sovereign Prince does not receive
his authority from the laws, but laws receive their authority from him. We
are often indeed minded of what BRACTON says, LEX FACIT REGEM, that the law
makes the King; by which that great Lawyer was far enough from understanding,
that the King receives his Sovereign power from the law; for the law has no
authority, nor can give any, but what it receives from the King; and then it
is a wonderful riddle, how the King should receive his authority from the law.
But when he says* The Law makes the King, he distinguishes a King from a
Tyrant, and his meaning is, that to Govern by laws, makes a Sovereign Prince a
King, as King signifies a Just and equal and beneficial power and authority;
as appears from the reason he gives for it, Non est enim Rex, ubi dominatur
voluntas, and non lex; He is no King, who Governs by arbitrarie will, and not
by law: not that he is no Sovereign Prince, but he is a Tyrant and not a King.

3. And hence it evidently follows, that the being of Sovereign Power is
independent on laws; that is, as a Sovereign Prince does not receive his power
from the law, so, should he violate the laws by which he is bound to Govern,
yet he does not forfeit his power. He breaks his faith to God and to his
Country, but he is a Sovereign Prince still. And this is in effect
acknowledged by these men, who so freely confess, that let a Prince be what he
will, though he trample upon all laws, and exercise an arbitrarie and illegal
authority, yet his person is sacred and inviolable, and irresistible; he must
not be touched nor opposed. And allow that saying of David to be Scripture
still, Who can stretch forth his hand against the Lord's Anointed, and be
guiltless? Now what is it, that makes the person of a King more inviolable and
unaccountable than other men? Nothing, that I know of, but his sacred and
inviolable authority: and therefore it seems, though he act against law, yet
he is a Sovereign Prince, and the Lord*s Anointed still; or else I see no
reason, why they might not destroy his person also. And yet if nothing but an
inviolable and unaccountable authority can make the Person of the King
inviolable and unaccountable, I would gladly know, how it becomes lawful to
resist his authority, and unlawful to resist his Person. I would desire these
men to tell me, whether a Sovereign Prince signifies the natural Person, or the
Authority of a King; and if to divest him of his authority, be to kill the
King, why they may not kill the man too, when they have killed the King. Thus
when men are forced to mince Treason and Rebellion, they always speak Nonsense.
Those indeed who resist the authority of their Prince, but spare his Person,
do better than those, who kill him; but those who affirm, that his Person is as
resistible and accountable as his Authority, speak more consistently with
themselves, and the Principles of Rebellion.

4. And hence I suppose, it plainly appears, that every illegal act the King
does, is not an inauthoritative Act, but lays an obligation on Subjects to
yield, if not an active, yet a passive obedience. For the King receives not his
Sovereign Authority from the Law, nor does he forfeit his authority by
breaking the law; and therefore he is a Sovereign Prince still; and his most
illegal acts, though they have not the authority of the law, yet they have the
Authority of Sovereign Power, which is irresistible and unaccountable.

In a word, it does not become any man who can think three consequences off, to
talk of the authority of laws in derogation to the authority of the Sovereign
power. The Sovereign power made the laws, and can repeal them and dispense with
them, and make new laws; the only power and authority of the laws is in the
power, which can make and execute Laws. Sovereign Power is inseparable from the
Person of a Sovereign Prince: and though the exercise of it may be regulated by
Laws, and that Prince does very ill, who having consented to such a regulation,
breaks the Laws; yet when he acts contrary to Law, such acts carry Sovereign
and irresistible Authority with them, while he continues a Sovereign Prince.

But if it be possible to convince all men how vain this pretense of Laws is,
to justify Resistance or Rebellion against a Prince, who persecutes without or
against Law, I shall only ask two plain questions.

1. Whether the Laws of God and Nature be not as sacred and inviolable as the
Laws of our Country? if they be, (and methinks no man should dare say that they
are not) why may we not as well resist a Prince, who persecutes us against the
Laws of God and Nature, as one, who persecutes against the Laws of our
Country? is not the Prince as much bound to observe the Laws of God and
Nature, as the Laws of his Country? if so, then their distinction between
suffering with and against Law signifies nothing. For all men, who suffer for
well-doing, suffer against Law* For by the Laws of God, and the natural ends of
humane Government, such men ought to be rewarded, and not punished. Nay, they
suffer contrary to those Laws, which commanded them to do that good, for which
they suffer. Thus the Christians suffered under Pagan Emperors, for worshipping
one supreme God, and refusing to worship the numerous Gods of the Heathens; and
therefore, according to these principles, might have justified a Rebellion
against those unjust and persecuting powers; but the Apostles would not allow
this to be a just cause of resistance, as I have already shown you; and yet I
confess I am to seek for the reason of this difference, why we may not resist a
Prince, who persecutes against the Laws of God, as well as him, who persecutes
against the Laws of England.

2. My other question is this, Whether a Prince have any more authority to make
wicked and persecuting Laws, than to persecute without Law? These men Julian
Apostate
tell us, that if Paganism or Popery were established by Law, they were bound
to suffer patiently for their Religion, without resistance; but since
Christianity and Protestancy is the Religion of the Nation, they are not bound
to suffer, but may defend themselves, when they are condemned by no Law. But if
we examine this thoroughly, it is a very weak and trifling Cavil. For what
authority has a wicked and persecuting Law? and who gave it this authority?
what authority has any Prince to make Laws against the Laws of God? if he have
no authority, then it is no Law; and then to make a wicked Law to persecute
good men, is the same thing, as to persecute without Law, nay as to persecute
against Law. The pretense for resistance is, when the Prince persecutes without
authority. Now I say, a Prince has no more authority to make wicked
persecuting Laws, than to persecute without Law. Should a Popish Prince procure
all our good Laws for the Protestant Religion to be repealed, and establish
Popery by Law, and make it death not to be a Papist, he would have no more real
authority to do this, than to persecute Protestants without repealing the
Laws. A Soverain and unaccountable power will justify both, so as to make
resistance unlawful; but if it cannot justify both, it can justify neither.
For a Prince has no more authority to make a bad Law, than to break a good
one; so that this principle will lead them a great deal farther than they
pretend to; and let the Laws of the Land be what they will, in time they may
come to think it a just reason for Rebellion, to pull down Antichrist, and to
set up Christ Jesus upon this Throne. This I hope is a sufficient answer to the
two first objections, That we are bound by no Law to suffer against Law; And
that the Prince has no authority against Law.

3. The next objection is, that they have a natural right of self-preservation
and self-defence against unjust and illegal violence. This very pretense was
made great use of to wheedle people into this late Conspiracy. Those who were
employed to prepare and dispose men for Rebellion, asked them, whether they
would not defend themselves, if any man came to cut their throats: this they
readily said they would: when they had gained this point, they asked them,
whether they did not value their Liberties, as much as their Lives; and whether
they would not defend them also. And thus they might have proceeded to any part
of their Liberties, if they had pleased; for they have the same right to any
part, as to the whole, and thus self-defence would at last reach to the
smallest occasion of discontent or jealousy, or dislike of Public Government.

Now in answer to this, I readily grant, that every man has a natural right to
preserve and defend his life by all lawful means; but we must not think every
thing lawful, which we have strength and power and opportunity to do; and
therefore to give a full answer to this plea, let us consider,

1. That self-defence was never allowed by God or Nature against public
authority, but only against private violence. There was a time, when Fathers
had the power of life and death over their own Children; now I would only ask
these men, whether if a Son at that time saw his Father coming to kill him, and
that as he thought very unjustly, he might kill his Father to defend himself.
This never was allowed by the most barbarous Nations in the world; and yet it
may be justified by this principle of self-defence, as it is urged by those
men; which is a plain argument that it is false. It is an express Law, that he
that smites his Father or his Mother shall be surely put to death, 21 Exodus
15. and yet then the power of Parents was restrained by public Laws. And the
authority of a Prince is not less sacred than of a Parent; he is God's Minister
and Vicegerent, and Subjects are expressly forbid to resist; and it is a vain
thing to pretend a natural right against the express Law of God.

2. For the sole power of the Sword is in the King's hands, and therefore no
private man can take the Sword in his own defense but by the King's authority,
and certainly he cannot be presumed to give any man authority to use the Sword
against himself. And therefore as Christ tells Peter, he that takes the Sword
shall perish by the Sword; he who draws the Sword against the lawful powers,
deserves to die by it.

3. We may consider also, that it is an external Law, that private defense must
give place to the public good. Now he that takes Arms to defend his own life
and some few others, involves a whole Nation in blood and confusion, and
occasions the miserable slaughter of more men, than a long succession of
Tyrants could destroy. Such men sacrifice many thousand lives, both of friends
and enemies, the happiness and prosperity of many thousand Families, the
public peace and tranquillity of the Nation, to a private self-defence; and if
this be the Law of Nature, we may well call Nature a stepmother, that has
armed us to our own ruin and confusion.

4. And therefore we may farther observe, that Non-resistance and subjection to
government, is the best way for every man's private defense. Our Atheistical
Politicians, who know no other Law of nature, but self-defence, make this the
Original of humane Societies; That it is a voluntary combination for
selfdefence. For this reason they set up Princes and Rulers over them, and put
the power of the sword into their hands, that they may administer Justice, and
defend their Subjects from public and private violence: and they are certainly
so far in the right, that public Government is the best security not only of
the public peace, but of every man's private interest; nay it is so, though our
Prince be a Tyrant, as I have already shown you, that no Government can be
secure without an irresistible and unaccountable power. So that the natural
right of self-defence is so far from justifying Rebellion against Princes, that
it absolutely condemns it, as destructive of the best and most effectual means
to preserve ourselves: for though by Nonresistance a man may expose his life to
the fury of a Tyrant, so he may loose his life in any other way of defense;
but public Government is the best and surest defense, and therefore to resist
public Government, is to destroy the best means of self-defence.

5. However, this principle of self-defence, to be sure, cannot justify a
Rebellion, when men do not suffer any actual violence; and therefore those men
who were drawn into this late Conspiracy, when they saw no body attempt
cutting their throats, when they saw none of their liberties invaded, were so
well prepared to be Rebels, that they needed no arguments to persuade them to
it.

4. The next objection against the Doctrine of Non-resistance is this, That it
destroys the difference between an absolute and limited Monarchy, between a
Prince whose will is his Law, and a Prince, who is bound to govern by Law;
which undermines the Foundamental constitution of the English Government. If
this were true, I confess, it were a very hard case for the Ministers of the
Church of England, who must either preach up resistance, contrary to the Laws
of the Gospel, and the sense and practice of the Christian Church in all Ages,
or must preach up Non*resistance, to the destruction of the Government under
which they live; but thanks be to God, this is not true. For the difference
between an absolute and limited Monarchy, is not, that resistance is unlawful
in one case, and lawful in another* for a Monarch, the exercise of whose power
is limited and regulated by Laws, is as irresistible, as the most absolute
Monarch, whose will is his Law; and if he were not, I would venture to say,
that the most absolute and Despotick Government, is more for the public good,
than a limited Monarchy.

But the difference lies in this, that an absolute Monarch is under the
Government of no Law, but his own will; he can make and repeal Laws at his
pleasure, without asking the consent of any of his Subjects; he can impose what
Taxes he pleases, and is not tied up to strict Rules and formalities of Law*in
the execution of Justice; but it is quite contrary in a limited Monarchy,
where the exercise of Sovereign Power is regulated by known and standing Laws,
which the Prince can neither make nor repeal without the consent of the people.
No man can loose his Life or Estate without a legal process and Trial; no
Moneys can be levied, nor any Taxes imposed on the Subject, but by Authority of
Parliament; which makes the case of Subjects differ very much from those, who
live under an Arbitrary Prince.

No, you will say, the case is just the same: for what do Laws signify, when a
Prince must not be resisted, though he break these Laws, and Govern by an
Arbitrarie and Lawless will? He may make himself as absolute, as the Great Turk
or the Mogul, whenever he pleases; for what should hinder him, when all men's
hands are tied by this Doctrine of Non-resistance? Now it must be acknowledged,
that there is a possibility for such a Prince to Govern arbitrarily, and to
trample upon all laws; and yet the difference between an absolute and limited
Monarchy is vastly great.

1. For this Prince, though he may make his will a Law to himself, and the
only rule of his Government, yet he cannot make it the Law of the Land; he may
break Laws, but he can neither make nor repeal them; and therefore he can never
alter the frame and constitution of the Government, though he may at present
interrupt the regular administration of it: and this is a great security to
posterity, and a present restraint upon himself.

2. For it is a mighty uneasy thing to any Prince, to govern contrary to
known Laws. He offers as great and constant violence to himself, as he does to
his Subjects. He cannot raise money, nor impose any Taxes without the consent of
his Subjects, nor take away any man's life without a legal Trial (which an
absolute Prince may do) but he is guilty of rapine and murder, and feels the
same rebukes in his own mind, for such illegal actions, though his impositions
be but reasonable and moderate, and he put no man to death, but who very well
deserves it, that an absolute Tyrant does for the most barbarous oppressions
and cruelties. The breach of his Oath to God, and his promises and engagements
to his Subjects, makes the exercise of such an arbitrarie power very
troublesome: and though his Subjects are bound not to resist, yet his own
guilty fears will not suffer him to be secure: and arbitrarie Power is not so
luscious a thing, as to tempt men to forfeit all the ease and pleasure, and
security of Government, for the sake of it.

3. Though Subjects must not resist such a Prince, who violates the Laws of his
Kingdom* yet they are not bound to obey him, nor to serve him in his
usurpations. Subjects are bound to obey an absolute Monarch, and to serve his
will in lawful things, though they be hard and grievous; but in a limited
Monarchy, which is governed by Laws, Subjects are bound to yield an active
obedience only according to Law, though they are bound not to resist, when
they suffer against Law. Now it is a mighty uneasy thing to the greatest
Tyrant, to govern always by force; and no Prince in a limited Monarchy can make
himself absolute, unless his own Subjects assist him to do so.

4. And yet it is very dangerous for any Subject to serve his Prince contrary
to Law. Though the Prince himself is unaccountable and irresistible, yet his
Ministers may be called to an account, and be punished for it; and the Prince
may think fit to look on quietly, and see it done: or if they escape at
present, yet it may be time enough to suffer for it under the next Prince;
which we see by experience makes all mon wary how they serve their Prince
against Law. None but persons of desperate fortunes will do this bare-fac't;
and those are not always to be met with, and as seldom fit to be employed.

5. And therefore we may observe, that by the fundamental Laws of our
Government, as the Prince must Govern by Law, so he is irresistible: which
shows, that our wise Lawmakers did not think, that Non-resistance was
destructive of a limited Monarchy.

6. And in this long succession of Princes in this Kingdom, there has been no
Prince that has cast off the Authority of Laws, or usurpt an absolute and
arbitrary Power: which shows how vain those fears are, which disturb the
fancies and imaginations of Rebels, if they be not pretended only to disturb
the public Peace.

7. Non-resistance is certainly the best way to prevent the change of a limited
into an absolute Monarchy. The Laws of England have made such an admirable
provision for the honor and prosperous Government of the Prince, and the
security of the Subject, that the Kings of England have as little temptation to
desire to be absolute, while their Subjects are obedient and governable, as
their Subjects have, that they should be so. And if ever our Kings attempt to
make themselves absolute (which thanks be to God, we have no prospect of yet)
it will be owing to the factious and traitorous dispositions of Subjects. When
Subjects once learn the trade of murdering Princes, and rebelling against them,
it is time then for Princes to look to themselves; and if ever our posterity
should suffer under so unhappy a change of Government, they will have reason
for ever to curse the Fanatic rage and fury of this Age; and the best way to
remove that scandal, which has been already given to Princes, is by a public
profession and practice of this great Gospel-duty of Non-resistance.

8. The last objection against Non-resistance is this, that if resistance in no
case be allowed, the mischiefs and inconveniences to Mankind may be
intolerable. To which I shall briefly return these following answers.

1. That bare Possibilities are no argument against any thing. For that which
may be, may not be; and there is nothing in this world, how good or useful or
necessary soever it be in its self, but may possibly be attended with very
great inconveniences; and if we must reject that which is good and useful in it
self, for the sake of some possible inconveniences, which may attend it, we
must condemn the very best things. Modesty and Humility, Justice, and
Temperance, are great and excellent Virtues; and yet we may live in such an
age, when these Virtues shall beggar a man, and expose him to contempt. Mercy
and Clemency is a noble quality in a Prince, and yet it is possible, that the
Clemency of a Prince may ruin him, and he may spare Traitors Lives, till they
take away his. Marriage is a Divine Institution, which contributes as much to
the happiness and comfort of humane life, as any one thing in this world; and
yet it may be you cannot name any thing neither, which many times proves so
great a plague and curse to Mankind. Thus Non-resistance is a great and
excellent duty, and absolutely necessary to the peace and order and good
government of the world; but yet a bad Prince may take the advantage of it, to
do a great deal of mischief. And what follows from hence? that Non-resistance
is no duty, because it may possibly be attended with evil consequences? then
you can hardly name any thing, which is our duty; for the most excellent
Virtues may at one time or other expose us to very great inconveniences; but
when they do so, we must not deny them to be our duty, because we shall suffer
by it; but must bear our sufferings patiently, and expect our reward from God.
And yet that there is not so much danger in Non-resistance, as these men would
persuade the world, I hope appears from my answers to the last objection.

2. When we talk of inconveniences, we must weigh the inconveniences on both
sides, and consider which are greatest. We may suffer great inconveniences by
Non-resistance, when our Prince happens to prove a Tyrant; but shall we suffer
fewer inconveniences were it lawful for Subjects to resist?

Which is the greatest and most merciless Tyrant? an arbitrary and lawless
Prince, or a Civil War? which will destroy most men's Lives? a Nero or
Dioclesian, or a pitched Battle? who will devour most Estates? a Covetous and
Rapacious Prince, or an insolent Army, and hungry Rabble? which is the greatest
oppression of the Subject? some illegal Taxes, or Plunderings, Decimations, and
Sequestrations?

Who are most likely to abuse their power? the Prince, or the people? which is
most probable, that a Prince should oppress his dutiful and obedient Subjects,
or that some factious and designing men should misrepresent the government of
their Prince, and that the giddy multitude should believe them? who is most
likely to make a change and alteration in government? an Hereditary Prince, or
the People, who are fond of innovations?

While Soverain and irresistible power is in the hands of the Prince, it is
possible we may sometimes have a good one, and then we shall find no
inconvenience in the Doctrine of Non-resistance. Nay, it is possible, we may
have a great many good Princes, for one bad one; for Monsters are not so
common, as more natural productions: so that the inconveniences we may suffer
by this Doctrine will but seldom happen; but had the people power to resist, it
is almost impossible, that public government should ever be quiet and secure
for half an age together: they are as unstable as the Seas, and as easily moved
with every breath, and as outrageous and tempestuous too. These are not some
guesses and probabilities, but demonstrations in this unhappy age, wherein we
have seen all these things acted.

The CONCLUSION, Containing a short Dissuasive from Resistance and Rebellion.
HAving thus largely proved that Subjection and Non-resistance is a necessary
duty, which Subjects owe to Soverain Princes, and answered all those objections
which are made against it; the result of all is, to persuade Subjects to the
practice of it. And St. Paul urges two very powerful arguments to persuade us
to it, Romans 13.

1. That the powers are of God, and he that resists the powers, resists the
ordinance of God. And certainly he is no Christian who disputes obedience to
the Divine Ordinance and Constitution. A Prince is the Image, the Vicegerent
of God, and therefore Princes are called Gods in Scripture, and be he what he
will, a good or a bad Prince, while God thinks fit to advance him to the
Throne, it becomes us to submit and reverence the Divine Authority. Will you
lift up your hand against God? will you cast off his authority and government
too? does not he know how to rule us? how to choose a Prince for us? The
greatest Rebel would blush to say this in so many words, and yet this is the
Language of Rebellion. Men dislike their Prince, that is, that Governor, whom
God sets over them: they rebel against their Prince, they Depose him, they
Murder him; that is, they disown the Authority of God, they deface and destroy
his Image, and offer scorn and contempt to his Vice gerent. Earthly Princes
look upon every affront and disgrace done to their Ministers and Lieutenants,
to be a contempt of their own Authority; and so does God too: he who pulls down
a Prince, denies Gods authority to set him up, and affronts his wisdom in
choosing him.

2. And therefore such men must not expect to escape a deserved punishment,
they shall receive to themselves damnation. Now (...) may either signify the
punishment of Rebellion in this world, or in the next; and here it signifies
both.

1. They shall be punished in this world. And whoever consults Ancient and
Modern Histories, will find, that Rebels very seldom escape punishment in this
world. How often does God defeat all their Counsels, discover their secret
Plots and Conspiracies! and if they be prosperous for a while, yet vengeance
overtakes them; if they escape punishment from men, they are punished by some
such remarkable providence, as bears the Characters of a Divine Justice in it.

2. However, such men shall not escape the punishments of the other world; and
if you believe there is a Hell for Rebels and Traitors, the punishment of
resistance is infinitely greater than all the mischiefs which can befall you in
subjection to Princes, and a patient suffering for well doing. What shall it
profit a man, though he should gain the whole world, which is something more
than a single Crown and Kingdom, and loose his own Soul? Though an universal
Empire were the reward of Rebellion, such a glorious Traitor, who parts with
his Soul for it, would have no great reason to boast much of his purchase. Let
us then reverence the Divine Judgments, let us patiently submit to our King,
though he should persecute and oppress us; and expect our protection here from
the Divine Providence, and our reward in Heaven; which is the same
encouragement to Non-resistance, which we have to the practice of any other
Virtue. Were the advantages and disadvantages of Resistance and Non-resistance
in this world fairly estimated, it were much more eligible to submit, than to
rebel against our Prince; but there can be no comparison between these two,
when we take the other world into the account. The last Judgment weighs down
all other considerations; and certainly Rebellion may well be said to be as the
sin of Witchcraft, when it so inchants men, that they are resolved to be
Rebels, though they be damned for it.

THE END.
BOOKS Printed for Fincham Gardener.
1. A Persuasive to Communion with the Church of England. 2. A Resolution of
some Cases of Conscience which respect Church Communion. 3. The Case of
Indifferent things used in the Worship of God, proposed and Stated, by
considering these Questions, etc. 4. A Discourse about Edification. 5. The
Resolution of this Case of Conscience, Whether the Church of Englands
Symbolizing so far as it does with the Church of Rome, makes it unlawful to
hold Communion with the Church of England? 6. A Letter to Anonymus, in answer
to his three Letters to Dr. Sherlock about Church Communion. 7. Certain Cases
of Conscience resolved, concerning the Lawfulness of joining with Forms of
Prayer in Public Worship. In two Parts. 8. The Case of mixed Communion: Whether
it be Lawful to Separate from a Church upon the account of promiscuous
Congregations and mixed Communions? 9. An Answer to the Dissenters Objections
against the Common Prayers, and some other parts of Divine Service prescribed
in the Liturgy of the Church of England. 10. The Case of Kneeling at the Holy
Sacrament stated and resolved, etc. In two Parts. 11. A Discourse of Profiting
by Sermons, and of going to hear where men think they can profit most. 12. A
serious Exhortation, with some important Advices, relating to the late Cases
about Conformity, recommended to the present Dissenters from the Church of
England. 13. An Argument for Union; taken from the true interest of those
Dissenters in England who profess and call themselves Protestants. 14. Some
Considerations about the Case of Scandal, or giving Offense to Weak Brethren.
15. The Case of Infant Baptism; in Five Questions, etc. 16. The Charge of
Scandal, and giving Offense by Conformity, Refelled, and Reflected back upon
Separation, etc.
1. A Discourse about the charge of Novelty upon the Reformed Church of
England, made by the Papists asking of us the Question, Where was our Religion
before Luther? 2. A Discourse about Tradition, showing what is meant by it, and
what Tradition is to be received, and what Tradition is to be rejected. 3. The
difference of the Case between the Separation of Protestants from the Church of
Rome, and the Separation of Dissenters from the Church of England. 4. The
Protestant Resolution of Faith, etc.
Some Seasonable Reflections on the Discovery of the late Plot, being a Sermon
preached on that occasion, by W. Sherlock, D. D. Rector of St. George
Buttolph-lane, London.

King David's Deliverance: or, the Conspiracy of Absolon and Achitophel
defeated, in a Sermon Preached on the day of Thanksgiving appointed for the
Discovery of the late Fanatical Plot. By Thomas Long, B. D. one of the
Prebendaries of Exon.


