THE IRREGULARITIE OF A PRIVATE PRAYER IN A PUBLIC CONGREGATION.

In a Letter to a Friend.

printer's or publisher's device

ANNO DOMINI, 1674.

THE IRREGULARITIE of a Private Prayer in a Public Congregation.
Sir,
I Have sent you herein my repeated and enlarged Thoughts, upon what was once
the subject of our serious discourse; wherein I would not at all disparage, or
in the least undervalue, the private prayers and devotions of any person,
whether of the Laity or Clergy, whether those prayers be by himself composed,
or by others, whether they be premeditated, or sometimes ejaculatorie; whether
fixed, or occasional; orall or mental; for thus, and all these ways, every
truly religious Christian prays and undoubtedly finds the benefit, and feels
the comfort of such holy breathings-forth of his Soul unto Heaven in his
private recesses.

But that any Person, especially such who have entered into holy Orders in this
Church of England, should presume to use any Prayers in Public of his own
private conception, whether premeditate, or extemporary, before, or after his
Sermon, other than those Prayers, which are by public Authority allowed, and
published to that end; I humbly conceive (with submission to my Superiors) to
be unlawful in several respects.

First. It Is a Disorder and Confusion in the service of God: For thus the
Public and Private worship of God are confounded, whilst those Private
Prayers, which our Lord has consined to the private closet, do yet, contrary
to his express command appear in Public and usurp the place of his Public
Service in the Congregation. The holy duties of Public and Private Prayers, as
they are distinct in their own nature, and constant use, so they are
distingushed by our Lord, and distinct rules prescribed for the distinct and
discreet performance of either Duty. First, For Private Prayer Matt. 6.6. When
thou Prayest, enter into thy closet -- speaking in the singular number to every
particular person. Secundly, For Public Prayer v. 7. but when ye Pray use not
vain repetitions -- speaking in the plural number to many assembled together:
where, to avoid the Heathenish practice of much speaking, or multitudinous
words in Prayer, v. 8. a short and most excellent Form is given us v. 9. Thus
then public Prayer being distinguished by our Lord from private, we are
thereby forbidden to confound them in their use, and practice: 1. Cor. 14.40:
Let all things be done decently and in order: not preposterously and
disorderly, one part of divine worship undermining another, and the lesser and
more particular Duty usurping upon the greater; and more general religious
Office.

Secondly, It Is not only a disorderly, but also an unreasonable Service, and so
not likely to be acceptable to him, who is both the God of order, and of
wisdom. And the unreasonableness of this Private Prayer in Public, will
appear, by considering; That all prayers offered up unto God in Public, must
be publicly known, consented unto, and agreed upon (which the Private prayer
generally is not) by all them that join therein: upon which agreement (and not
otherwise) Christ has promised his presence, viz, to hear our Prayers, and
grant our requests, Mat. 18.19, 20. Again I say unto you; If two of you shall
agree upon Earth, touching any thing they shall ask, it shall be done unto them
of my Father, which is in Heaven: for where two or three are gathered together,
there am I in the midst of them; whereupon says the Gloss out of Origin, This
is the cause we are not heard when we pray, in that we agree not in all things,
-- For as in Music, there must be harmony and agreement of voices, or else it
delights not the hearer; so in the Church, an assent and agreement is
necessary, or else God is not pleased, neither will he hear the voice of our
prayers. It Is this agreement in prayer, that denomitates our public worship of
God, Common Prayer: because agreed upon by common consent, which does
presuppose; that it is known to all, that all may join therein: So it was ever
in the Church of Christ; the faithful knew, what they prayed for; and this, not
at the second hand, from the mouth of the Minister, but before they joined with
him; So Saint Chrysostom: Chrysostom. Hom 6. in Tim.
You that are faithful know, what things are to be desired in prayer, because
all prayer, viz. that is in Public, ought to be common: It Is the Exhortation
of Ignatius, Ignnat. Ep. ad Magn.
who lived in the times of the Apostles and saw our Lord in the flesh, That we
assemble together in one place and use one prayer common to all: For if the
prayers of a Congregation be not known, common and agreed: Then

First, The People cannot join therein it being little less than the sacrifice
of fools, for men to ask of God, they know not what; but wholly depend upon the
Ministers unknown expressions.

Secondly, A Prayer, that is unknown before it be offered up, is to an English
man, though spoke in English, as a Latin prayer to him, who understands no
Latin, for they are both lame, and maimed, and cannot stand with common sense,
except they make use of that Crutch, which we so much blame in the Papists,
viz. an implicit faith to support them; and both the one and the other do
equally transgress that rule of prayer prescribed by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.15.
I will pray with the spirit, and will pray with understanding also.

Thirdly, It is against both the judgment and practice of the Universal Church
of Christ, no footsteps thereof are to be found in Antiquity, but many Canons
of the Church against it, whereof some are noted in the Margin. Council. Leodic.
cel. Anno. 320. Can. 15.17. and nlt. Council. Milevit. 2d. An. 416. Can. 12.
Council. Epaunens. celeb. An. 509. Council. Gerund. celeb. An. 516. c. 1. Cocil.
Tolet. quart. Can. 2. Council. Venet. celeb. An. 452. Can. 15. Council. Bracor.
1. celeb. An. Can. 562.19. and 20. and 22. Council. Vasen. celeb. 442. Can. 5,
6, and 7.


Fourthly, It Is a transgression of the Laws and Orders of this particular
Church of England, and this occompanied with the breach of that solemn promise,
which every Minister, lawfully Ordained, has made: no man being admitted into
holy Orders, until he has attested the lawfulness of the book of Common
Prayer, and promised, that he himself will use the same and no other in
public, subscribing with his own hand this attestation and promise: so that
the contrary practice in the use of any Private prayer by any Minister of this
Church, is a breach of Fidelity to the Church, and to the Reverend Bishop that
Ordained him.

Fifthly, It Is also a Transgression of the Common Law of the Land, which in the
Acts of Parliament for Uniformitie in Common Prayer, both old and new, enjoins
peremptorily, under severe penalties, That no man shall use any prayer openly
or in public, but such as are set forth in the said book: so that both in this
and in the former respects it is an act of Disobedience to the Higher Powers,
and breach of the fifth Commandment.

I might add, in the last place, the Non-conformitie of this Practice with all
other Protestant Communicants beyond the Seas, their Ministers being neither
fond of it themselves, nor permitted such a Liberty by their Governors.

Object. Private Prayer before Sermon is allowed, nay enjoined by the 55 Canon
of the Church: which is called indeed a Form of Prayer, but therein the
Minister is not bound up to the use of the same words, but may pray to that
effect.

Answ. First, But surely, there is no man, that understands sense, and is not
blinded with prejudice, will say, That the Form prescribed in the Canons, is a
Form of prayer, but an Exhortation only to move the people to join in prayer
for Christ's Holy Catholic Church, for the Kings Majesty, for -- and it is most
properly called a bidding of prayer. And 'twas Mr. Cartwright, that Ringleader
of the Puritan-Faction in the time of Q. Elizabeth, who first turned this
Bidding prayer, into a long prayer of his own head, and 'twas the very engine,
hereby he and his followers undermined the Common Prayers of the Church.

Answ. Second. It is a very unseemly thing (if seriously considered) to tell
the Great King of Heaven (by way of prayer to him) that the Kings Majesty is
King of England, Scotland, etc. Defendor of the Faith, etc. or to tell him of
such or such a Lord, that he is Earl of such or such a Place -- Lord of such;
one of the Privy Council -- his very good Lord and Patron: clauses with several
particulars in that Canon are very improper to be said unto God by way of
Prayer, but not so by way of Exhortation unto Prayer.

Thirdly, Because the Observance of this Canon was obnoxious to the censure and
exceptions of many, who desired an absolute Prayer in stead of that bidding
Form, it was proposed at the Convocation held An. 1640. that it might be so
ordered; and accordingly there was a short Prayer drawn up, comprizing all the
heads of the Canon; The which, notwithstand the confidence some had of its
universal reception, was rejected by the most Reverend Archbishop, who judged
it neither safe nor fitting to alter that Ganon, which was founded on the
Injunctions of Queen Elizebeth and King Edward 6. at the first Reformation;
which sufficiently evinceth the said Canon to be no Prayer, not yet lawful to
be altered and used Prayerwise.

Fourthly, It Is a presumptuous usurpation and Affront upon the Church of
Christ, for any man to thrust himself, upon such a Ministeral Office, as he is
not by the Authority of the Church entrusted withal, and whosoever acts the
Presbyterian in this particular becomes Independent; the one having no more
just Anthority derived from the Church, that ordained him, to use such a
private Prayer of his own in Public, than the other has either to Preach, or
Pray in Public, being not admitted into holy Orders, nor lawfully called
thereunto.

Fifthly, It Is an Innovation in Religion, a new up-start practice, brought into
the Church not above 70 years ago, and may therefore be reckoned inter profonas
vocum novitates, which the Apostle admonished to avoid, even all profane and
vain bablings, 1 Timothy 6.20.
canting language, new words, and new ways, such as are contrary to those old
paths, and those good wais which the Lord commands us to enquire after and to
walk therein. Jer. 16.16.
And such New wais are fitly called profane, quasi procul a fano, says the
Commentator, Lyr. in Loc.
because fat from the Temple, or different from the words and wais of Christ's
Church, and contrary to the Apostles depositum tene, 1 Timothy 6.
in the following words, hold fast that which is committed to thee. i. e. says
the Father, quod tibi creditum, non quod a te inventum, what the Church,
whereby thou art addmitted to the Ministerial Function, has committed to thy
trust, and commanded thee to observe, hold fast that, keep close to that, not
following thine own fancy and invention to bring in what is New, which ever
undermines the Old, and true way of Divine worship.

Seventhly. If a call or command from God be herein pretended, though not
allowed by the Church, yet in this particular they are at aloss, except they
pretend immediate Revelation with the Enthusiasts: For there is neither
command, nor example, in holy Writ, to justify this private Prayer in Public:
we have many, Sermons of the Apostles upon record, but no Prayer before any of
them, so that this is an act of usurpation, upon the Public Divine Worship, a
presumption to do that, which God has no where commanded, nor the Church of
Christ allowed.

Eighthly. Liberty being permitted for any person of what persuasion soever to
vent his private conceptions by way of Prayer in Public, opens a gap to
Heresy and Schism in the Church; to Sedition and Rebeltion, in the Kingdom,
For their private errors and designs being inserted in their Prayers, do
insinuate into the Affections; and more mightily enssame the People, than by
any other way of persuasion whatsoever; Old Truths being undermined by New wais
of worship and vain bablings, the constant Parents of errors in the Faith 1.
Tim. 6.20.21.


Ninthly. Thus Separations and Divisions, both amongst Ministers, and People
are bred and nourished: for whilst one Minister, or gifted man (as such are
called) Prays thus, and thus, and another in a way, and with words diverss from
him: one sort and Sect of men likes this man's way, method, and language, tone
and gesture; another sort is taken more with another way -- Hence; One says:
I am of Paul; and another, I am of Apollo; and another, I of Cephas 1 Cor. 1.12.
which is the life and being of Schism: the remedy whereof is; To obey that
most pathetical exhortation: Now I beseech you, Brethren, by the name of our
Lord Jesus Christ; that ye all speak the same thing, That there be no
divisions amongst you. 1. Cor. 1.10.
To speak the same thing and to use the same words in the Public worship of
God: or as the same Apostle; To glorify God with one mind and one mouth is the
way to avoid divisions and to take off the People from their partiality and
fondness, in preferring one Minister before another, merely for their less, or
more eminency; in this unwarrantable way of Praying.

Tenthly; By this Private Prayer, the Public Prayers of the Church are employed
to be imperfect and deficient; are slighted, nay contemned and undermined. For
they, with whom this way is in repute, generally slight, and slubbour over the
Common Prayer carelessly, irreverently, and indevoutly; but to their own
conceived Prayers give all the advantages of seeming zeal, both in their tone
and language, elevation of eyes, hands -- and no marvel then, that the one be
so much applauded by the vulgar, and the other slighted; especially when they
are persuaded by these Enthusiasts; that Common Prayer and all the Ceremonies
in that celebration are taken out of the Mass Book; that they are but a dead
letter and the invention of man, whereas the private, conceived Prayer, is no
less than the immediate influence of the holy Spirit of God;



Answ. But in holy Prayer it is not the words said, whether written, or not
written, whether said within, or without Book; but the affectionate Zeal of
him, that prays, that gives vigor and efficacy to this holy Duty; and where
this is wanting, the fault is not in the Prayers themselves; but in the
Persons, that profanely slight and undervalue them; the deadness, they talk of,
lies in their own hearts, which are not touched with the quickening spirit of
devotion, in the use of those holy and good Prayers. And whosoever is more
affected with a conceived, than a written Prayer, thinks sure, That the one is
more immediately by inspiration from Heaven than the other, Orationis
sublimitas ex part orantis non ex sublimitate, vel subtilitate verborum, sed
humilitate and devotionis affectu ejus qui oratpensanda est. Jac. Alvar. de
inquis. pac.
and so smells strong of the Heresy of Enthusiasm; I am sure; To speak
foolishly and impertinently has been usually accounted, and called speaking
without Book.

Object. Private Prayer of their own before Sermon; the which surely they would
never do, if they conceived it unlawful.

Answ. equity or iniquity, fitness or unfitness thereof: Nor can the practice
of this, or any other custom prove the same to be lawful. There is a great
difference betwixt consuetudo and corruptela: the one is laudable, the other
unlawful; many persons also, that are eminent in knowledge, and Piety, in the
general, may, through long custom, and many examples, fail in some particulars,
through inconsideration:

Answ. 1.

Answ. 2. sensible Devotion, which begins in the sensitive nature, producing
tenderness of spirit, drawing often sighs from the bosom, and tears from the
eyes, and begets a secret delectation and sweetness in the soul; with which
many persons are much taken and transported, as conceiving such pleasing
delights in Prayer to be no other than the influences of the holy Spirit of
God. And yet this exterior pleasure of a sensible Devotion is not always a sign
of a sound and right temper of holiness in the soul: Jac. Alha. de inquis. pac.
lib. 2. par. 3. cap. 3. Sancti Soph. Treat. 3. sermon. 2. c. 5.
Because, First; many wicked, irregenerate persons may, and have enjoyed the
same. Secondly; It may proceed from the natural temper. Thirdly; From the
vehement intention of the mind. Fourthly; From the mournful tone, cadence of
words, and power of language. And such sensible delights, even in Prayer, are
sometimes the insinuations and illusions of the Evil Spirit, to puff up the
soul with self-love, vainglory, presumption in God's favor, and comempt of
others. I deny not, but such sensible consolations are often the influences of
the holy and true Spirit, given us for our encouragement in holy divine
Offices, in the love of God and obedience: but there is great discretion and
humility also required in the use we make of them; neither are we overhighly to
esteem of them (as the Casuist Consolationes sensibiles quamvis non sunt
despiciendae, non sunt tamen supra modum aestimandae: quia nec verae virtutes,
nec solidarum virtutum effectus nec necessaria profectus instrumenta sine
quibus plurimi admagnum virtutem ac mentis puritatem ascendunt. Jac. Alv. ibid.
observes) Because they are neither true virtues, nor necessary effects of
solid virtues, neither are they necessary instruments of proficiency in true
devotion: For without such sensible consolations, many holy persons have
ascended to a great height of virtue, and purity of mind.

The strongest Devotions, and most effectual Prayers, are seldomest attended
with these sensible consolations, and sweetnesses, which flow in upon variety
of taking expressions; for a great Devotion is like a great Grief, which is not
so expressive in words, as a less moderate passion: a lesser Grief also is
wasted away by tears and complaints, whilst the greater is both more silent and
more lasting; so the less and more weak Devotion of the Soul, is breathed out
and wasted in variety of language; not the solid, strong, and lasting fervor.
Such was the prevailing devotion of Moses, when he fell down before the Deuteronomy.
9.18, 25.
Lord: and that of Hannah also, when she prayed in the 1 Samuel 1.10, 11.
Temple: Their words in their prayers were few, and low, unheard; but their
desires and affections strong, and prevalent, as being not wasted by much
speaking. And such was that Devotion of our Lord in the Garden and on the
Cross, when he poured out his Soul in Prayers and Supplications with strong
crying and Heb. 5.7.
tears: His words were few, but his devotion great, and prevailing mightily;
which devotion was neither begotten nor increased, nor poured forth in a sloud
of language and various expressions: for he went away (says the holy Chost)
and Mat. 26.44.
prayed, saying the same words. So that settled and stinted Forms of Prayer, may
be expressive enough of the greatest Devotion: nor is God more pleased, or the
Soul that prays, more profited by variety of expressions, though the exterior
pleasure of a sensible devotion may be raised thereby.

Object. 5.

Answ. 1. necessities, though not to their curiosities; they may be such, as
may sufficiently serve every man's duty, though not please all men's fantasies.

Answ. 2. condition in all circumstances, it is no argument against them; for
that would conclude against all Laws whatsoever, wherein it is impossible to
make provision for all particular circumstances and accidents, that occur: it is
sufficient, that all Public Sanctions do secure the Public Interest, and
whatsoever has influence upon Public Societies and Communities of men.

Answ. 3. him; that which cannot be expected in public Prayers, which are of a
public Nature and Design, suiting with public Interests, the Duties and
Conditions of all Christians; and providing also for public Events, that are
either probable, or can be reasonably foreseen.

Answ. 4. Public. It is more safe and prudent, to recommend many things unto
God in general expressions, than to insist particularly and positively upon
them, especially in such things as are temporal and worldly, wherein men are
more apt to be positive, and expressive than becomes. Our blessed Savior knew
well enough the particular wants and conditions of his Disciples, when they
begged of him to be taught to pray; yet he descends not to any enumeration of
those particulars, but gives them a Form of Prayer, in general terms, because
it was for a public use and benefit.

Answ. 5. inconveniences, disorders, irregularities -- in the private Prayer,
though pretended to complete and fill up the emptiness of the public? The
defects, the impertinencies, tautologies, errors and blasphemies of many such
private Prayers are obvious to each man's observation.

Object. 6.

Answ. 1. preach to the People and by way of Sermon to exercise their gifts,
for the edification of others; wherein variety of expressions are very useful
to move, excite, admonish, exhort, reprove -- which are the ends of preaching,
not so of praying: as before was observed.

Answ. 2. preaching, the matter is of less moment than to err in prayer:
Because, First; It is more safe to be bold with the People than with the great
Majesty of Heaven; the People may pardon an indiscretion, a rudeness, a
mistake, if any such happen in a Sermon; but that boldness, or impudence
rather, which ventures to offer up unto God their mistakes and indecent
expressions, is not so venial and easily pardonable. Secondly, Sermons to the
People are but the means, not any essential parts of Gods worship it self: but
holy Prayer is a part and the principal part of Gods outward worship; so that
to mistake and err in the one, is but indiscretion, if not wilful; but to err
in the other is impiety and irregligion. A mistake, a falsehood in Prayer, is
not a lie unto men, but unto God: Acts 5.4, 5.
The great Sin for which Ananias and Sapphira were struck with sudden death.
Which should strike the hearts of all men with such an awful fear, as not to
dare to utter any thing unto God, that may prove false, or be improper to be
spoken; nor yet to go beyond what they are authorized to say in public by the
commands of God and of his Church.

Object. 7. John 17.) was long, and no part of a Liturgy.

Answ. by particulars, if it were not too tedious to be here inserted: And his
prayer Joh. 17. was a private, not a public Prayer: 'twas designed indeed to a
public use and benefit, not offered up in Public, and with his Disciples,
though for, and in their behalf: and 'twas a prayer, that was proper and
peculiar to Christ alone, as the only Mediator betwixt God and man, and so not
to be drawn into an example.

Object. 8. Solomon prayed in the Temple a Private Prayer of his own in Public,
2 Chronicles. 6. So did Hezekias, 2 Chronicles. 30.18. So did Elijah the Prophet, 1 Kings
18.16. and St. Paul the Apostle, Acts 20.36.

Ausw. Paul's Prayer, Acts 20.36. whether 'twas a set Form or not, it is not
expressed, nor yet many of our Saviors prayers upon record, and so no argument
pro or con to be drawn from thence.

Object. 9. Paul himself began and ended his Epistles with prayers, and there
is a prayer extant of Saint Ambrose, which he used before his Sermon.

Answ. viz. Short Collects, or rather Ejaculations, imploring the Divine
Assistance, which they used, not alwais before, but sometimes in the midst of
their Sermons also, when they treated of some high mystery of Godliness, or
other matter of difficulty, or were transported with more than ordinary zeal to
the practice of such or such a virtue, or the eradication of some reigning
offense amongst the People; as is frequent in many of St. Chrysostom. Homilies:
And of St. Ambrose; he, being a Metropolitan, might surely assume such a power,
to compose a Prayer for his own use, which is not, nay ought not to be allowed
to every inferior Presbyter. Secondly; Because he used a short Prayer, and this
but sometimes before his Sermon, it does not follow; That every green-headed
Minister may use a Prayer of his own private conception twenty times as long as
the other, and so fully as far distant from the pattern, which our Lord has
given us, which is also answer sufficient to St. Paul's example objected.

Object. 10. Augustine affirms the necessity of this Prayer before Sermon,
saying August. de Doct. Christiana.
That Queen Esther prayed for the temporal safty of her Nation, before she
adventured to speak before the King Ahasuerus, that God would put into her
mouth congruous words. How much more ought we to pray for the like gift, when
we are to speak for the eternal salvation of souls in the Word and Doctrine?
And again, says he, when the hour is come (to preach) before he opens his
mouth, let him lift up his thirsting soul unto God.

Answ. public Prayers of the Church, but his private also, betwixt God and his
own soul; and this also, as the Father directs, before he opens his mouth in
Public. And such was Queen Esther's Prayer in private, before she publicly
spoke to the King; which makes rather against, than for the Private Prayer in
Public for and with the whole Congregation: St. August. could not be guilty of
any such practice; for it was against his judgment, being himself one of the
Two Hundred Fathers of that Milevitan Council, wherein it was decreed; That no
prayer should be used in public, but such as were approved in the Synod:
Sometimes this Father did conclude his Sermon with an Exhortation, conceived in
Form of a prayer. e. g. Conversi -- Turning unto the Lord God, Father Almighty,
let us render him all possible thanks, besceching him of his great mercy, that
he would vauchsafe to hear our prayers, and expel the Enemy from having any
influence upon our thoughts and desires, words and actions; that he would
encreas our faith; govern our minds; fill us with spiritual ^ogitations, and at
last bring us to everlasting huppiness through Jesus Christ. -- which is not so
much a Prayer, as an Invitation to prayer, suitable to the Form prescribed in
the Canon of our Church.

Object. 11. The liberty of Private prayer in Public is the way to make an able
Ministry; whilst thus they are put on to exercise and improve their
Ministerial gifts and graces.

Answ. It Is rather the way to make a Licentious, Fanatic, Brainsick Ministry,
and in process of time no Ministry at all; for from this Practice it is; that
so very many unlearned, unstable souls have taken up the trade and proved as
eminent, at least as well approved of by the people for their gift of Prayer,
as the most learned of their Tutorers therein.

And whosoever shall impartially weigh, and without prejudice consider it, he
may observe, that this Private prayer in Public, both in Church and at home, is
the very life and soul of that Schism, and Division, which is still so
perniciously kept up in this Church: It Is hereby maintained more than by
preaching and disputes: It Is from hence that Parties do call their leaders
Godly Ministers, and themselves the godly Brethren: The children that cry Abba
Father: The chosen and familiar friends of God, from their over-saucy and
familiar convers with God. This is that great Idol, whom all the world of
Non-conformists on this side the pale of the Roman Church adore and worship,
crying down the goodly frame of Gods worship in his Church under the notion of
Idolatry, Superstition, and Will Worship, that every one may set up his Idols
in his own heart, follow the sway of their own imaginations, to be guilty
themselves of that Will Worship, which they falsely impute to the Church of
Christ.

Upon this Rock many thousand souls have suffered shipwreck, who have been
otherwise piouslly inclined: For being taken with holy language, religious tone
and seeming zeal of this or the other person in their private conceived Prayers,
they have in respect thereof slighted, and undervalued even the Celestial
Prayer of God the Son, all the divinely inspired prayers of God the Holy Ghost
recorded in Holy Writ, with all the devout and excellent Prayers of the Church
of Christ, which are framed after the pattern prescribed by our Lord; commanded
by the Higher Powers; used by the devout People of God in all ages and whereby
many thousand triumphant Saints in He-have prayed themselves into that blisfull
place of Eternal Glory.

After all this; It would be considered;

That, as every error in Religion is very prolifick in bringing forth many
others of the same misshapen stamp and nature; so this erroneous way of divine
worship, the use of a Private Prayer in a Public Congregation is also
productive of many mistakes, and falsehoods and deformed wais of worship in the
management thereof; And

1. Such private Prayers in Public are generally in the length of them: For
Long Prayers are unlawful

First; Because they are prohibited, by our Lord, Mat. 6.7. When ye pray, use
not vain repititions: which cannot be understood of the same Prayer repeated
(which is falsely objected against the prayers of the Church) for so prayed our
Lord himself, and his example surely contradicts not his Doctrine; whose
Prayer, when most earnest in his Desires, was the same three times repeated,
and a very short Prayer also, Mat. 26.44. By vain repititions then must be
meant the repetitions of the same thing in other words. For First; To use
multitude of words, and variety of expressions in Prayer is vain, i. e.
superfluous; impertinent and to no purpose; since our Desires may, and ought to
be expressed in few words and pertinent. Secondly; Such are generally vain, i.
e. empty and insignificant, that have more noise than weight; more sound than
sense, serving only to fill up the time, to amuse the minds, and tickle the
itching ears of the Hearers.

That such kind of long Prayers are here forbidden by our Lord, is manifest.

2ly; From the parallel Text quoted in the margin. Eccles. 5.2. Be not rash
with thy mouth, and let not thy heart be hasty to utter any thing before God;
for God is in Heaven and thou upon earth, therefore let thy words be few. And
this Text in the margin quotes another to the same purpose, Prove. 10.19. In the
multitude of words there wants not sin, but he, that refraineth his lips, is
wise.

3ly; From the custom of the Heathen; as it follows: Use not vain repetitions,
as the Heathen do. It was the manner of the Heathen, says the ordinary Gloss
out of Cyprian, to endeavor rather to be eloquent, than devout in their
Prayers; and to be loud and clamorous rather than fervent and zealous. An
example whereof we have, 1 Kings, 18.27. Where Elijah mocks the Priests of Baal
calling upon their Pagan Deities: Cry alowd, for he is a God; either he is
talking or he is pursuing or he is in a journey or peradventure he is asleep
and must be awaked. And accordingly they cried alowd, thinking, as our Savior
here says; that they should be heard for their much speaking. And therefore,
as it follows v. 18. Be not like unto them. It is a shame for Christians in the
Worship of the True God, to be like the Heathen in the worship of their Falls
and feigned Dieties. Our Duty is, to endeavor more for humility, purity, and
fervency in heart, than for glib, nimble and voluble tongues; to pray, not with
multitude of words, and variety of phrases, but with pertinent and pithy
expressions; with ardency and godly zeal: and the reason follows: For

Your heavenly Father knows, what things you stand in need of before you ask
him: He is every where present, and knows all things, even the secret of all
hearts; and therefore, to court him with long and loud Prayers implies our
ignorance or misbelief of his perfections.

Against such extravagancy in Prayers our Lord prescribes us a Form, with
command saying; After this manner pray ye, verse. 9. i. e. as from the context
is manifest, not after the manner of the Heathen, who think to be heard for
their much speaking, but after this manner, i. e. in few words, and such as are
pithy, and to purpose.

And, That it is the meaning of our Lord in this place; That all our Prayers
should be short and not much exceeding the length of the Pattern, he has given
us, is manifest,

1. Not only from the Context impartially weighed and understood: but 2. From
the Practice of Christ's Church, which is undeniably the best and surest
Interpreter of Christ's meaning in his words. And all the Prayers of the Church
of Christ are, and ever were such in all ages, in all places, amongst all
persons, that are called Christians: their Liturgies or Public Prayers are
short and pithy, called therefore Collects; as being so many Collections of
much matter in few words. 3. Such are all the Prayers of the Holy and True
Spirit of God, which stand upon record in Holy Writ, both for use and
imitation, viz. the whole Book of Psalms, with many more; all which, though
some of them be long, as to the whole Psalm or Hymn, yet they are divided by
Verses into so many shorter Prayers. 4. Long Prayers are not only forbidden by
our Lord, as the custom of the Heathen; but also frequently reproved by him, as
the practice of Hypocrites, Matthew. 23.14. Mark 12.40. Luke 12.47. 5. By long
and manifold sad experience it is well known, and has been often observed; That
all long, conceived Prayers have been guilty of manifold infirmities; light,
vain, and unseemly expressions, not fitting to be offered up to the All-wise,
All-glorious Majesty of Heaven: yea, many falsehoods, many impieties and
profanations, have been uttered in such kind of Prayers, and what have been
contradictory to the Religious Duties we owe to God and men. 6. If it be here
said; How can we be too long in our Prayers, since our Lord continued all night
in Prayer, Luke 6.12. and says also; That we ought alwais to pray, and not to
faint, Luke 18.1. and his Apostle commands, Continus in prayers, and watch,
Col. 4.2. and Pray without ceasing, 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. and how can these Commands
be obeyed without long Prayers?
Augustine says; Oration plus gemitibus quam sermonibus agitur; plus fletu quam
afflatu. And it is thus, The Spirit helps our infirmities, by quickening our
Devotions, and enflaming our Desires; he makes intercession for us; i. e. as
the same Father, secretly inclining our hearts to intercede for us, with
groanings that cannot be uttered, Romans 8.26. From which Text it is apparent
(quite contrary to the Enthusiasts sense thereof) That it is inward groanings,
not outward bellowings; the internal fervent desires of the Soul, not multitude
of words, which is the Proper work of the Holy Spirit in Prayer.

The Ordinary Gloss out of St. Chrysostom asks the same Question: If we must
not use many words in our Prayers, how shall we pray without ceasing, as it is
commanded? And answers out of the same Father; That both are to be observed in
our Religious Devotions: viz. 1. That our Prayers be short. And 2ly, Frequent
and cominued. So Christ has both commanded, and also exemplified in his
Personal Prayers. And St. Paul also; That our Prayers be short, but often
renewed; in few words, but with great devotion; ending briefly, and beginning
afresh; leaving some intervals, or spaces of time for the reinquickning and
enkindling the fire of fervor and holy zeal in the Soul. And it is added, out of
Cassianus; The Fathers conceived it most useful to use short, but frequent
Prayers. To be frequent, that our Souls may cleave the more steadfastly unto
God, by often addresses to his Majesty. To be short, that we may quench the
fiery darts of the Devil; who is most busy to tempt us to dullness and deadness
of heart in our Prayers; which he very easily effects, when the Prayers we say,
or hear, are long, and continued without any intermission.

It Is recorded of those Primitive Christians in Egypt, who were most famous for
their transcendent Devotions, and great Austerities in the exercise of
Religious Duties; That their Prayers were many and often, night and day
continued; and yet, That they were short also: not only in their solemn
Assemblies, and public Offices of Devotion, but also; That their private
Prayers were as so many Raptures, and Ejaculations, or Desires, darted up into
Heaven. For, as the Father says hereupon; Absit ab Oratione multa locutio, sed
non desit multa precatio, si fervens perseveret intentio. Let not our Devotions
be accompanied with much speaking, but much praying, so long as we can hold out
in attention and fervency.

FINIS.

