A SERMON Preached on the Second of SEPTEMBER, BEING THE Fast for the Fire of
London, AT THE Cathedral Church of St. PAUL's, Before the Right Honorable the
LORD MAYOR, ALDERMEN, and Citizens of London.

By W. SHERLOCK, D. D. Dean of St. Paul's, Master of the Temple, and Chaplain
in Ordinary to His Majesty.

LONDON: Printed for W. Rogers, at the Sun against St. Dunstan's Church in
Fleetstreet. MDCXCIX.

MICAH VI. 9. The Lord's voice cries unto the city, and the man of wisdom
shall see thy name. Hear ye the rod, and who has appointed it.


WHEN the State of this World is happy and prosperous, it is no wonder to see
men indulge themselves in Ease and Luxury, forget God, or grow careless and
formal in Religion. For though it might reasonably be expected that happy
Creatures, who rejoice in the Blessings of Heaven, should be very devout
Worshippers of that God from whose Bounty and Goodness they receive all; yet
Human Nature in this degenerate state is very fond of sensual Pleasures: And
when an easy and plentiful Fortune puts it into men's power to enjoy as much of
this World as they will, there are but very few who can set bounds to their
Enjoyments, and taste the Pleasures of this Life, without taking large and
intoxicating Draughts of it; and this sensualizes men's minds; and a carnal mind
is enmity against God; says unto God, Depart from us, for we desire not the
knowledge of thy ways.

Never any People had more sensible demonstrations of the Power and Presence of
God amongst them, and his particular Care of them, than the Israelites had; and
yet Moses tells us in his Prophetic Hymn, Iesurun waxed fat; and kicked; thou
art waxen fat, thou art grown thick, thou art covered with fatness; then he
forsook God which made him, and lightly esteemed the rock of his salvation, 32.
Deuteronomy. 15. And thus God complains; 1. Isa. 2, 3. Hear, O heavens, and give ear,
O earth, for the Lord has spoken; I have nourished and brought up childrem,
and they have rebelled against me. The ox knows his owner, and the ass his
master's crib; but Israel does not know, my people does not consider. And as
much as we may despise and abhor the Ingratitude of the Jews, this is the
general state of Mankind; and we may find too many Examples of it in all Times
and Nations.

But it seems much more unaccountable, That when the judgments of God are
abroad in the world, the inhabitants thereof should not learn righteousness:
Because Judgments are apt to awaken men, and make them consider. When God
speaks in Thunder and Lightning, those must be deaf indeed, who will not hear.
This is the merciful design of Providence in sending such terrible Judgments on
the World, To make men consider their ways and their doings, and to convince
them that there is a God that judges in the earth. For Judgments have a Voice,
had we but Ears to hear: They proclaim the Power and the Majesty of God; a
terrible Majesty, and irresistible Power; they scourge and they threaten
Sinners, and call for Weeping, and Mourning, and Fasting: And how unthankful
soever the Jews were to God for his great Mercies and Deliverances, yet they
were not so insensible of his Judgments: When he slew them, then they sought
him, and returned and enquired early after God, and remembered that God was
their rock, and the high God their Redeemer, 78. Psalm. 34, 35.

This we are exhorted to in my Text, To hear the rod, and who has appointed
it: To consider for what reason those Evils which we at any time suffer, are
come upon us, and what God intends by the Rod; which is the only way to grow
better by our Afflictions, and to prevail with God in great Pity and Compassion
to remove them.

But this is the great difficulty; Who shall reveal this Secret to us? How
shall we distinguish between the Corrections of God, and the Wickedness of Men?
How shall we understand the Language of the Rod, and to whom it speaks; for
what Sins it strikes, and who are those Achans that are the Troublers of our
Israel; and what God expects from us in such Cases?

I shall briefly explain these things to you, and Apply it to the present
Occasion.

But I must premise, That I only address my self now to those who believe a God
and a Providence; and that God has revealed his Will and the Rule of his
Providence in the Holy Scriptures. As for Atheists and Infidels, who have
neither Eyes nor Ears, they can only feel the Rod like Bruits, not hear its
Voice like Men: Though the Lord's voice cries unto the city, it is only the
men of wisdom that see his name.

Now as for those who believe a God and the Holy Scriptures, there are two very
plain Interpreters of God's Judgments; Natural Conscience, and the Word of God.
For the Judgments of God have not an Articulate Voice to acquaint us in plain
and express words, upon what Errand they come; but they are Signs which speak
by an Interpreter; and if we carefully attend to the Dictates of Natural
Conscience, and to the Word of God, we cannot mistake their meaning.

1. As first, No man who attends either to the Dictates of Natural Conscience,
or to the Word of God, can doubt who it is that has appointed the rod: This is
the first and most natural question of all; and yet a great many who profess to
believe a God and a Providence, seem not well satisfied in this Point: They
allow that some Judgments are the Hand of God, but are not willing to grant
this of all; especially when they see what the immediate and visible Causes of
such Sufferings are.

Some of the greatest Evils which either Private Men or Public Societies
suffer, are manifestly owing to the Injustice and Wickedness of men; and they
can no more believe that it is the Will and Appointment of God, that they
should suffer such Evils, than that it is the Will of God that others should do
them: And all such Rods as are not appointed by God, can teach us nothing but
the Wickedness of those by whom we suffer; for if God has not sent them, they
can bring us no Message from God. And yet most men are in some degree infected
with this disease: We suffer many Evils which we are not willing to ascribe to
God, and then we learn nothing from them but a little Worldly Policy and
Prudence, to take better care of our selves and our Affairs, to be jealous and
distrustful of men; or it may be, to watch our Opportunities to revenge the
Injuries we suffer, and to return them with Interest: And yet we profess to
believe a Providence; though it were as honorable to God to deny his
Providence, as to deny his Sovereign Disposal and Government of all Events; or
rather, they are both an equal Reproach to him. For a Providence which does not
take care of Creatures, is little worth; and we cannot say that God takes care
of his Creatures, if any Evil befalls them without his Will and Appointment.

But Natural Conscience sees the Hand of God in all the Evils we suffer:
Whatever the visible and immediate Causes and Instruments of our Sufferings
are, a guilty Conscience takes notice of the Divine Vengeance; the Terrors of
God take hold upon him, and he trembles before his Judge, though he do not see
him; he is afraid of God, when he feels only the Hands of men. And what is the
meaning of this? What is the Language of these guilty Fears, but that whatever
the Rod be that strikes, it is moved and directed by a Divine Hand; that the
Wickedness and Injustice, the Wrath and Fury of Men, is no other than the
Vengeance of God? For why should the Evils we suffer from men so terrify a
guilty Conscience, had we not a Natural Persuasion, That all these Evils are
sent by God, whoever are the Instruments of them?

Thus it is natural in all such cases to fly to God for help. Atheists
themselves cannot wholly prevent this; but when they are surprised with any
sudden Dangers, Nature is too quick and too powerful for their Philosophy, and
surprises them into an acknowledgment of God and a Providence, which they must
do Penance for when their Fright is over. Sinners who forget God in Prosperity,
fly to him in their Distress; remember that God is their rock, and the high God
their Redeemer. And if this be a Natural Acknowledgment of Providence, as it
certainly is, it owns the Hand of God in our Sufferings, as well as his Power
to save; for both equally belong to the Supreme and Sovereign Lord of the
World; and it is not merely his Power to help, which makes Sinners fly to God
in their distress, but a sense of his Anger in what they suffer: They do not
fly to God as men do to a powerful Patron, but as Criminals do to the Mercy of
a provoked Father or Prince: When they fly to God, it is to implore his Mercy
as humble Penitents, to appease his Anger, that he may remove his Judgments;
and when we fly to the Mercies of God to remove the Rod, it is an
acknowledgment that it is he that strikes, as well as he alone that can save.

And that Conscience judges right in all this, however some men may attribute
it to a Superstitious Education, is evident from Scripture, which expressly
tells us, That God does whatsoever pleases him both in heaven and in earth.
That none can stay his hand, or resist his will, or say unto him, What do
thou? That there is no evil in the city, which the Lord has not done. If Job
be stripped of all his large Possessions in a day, it is the Lord that gave, and
the Lord that takes away. If the mighty King of Assyria invade Israel, and lay
waste their Cities and Country, he is the rod of God's anger, and the staff in
his hand is his indignation, 10. Isa. 5, 6. Affliction comes not forth of the
dust, neither does trouble spring out of the ground, but God is the judge, he
puts down one, and sets up another, 75. Psalm. 7, 8. This shows us, that
whatever our Sufferings are, it is God that appoints the Rod, and then it must
nearly concern us,

2dly. To hear the Rod, what and to whom it speaks. Now in this case also,
Conscience and the Word of God are the best Interpreters of God's Judgments.
The Rod teaches another way, but teaches the same thing that Conscience and
Scripture teach us; that is, it proclaims aloud the Evil of Sin, and God's
Anger and Displeasure against it, and calls us to Repentance, and Reformation
of our Lives.

When the Judgments of God are upon us, Conscience knows their Errand, and
calls all our sins to remembrance, and sets them in order before us. Nothing
but Guilt makes us afraid of God; and how quiet and secure soever Sinners are
at other times, the Judgments of God will awaken their guilty Fears; and if men
will hearken to the Voice of an awakened Conscience, it will certainly tell
them why God strikes; and we cannot take a safer course, than to reform those
Sins of which our Consciences then accuse us.

All the Threatenings of Scripture are against Sin, and all the Judgments there
recorded, especially Public and National Judgments, were inflicted for the
Punishment of Sin; and these are to be our Examples, as they are the standing
Rules and Measures of Providence. God never punishes but for Sin, though he may
exercise particular good men with difficult Trials; and therefore when bad men
and a wicked Nation suffer, they may certainly know the Cause; they have
sinned, and God is angry, and summons them to Repentance; for this is the fruit
of all, to take away sin. The Voice of Judgments is the same with the Voice of
Conscience, and the Voice of God's Prophets; Wash ye, make ye clean, put away
the evil of your doings from before mine eyes: Cease to do evil; learn to do
well; seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the
widow, 1. Isa. 16, 17.

This is plain enough, and sufficiently known, if it were but sufficiently laid
to heart; and this is all that* we are concerned to know of the Judgments of
God. The secret and hidden* Designs of Providence, which many times surprise
the World with unexpected Events, are the Care of God, and belong not to us,
till the Scene opens, and we see what part is allotted us in it. Whatever God
be a-doing, we have nothing to do but to amend our Lives, which will remove the
Scourge from us, and entitle us to the Care and Protection of Providence.
Whereas to busy our selves with Politic or Prophetic Guesses at unknown
Events, to paint our Imaginations with black and frightful, or with gay and
charming Scenes of things, as desponding Fears, or sanguine Hopes inspire the
Prophet, can do us no good, but may do a great deal of hurt to our selves and
the World. This is not the Voice of the Rod, which makes no new Revelations to
us, but only awakens the Convictions of Conscience, and enforces the Reproofs
and Threatenings of the Word, with such sensible and smarting Proofs of the Evil
of Sin, and God's Anger against it, as will make all men consider, who have not
lost their Senses; and many times restore Sense and Understanding to those who
had lost them.

But this to some men will seem a very dull Account of God's Judgments, which
will neither gratify their Curiosity nor Ill Nature; nor, which they think
worse, leave them any excuse to palliate their Hypocrisy.

The Judgments of God declare God's Anger against Sin, and call us to
Repentance: This men will own, but do not like to hear. it expressed in such
general Terms, as if when God sends his Judgments amongst us, he were angry
with us for all our sins, and called us to repent of them all: This they think
hard, that they must part with all their Sins, to remove these Judgments; nay,
this they think cannot be the Truth of the Case, because the World is always
very wicked, and yet the Judgments of God are not always abroad in the World:
And therefore they suppose, that when God does execute Judgments, it is not Sin
in general, but some particular Sins, which so highly provoke him; and could
they learn what they are, and reform them, they might see happy Days again: And
this sets men at liberty to favor what Sins they please, to reproach and
accuse each other, and to charge all the Evils and Calamities they suffer upon
one another, without thinking of reforming themselves.

Thus to be sure it always is, when there are differing Parties and Factions in
a Nation, who judge very differently of Good and Evil: They will all confess
they are great Sinners; and, it may be, too many of all Parties are guilty of
the same Sins; but those Sins which are common to them all, must pass for
nothing, because so far they are all agreed. But then there are peculiar
Party-Sins, which every Party dislikes in each other; and what they dislike,
they conclude God dislikes too; and to these they attribute all the Evils they
suffer: As if the Judgments of God were not to reform the World, but to decide
some Party-Quarrels, which will never be decided this way, when every Party
will expound Judgments in favor of themselves.

But all men see that this is to judge by a false and partial Rule: This is
neither Conscience nor Scripture; for Conscience equally condemns all Sin, and
so does the Scripture too. I grant, tho there is always a great deal of
Wickedness committed in the World, God does not always inflict Public
Judgments, which are commonly executed when Wickedness and Impiety is grown
public too; when public Government is remiss in punishing Wickedness, or the
Numbers and Power of Sinners are grown too great for the Correction of Public
Justice: But we shall always find in Scripture, that when God did inflict
Public Judgments, he called for a general Repentance and Reformation; and if
this were not so, no man could understand the Voice of the Rod without a Spirit
of Prophecy. But this deserves a more particular Consideration, both with
respect to those Sins for which God most commonly sends his Judgments, when he
sees fit to execute a Public Vengeance; and the necessity of an universal
Reformation, when the Judgments of God are upon us.

1. The most general account the Scripture gives us of Public Judgments, is an
universal Corruption of Manners. Thus the Prophet describes the state of the
Jewish Church, when God threatened his Judgments against them: Ah sinful nation,
a people laden with iniquity, a seed of evil doers, children that are
corrupters; they have forsaken the Lord, they have provoked the Holy One of
Israel, they are gone away backward. And the whole head is sick, and the whole
heart faint. From the sole of the foot unto the head, there is no soundness in
it; but wounds, and bruises, and putrefying sores: they have not been closed,
nor bound up, nor mollified with ointment, 1. Isa. 4, 5, 6. And in verse 10. he
calls them, The rulers of Sodom, and people of Gomorrah. When Wickedness is
grown universal, and has infected all Ranks and Orders of men, such a Nation
is ripe for Judgment; but it adds greatly to the Guilt and Provocation, when
men are not contented to be wicked, without bidding open defiance to God and to
all Religion. Woe unto them who draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as
it were with cart-ropes. Who deride all the Threatenings of God, and even dare
his Power and Justice: That say, Let him make speed, and hasten his work, that
we may see it; and let the counsel of the Holy One of Israel draw nigh, and
come, that we may know it. Who mock at the differences of Good and Evil, and
value the Reputation of their Wit and Philosophy too much to be cheated with
such empty Names. Woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil, that put
darkness for light, and light for darkness, that put bitter for sweet, and
sweet for bitter. Woe unto them that are wise in their eyes, and prudent in
their own sight: Who having first destroyed the eternal and essential
differences of Good and Evil, change their Names too at pleasure, and think
themselves the only Wise Men in the world for doing so. This takes off all
Restraints, and gives the Reins to their Lusts, and they live just as they
believe, without making any difference between Good and Evil. Woe unto them that
are mighty to drink wine, and men of strength to mingle strong drink; who
justify the wicked for a reward, and take away the righteousness of the
righteous from him. Therefore as the fire devoureth the stubble, and the flame
consumes the chaff, so their root shall be as rottenness, and their blossom
shall go up as the dust, because they have cast away the law of the Lord of
hosts, and despised the word of the Holy One of Israel, 5. Isa. 18, etc. The
like account we find in the other Prophets. And when the state of a Church and
Nation is so corrupt, we need not enquire for what particular Sins God strikes;
but yet there were some Sins which God expressed a severer Indignation against,
and seldom delayed to punish; such as their Idolatry, and Contempt of the God
of Israel, of his Word and Prophets; a Profanation of his Worship; Atheistical
Notions of Providence, and of Good and Evil; or their abominable Hypocrisy, in
committing all the Lewdness and Villainies which men could commit, and
sheltering themselves in an external Form and appearance of Religion, which the
Prophets every where complain of. To these Causes is owing the universal
Corruption of Manners; for it is impossible any Nation should so universally
degenerate, till they have either corrupted their Religion by Superstition and
Hypocrisy, or lost all sense of it; and therefore this calls for a speedy
Vengeance.

As for what more particularly concerns the Christian Church, we may learn from
the Epistles to the Seven Churches of Asia, what it is provokes our Lord either
severely to punish us, or to remove the Gospel from us. The Church of Ephesus,
though she had acquitted her self well in many things, yet had left her first
love, had abated very much of her Zeal and Fervor for the Name and Religion of
Christ. The Church of Pergamus is threatened for suffering those among her who
taught Idolatrous Worship, and fleshly Lusts: And the Church of Thyatira
likewise for suffering the Woman Iezabel to commit Fornication, and to eat
things sacrificed to Idols. The Church of Sardis made a glorious and pompous
Profession of Religion, but without the true Life and Spirit of it; she had a
name to live, but was dead: And the Church of Laodicea grew very cold and
indifferent even in the Profession of Religion, as well as in the Practice of
it; she was neither hot nor cold, but lukewarm. All these our Savior summons
to Repentance, and threatens to punish or destroy them if they did not, Chap.
2, and 3. of the Revelations.

The Application of all this to our selves is so obvious, that I need not
multiply words about it: We are that very Nation wherein all these Evils meet;
it is hard to name any Vice which is not openly committed amongst us without
Fear or Shame: Nay, things are come to that pass, that to be a modest Sinner,
to boggle at any Wickedness, or to blush at it, is as great a Reproach as to be
Virtuous: And though some men are ashamed to own themselves Atheists, yet to
believe in Christ, and to own any Revealed Religion, or to talk seriously of
Providence, of God's governing the World, and punishing Cities and Nations for
their Wickedness, is thought a Jest; and I wish it were a Jest only among vile
and mean People, of no Fortune or Education; whereas we often see that their
Condition makes them modest, and untaught Nature teaches them better, till they
are corrupted by the Examples of Men of Wit and Figure in the World. And as for
those who pretend to Religion, it is a very melancholy Prospect, to observe how
little of the true Life and Spirit of Christianity there is among them. There
is indeed Noise, and Zeal, and Faction enough among some People, and that makes
others as cold and indifferent: The Tempers of the Church of Sardis and
Laodicea, the one that had a Name to live, but was dead, the other that was
lukewarm, make much the greatest Parties among us; and the very best men, I
fear, are too much inclined to the state of Ephesus, which had left her first
Love, those great Passions and Ardors of Devotion which ought to inspire the
Minds of Christians.

Let us then hear the Rod and tremble: See how God dealt with the Jewish Church
for these Sins; see what our Lord has done to the Churches of Asia; and though
we cannot say what God will do to us, because we know not what wonderful
Designs are in the Womb of Providence, yet we know what we do, and how God has
dealt with those who have done as we do; which is too just reason to fear that
he will deal so by us too, unless we repent and reform, which they did not. For,

2dly. When the Judgments of God are upon us, the Reformation must be universal
too: It concerns every man to reform himself; for a Nation can never be
reformed, but by the Reformation of particular men, who make up the Nation; and
therefore when we are summoned to Repentance, as the Judgments of God summon us
all, every man must examine himself what he has to repent of, and reform
himself. But yet there is great difference between a National and Personal
Repentance and Reformation, and they serve very different Ends.

A Nation may be said to be reformed, and God may in great Mercy remove his
Judgments, tho (what is never to be expected) every particular man do not
repent and reform himself: But then such a National Reformation requires the
Execution of Public Justice against Public Wickedness, to make Sin publicly
infamous, and to teach the greatest and most powerful Sinners Modesty: To
banish, if not Sinners, yet Sin out of our Courts, and out of our Streets, and
to make it once more seek for Night and Darkness for a Covering; that Virtue
may no longer blush in Company, or need Apologies; nor Vice dare to brave it at
Noonday.

There has indeed of late been some Care taken by Public Laws and Royal
Proclamations, to punish the Profanation of God's Name by accursed Oaths; but
yet in most cases men may be as vile as they please, and as publicly so as
they please, and little or no notice taken of them; nay, they may talk and
write what they please against God and Religion, ridicule the History of Moses,
and the Gospel of our Savior, and the Mysteries of the Christian Faith, and
gain Credit and Reputation by it. I hope there are not many Christian Nations
in the World, which in so public a manner permit these things. We have talked
of Liberty of Conscience, and Reformation, to good purpose, if the only effect
of it be a liberty of ridiculing the Christian Faith; which might make one
suspect that all the Zeal some men have expressed against Popery, was at the
bottom of it a Zeal for Atheism and Irreligion; which the Discipline of Popery,
as bad a Religion as it is, would not endure; it is indeed well fitted to make
Atheists and Infidels, but will make men have a care how they profess it. And
it is to be feared, that this Skepticism, and Infidelity, and Contempt of
Religion, will prove a Backdoor to let in Popery again upon us.

But to leave these Thoughts with those whose proper Care and Business it is;
whether a Nation will be reformed or not, it concerns every particular man to
hear the Rod: The Judgments of God warn us of his Anger and Displeasure against
Sin, that we may fly from the Wrath to come; and we do not hear the Voice of
the Rod, nor improve Judgments to their true end, if we do not so repent and
reform, as to save our Souls; and this to be sure must be a Personal and an
Universal Reformation. And yet even with respect to present Judgments, a
Personal Repentance and Reformation is of great use; for when the Judgment is
Public and National, God many times makes a remarkable distinction between
persons: Say ye to the righteous, it shall be well with them, for they shall
reap the fruit of their doings: Woe unto the wicked, it shall be ill with him,
for the reward of his hands shall be given to him: Which is spoke with respect
to Public Judgments, 3. Isa. 10, 11. Which is a sufficient Encouragement for
particular men to repent, and reform their Lives, whatever others do.

But it is time to apply what I have now discoursed, to the Particular Occasion
of this Day's Solemnity; though possibly some may think that this Application
comes too late; it might have been very seasonable One or Two and thirty Years
ago, while the Marks of this Terrible Vengeance were fresh and visible; when
the Ruins of our Houses and Churches could only tell us where London stood, and
show us its Funeral Pile, where its Glory lay in the Dust: When so many
Thousand Families felt the smart of their Ruined Fortunes, and were either
forced to begin the World again, or sunk irrecoverably under it. This Fiery
Vengeance had a Voice then, and a very Terrible Voice, enough to awaken the
most stupid and Lethargick Sinners. But when we see our City rebuilt more
beautiful than ever, as the little poor Remains of the Old one witness: When
our Riches and Glory are increased beyond the Example of most former Ages, it
seems too late to lament over the Ashes and Rubbish of our Fired City, when
there are no visible Remains of these Ruins to move our Pity or Sorrow: And
indeed were this the only design of this Annual Fast, it were high time to put
an end to it, or to turn it into a Thanksgiving Festival: For it is in vain to
expect, that after Three and thirty Years, the return of this Day should revive
and renew our Sorrows and Lamentations, when our Ruins are removed, our Losses
repaired, and those frightful Impressions which the sight of that devouring
Fire made on us, forgot; and little left to put us in mind that our City was
burnt, but the Inscription upon the Monument, and the sight of a New City, with
the several Dates of its Resurrection; which must needs qualify all melancholy
and sorrowful Reflections on what is so long past.

But though the Design of this Solemnity is not to represent and act over again
a new doleful Scene of Horror, Confusion, and Amazement, which neither Nature
nor Art can imitate, as we saw it once on this day, without such another
amazing Sight, which God grant we may never see again till the General
Conflagration; yet it is of great use to keep up a lively sense of such
Judgments upon our Minds, which become the subject of Reason, of cool Thoughts,
and wise Consideration, when the Terror and Frightfulness of them is over.

Judgments could never make a lasting Reformation in the World, were we
concerned to remember them no longer than we feel their smart; but they are
intended both for Punishment and Instruction; the Punishment ends with the
smart, and that puts an end to all whining and tragical Complaints; but this
alone is the discipline of Fools or Bruits: The Instruction is for Men, and
this is to last as long as Memory, and Thought, and Reason last. What could the
Fire of London teach us Thirty three Years ago, which it does not teach a wise
man still? And what Thoughts and devout Passions became us then, which are not
still on this Day the proper Exercise of our Devotion?

When we saw our Churches and Houses in Flames, when we saw those furious
Torrents of Fire rolling down our Streets, and despising all the Opposition
that Human Art or Strength could make, as if they had known by what a Divine
and Irresistible Commission they acted; there were few men to be found, who did
not express a great Fear and Reverence of the Power, and Justice, and terrible
Majesty of God; who did not see and own the Hand of God, and the visible Tokens
of his Displeasure, and begin in good earnest to think of reforming their
Lives, and making their Peace with God, who had now taken the Rod into his own
hand.

When we saw our Riches make to themselves Wings and fly away as an Eagle
toward Heaven; when we saw all our Pride and Glory, the Toil and Labor of our
whole Lives, the Food and the Instruments of our Lusts, vanish into Smoke and
Dust, this effectually taught us the Uncertainty of all present things, and
made us seriously consider what an ill state those were in, who had nothing to
trust to but such vanishing Treasures; and how reasonable our Savior's Command
is, Not to lay up for our selves treasures on earth, where moth and rust do
corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal; but to lay up for our
selves treasures in heaven, which are not subject to such Casualties; which
will make us bear such Losses better when they come, and secure our eternal
Interest.

When men saw their Riches and Treasures vanish in a Cloud, it naturally made
them consider how much of this they owed to the Poor, how much they had spent
upon their Lusts, and how much they had unjustly got; that is, how much of what
God had taken from them was not their own, and how much they had abused the
Gifts of God: Very Wise and Pious Thoughts, had they lasted; and yet too plain
to be missed by those who thought at all, when they saw these Lessons written
in bright Characters of Fire.

Now was all this, do you think, calculated only for Sixty six? Is not God the
same still? A Just and Righteous Judge, who is angry with the wicked every day,
though he do not every day bend his bow, and let fly his Arrows; though he do
not every day make the earth tremble and quake, and the very foundations of the
hills to shake, because he is angry; though we do not every day see a smoke go
out of his presence, and a consuming fire out of his mouth; though he do not
upon every Provocation appear in his Terrible Majesty, riding upon the
Cherubins, and flying upon the wings of the wind. Methinks one such Example
might serve us for some Ages, without expecting or desiring to be summoned
again to Repentance by new Terrors. God is gracious and merciful, slow to
anger, and of great kindness: He delights more to display his Glory in acts of
Goodness and Bounty to his Creatures; but Judgments are his strange work, which
makes the signal Execution of them so very rare; and the way to have them rare,
is not to forget them, to learn Righteousness by the things which we have
suffered; to fear and tremble before that God who is so terrible in his doings
toward the children of men.

But if the Fire of London was too long since to work upon our Fears at this
distance, (though I confess I wonder how any man who saw that Sight, should
ever forget it, or remember it without a just Awe and Reverence of God); but I
say, if these Impressions of Fear and Terror are lost, let the Beauty and Glory
of our New City, our Increasing Riches, our Flourishing Trade, our Ease and
Plenty, teach us to Love and Reverence, and Worship and Praise that God, who in
the midst of judgment has remembered mercy; who has plucked us as a firebrand
out of the fire, and has not suffered our Enemies to triumph over us; who
said, Down with it, down with it, even to the ground. This is the way to
perpetuate our Prosperity and Glory, if the Remembrance of past Judgments
teaches us to Fear God, the sense of his present Mercies to Love him, and both
to Obey him.

Which God of his Infinite Mercy grant, through our Lord Jesus Christ: To Whom,
with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be Honor, Glory, and Power, now and ever.

Amen.
FINIS.
Books Published by the Reverend Dr. Sherlock, Dean of St. Paul's, Master of
the Temple, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.
AN Answer to a Discourse, entitled, Papists protesting against Protestant
Popery. 2d Edit. Quarto.

An Answer to the Amicable Accommodation of the Differences between the
Representer and the Answerer. Quarto.

Eleven Sermons preached on several Occasions. Quarto.

A Vindication of some Protestant Principles of Church-Unity and Catholic
Communion, from the Charge of Agreement with the Church of Rome. Quarto.

A Preservative against Popery, in Two Parts; with the Vindication, in Answer
to the Cavils of Lewis Sabran, Jesuit. 4to.

A Discourse of the Nature, Unity, and Communion of the Catholic Church. First
Part. Quarto.

Case of Allegiance due to Sovereign Powers, Stated and Resolved, according to
Scripture and Reason, and the Principles of the Church of England. Quarto.

A Vindication of the Case of Allegiance due to Sovereign Powers. Quarto.

A Discourse concerning the Divine Providence. Quarto. Second Edition. Price 5
s.

A Vindication of the Doctrine of the Trinity. 3d Edit. 4to.

Apology for Writing against Socinians. Quarto.

A Vindication of the Sermon of the Danger of corrupting the Faith by
Philosophy; in Answer to some Socinian Remarks. 4to.

A Defense of Dr. Sherlock's Notion of the Trinity. Quarto.

The Distinction between the Real and Nominal Trinitarians examined, in Answer
to a Socinian Pamphlet. Quarto.

A Practical Discourse concerning Death. In Octavo. Tenth Edition. Price 3 s.

A Practical Discourse concerning a Future Judgment. The Fifth Edition. Octavo.
Price 3 s. 6 d.

The Present State of the Socinian Controversy, and the Doctrine of the
Catholic Fathers concerning a Trinity in Unity. 4to. Price 5 s.

An Answer to the Animadversions on the Dean of St. Paul's Vindication of the
Trinity. By I. B. A. M. Quarto.

A Defense of the Dean of St. Paul's Apology for Writing against Socinians.
Quarto.


