A SERMON Preached before the RIGHT HONORABLE THE Lord Mayor AND ALDERMEN OF
The CITY of LONDON, AT GVILD-HALL-CHAPPEL, On Sunday, Nov. 4. 1688.

By WILLIAM SHERLOCK, D.D. Master of the Temple.

LONDON: Printed for William Rogers, at the Sun over against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleet Street. 1689.

Chapman Mayor, etc.
Cur. Special. tent. die Lunae Quinto die November. 1688. Annoque Regni Regis
Jacobi Secundi Angl. etc. Quarto.
THis Court does desire Dr. Sherlock to Print his Sermon Preached Yesterday
morning at the Guild-Hall-Chappel, before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of this
City.

Wagstaffe.

IMPRIMATUR,

November. 14, 1688. Z. Isham R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir John Chapman, LORD MAYOR OF THE CITY of LONDON.
My LORD,
IN obedience to the Order I received from your Lordship and the Court of
Aldermen, I Present you with this plain Sermon, the whole Design of which is,
not to debate any thing, nor to determine on which side the Truth lies, in
those warm Disputes which have been among us, but to convince all those, who
Love and Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem, how many Controversies there are,
which should be laid aside without Disputing, and how a little condescension to
each other, may either happily Unite us into oue Communion, or at least Teach
us to Live together in Love and Charity, notwithstanding some different
Apprehensions of Things; and I hope so Charitable a Design as this, will raise
no new Disputes and Quarrels among us.

That GOD would preserve his Church, restore Peace and Unity among
Christistians, bless this Great and Populous City, and direct your Lordship in
the Government of it, in these difficult Times, is the hearty Prayer of,

My LORD, Your Lordship's Most obedient Servant, WILL. SHERLOCK.

A SERMON Preached before the Lord Mayor.
122 PSALM 6, 7. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love
Thee, Peace be within thy Walls, and Prosperity within thy Palaces.
THough the particular time and occasion of Penning this Psalm is uncertain,
yet so much is plain, that it was after David had settled the Ark at Jerusalem,
and made that City the place of God's House, and of Religious Worship, and the
Seat of Justice and Judgment. There was the House of God, verse. 9. that is,
though the Temple was not yet built, if this Psalm was composed by David, as
the Title of it signifies it was, yet there was the Tabernacle and the Ark of
God, which formerly was in Shilo, and afterward removed from one place to
another, till David settled it in Jerusalem: thither all the Tribes of Israel
were to resort three times a year to worship God before the Ark of the
Testimony, 4 ver. There was the Imperial Seat, where David had built his Throne
and Palace, and where his Posterity were to dwell and govern Israel; and
therefore it was the Seat of Justice too, as that must be, where the Kings
Throne and the House of God was placed. There are set thrones of judgment, the
thrones of the house of David, 5 ver. These were the peculiar Privileges of
Jerusalem, above any other City in Jury. This was the reason of that peculiar
affection and passionate concern, which David had himself, and exhorts all
others to express for Jerusalem, that he greatly rejoiced to go thither, and to
continue there. I was glad when they said unto me, Let us go into the house of
the Lord, our feet shall stand within thy gates, O Jerusalem. That he exhorts
all people to pray for the peace and prosperity of Jerusalem, and promises a
Blessing to those who love it; as it is in my Text, Pray for the peace of
Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love thee; peace be within thy walls, and
prosperity within thy palaces. All this was not for the sake of the material
Buildings, the beauty of the place, or the convenience of its situation, but
because it was the Center of Unity; Which is builded as a City that is compact
together, whither the Tribes go up, the Tribes of the Lord, unto the Testimony
of Israel, to give thanks unto the name of the Lord, 3 and 4 ver. Which shows
in what respect he commends Jerusalem, that it is built as a City, which is
compact together; not with regard to the Uniformity and regular Order and Union
of its material Buildings, but that it was the Center of a Religious Unity and
Order in Worship, where all the Tribes of Israel met and united in the same
Acts of Worship and Praise to God. There was the House of God, there were the
set Thrones of Judgment. So that to Love Jerusalem, to Pray for the Peace and
Prosperity of it, is to love the House, the Worship, the Name of God; to love
and pray for the Unity, Happiness, and Prosperity of the Church, for the
flourishing State of Religion, and the peaceful Opportunities of Worshipping
God in his Holy Temple, together with the equal and impartial Administration of
Justice, which is so much for the Public good, to promote the Temporal and
Eternal Happiness of Men, that our Love to Mankind, but especially our Love to
the Brethren, as well as our Zeal for God's Glory and Worship, requires this of
us, For my Brethren and Companions sake, I will now say, Peace be within thee:
Because of the House of the LORD our GOD, I will seek thy good, v. 8, 9.

Thus I have given you a very plain and easy Exposition of this whole Psalm,
and therein have sufficiently Explained my Text; I have but one thing more to
add, to make way for my intended Discourse, and that is, to show you, that this
Exhortation does directly, and not merely by Accommodation and Analogy concern
Us, as well as it did the Jews.

For Jerusalem was but a Type of the Christian Church, as the carnal Israel, or
the carnal Seed and Posterity of Abraham were of true and sincere Christians,
who are the Children of Abraham, by Faith in Christ: And therefore St. Paul
expressly distinguishes between the earthly Jerusalem, and the Jerusalem which
descends from above, 4 Gal. 25, 26. For this Agar is Mount Sinai in Arabia, and
answers to Jerusalem, which now is, and is in bondage with her Children; but
Jerusalem which is above, (or from above, that is, the Christian Church) is
free, which is the Mother of us all. Which in 12 Heb. 22. he calls Mount Sion
the city of the living GOD, the heavenly Jerusalem. And 3 Rev. 12. it is
called, The city of GOD, the new Jerusalem, which comes down out of heaven
from GOD. And 21 Rev. 2. The new Jerusalem coming down out of heaven from GOD,
prepared as a bride adorned for her husband: Which is a Description of the most
reformed and purified state of the Christian Church on Earth. So that this
Exhortation, To Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem, does most properly belong to
Christians, because the Christian Church is the true Jerusalem, the new, the
holy Jerusalem, descending out of Heaven from GOD, v. 10.

By this time, I suppose, you understand the meaning of my Text, and how much
we are concerned in it; and there are two parts observable in the words: 1. The
Duty to Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem; or of the Christian Church, Peace be
within thy Walls, and Prosperity within thy Palaces. 2. The Encouragement to
this, They shall prosper that love thee.

It is the first of these I shall at present speak to, The Duty to Pray for the
Peace of Jerusalem; wherein I shall consider two things.

1. What we must Pray for.

2. How necessary Prayer is, to obtain the Blessing.

1. What we must for: Peace and Prosperity. Peace be within thy Walls, and
Prosperity within thy Palaces.

Now the Peace of the Church signifies two things.

1. The Unity and Agreement of Christians among themselves.

2. The Preservation of the Church from external Oppressions and Persecutions.

1. The Unity and Agreement of Christians among themselves: When they profess
the same Faith, and join in the same Worship; when they love like Brethren, and
have a tender affection and sympathy for each other, as Members of the same
Body: This all Christians confess to be a great and necessary Duty, and pretend
to lament those many scandalous Dissensions and Divisions of the Christian
Church.

This I am sure, that though Divisions and Dissentions are destructive to all
Societies, yet there is no Society suffers so much by it as the Christian
Church: this destroys Love and Charity, which is the true Spirit of the Gospel,
and the Badge and Cognizance of our Profession; By this shall all men know,
that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another. This turns the Christian
Church into a School of wrangling Disputes, and makes men more concerned what
they believe, than how they live; this gives great offense to the World,
representing the Christian Faith as very doubtful and uncertain, and
Christianity it self as a great Disturber of the Peace of Mankind; this
overthrows all Government and Discipline in the Church, and makes its Censures
despised and scorned, when the most profligate Sinners can shelter themselves
in a Schism, and palliate or expiate their other Crimes by a factious Zeal; and
therefore, if ever we desire to see Christianity flourish, we must Pray
heartily for Peace and Unity among Christians.

But that we may the better understand what we are to Pray for, let us briefly
inquire wherein the Unity of the Church consists; and that is, in the Unity of
Faith, the Unity of Communion, and the Unity of Love and Charity.

1st, Unity of Faith: Whereby I do not understand, that all Christians must
agree in all the Opinions and Speculations of Religion; it would be well if it
could be so, but this can never be, while men have such different
Understandings and Abilities, such different Skill and Opportunities of
inquiry; but the Unity of Faith is secured by an Agreement in all the
Fundamental Articles of Re^^^ion, though a little varied in some nicer
Speculations, which are like the different features in men's faces, which
distinguish them from one another, but do not alter the Humane shape: and this
is the difference between the Disputes which divide Papists and Protestants,
and the Disputes of Protestants among themselves: The first subvert the
Foundations of Christian Faith and Worship, and therefore these Differences can
never be Accommodated and Reconciled; they will not part with their Errors,
and we must not embrace them, if we love our Souls, for as dear a thing as
Peace is, we must not part with Truth for Peace. But now the Disputes among all
that are allowed to be Protestants, whatever mistakes there may be on any side,
do not overthrow any necessary Article of the Christian Faith; and therefore
the Unity of the Faith may be secured amidst all these Disputes. Some of these
Disputes are only inconvenient Modes of speaking, and the difference is only in
Words, when both Parties really mean the same thing; which, I believe, if all
Heat and Passion were laid aside, would in a great measure appear to be the
true State of that Protestant Controversy, about Justification by Faith alone.
Others are mere Philosophical Disputes, in which the Christian Faith is not
peculiarly concerned, for they have been, and are disputed in all Religions;
such as the Controversy about God's Eternal Decrees, and the Power and
Efficacy of Nature and Grace; which is only a reviving of that old
Philosophical Dispute about Necessity and Fate, and God's concourse with second
Causes to produce their Effects. And thus it is in some other Cases; now
methinks such Disputes as these, which do not properly belong to the Christian
Faith, should not divide the Christian Church: let men dispute about them as
Philosophers, but as Christians, let it suffice them to believe what Christ and
his Apostles have plainly taught us; that is enough to carry us to Heaven; and
methinks it should be enough to make us agree in the Way thither.

As to Explain this more particularly, but very briefly: There is no good
Protestant but will confess, That we are Justified only by the Merits of
CHRIST's Death and Sacrifice, as the only Expiation and Atonement for our sins:
that no works of Righteousness which we can do, can make satisfaction to God
for our sins, nor merit Eternal Life, which is the gift of God: that Christ is
our only Savior, and that he is the Savior only of his Body or Church: that
we are incorporated into the Body of Christ, and put into a state of
Justification by Faith and the Christian Sacraments: that no impenitent
unreformed sinner, though he do profess to believe in Christ, and be baptized,
shall be saved by Him; and therefore though Repentance and a holy life do not
merit the pardon of sin, nor eternal Rewards, yet they are necessarily required
in all those, who shall be forgiven and saved by Christ. This I say, all good
Protestants agree in, and all this is plainly taught in Scripture; and whoever
believes this, and practices accordingly, shall certainly be saved: and what
need is there then of reducing all this into artificial Schemes, wherein Men's
Fancies and Conceits differ? What necessity is there of disputing what the
Office of Faith, or what the Efficacy of Works is in our Justification, when we
all agree, that we are saved only by the Mercy of God, and the Merits of Christ
through Faith in his Blood, and the Exercise of Repentance and a holy Life: to
understand the reason and order of things, conduces much to the beauty and
perfection of Christian Knowledge; but Men may be saved, and the Peace of the
Church better secured, without such particular Determinations.

Thus all good Protestants agree, that all God's Works are known to him from
the foundation of the World; that Christ is the Lamb slain from the foundation
of the world: that God knows who are his, and always did so: that we are
predestined to the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself, according
to the good pleasure of his will, to the praise of the glory of his grace,
wherein he has made us accepted in the beloved: that we are predestined
according to the purpose of him, who works all things according to the
counsel of his own will, 1 Ephesians. 5, 6, 11. that when God comes to judge the
World, he will appear infinitely just, and good, and merciful: that bad men
shall have no reason to complain of God, and that good men shall have nothing
to arrogate to themselves. This secures the glory of God, of his wisdom,
goodness, justice, power, and soveraignity, and what need is there to inquire
any farther into the divine Decrees, than the Scripture has revealed; in the
particular explication of which, when men follow their own fancies, they vastly
differ from each other, to the great disturbance of the peace of the Church. We
are assured by plain testimonies of Scripture, that God desires not the death
of a sinner, but rather that he should return and live: that our destruction is
of our selves: that all the good we do, is wholly owing to the grace of God,
who works in us both to will and to do of his own good pleasure: that all the
evil we do, is owing to our selves; that every man is tempted, when he is drawn
away of his own lust and enticed, then when lust has conceived, it brings
forth sin; and sin, when it is finished, brings forth death. This we all
agree in, and this attributes the glory of all the good we do to God, and the
shame of all the evil we do to our selves; this encourages us to do good in a
confident assurance of the Divine Grace, and teaches bad men, that they must
not think to excuse their wickedness by charging it on God: and this is all
that is necessary for us to know, because it is all that is needful to the
purposes of Religion, and a holy life.

But when men frame this into Philosophical Hypotheses, they then divide as far
from each other, as East and West; and all the attempts of reconciling them is
vain and fruitless, for there is no Medium to unite in. The only way to Peace,
is to silence all these Disputes, as matters which Mankind will never agree
about, and wherein Religion is no more concerned, than the government of
Kingdoms or States, and on which the salvation of our Souls no more depends,
than the conduct of our secular affairs, or the preservation of this mortal
life: for the dispute about Decrees, Predestination, God's power over our
Wills, how God and Creatures produce the same effect, what belongs to God, and
what belongs to the Creature in every action, (since in him we live and move)
concerns every thing else as well as Religion; and yet in all other cases, men
let Philosophers dispute these points, and quietly go about their business, and
do what is fit to be done, as if there were no Controversy about these
matters; and I cannot imagine why they should not do so in Religion too:
Believe what is plainly taught, and do what is commanded, use the greatest
wisdom, and our utmost diligence in doing good, and depend upon the succors of
the Divine Grace, and leave these Disputes to be decided at the Day of
Judgment, and that will decide them all. By this means I am sure most of the
Disputes among Protestants, which have given the greatest Disturbance to the
Church, would be for ever silenced, and Christian Religion would not be
clogged, nor reproached with such Philosophical Controversies.

2ly, The Unity of Communion: and that consists in our worshipping God
together: when we resort to the same Church to offer up our united Prayers and
Thanksgivings to God, and to partake of that holy Supper, which is the
Sacrament and Symbol of our Union to Christ, and to each other: and this indeed
is true Church-Unity, and it is greatly to be lamented, that men who profess
the same Faith, and agree in all the Essentials of Worship, should divide
Communion, and refuse to Pray together, and to Feast at the same holy Table of
our Lord. We cannot indeed Communicate with the Church of Rome, because they
have corrupted the very Essentials of Christian Worship. Most men do not
understand their Prayers, and therefore cannot join in Prayer with them: they
worship Images and Pictures, which is expressly forbidden by the second
Commandment. Instead of praying to God in the Name of our only Mediator and
Advocate Jesus Christ, they have joined other Intercessors with him; pray to
Saints and Angels, and the Virgin Mary, to pray for them, and help them. They
worship the Host, which we believe to be nothing but Bread and Wine as to the
substance, and therefore no Object of Worship, and turn the Sacramental Feast
of Christ's Body and Blood into a propitiatory Sacrifice for the Living and the
Dead. Such a Worship as this we dare not join in, because it is Sinful and
Idolatrous. But the case is quite different among Protestants; they pray to the
same God, in the only Name of the same Lord Jesus Christ, put up the same
Petitions, offer the same Thanksgivings and Praises, observe the same Divine
Institutions, without any essential change and alteration, and yet cannot
worship God together; as if it were an impious thing to put up the same
Prayers, and to offer the same Praises to God in a pious, and grave, and
well-composed Form of Words, which others do, it may be not so well and
decently, in their conceived Prayers; as if the Devotion of the Communicant in
receiving so inestimable a Blessing as the Sacramental Body and Blood of Christ
upon his knees, were a profanation of that Holy Feast; as if a white
Linnen-Garment, which never underwent any Religious Conjurations, and is used
only as a decent Habit, without any opinion of its Virtue or Sanctity, were a
just reason to drive men out of the Church, from the Christian Communion of
Prayers and Sacraments. These would be surprising stories to any Christians in
the World, who had never heard before of such Disputes among us.

Pray give me leave to speak my mind freely upon this occasion. Upon the best
and most impartial Inquiries and Observations I can make, I do in my Conscience
believe the Church of England to be the most Apostolical and best Reformed
Church in the World: I see no reason from the nature of things to make any
material Alterations in her Doctrine, or Worship; and therefore, I confess, it
has given me very just Resentments to hear our Church charged with such unjust
Imputations of Popery, Superstition, Idolatry, Will Worship, and what not, and
to see a blind and furious Zeal ready to raze up the very Foundations of it. It
has often grieved me to see such a Church as this rent and torn by Schisms,
which a man of ordinary prudence might easily foresee, would give great
advantage to the common Enemy of the Protestant Faith. This and the care of
men's Souls, and of their temporal Fortunes too, moved several Divines of this
Church, when the Government thought fit to re-enforce the Laws of Uniformity,
to examine and answer all the Arguments of our Dissenting Brethren, which they
performed with that good Temper, with that perswasiveness and strength of
Argument, as will be a Vindication of our Church to future Ages; and I wish it
may upon second thoughts, have yet a better effect upon those, who were not
then persuaded: and this, I suppose, will not be called Persecution, much less
can the many kind Offices they did in keeping off Ecclesiastical Censures be
called a Persecution.

And yet after all, when it is so apparent, that Prejudices are grown as
obstinate as they are unreasonable, when not the reason of the thing, but the
weakness of some, and the ill designs of others, require some compliance and
condescension, we have reason to hope, that the CHVRCH of ENGLAND, which at the
beginning of the Reformation took such prudent Care not to offend the Papist by
going farther from them, than was necessary, will, whenever it is likely to do
good, condescend a great deal farther, than it is necessary to Reform, to meet
the Dissenter; for while the external Decency, Gravity, and Solemnity of
Worship is secured, no wise and good Man will think much to change a changeable
Ceremony, when it will heal the Breaches and Divisions of the Church: and let
us all heartily Pray to GOD, that there may be this good and peaceable
Disposition of Mind in all Conformists and Non-conformists, toward a happy
Reunion; and all considering Men will think it time to lay aside such little
Disputes, when it is not merely the Church of England, nor any particular Sect
of Protestants, whose Ruin is aimed at, but the whole Protestant FAITH.

3ly, Another kind of Unity is, Love and Charity, and a mutual Forbearance.
This, I confess, is a very difficult thing, when the Dispute runs so high as to
divide Christian Communion; for it seems in effect to declare Men to be
Heathens and Publicans, when we refuse to Worship GOD with them: and few Men
can bear this, when so dear an Interest is concerned, as the Salvation of their
Souls. And the truth is, that Forbearance St. Paul so often mentions, was to
preserve Men of different seize, and different apprehensions, in the
Unity of the Church, not to countenance their Schisms and Separations.

But yet, since we are fallen into such unhappy Circumstances, that a great
many Men, whom we have reason to hope, are in other respects very good
Christians, and such as our common Savior will receive with all their
Infirmities, are involved in a Schism, let us still treat them as Christian
Brethren, pay all that Kindness and Respect to them, which is due to the
Members of Christ, to the Children of the same Father, and the Heirs of the
same Promises.

The good Order and Government, and the wholesome Laws and Constitutions of a
Church, trust not be presently Sacrificed to the Scruples of every good, but it
may be ig^^^^^^ and indiscreet Christian; but yet in (...) Treatment of them,
we must consider ^^ether we have not reason to think, that Christ will own them
with all their Fa(...) and if we have reason to believe, that Christ will own
them, we ought also to own them, and pay such Kindness to them as is due to all
sincere Christians, though under some Mistakes.

Now I am very confident, after all the Heats that have been between the Church
of England and Dissenters, neither of them will Damn each other upon account of
such Differences as are between them: no Church-of-England-man will say, That
to Pray Extempore, to Baptize without the Sign of the Cross, to Officiate
without a Surplice, to Receive the Sacrament Sitting, are damning Sins; and I
believe there are very few, if any of our Dissenters, that will say, That the
contrary Practice is Damning; and then there may be good Christians on both
sides; and those who are so, ought to love one another, as Members of the same
Body of CHRIST, though divided in their external Communion, by some unhappy
Differences.

Schism indeed we do say, is a damning Sin; but there may be Divisions where
there is not always the guilt and formality of Schism; and we hope this is the
Case of all good Men, who separate from the Church, through some invincible
Prejudices and Prepossessions.

This shows what great reason we have to love one another, notwithstanding such
dividing Disputes; but if we would practice this true Christian Charity, we
must take care, that these Differences do not grow up into personal Hatreds and
Animosities. Men's Opinions and Practices may differ, and while they dispute
fairly, they may be Friends still; but when Self-love, Honor, Reputation, and
Interest, is engaged in the Quarrel, this makes the Enmity mortal, and they
must Ruin one another, though they both fall together. This I am sure is not
the Zeal which descends from above, which is pure and peaceable, gentle and
easy to be entreated.

2. The Peace of the Church signifies its Preservation from the Oppression and
Persecution of its Enemies: For the Church never wants Enemies, though their
Power be not always equal; and this, I presume, I need not persuade you to Pray
for, for you are all sensible what an advantage this is. There is none of you
would choose Racks and Tortures, a Gibbet or a Stake, these are grievous things
to Flesh and Blood, the very thoughts of which make us tremble: though immortal
Life, and the Joys and Pleasures of GOD's Presence, are an abundant Recompense
for the loss of this present Life, and all the Sufferings of this World; yet it
is a very difficult Trial, even to the best Men, who, when they see it a
coming, cannot but Pray with the importunity of an Agony, as our SAVIOR did,
Lord, let this Cup pass from me. Though good Men prefer their future Hopes
before all present Things, yet their Life, their Ease, their Liberties, their
Estates, are valuable things too, and all Men would be glad to get to Heaven
without meeting with such a Storm by the way.

Especially if it be such a Storm as threatens the very Ruin of the Church, and
of the true Religion, to subvert the Faith of many professed Christians, to
entail Ignorance, Infidelity, or monstrous Errors on our Posterity; in such a
case the love of our Religion, of our Country, of our Posterity will make us
raise our Hearts and our Voices to Heaven, in our fervent and passionate
Prayers for the Peace of Jerusalem. And if we do heartily Pray for the Peace of
Jerusalem, methinks we should not Sacrifice our Religion to private
Animosities: GOD forbid, were it in my power, and had I never so little
kindness for Dissenters, that I should ever embrace any Proposals which would
Ruin all the Dissenters in England, and the Protestant Religion into the
bargain; and I doubt they are no Protestant Dissenters who would be contented
to Ruin the CHVRCH of ENGLAND, though they introduce Popery, and set up the
Church of Rome in its stead.

Thus I have shown you, what that Peace is, which we must Pray for; and I need
not add many words in the second place, to show you, how necessary Prayer is to
obtain these Blessings; for not to insist now on those common Topics, of the
Necessity of Prayer in general, and its Power and Efficacy to obtain our
Requests of GOD, I shall desire you only to consider, that this Peace is such a
Blessing, as none but GOD can bestow, and therefore we ought to pray for it.

1. As for Unity and Peace among our selves, this Saint Paul expressly prays
for, 15 Romans 5, 6. Now the God of patience and consolation grant you to be like
minded one toward another, according to Christ Jesus, that ye may with one
mind and one mouth glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ: for
it is God that makes men to be of a mind. Whoever considers the unruly
passions of men, their different capacities and understandings, and different
interests, will not wonder that the best Arguments, and the most obliging Arts,
do not always prevail; but God can still our passions, enlighten our minds,
overruled our interests, remove our prejudices, and unite and reconcile the
most distant persons: and not to take notice now of that power he has over our
Wills, and his immediate applications to our Minds and Spirits, he many times
effects this by some external and visible Providence. The Jail and the Stake
presently reconciled the Differences between those two excellent Bishops and
Martyrs RIDLEY and HOOPER, who before disputed fiercely about some Ceremonies,
as we have done; and I pray God grant us so much Christian prudence and temper,
that we may not need such means to reconcile us: and we have great reason to
hope this, since the Divine Providence has in a great measure already removed
the Prejudices on both sides, and convinced us, that we are not at such a
distance from each other as our Enemies would have us, and as it may be, we
thought our selves to be. Dissenters, I hope, are by this time very well
satisfied, that the Church of England has no inclination to Popery, and we have
reason to acknowledge, that the Body of Dissenters (for some private Intriguers
on either side do not deserve our notice, nor to be thought on either side)
have not such an irreconcilable Hatred to the Church of England, as to
sacrifice her to a Popish Interest; and this bids fair for a good Understanding
between us, and let us pray to God to continue and perfect it.

2. As for the Preservation of the Church from the Oppression and Persecution
of her Enemies, this is God's care too, and many times nothing but an
All-seeing, Vigilant, and Omnipotent Providence can secure her. Many times
their Designs are laid deep and low, full of Intrigue and Artifice, unknown to
all men but themselves, as it was in the Gunpowder Treason, when our King, and
Nobles, and Senators, were designed as a rich Sacrifice to a furious and
Antichristian Zeal; but when the wicked plotteth against the just, and gnasheth
on him with his teeth, the Lord shall laugh at him, for he sees, that his day
is coming, 37 Psalm. 12, 13.

Let us then Pray heartily to God, that he would reconcile our Differences and
Divisions, and restore Peace and Unity to his Church, that he would defend us
from all the Plots and Machinations of our Enemies, that we being delivered
from all Persecutions, may ever more give thanks unto him in his Holy Church,
through Jesus Christ our Lord; to whom, with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be
Honor, Glory, and Power, now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for William Rogers.
THE Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome, truly Represented; in
Answer to a Book, entitled, A Papist Misrepresented, and Represented, etc.
Quarto. Third Edition.

An Answer to a Discourse, entitled, Papists protesting against Protestant
Popery; being a Vindication of Papists not Misrepresented by Protestants.
Quarto. Second Edition.

An Answer to the Amicable Accommodation of the Differences, between the
Representer and the Answerer. Quarto.

A View of the whole Controversy, between the Representer and the Answerer;
with an Answer to the Representer's last Reply. 4o.

The Doctrine of the Trinity, and Transubstantiation, compared as to Scripture,
Reason, and Tradition; in a new Dialogue between a Protestant and a Papist. In
two Parts. 4o.

A Discourse concerning the Nature of Idolatry: in which the Bishop of Oxford's
true and only Notion of Idolatry is Considered and Confuted. 4o.

The Protestant Resolved: or, a Discourse, showing the Unreasonableness of his
Turning Roman Catholic for Salvation. Second Edition. 8o.

The Absolute Impossibility of Transubstantiation demonstrated. 4o.

A Vindication of some Protestant Principles of Church-Unity and
Catholick-Communion, from the Charge of Agreement with the Church of Rome. In
Answer to a late Pamphlet, Entitled, An Agreement between the Church of
England and the Church of Rome, evinced from the Concertation of some of her
Sons with their Brethren the Dissenters. 2d Edition.

A Preservative against Popery; being some Plain Directions to Unlearned
Protestants, how to Dispute with Romish Priests. The First Part. The Fifth
Edition.

The Second Part of the Preservative against Popery: showing how contrary
Popery is to the True Ends of the Christian Religion. Fitted for the
Instruction of Unlearned Protestants. The Second Edition.

A Vindication of Both Parts of the Preservative against Popery: In Answer to
the Cavils of Lewis Sabran, Jesuit, 4o.

A Discourse concerning the Nature, Unity and Communion of the Catholic
Church: wherein most of the Controversies relating to the Church, are briefly
and plainly stated. The First Part. 4o.

These Five last by William Sherlock D. D. Master of the Temple.


