Clarke Mayor.
Martis xiij. die Aprilis 1697. Annoque Regni Regis Willhelmi Tertij, Angliae,
etc. Nono.
THis Court does Desire Mr. Dean of St. Paul's to Print his Sermon, Preached at
the Parish Church of St. Bridget, on Tuesday in Easter-Week last, before the
Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Governors of the several Hospitals of this City.

GOODFELLOW.

The Nature and Measure of Charity.

A SERMON Preached before the Right Honorable the LORD MAYOR, AND THE Court of
Aldermen, AT THE Parish Church of St. BRIDGET, ON Tuesday in Easter-Week, April
6. MDCXCVII.

By WILLIAM SHERLOCK, D. D. Dean of St. Paul's, Master of the Temple, and
Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

LONDON:

Printed for W. Rogers, at the Sun against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet.
MDCXCVII.

THE DEAN of St. PAUL's SERMON Before the LORD MAYOR, At St. Bridget's-Church
on Easter-Tuesday. 1697.

2 COR. viii. 12. For if there be first a willing mind, it is accepted
according to that a man has, and not according to that he has not.
THE Occasion of these Words was this. The Christians of Judaea were at this
time in great Want, by reason of a general Dearth, which was foretold by Agabus
at Antioch, Acts 11. 28. And there stood up one of them named Agabus, and
signified by the spirit, That there should be great dearth throughout all the
world, which came to pass in the days of Claudius Caesar. Upon this Notice, the
Disciples, every man according to his ability, determined to send relief unto
the Brethrem which dwelt in Judaea.

This is that Contribution for the Saints which St. Paul directs them about, at
the Conclusion of his first Epistle to them, Chapter 16. and this is what he
inculcates on them in this and the following Chapter, but with so much Art and
Insinuation, that though he uses the most powerful Arguments, yet he would not
seem to persuade, nor to think that they needed any Persuasion; for it is not
Honorable for Christians, whose Religion is Charity, to need such Persuasions
and Importunities. They may be directed in their Charity, and put in Mind of
such particular Charities, as are of the greatest Necessity, or the most
present use, or have the most general Influence, or do the greatest Reputation
and Service to Religion; or their Charity may be heightened, inflamed, and
enlarged, by the Proper Arguments and Motives of Liberality; but their Religion
teaches them to be Charitable, and the Name and Profession of a Christian is a
Reproach to them without it: And this is all the Apostle aims at even in his
soft and tender way of Persuasion; not merely to persuade them to contribute to
the Necessities of the Saints, which he knew they were willing to do; but that
they should contribute liberally, with a free and cheerful Heart, and open
Hand; which is the sum of all his Arguments, as I shall show you in the
Conclusion, if Time permit.

But the great Difficulty concerns the proper Measures of a liberal and
overflowing Charity. Our Savior has prescribed no set Bounds and Proportions
to our Charity; and it is thought as possible to be imprudent and excessive, as
too frugal and sparing: We have many other Obligations upon us besides CHARITY;
to provide for our own comfortable Subsistence, to take Care of our Wives and
Children, and to discharge all other Duties and Offices according to our
Station and Character in the World: All which ought to set Bounds to our
Charity. But what these Bounds are, is thought the great Question, which is not
easily answered: This is true; nor can any certain Measures be prescribed; nor
does the Apostle pretend to it: But though there is a great Latitude in true
Christian Charity, which does not consist in a Point, but admits of different
Degrees and Proportions; yet the Apostle, in my Text, directs us to such a
Principle, as is much better and safer than any stated Rules, because it will
be sure never to sink below the just Proportions of Charity; and will render
all we do, be it more or less, very acceptable to God. For if there be first a
willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has, and not according to
that he has not.

In which Words, I shall observe Three Things, which are expressed, or
necessarily implied in them. First, That a great Readiness and Forwardness of
Mind, to do Good, is the true Spirit of Charity; which gives Value and
Acceptance to all we do. Secondly, That this Readiness of Mind to do Good, to
Relieve the Necessities of those who want, will observe the just Proportions of
Giving, will give according to what a man has: as is necessarily implied in
the Words; for if a willing Mind be accepted, according to what a man has, it
is, because it gives according to what a man has. Thirdly, That where there is
this Willing Mind, with a fitting Proportion according to our Abilities;
whether it be more or less, which we give, it is equally acceptable to God.
Such a Man is accepted according to what he has, not according to what he has
not. I shall speak as briefly as I can to each of these, that I may not be
prevented in such an Application, as is proper to this Solemnity.

First, That a great Readiness and Forwardness of Mind (for so (...) signifies)
to do Good, to relieve the Necessities of those in Want, is the true Spirit of
Charity, and gives Value and Acceptance to all we do. Such a Willingness of
Mind, when (...), it is the Principle and first Mover in all our Charitable
Actions, is (...) very acceptable to God.

This, I think, I may take for granted; for what is the Grace and Virtue of
Charity, but a Charitable Inclination, Disposition, Temper, Habit of Mind? And
what is this but a Readiness and Forwardness to do Good? Our Inclinations and
Passions are the Principles of Action, and therefore have a natural Tendency
toward their proper Acts and Objects, and will act when they have the Power
and Opportunity of Action: Charity is Love, the Love of Pity and Compassion to
the Miseries and Sufferings, and Wants of our Brethren; and Love in all other
Instances is a very restless active Principle; and so will our Love to the Poor
and Miserable be, if it be Inclination and Habit.

There is no man but will pretend to be very ready and willing to do Good,
though he never does any: For to have no Inclination to do Good, is so
Infamous, that those who do no good, are ashamed to own it; but to do no good,
is a Plain Evidence against them, when nothing can hinder them from doing Good,
but the want of Will and Inclination to do it; when God has furnished them with
the means of doing Good, and there are thousands of Objects to exercise their
Charity, and to move their Pity, if they had any. The Will is accepted for the
Deed, both by God and Men, when it is not in our Power to do that Good which we
sincerely desire to do, and which we would certainly do, were it in our Power;
but it is to mock both God and Men, to pretend a Willingness, when it is
visible to all the World, That a Will to do Good is the only thing we want. But
such a Readiness and Willingness of Mind as is Active and Vigorous, as
contrives and lays Designs of Charity, or embraces such as are offered, and
takes all wise Opportunities of doing Good, this is very acceptable to God, as
being the most Divine and God-like Temper, the Image of his own Goodness, and
the noblest Exercise of our Love to Men, inspired with the Love of God. Now in
Moral Actions it is the Principle that gives the Value; not so much the Gift,
as the Mind of the Giver; and therefore St. Paul tells us, That though we give
all our goods to feed the poor, and have not charity, we are nothing. 1 Cor.
13. 3. God can feed the poor without us, if he so pleases; but as for several
other wise ends of Providence, so he has ordered, That the poor shall be always
with us for the trial and exercise of our Virtue, but the Virtue is not the
Gift, but the Charity. And could we perform all the Acts of Charity without a
charitable Mind, the World might be better for it, but not we our selves.

2dly. This readiness and forwardness of Mind to do good will observe the just
proportions of Charity, will give according to what a man has. I observed
before, That our Savior in his Gospel has prescribed no fixed Measures nor
Proportions of Charity: Nor could he reasonably do this, considering the nature
of Charity; which though it be not so absolutely free, that we may choose
whether we will be charitable or no (for charitable we must be at the peril of
our Souls); yet the proportions must be free, or it is not Charity, but a Poors
rate, as all the positive Laws, which God gave the Jews for the relief of the
Poor, were no better; and therefore, by the wiser Jews, were never placed to
the account of Charity, but of Justice, and a Legal Righteousness: Which is the
very distinction St. Paul makes between a righteous and a good man, Romans 5. 7.
But scarcely for a righteous man will one die, yet peradventure for a good man
one would even dare to die. A Righteous man is one, who is legally Righteous,
and observes what the Law requires; but a Good man is one who is acted by a
free, unconfined and generous Goodness.

Now upon this pretense, That there is no proportion assigned to Charity, there
are to^ many, who content themselves with very little* indeed with nothing
which can properly b^ called Charity. But I wonder in the mean time what these
men make of all those Command^ and Exhortations which we find in the Gosp^^ to
Charity, which are so many, so pressing an^ importunate, and bound on us by so
many pr^mises of present and future Rewards, and wit^ so many terrible
Threatenings denounced against the uncharitable, that surely they must mea^
something; and as willing as men are in the^^ Cases, to pretend Ignorance, I
believe there a^^ few men living, but know in some measure what Charity means:
And though they may dispute how much they ought to give, yet certainly know,
that they ought to give; and that to give nothing, or what is next to nothing,
all Circumstances considered, is not Charity.

A Charitable Temper and Disposition of Mind is an indispensible Duty, and the
most Essential Part of the Christian Religion. This our Savior commands; and
he need command no more, for Charity is and will be a Rule and Measure to it
self. Where this Divine Principle is, it will teach us when, and how, and in
what Proportion to give: The Sun needs no Rules and Directions how to
communicate its Light and Heat. Nature is the surest and most infallible Rule,
and Law to it self; and thus it is proportionably in Moral as well as in
Natural Agents. For what is the immediate effect of Nature and Life, can never
be taught without its Principle; cannot exceed its Principle, and cannot fall
below it. All the Rules in the World can never teach that man Charity, who
wants the Principle; a Charitable Mind needs no Rules, but turns naturally on
its own Byas; which will direct its Motions right.

There is a great difference indeed between Natural and Moral Agents. Natural
Agents are necessarily determined to some one End, and therefore have but one
Principle, which uniformly and steddily pursues the Ends of Nature; but Moral
Agents, as they act freely, so they have many different Principles,
Inclinations, and Passions, which stint and limit each other; that none of them
can act to their utmost Vigor, but as they are mutually poized and balanced:
And this is the Work of Reason and Religion, to put them into their Natural
Order, and to set just Bounds to them; and that proportions the degrees of
their Activity and Strength; but yet every Principle, unless violently
oppressed, will act according to its Nature, as it more or less prevails. And
this gives Measures and Proportions to all our Actions; as to show you this in
our present Case.

Charity is that Love to Mankind which makes us pity all their Wants and
Sufferings, and inspires us with a great Zeal and Concernment to Help and
Relieve them. If you enquire, What the Natural Measure of this Charity is? I
know no other Natual Measure, but its Natural End, that is, To relieve all that
suffer and are in want; for that is what Charity would do, and what all
Charitable Men heartily wish that they could do. Well! but this is impossible,
for there are too many miserable People for any man to Relieve them all. This
is true, and Want of Power must of Necessity set Bounds to our Charity; but
since we cannot Relieve all, we must relieve such as we can; and wisely
consider where the greatest Necessities, and greatest Obligations are: Which
will give the Preference to Christians before Infidels; to Good Men before the
Wicked; to God's Poor, whom the Divine Providence has made Poor, to the Poor of
their own Making, whom Idleness, Luxury, and Vice have made Poor and Miserable.
Well! But how far must we Relieve these Poor? Must we give as long as we have
any thing to give, and make our selves the Objects of Charity? By no means!
There are other as Natural Principles as Charity, which must set Bounds to it.
Self-Love is a Natural and Necessary Principle; no man is bound to love any man
better than himself: To love our Neighbor as our selves, is all that the
Gospel it self makes our necessary Duty; though some Great and Generous
Friendships, and Divine Charities, may go further, as far as concerns this
Life. Next to Self-Love, our Natural Affection for our Wives and Children must
take place, as ingrafted in it, and thought the Best and the Dearest Part of
it, as being nearest to our selves, and what the best men are the most tenderly
concerned for. And this is the chief thing, which among men of any Principles,
disputes the Bounds of Charity: For as for those stupid Brutes, who love Money
only to look on, or to count their Bags and Securities, without suffering
themselves, or any Body else, to use it, they are not fit to be named: For I
can hardly reckon them among reasonable Creatures. But men's Care of
themselves, and of their Wives and Children (not to descend at present to other
Relations, which may come within the compass of Charity, though of a nearer and
more sacred Obligation) is thought a very Prudent and Reasonable Consideration
in this Case, and indeed is so; for there is a great deal o^ Truth and Reason
in that common Saying rightly understood, That Charity begins at Home

The great Controversy then is between ou^ Love to our Selves, our Wives and
Children* and Charity to the Poor. Now there is no Dispute, but the first must
have the Preference; but yet Charity to the Poor must have its Place also And
then the only Question is, In what Proportion this must be? And that is a very
hard Question, if you put it in Arithmetic, for I can name no Proportion; nor
has our Savior thought fit to name any: But, as I observed to you before, True
Charity will assign a just Proportion to it self: For a true Charitable Mind
will spare what it reasonably can, and never below the Proportion of Charity;
and will spare more or less, according to the Degrees of its Charity. I must be
forced to represent this in short to you, that I may not be tedious.

That Love we have for our selves, and for our Natural Dependents, will
generally secure us against exceeding the Proportions of Charity, that there is
seldom any Danger on that side. On the other hand, if we have a true Charitable
Mind and a sincere Compassion for the Sufferings of others, we shall certainly
do what we our selves, considering our Circumstances, and what all Charitable
men who know our Circumstances, will call Charity. But then, the more Intense
and Fervent our Charity is, this will still increase the Proportion, and
sometimes to such Heights, as can hardly escape the Censure of Affectation and
Folly: And were it not for the Interposition of the Divine Providence, might
sometimes prove very fatal to themselves and their Families. As to give you the
Account of this in short; There are Two things absolutely necessary to dispose
men to Give Liberally: A just Sense of the Miseries of others; and a true
Judgment of our own Abilities.

As for the First:

A Charitable Mind is very easy to receive the impressions of Charity; and the
more charitably it is disposed, still the more easy. Every pitiable Object
moves and affects such men, and they are no more able to resist the Silent
Oratory of meager Looks, naked Backs, and hungry Bellies (were they not
sometimes hardened by Cheats and Vagabonds) than to deny themselves what is
necessary to Life: Much less can they deny any known and unquestioned Charity;
for since Charitable they are, and Acts of Charity they will do, they are very
glad to know how to dispose of their Charity, to do that Good which they intend
by it. A Soft and tender Mind, which feels the Sufferings of others, and
suffers with them, is the true Temper and Spirit of Charity; and Nature prompts
us to ease those Sufferings, which we feel: This makes us so ready to supply
our own Wants, because we have a quick and smart Sense of them; and the
Christian Sympathy and fellow-feeling of Charity, will proportionably incline
us to relieve our suffering Brethren, when we feel in our selves what it is
they suffer. An inward Principle is more powerful than all external Arguments;
and Sense and Feeling is this Principle; and Charity is this Sense.

Thus, as for Proportions, a Charitable Mind sets no other Bounds to its
Charity, but only Ability; that the only Question is, Whether we can spare any
thing from our selves and Families? and what we can spare? Now when Charity is
the Judge of this, it is always a favorable Judge on the side of the Poor and
Miserable, and always the more favorable Judge, the greater the Charity is: It
will teach us to think, That we want less, and consequently can spare more,
when we consider how much others want: At least it will teach us to abate of
what we do not want; of all Idle and Superfluous Expenses; of all needless Pomp
and Ceremony, which is more than our Station and Character requires; and it is
incredible to think what an inexhausted Fund this would be for Charity: Did we
truly estimate our own Wants, rectify our Expenses, and set just Bounds to our
Desires, many of us would soon find, that we have a great deal to spare: And
nothing will so effectually do this, as Charity; and therefore Charity is the
best Rule and Measure to it self. So that there is no great occasion to dispute
Proportions; let us learn to be Charitable, and Charity will teach us what to
give. Every man can tell when another is Charitable; and a Charitable man man
can tell when he himself is so; and as our Charity increases, so we shall
abound in the Fruits of Charity; for the more we love, the more liberally we
shall give.

This is not to leave what we will give to Charitable Uses, to our own free
Choice, as a Trial of our Ingenuity, as some represent it: For had this been
the Case, there should have been some Proportion fixed, less than which we
should not give, though we might give as much more as we pleased; for otherwise
nothing is matter of strict Duty, but all is left to Ingenuity; which is so far
from being true, that there is not a more necessary Duty in all Religion than
Charity; and even the greatest Degrees and Heights of Charity, are all Duty:
For we are commanded to be Charitable, and to aim at the highest Degrees of
Charity; and the Proportion of giving is referred to the Principle, and
included in the Degrees of Charity; such a Proportion as such a Degree of
Charity will give, is as much a strict Duty as such a Degree of Charity is.

The very nature of Charity proves that thus it is, and that it cannot be
otherwise. For merely to give, or not to give; to give more or less, is no
certain proof of a charitable, or uncharitable Man; how liberally soever we
give, we are not charitable, unless we give from a principle of Charity, and
our Charity be as great as our Gift. So that had God prescribed how much every
Man must give to the Poor, they might have observed this proportion of Giving
without any Charity, and then such Gifts as these had been no acts of Charity,
when the Gift and the Charity was parted: But a charitable Man will give, and
will give in proportion to the degrees of his Charity, and therefore Charity;
and the increase of Charity is the only proper object of Command; for he will
give liberally, who loves much; and the proportion of giving is commanded in
the degrees of Charity, which alone can prescribe, and will observe a just
proportion.

Let no man then inquire, how much he must give; the proper inquiry is, how
much he must love. Let no man satisfy himself with some small trifling
presents, which bear no proportion to what he has, upon pretense that God has
prescribed no proportion of giving; but let him ask himself, Whether, in his
own Conscience, what he gives, bears any proportion to that love and charity to
the poor and miserable, which God requires: and let him remember, that though
God has not fixed the proportions of giving, he requires great degrees of
Charity; and though Men may give liberally without Charity, yet not to give in
some due proportion, is a certain sign of want of Charity, when there wants no
ability to give.

Give me leave to observe by the way, that what I have now said of Charity, is
true of all other Christian Graces and Virtues; that it is the principle, which
both must and will give laws and measures to the external acts of such Graces
and Virtues: As to instance at present only in the Acts of religious worship,
the measures and proportions of which are as much disputed, and no more
determined and limited by the laws of our Savior, than those of Charity: We
are commanded to fast, and pray, and to communicate at the Lord's Table, and to
read and meditate on the Holy Scriptures, and such other acts of Religion; but
we are not told, how often we must fast and pray and receive the Lord's Supper,
nor how much time we must spend in our public or private Devotions; or though
all the public Exercises of Religion must be regulated by the public
Authority of the Church; which as to time and place, and other external
circumstances, is the safest rule; yet our private Devotions are free, and both
public and private Devotions have a great latitude; and thus as it is in the
case of Charity, some men think, they can never spend time enough in the
public and private Exercises of Religion; and others think a very little will
serve the turn, and any trifling pretense is sufficient to excuse them from
their Closets, or the Church, and especially from the Lord's Table.

And the resolution of this is the same, as in the case of Charity; We are
commanded to be devout Worshippers of God, and the true spirit of Devotion
naturally prescribes the external measures and proportions. Devout minds, who
have a true sense of God, and of their constant dependence on him; That they
owe all temporal and spiritual Blessings to him, and daily need the pardon of
their Sins, the protection of his Providence, and the supplies of his Grace,
will never fail to worship God, whom they inwardly reverence and adore; and as
our devout sense of God increases in strength and vigor, the external
expressions of devotion will be more frequent, more lively and affecting; for
nature will exert it self, and will exert it self in proportion to its strength
and vigor. But to return.

3. The third thing I proposed, I must at present wave; that where there is a
willing mind, with a fit proportion, according to our abilities, (which, as you
have heard, there will be, where there is a truly willing and charitable mind)
whether it be more or less, that we give, it is equally acceptable to God. Such
a man is accepted according to what he has, not according to what he has not:
and indeed there is no great occasion to insist on it; for it is self-evident,
that God will not exact that from us, which we have not.

Only we must observe, that this does not excuse any man from Charity, though
he have nothing to give; he must have a willing charitable mind to make him
accepted; nor does it excuse those from Charity, who have but little to give,
for they must give according to what they have: nor does it excuse those, who
have nothing to give, from other acts of Charity, which require the giving
nothing, and a great many such acts of real Charity there are, which poor
people may do for each other, though they have not a penny in their purse.

But it is time now to turn my Discourse to the proper business of this great
Solemnity. Public Charities are always reckoned amongst the greatest Ornaments
of any Country, and make up the most lovely and charming part of their
Characters: Stately and magnificent Buildings show great art, and great riches,
and a gallant and noble genius, but great Charities have something divine, and
strike the mind with a religious veneration. There may be much more magnificent
shows, than this day's procession, but none which affect wise and good men with
a sincerer pleasure: To follow a great number of Orphans, in the mean, but
decent Dress of Charity, singing the praises of God, and praying for their
Benefactors, is beyond all the Roman Triumphs, however adorned with a pompous
equipage, and great numbers of royal slaves.

These present us with nothing but the miserable spectacles of spoil and
rapine, the uncertain changes and vicissitudes of fortune, the lamentable fate
of conquered Princes and People, and the pride and insolence of Conquerors; but
here are the triumphs of a generous Goodness and divine Charity, triumphs
without blood and spoil, without slaves, and captives, unless redeemed slaves,
rescued from the jaws of poverty, and all the injuries and miseries of a ruined
fortune: that to me this great City, and this honorable Train, never looks
greater than in this humble pomp. A pomp not for vanity and ostentation, but to
endear and recommend Charity, by showing the visible and blessed fruits of it:
and to the same end, I must give you an account of the present state of these
public Charities.

The REPORT was here Read.
THat these are all great Charities, I need not tell you; indeed all so great,
that it is hard to know, to which to give the preference, and what occasion all
these Charities have of fresh, liberal, and constant supplies, the Report
acquaints you.

But I cannot pass over one thing I observe in this Report, and which, I fear,
many necessitous people feel, that there have been no Orphans taken into
Christ's Hospital this Year, nor, as I remember, for two Years last past. I do
not mention this by way of reflection, as any fault in the administration and
government, but to put you in mind, how much that excellent foundation needs
your supply; and though I do not love to compare Charities, they being all of
great use and necessity in their kind, yet I think this foundation has
something to plead for it self beyond any other.

A helpless age, destitute of friends, and all means of support will plead for
it self without saying any thing: it is a pitiable sight to see poor innocent
Children turned helpless into the wide World to starve, or beg, or steal, or to
suffer all imaginable difficulties and necessities at home: without education,
without government or discipline, without being used to labor, or taught any
honest way of living; which, as they grow up, improves into a habit of
idleness, and that betrays them to all degrees and kinds of wickedness, trains
them up to the Gallows, or fills our other Hospitals with vagrant and miserable
people.

There is nothing, which all wise Commonwealths have been more concerned for,
than the education of Children, which proves a great support, and gives great
ease and security to any government, by breeding up useful members of it: So
that this is a Charity, which would in a great measure make some other
Charities less needful; and it is certainly a greater Charity to prevent the
miseries of mankind, than to relieve them.

This is a Charity, wherein every member of this great City, is most nearly
concerned, because they and no others have a right to it. It is a provision for
their posterity, against all the sudden strokes of fortune, which no man can be
secured from; Here it is, that families, which are unexpectedly ruined by the
uncertain chances of trade may be raised again by Charity; at least, by that
virtue and industry, which their education teaches them, and those fair
advantages, with which according to their several capacities they are placed in
the world; they have a new opportunity given them of trying a better fortune,
or rather, a more propitious providence. So that every Citizen is concerned to
promote and enlarge this Charity, because no man knows who shall want it, if
not for his Children, yet for his Grandchildren, or remoter descendents; and
possibly to men, who are sensible of the uncertain changes of the World, and
have a religious reverence for the divine providence, it would be no mean
argument to promote this Charity, were care taken, that the Descendents of
Benefactors, if ever they should want this Charity, should certainly have it.

It is certainly for the honor of this great City to make the best provision
it can for the Children of unfortunate Citizens; and those on whom providence
has smiled, while they have seen their Neighbors shipwrackt by such
unaviodable accidents, as no prudence or conduct could escape, cannot make a
more proper acknowledgment of the divine goodness than this.

I shall add but one thing more of this nature. This is the only Charity, which
is most likely to raise a fund of Charity: Among such great numbers, as have
their education in this place, there have been, and we may reasonably hope
there always will be, not a few, who will raise their fortunes in the World,
and remember, their beginning was Charity. I Am sure, such men ought to do so,
and then such an Hospital as this, may help to support and enlarge it self, and
in time raise new Hospitals, for new Colonies of Charity.

But while I plead for Christ's Hospital, I would not be thought to divert the
whole current of Charity into this one channel; as things now are, there is
absolute necessity of other Charities: the sick, diseased, and maimed, are
great objects of Charity, especially Soldiers and Seamen, who venture their
lives, and lose their health and their limbs in the service of their Country,
to defend our fortunes, liberties, lives, and religion. There is none of us,
but would think it a very poor recompense for the loss of health and limbs to
be cured upon Charity; it is certainly the least that we can do for them; so
very little, that if it be charity to do it, it is barbarity to deny it, and
that is but a very small degree of charity, which is but one remove from
barbarity itself.

As for other sick, and diseased, and lame people, who cannot be at the charge
of a Cure, where sickness, disability, and poverty meet, this makes them double
objects of charity, especially, as it often happens, when these disabilities
fall upon the industrious, who before supported themselves and their families
by honest labors, without charity.

Nay as for those, who may be justly thought the least objects of charity, the
wicked and vicious, who reap the deserved fruits of their own wickedness, I am
sure, they are the objects of the greatest pity, because this life will not end
their miseries; and if we can prolong their lives here to save their souls, it
will be charity indeed, and what effect the sense of their wickedness and
sufferings, and the Grace of God, may have upon them, no man can tell.

As for distracted Persons, I believe, no man, who considers, what a blessing
reason and understanding is, and what a misery the want of it is, can think of
them without the most sensible compassion: I think, all other evils whatsoever,
are to be preferred before it; and therefore to restore them to their senses
again, which we hear by the blessing of God is often done, or however to keep
them from doing themselves, or others any injury, and to preserve human nature
from that contempt, which such public spectacles expose it to, is a very
extraordinary Charity.

Now all this shows, that a charitable man need not be at any great loss, how
to dispose of his Charity; here are too many very proper objects of Charity,
(if God so pleased) and we ought to be very thankful to God, that we our
selves are not in the number, for it is more blessed to give, than to receive.

But then the great numbers of miserable people, who in several kinds want our
Charity, is a very powerful argument to greater liberality and bounty. For
this I must add to what I have already said concerning the measures and
proportions of Charity; that a truly charitable mind will increase its
proportions according to present wants; will sometimes abridge itself even in
the conveniences of life to supply great and pressing necessities; for a great
love will not only spare, what it easily can, but when there is great reason
for it, will deny it self to do good.

And here I intended to have represented to you our Apostles arguments for a
liberal and bountiful Charity: but, I fear, I have already too much
trespassed; and where there is a willing mind, so many and so great objects of
Charity, are themselves very pressing arguments. And therefore as the Apostle
endeavors to inspire his Corinthians with an holy Emulation of the zeal and
forwardness of the Churches of Macedonia, how that in a great trial of
affliction, the abundance of their joy, and their deep poverty, abounded unto
the riches of their liberality; so I shall only desire you to emulate the great
Examples of past and present times, and that you would set as great Examples
for times to come. If any thing deserves our emulation, great and generous
Charities do, which are a resemblance and imitation of the divine goodness,
than which nothing can more endear us to God or Man: We owe all our present
foundations to Royal Bounty and private Charities; and thanks be to God, our
present age, as bad as it is, is not without some great Examples; and though
true virtue is void of the pride, and vanity, and envy, and jealousies of
earthly Rivals, yet it fires at great Examples, and is ashamed to be outdone
by Equals in love to God or Men; Especially when the honor of the Church,
whereof they are members, and the Religion, which they profess, is concerned.

It is well known, how many pious and charitable foundations are owing to
Popish superstition; they hoped to expiate their sins, and to merit heaven by
their good works, and in this hope, and this persuasion, they did a very great
many. We understand better than to think of meriting any thing of God, much
less of purchasing a liberty of sinning, by Acts of Charity; but if those great
rewards, which are promised to Charity, and which we profess to believe, will
not make us charitable, without the opinion of merit and satisfaction; Charity
is so great and excellent a virtue, and so very useful to mankind, that at
least thus far Popery will be thought the better Religion; and therefore as the
Apostle argues, As ye abound in every thing, in faith, and utterance, and
knowledge, and all diligence, and in your love to us, see that ye abound in
this grace also: As we have a more orthodox says, a clearer and distincter
knowledge, and a purer worship, than the Church of Rome, let us excel in
Charity too, and convince the World, that to renounce Popery, is not to
renounce good works.

FINIS.
BOOKS Published by the Reverend Dr. Sherlock, Dean of St. Paul's; and to be
Sold by W. Rogers.
AN Answer to a Discourse, entitled, Papists protesting against Protestant
Popery, 2d Edit. 4to. An Answer to the Amicable Accommodation of the
Differences between the Representer and the Answerer, 4to. A Sermon at the
Funeral of the Reverend Dr. Calamy, 4to. A Vindication of some Protestant
Principles of Church-Unity and Catholic Communion, etc. 4to. A Preservative
against Popery, in two Parts, with the Vindication. A Discourse concerning the
Nature, Unity, and Communion of the Catholic Church, First Part, 4to. A Sermon
before the Lord Mayor, November. 4 1688. 4to. A Vindication of the Doctrine of
the Trinity, 3d Edit. 4to. The Case of Allegiance to Sovereign Powers stated,
etc. 4to. A Vindication of the Case of Allegiance, etc. 4to. A Fast-Sermon
before the Queen at Whitehall, June 17. 4to. A Practical Discourse concerning
Death. In Octavo. Ninth Edition, Price 3 s. In Twelves, Price 2 s. A Practical
Discourse concerning Judgment, 4th Edit. 8 vo. A Sermon before the House of
Commons, Jan. 30. 1692. 4to. A Sermon preached before the Queen, Feb. 12. 1692.
4to. The Charity of Lending without Usury, in a Sermon before the Lord Mayor on
Easter-Tuesday, 1692. 4to. A Sermon at the Temple-Church, May 29. 1692. 4to. A
Sermon Preached before the Queen, June 26. 1692. 4to. A Sermon Preached at the
Funeral of the Reverend Dr. Meggot, late Dean of Winchester, December. 10. 1692.
4to. A Discourse concerning the Divine Providence, 2d Edit. 4to. An Apology for
Writing against Socinians, 4to. A Sermon at the Temple-Church, Dec. 30. 1694.
upon the sad Occasion of the Death of our Gracious Queen, 4to.
BOOKS Printed for, and are to be Sold by W. Rogers.
ARchbishop Tillotson's Works, being all that were Published by his Grace
himself; and now Collected into One Vol. Fol. Price 20s. -- Discourse against
Transubstantiation, 8vo. alone. Price 2d. stitcht. -- Persuasive to Frequent
Communion in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. 8vo. sticht 3d. In 12o bound,
6d. -- Sermons concerning the Divinity of our B. Savior, 8vo. -- Six Sermons.
I. Of Stedfastness in Religion. II. Of Family-Religion. III, IV, V. Of the
Education of Children. VI. Of the Advantages of an Early Piety. In 8vo. Price
3s. In 12o. 1s. 6d. Bishop of Worcester's Doctrines and Practices of the Church
of Rome truly Represented, etc. 4to. -- Doctrine of the Trinity and
Transubstantiation compared, in in Two Parts, 4to. Bishop of Norwich's Two
Sermons of the Wisdom and Goodness of Providence, before the Queen at
Whitehall, 4to. -- Sermon preached at St. Andrew's Holborn, on Gal. 6. 7. -- Of
Religious Melancholy. A Sermon preached before the Queen at Whitehall, 4to. --
Of the Immortality of the Soul, preached before the King and Queen at
Whitehall, on Palm Sunday, 4to. Bishop of Bath and Wells Commentary on the Five
Books of Moses: with a Dissertation concerning the Author or Writer of the said
Books; and a General Argument to each of Them, in 2 Vol. 8vo. Dr. Clagett's
Sermons, in Two Volumes, 8vo. Dr. Wake's Sermons, in 8vo. A Defense of the Dean
of St. Paul's Apology for Writing against the Sacinians, 4to. A Defense of Dr.
Sherlock's Notion of the Trinity in Unity, 4to. An Answer to the Animadversion
on the Dean of St. Paul's Vindication of the Trinity, 4to. The Distinction
between Real and Nominal Trinitarians Examined, and the Doctrine of a Real
Trinity Vindicated from the Charge of Tritheism: In Answer to a late Socinian
Pamphlet, Entitled, The Judgment of a Dis-interested Person, concerning the
Controversy about the B Trinity, depending betw. Dr. S -- th and Dr. Sherlock,
4to. Mr. Tyrrell's History of England, Fol. Price 20s. Dr. Pelling's Discourse
concerning the Existence of God, 8vo. -- Practical Discourse concerning
Holiness, 8vo.
THE END.

