A MODEST EXAMINATION OF THE AUTHORITY and REASONS Of the Late DECREE OF THE
Vice Chancellor of OXFORD, AND Some HEADS of Colleges and Halls; CONCERNING The
Heresy of Three Distinct Infinite-Minds in the Holy and Ever-blessed Trinity.

By WILLIAM SHERLOCK, D. D. Dean of St. Paul's, Master of the Temple, and
Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

LONDON: Printed for W. Rogers, at the Sun against St. Dunstan's Church in
Fleetstreet. MDCXCVI.

A MODEST EXAMINATION OF THE Oxford Decree, etc.
NO Man has truer Honor and Reverence for that Great and Learned Body of the
University of Oxford, nor has paid more just Civilities and Respects to any of
the Heads or Members of it, as I have happened to be acquainted with them, than
my self; which makes it very uneasy to me, that there should be the least
appearance of any Quarrel or Disrespect on either side.

I can despise a Thousand Jacobite Stories, even with all the Additional
Comments and Flourishes of a Malicious Animadverter; and justify my Neglect and
Silence, to my self, who am most nearly concerned in it: For many of those
Stories I can only deny, because I know nothing of them, but only this, that
according to my Principles and Inclinations, it was morally impossible that I
should say or do such things: And what I do remember any thing of, is falsely
reported; and yet cannot be rectified without betraying the Privacies of
Conversation, as my Accusers have done, and reflecting sharply upon some who
have been old Friends, whatever they are now; which are such hateful Vices, and
so destructive to the Innocent Freedoms of Conversation, that nothing but
absolute necessity can justify or apologize for the least approaches to them.
But the Charge of Heresy is of a different nature, especially considering my
Profession, Character, and Station in the Church, which will not admit of a
Complemental Silence: That if it should be thought too bold and daring to enter
the Lists with these Oxford Heads, that force and necessity which they
themselves have put upon me, and which a very modest man neither can nor ought
to resist, I hope will excuse it.

But how come I to be concerned in this Decree, which only censures one of
their own Members, for some Passages in a Sermon about the Trinity; which, as
it is said, gave just occasion of Offense and Scandal to many? How many were
offended, I cannot tell; whether they had just cause of Offense, shall be
examined presently; but how much soever they were offended, they did not think
it deserved such a censure: For when a Warm Zealot promoted a Petition to the
Vice Chancellor for a Censure, he could persuade but one Master of Arts to
subscribe it.

But though this Decree was occasioned by this Oxford Preacher, yet every one
knew as soon as they saw it or heard of it, that it was aimed against me: I Am
sure these Gentlemen knew very well what work there has been made with Three
Distinct Infinite Minds or Spirits. The Animadverter had railed himself out of
breath, and then calls for a Decretum Oxoniense to help him; which was the
wisest thing he could do; for his Reason will never do any hurt; but such a
Decretum might furnish him with new Topics of Railing. It happened as luckily
for the purpose as if it had been contrived, that this Preacher used some of
the same Expressions which I had done, and which the Animadverter had charged
with Tritheism, viz. Three Distinct Infinite Minds and Spirits. This was an
Opportunity not to be neglected, to obtain his desired Decree: Dr. South
solicited the Cause with such Zeal and Importunity, as could not be resisted;
and, as I am informed, prepared the way for it in a furious Sermon the Sunday
before, wherein he upbraided them, as being afraid to condemn Heresy, Deism,
Socinianism, Tritheism, lest they should fall from Ecclesiastical Grace, and
the door of Preferment should be shut against them; which was a very civil
Complement both to them and to the Governors of our Church. Some of the wisest
Heads among them, and who were most concerned in a Decree of Heresy, were
absent; others absented themselves; and some who were present in the
Convention, dissented, alleging, That their Proceedings were Irregular, and
not according to their Statutes. But some of the Animadverters Complexion and
Interest, with great Zeal overruled the rest, and the Decree was past, and
printed in Latin, in these words: In Conventu D. Vice-Cancellarii and
Prefectorum Collegiorum and Aularum Vniversitatis Oxon. Die Vicesimo quinto
Novembris. A. D. 1695.
CUM in Concione nuper habita coram Universitate Oxon. in Templo S. Petri in
Orient, ad Festum SS. Simonis and Judae proxime elapsum, haec Verba, inter
alia, public prolata and asserta suerunt, viz. [There are Three Infinite
distinct Minds and Substances in the Trinity.] Item [That the Three Persons in
the Trinity are Three Distinct Infinite Minds or Spirits, and Three Individual
Substances.] Quae verba multis justam offensionis Causam and Scandalum dedere:

Dominus Vice-Cancellarius and Praefecti Collegiorum and Aularum, in generali
suo Conventu jam congregati, Judicant, Declarant, and Decernunt, praedicta
Verba esse Falsa, Impia, and Heretica; Dissona and Contraria Doctrinae
Ecclesiae Catholicae, and speciatim Doctrinae Ecclesiae Anglicanae, public
receptae.

Quapropter praecipiunt and firmiter injungunt Omnibus and singulis, eorum
fidei and curae commissis, ne ^ale aliquod Dogma, in Concionibus, aut alias, in
posterum proferant.

Ex Decreto Domini Vice-Cancellarii and Prefectorum Ben. Cooper Not. publicus
and Registrarius Vniversitatis Oxon.



Whoever drew up this Decree, some Critics say he need not brag much of his
Skill in Latin, having transgressed the plain Rules of Grammar, in using Eorum
fidei and curae, for suae.

But this Latin Decree did not satisfy the Animadverter, but for the Benefit
and Edification of English Readers, he (as is easy to guess) Translates it, and
adds a notable Title, and a notable Remark to it.

The Title is, An Account of the Decree of the University of Oxford, against
some Heretical Tenets.

The Remark by way of Postscript is, It may be noted, That the Propositions
abovementioned are Dr. S -- k's in his Discourse of the Trinity, and the
Defenders of it, and wrote against by the Animadverter, etc. which is as good
English as the other is Latin: And yet this did not satisfy him, till he had
published this Oxford Decree against Dr. Sherlock in one of the Weekly Prints.
Spectatum admissi! Certainly he thinks there is no standing against this Oxford
Decree; and therefore in the first place let us briefly examine the Authority
of it.

He calls it, The Decree of the University of Oxford; which is a mere Sham; for
some Heads of Colleges and Halls were never yet thought the University of
Oxford: But that Great and Learned Body, if they will vindicate their own
Rights, are more concerned in this than I am. The Decree of an Oxford
Convocation is indeed Decretum Oxoniense, or a Decree of the University of
Oxford: This is what the Animadverter called for, and this he would persuade
the world he has; but let the Oxford Convocation look to this, which may prove
an ill President.

But I am informed (for I confess I know not their Statutes my self) that this
Decree of the Heads of Colleges and Halls, is so far from being the Decree of
the University of Oxford, that it is no Judicial nor Authoritative Decree at
all; not so much as for censuring a Preacher, much less for declaring and
decreeing Heresy. Their Statutes refer such Censures to the Vice Chancellor,
and Six Heads, Doctors of Divinity, and to one or both the Professors of
Divinity; but give no such Authority to the General Meeting of the Heads, much
less to Heads, who are no Divines, nor Doctors in Divinity; and some such there
were in this Meeting. So that this pretended Decree of the University of
Oxford, is no more than the private Opinions of some Heads; and if that be so
Venerable an Authority, I will undertake any day in the Year, to procure a
Meeting of twice as many, as Wise and Learned Men, to censure their Decree. But
supposing their Authority to be Just and Regular, there is another very proper
Question, How far their Authority extends? Whether to the declaring and
decreeing Heresy? Whatever the Convocation of the University may challenge,
this was never before pretended to by the Heads of Colleges and Halls.

All the Authority I can learn their Statutes give them in such Cases, is to
summon the Preacher, who has said any thing in his Sermon contrary to the
Doctrine of the Church of England, and to require a public recantation from
him, or to forbid him ever to preach again in the University: Whereas nothing
of all this was done; the Preacher not summoned to this Meeting, nor his Name,
as far as I can learn, once mentioned in it; no Recantation enjoined, no
Prohibition of his Preaching again: But instead of this, which was their proper
Business, they declare and decree Heresy, which so many Masters of Arts might
have done with as good Authority, where ever they had met. And they ought,
(notwithstanding all their Zeal against Heresy) to have advised with men of
Skill, how far such an Irregular and Unstatutable proceeding might affect them.

The Authority of declaring and making Heresy, may be of such pernicious
Consequence to the Peace of any Church, that it is not fit to be entrusted with
any Body of men less then a National Synod; for otherwise we may have as many
different and contrary Religions, as there are Declarers and Decreers of Heresy.

In the Statute 1 Eliz. ca. 1. we find the power to order, determine, or
adjudge any matter or cause to be Heresy, restrained only to such as heretofore
have been determined, ordered, or adjudged to be Heresy by the Authority of the
Canonical Scriptures: Or by the first Four General Councils: Or by any other
General Council, wherein the same was declared Heresy by the express and plain
words of the said Canonical Scriptures: Or such as hereafter shall be ordered,
judged, or determined to be Heresy, by the High Court of Parliament of this
Realm, with the Assent of the Clergy in their Convocation. And if the King
could not grant a greater Authority than this to his High Commissioner for
Ecclesiastical Affairs, it is not likely that any other Body of men have it;
and my Lord Cook says, That this is a direction to others, especially to
Bishops in their adjudgng Heresy, 3 Instit. pa. 40. and how they have observed
this Law in their Decree, they had best consider.

Oxford Reasons have formerly had a very just Veneration paid to them, and will
have so still, whenever they are penned with the same strength and clearness;
but they have a greater Opinion of their Authority, than I can find the rest of
the world has, if they think by a mere Decree, without pretending to give the
least reason for it, to silence all disputes, and to bear down all Reasons, and
all Authorities on the other side

But since these Heads are pleased to take part in the quarrel, which one would
have thought they need not have done, had they not suspected the Success of
their Animadverting Champion; I accept this exchange with all thankfulness. As
for the Animadverter, he might for me have writ on as long as he pleased, and
have railed and triumphed as much as he pleased, and the world might have
judged of him, and his performances, as they pleased: His last Book I have read
nothing of, and could never persuade my self to read all his first Book; there
is such an Evil Spirit and such Venom in his Writings, as is enough to give an
Unchristian Tincture to those who read them: He resolved never to answer any
one but my self; and I resolved never to read what he writ; and thus there was
some hope to see an end of this matter, when he grew weary of writing, or his
Bookseller of Printing. But now I hope to meet with no new Animadverters, who
shall all fare alike with me; but with Men of Ingenuity and Candor, good
Learning, and good Tempers, who will reason without Sophistry and
Misrepresentations, weigh Authorities in an equal Balance, and contend for
Truth, not for Victory; and then it is indifferent to me whether I overcome, or
am overcome; for Truth is better than Victory, and will make an Honest Man
triumph in being conquered.

Having thus considered the Authority of this Decree, which the Animadverter so
much glories in, let us now examine the Decree it self.

These words, Three distinct Infinite Minds, and Three Substances, as applied
to the Three Persons of the Ever-Blessed Trinity, are singled out in this
Decree, and parted from the Body of the Sermon, without any thing to explain in
what sense the Preacher used them; and therefore we must conclude, that these
Words are absolutely condemned, as False, Impious, and Heretical: That though a
Mind in this place signifies an Intelligent Person; and Substance a Substantial
Person; and Three Infinite Intelligent Persons, and Three Infinite Substantial
Persons, is the Catholic Faith; as I doubt not to make appear; yet Three
Distinct Infinite Minds, and Three Substances, when they are used in no other
sense, than for three Intelligent and Substantial Persons, must be condemned as
Impious and Heretical. These are wonderful nice Critics, to make the same
Doctrine, owned and acknowledged to be the same, in one Form of Words to be
truly Catholic and Orthodox, and in another Form of Words, which do and are
intended to signify the same thing, False, Impious, and Heretical: This is a
strange Magical Power of Words; Hoc est Corpus in the mouth of a Popish Priest,
never were pretended to make a more Miraculous Transubstantiation. I wish it at
last appear that these Gentlemen do really believe Three Infinite Intelligent
Persons, and Three Substantial Persons in the Trinity; for let them distinguish
as subtly as they please, an Intelligent Person is a Mind, and a Substantial
Person is a Substance, and Three are Three; of which more presently.

There may indeed be a very Heretical Sense put upon these words: to say, That
there are Three Infinite Minds or Persons (for the Heresy is the same, whatever
the word be) wholly divided and separated from each other, (...); Three
Absolute Principlees, Independent on each other, (...); Three Unbegotten ones,
without any relation to each other, as Father, Son, and Spirit; (...): Three
Substances in the Arian Notion, for Three distinct Kinds and Species of
Substance; or Three Natures and Essences specifically different: All this, I
say, is False, Impious, and Heretical, and has been condemned as such by the
Catholic Church. And could they have affixed any such Sense as this on the
Preacher's Words, they would have done well to have shown it; and then they had
done very justly and religiously, in condemning such an Impious Sense of these
Words: but to condemn Words, in themselves very Orthodox, as Impious and
Heretical, without giving the least Intimation wherein their Impiety and Heresy
consists, is a new way of proceeding, which they never learnt from any of the
Ancient Councils. But Party- Shibboleths always do the best Execution, the less
they are understood.

The Charge is drawn up as fully and emphatically as it is possible. 1. That
these aforesaid Words are False. 2. That they are Impious. 3. Heretical. 4.
Contrary to the Doctrine of the Catholic Church. And 5. In particular contrary
to the Doctrine of the Church of England, as publicly received. Judicant,
declarant, and decernunt, praedicta verba esse falsa, impia, and heretica;
dissona and contraria doctrinae Ecclesiae Catholicae, and speciatim doctrinae
Ecclesiae Anglicanae, public receptae.
This they Judge, Declare, and Determine; and had they Proved it too, they had
done all at once; but now the hardest part still remains; and men who will not
take their bare word for it, will judge all over again. And I hope it will give
no Offense to that Great and Learned Body of the University of Oxford, to
examine the rash and hasty Judgment of some of the Heads of their Colleges and
Halls.

In order to this, I shall briefly premise some few plain Observations, the
more effectually to show the Rashness and Injudiciousness of this Decree.

As 1. That no form of words is to be condemned as False, Impious, and
Heretical, which do not necessarily and manifestly contain a False, Impious,
and Heretical Sense: Words may be new, unusual, inconvenient, and want the
stamp of Ecclesiastical Authority, which are not False, Impious, or Heretical.
These are very different Crimes, to broach new Words, and new Heresies, when
the Words themselves are not manifestly Heretical. And certainly such men ought
to have understood this, who take upon them to be Judges of Heresy.

Nay, 2dly. Such new forms of speech as are liable to an Heretical sense, are
not therefore to be rejected, if they are of use to secure the True Catholic
Faith, and those who use them declare the Orthodox sense wherein they use them.
All learned men know, that the Homoousion it self was charged with as many
Heresies as any other word can well be: Some charged it with Sabellianism;
others with a division and partition of the Divine Substance; as if the Son's
being begotten of his Father's Substance, and so being Consubstantial, or of
one Substance with him, signified such an Efflux and Emanation as divided the
Father's Substance, and communicated part of it to the Son: But when the
Catholic Fathers rejected these perverse and Heretical senses of the word, and
declared in what sense they used it, in opposition to the Arian Heresy, and
that it was the most significant word which could be used to that purpose, and
which those subtle Heretics, who equivocated in all other forms of words,
could by no means elude, the Nicene Council received it into their Creed; and
Eusebius of Caesarea, and some others, who at first scrupled the use of that
word, subscribed to it, when they were satisfied of its Orthodox signification.
It is reasonable for all men to consider this, who pretend to find Heresy in
words, Whether those who use them, own that Heretical sense which they charge
upon them; for otherwise they may as well condemn the Homoousion, as False,
Impious, and Heretical, as Three distinct Infinite Minds and Spirits, if they
have no regard to the sense of those who use these words, nor to the end for
which they are used.

3. And if we will ever allow of Unscriptural Words to explain and secure the
Catholic Faith, (which none but secret or open Heretics ever quarreled at)
there may be the same reason and necessity for it in our Age, that ever there
was in any Age of the Christian Church; and then it is as justifiable now, as
ever it was. The Church never had Authority to make a new Faith, but always
had, and always will have, Authority to declare and explain the True Catholic
Faith in such words as are most aptly expressive of it, and necessary to
countermine the Arts and Evasions of Heretics.

This Apology the Nicene Fathers made for putting the Homoousion into their
Creed, as St. Athanasius declares at large, in his Book de decretis Synodi
Nicaenae. The Arians made a shift to reconcile their Heresy to all other Forms
of words, by the Homoousion detected their Hypocrisy and Heresy: This was too
plain and express to be evaded by equivocal senses, and therefore they could
never be reconciled to it; and the Catholic Fathers thought that a very
necessary reason for the use of it.

Now if such expressions as these, Three distinct Infinite Minds and Spirits,
or Three Substances, be as necessary in our Age to detect and oppose
Sabellianism, and to secure the Catholic Faith of a Real, Substantial Trinity,
(which is all that is intended by them) as the Homoousion was at the time of
the Nicene Council, to detect and oppose Arianism; this will justify the use of
such expressions, how novel soever they may be thought; and what necessity
there is for this in our Age, will appear presently.

4. It is a sufficient justification of any Unscriptural Forms of words in
Articles of Faith, that though the express words are not found in Scripture,
yet all that is, and that is intended to be signified by those words, is found
in Scripture; for no words can be false, impious, and heretical, which contain
the true Catholic Faith, as taught in Scripture: Thus Athanasius and the other
Nicene Fathers answer that Arian Objection against the Homoousion, that it is
not to be found in Scripture; that though the word is not in Scripture, the
Faith signified by that word is; and thus St. Augustine particularly defends it
in his dispute with Pascentius.

5. No Expressions can be said to be contrary to the Doctrine of the Catholic
Church, which have been used by Catholic Fathers, either in the same or in
equivalent terms, and contain that Doctrine which the Catholic Fathers always
taught.

Having premised this, let us now examine the Censure, which these Oxford Heads
have made of these Propositions: There are Three Infinite distinct Minds and
Substances in the Trinity; Item, That the Three Persons in the Trinity are
Three distinct Infinite Minds or Spirits, and Three Individual Substances. That
is, I suppose, as much Individual Substances, as they are Individual Persons.

It is evident, that all this relates only to the Notion of the Trinity, and to
the Notion of a Divine Person, and of Three Divine Persons in the Trinity; and
therefore the Unity of the Godhead is not concerned in this, which belongs to
another Question, How these Three are One; of which more when I examine the
Heresy charged on these words.

1. But the first charge is, that they are false: I wish they had told us what
in them is false; but since they have made no distinction, we must suppose they
mean that all these words are false. Is it false then, that each Person in the
Ever-Blessed Trinity is by himself in his own Person a Distinct, Infinite Mind,
Spirit, or Substance? Is not God the Father an Infinite Mind or Spirit? Is not
God the Son, the substantial Word and Wisdom of the Father, an Infinite Mind or
Spirit? Is not God the Holy Ghost, that Eternal Spirit, which knows the
things of God, as the Spirit of a Man knows the things of a man, an Eternal
Mind or Spirit? Or is not an Infinite Mind and Spirit a Substance, the most
real perfect Substance; that is in the world, which gives Substance and
Subsistence to all other things? Is not the Father considered as an Infinite
Mind and Spirit, distinct from the Son and the Holy Ghost; the Son distinct
from the Father and the Holy Ghost; the Holy Ghost distinct from the Father and
the Son? To deny any thing of all this, is downright Sabellianism, and destroys
a real substantial Trinity, which is as Essential to the Christian Faith, as
the Unity of the Godhead is.

The only Quarrel then, that I can imagine, against these words is this; That
tho the Father be a distinct Infinite Mind, and the Son a distinct Infinite
Mind, and the Holy Ghost a distinct Infinite Mind, yet according to the
Catholic Form of Speech, we must not say that there are Three distinct
Infinite Minds, but one Infinite Mind or Spirit or Substance: Now I grant that
in the sense of the Homoousion, or Consubstantiality, this is very True and
Orthodox, in which sense St. Jerome condemned Tres Substantias or Three
Substances; and St. Austin, who allowed that the Father is a Spirit, the Son a
Spirit, and the Holy Ghost a Spirit, yet denied, that there are Three Spirits,
but One Spirit; but when we apply this to Persons, it is gross Sabellianism to
say, that there are not Three Personal Minds, or Spirits or Substances, but
only One Mind Spirit, or Substance; for then there can be but one Person too,
for one Personal Mind is but One Person.

Let us consider what a Mind is, and how we can know whether there be but One,
or more distinct Minds. The Substance of a Mind I know nothing of, no more than
I do what the naked Substance of Body or Matter is; but the true Notion of a
Mind is a thinking Being, and therefore where ever we find the Acts of
Knowledge, Understanding and Will, there is a Mind; and where there are
distinct Personal Acts of Knowledge and Will, there are distinct Personal Minds.

Now if we believe the Scripture, the Father knows the Son, and the Son knows
the Father; the Father wills, and the Son by a distinct Personal act, wills
with the Father, and what the Father wills; the Father works, and the Son
works, and sees all that the Father does, and does the same things.

Thus the Fathers proved against the Sabellians the real and substantial
distinction of Persons in the Unity of the Godhead, from those distinct
personal acts which are attributed in Scripture to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost;
which having a mutual relation to each other, require distinct Persons for
their Subjects; and since all the instances they give (as may be seen in
Tertullian against Praxeas, Novatian in his Book of the Trinity, Athanasius
against the Sabellians, St. Hilary, St Austin, and all that have writ on this
Argument) are acts of a Mind, as well as of a Person, they must prove (if they
prove any thing) distinct Minds as well as Persons; for if one singular
Solitary Mind may be the Subject of such distinct acts as necessarily suppose
more than one, One Person may be so too; and then there is no possible way left
to confute Sabellianism, or to prove a real Trinity of distinct substantial
Persons. It is very evident, that both the Sabellians, and the Catholic
Fathers in this Controversy understood the same thing by Person, which we do by
Mind or Spirit: By Person the Sabellians meant such a Person as is true and
perfect God; and therefore the most real Substance, an Infinite Mind and
Spirit; and for this reason they rejected Three Persons for fear of Three Gods,
which always was, and is still the Objection against a real substantial
Trinity; for there is no danger, that Three Names, or Notions, or Modes, should
be a Trinity of Gods. Notwithstanding this, the Catholic Fathers allow their
Notion of a Person, and prove against them such a Trinity of Persons as they
rejected, each of which is true and perfect God.

Now since Person is the Catholic word, which long Ecclesiastical use has made
familiar, I should by no means allow of any other word in this Mystery, could
we retain the old Catholic Faith, together with the word: But when men make no
more of a Person, than a mere Mode, and a Trinity of Modes in one singular
Nature, and Substance, must pass for a Trinity of Divine Persons, which was the
Heresy of Sabellius, who contended for One Singular Solitary Nature or
Subsistence in God, and was not much concerned by what name you called the
Three, so they were not Three Substantial Subsisting Persons; for he never
dreamt that there could be Three Real Substantial Persons in One Singular
Nature; I say, when this Heresy is revived under a new Name, we are under a
necessity of saying in more express words, what the Fathers meant by Person, if
we will retain the Catholic Faith, as well as the Word.

Would Men but give themselves a little Liberty of thinking, they would see how
impossible it is to find a Medium between a real Trinity and Sabellianism,
however disguised. The Three Persons in the blessed Trinity are either Three
Substantial Persons, or they are not; to deny them to be Substantial is
Sabellianism, whatever else we call them: There must be either One singular
solitary Substance in the Deity, or Three distinct Personal Substances: The
first is the fundamental Article of the Sabellian Creed, and a direct
Contradiction to the Doctrine of the Trinity, for One singular, solitary Nature
or Substance, is but One Person; for which reason the Sabellians so earnestly
contended for it, and the Catholic Fathers so vigorously opposed it: And if we
own Three distinct substantial Persons in the Trinity, we must own Three
distinct personal Substances; for a distinct substantial Person must have a
distinct Substance of his own, proper and peculiar to his own Person: that
though the Father and the Son are of one Substance, as the Son is begotten of
the Substance of the Father, and consubstantial with him; yet the personal
Substance of the Son is no more the personal Substance of the Father, than the
Father is the Person of the Son, or the Son the Person of the Father: and
therefore there is a manifest Sabellian Fallacy in it, which it is impossible
to make sense of, to say, That the Father is an infinite Mind, the Son an
infinite Mind, and the Holy Ghost an infinite Mind; that the Father is
Substance, the Son Substance, the Holy Ghost Substance, and yet that there are
not Three personal Minds, or Three personal Substances, but One singular Mind
and Substance; for this is to be One and Three in the same Sense; which is not
Mystery, but Contradiction.

There has been a nice Dispute about the singular and plural Predication, when
we speak of God; that since in the Unity of the Godhead there are Three and
One, what it is we may call Three, and what One: This is the whole Pretense, as
far as I can guess, for the Oxford Censure, that Minds and Substances are spoke
of in the plural Number. Now this seems to me to be a very plain Case, that if
in the ever Blessed Trinity there be Three and One, that wherein they are Three
may be said to be Three; but that wherein they are but One, must be said to be
but One; for otherwise Three are not Three, nor One One; which must either
destroy the Faith of the Trinity, or of the Unity. That there are Three
Persons, and One God, is the Catholic Language; and therefore Three belongs to
the Persons, and One to the Godhead: And therefore whatever is absolutely
Essential to the Notion of a distinct Person, may be numbered and distinguished
with the Persons; for whatever is included in the Notion of a Person, though it
be numbered with the Persons, no more affects the Unity of the Godhead, than a
Trinity of Persons does. If then a Person be a Mind, a Spirit, a Substance,
Three such Persons must be Three as distinct Minds, Spirits, or Substances, as
they are distinct Fersons; and Three such Personal Minds, Spirits, or
Substances, are as reconcilable with the Unity of the Godhead, as Three
substantial Persons; for the Three belongs to the Persons, who are Three, not
to the Godhead, which is but One; of which more presently.

As for that Phrase of Three individual Substances, it seems more obnoxious,
because individual may signify, and does in common use, more than barely
distinct, even a separate Substance, as all other individuals are; and an
Individual carries with it a Relation to a Species; and though the ancient
Fathers do indeed mention frequently a specific Unity of Nature in the
Godhead, they did not confine the Unity of the Divine Nature to this, which is
a mere Logical and Notional Unity: The Divine Nature is no Species, for it is
but One, and therefore the Unity of the Godhead is the most real, essential,
indivisible, inseparable Unity.

But how incautious soever the Expression is, the Preacher seems to have had no
ill meaning in it; and therefore this might have been corrected, but not so
heavily censured, especially since Boethius his Definition of a Person might
have led him to it, rationabilis naturae individua substantia, the individual
Substance of a rational Nature: And if this may be allowed a good Definition of
a Divine Person, whatever belongs to the Definition of a Person, may be
numbered and distinguished with the Persons.

2. Thus much for the first Charge, that these Words are false; the next is
much heavier, That they are impious. Now there are but two things wherein the
impiety of any Doctrine can consist, either in teaching some Wickedness, or in
reproaching and blaspheming the Deity. Now what Wickedness does this Doctrine
of a real substantial Trinity, a Trinity of Three infinite personal Minds,
teach us? unless to worship Father, Son, and Holy Ghost with the most humble
and devout Adorations, be impiety. This indeed it does teach us, and this we
do, and this no other Notion of a Trinity can teach us, or justify us in
doing: For is any other Trinity but a real substantial Trinity, the Object of a
religious Adoration? can we without impiety, distinctly worship, as we do in
our Litany, three distinct Persons, who are not each of them distinctly in
their own Persons, infinite Mind and Spirit? is a Mode, a Posture, a Somewhat,
without any name or notion belonging to it, the Object of Religious Worship? is
it possible in the nature of the thing, for any man, who believes but one
singular, solitary, divine Nature, to worship three with a distinct worship,
without any conception of a real, substantial, distinction between them? Can
any man honor the Son, as he honors the Father, as a distinct Object, and
with distinct acts of worship, who does not believe the Son to be as truly and
substantially a Divine Person, as the Father is, and as distinct a Person from
the Father, as Adam and Abel were distinct Persons, tho not separate Persons,
as they were? Men may please themselves with subtle distinctions, but they can
never distinguish themselves nor others out of their sense and feeling; and I
appeal to all Mankind, whether distinct Acts of worship do not require distinct
Objects, as really distinct as their Worship is? whether they can distinctly
worship, three Names, or Modes, or Somewhats, when there is but one real
substantial Subject or Suppositum of them all? if they can, their Devotion is
as airy, subtle, and unintelligible, as their Distinctions are.

Does this Doctrine then of a real substantial Trinity, of three infinite
Personal Minds, reproach or blaspheme the Deity? I do not now dispute with the
Antitrinitarian Heretics, who are professedly so, who charge the Doctrine it
self with Blasphemy, but with those who profess to believe a Trinity, but
charge the Doctrine of a real, substantial Trinity with impiety; and therefore
shall confine my self only to them.

Is it any Reproach then to the Ever Blessed Trinity to affirm, that each
Person is by himself a distinct infinite Mind? is an infinite Mind then a Term
of Reproach and Blasphemy? does not an infinite Mind signify all the
Perfections of a Deity? and is this Blasphemy? I beseech you against whom?
against Father, Son, or Holy Ghost? and is not each of these Divine Persons a
distinct infinite Mind? or is it Blasphemy to say, what they are? or when each
of these Divine Persons is a distinct infinite Mind, is it Blasphemy to say,
that three Divine Persons are three distinct infinite Minds? that is, will the
Three Divine Persons of the ever Blessed Trinity, when each of them is, and is
owned to be a distinct infinite Mind, think themselves reproached to be called
Three? and if the Divine Persons will not think themselves blasphemed by this,
there is no danger that the Divine Nature should: For the Divine Nature is
whole and entire in each Divine Person, and there is no danger but three
distinct infinite Minds must have the same One Divine Nature, for Infinite,
Infinite, and Infinite, are but one and the same Infinite Nature. But as I take
it, the danger of Blasphemy is on the other side: for if they deny the Three
Persons of the Trinity to be three distinct infinite Minds, which of these
Divine Persons, Father, Son, or Holy Ghost, will they deny to be an Infinite
Mind? for when we know him, we must strike him out of the Trinity, as not being
true and perfect God: Or if they allow Person to signify the same thing, when
applied to the Father, to the Son, or to the Holy Ghost, then neither of these
Persons is a Divine Infinite Mind, or each of them is, and then there are
three, as there are three Persons, or there is never a Divine Infinite Mind
among them all; the Consequence of which is so blasphemous, that I know not
whether I may venture to say it, for fear the Animadverter should serve me, as
he has done once already, to make these Consequences my own Doctrine: But yet I
will tell these Gentlemen, what a bolder man, than I am, would venture to say
upon this occasion, that if a Divine Person, as a Person, and as distinct from
the other Persons, be not an Infinite Mind, there is an end of the Christian
Trinity, in which every Person is true and perfect God, which no Person is, who
is not an Infinite Mind; and therefore if any one Person, considered in his
distinct personal Capacity, be not an Infinite Mind, he does not belong to the
Christian Trinity; and if all the Persons are in this respect alike, that not
any one of them, in his distinct Personal Capacity, is a distinct Infinite
Mind, then there is no Trinity at all; and if they will find a God, when they
have renounced a Trinity, it must be one singular Divine Nature, which they
themselves will not allow to be a Person: And thus we have lost a Trinity, and
lost a God, who is a Person. This is plain sense, and I fear, neither Thomas,
nor Scotus, can help them out.

But let us suppose (and I am sure they ought to be thankful for such a
Supposition, for their Notion of a Person will not admit it, unless they
understand one thing by a Person when applied to the Father, and another when
applied to the Son, and Holy Spirit; but I say, let us suppose) that the Divine
Nature is originally in the Person of the Father, or that the Father is the
(...), the unbegotten, self originated God, as he certainly is, and therefore a
Divine substantial Person, who is essentially God: Now the very Name of Father
is a relative Term, and signifies that he has a Son, begotten of himself; and
let any Man consider which sounds most like Blasphemy, both against the Father
and the Son, to say, that the Father begets a Son, who is his own perfect
Likeness and Image, the express Character of his own Substance ((...)) of the
same Substance with himself, but distinct in Substance, as Father and Son are,
true and perfect God, as his Father is, without any other the least difference,
but that one is the Father, and the other the Son; or to say, that the Father
begets no Substance at all, but only a Mode, or a Relation without a Relative,
in his own Substance: That the Father begets Filiation, not a Son, but Sonship;
is not this to ridicule the Divine Generation, and to make Sport for Atheists
and Heretics: If God begets no Substance, he begets nothing real, nothing
substantially distinct from himself, and therefore no substantial Person; and
then neither God is a true and real Father, nor the Son a real Son, which
overthrows the whole Mystery of our Redemption, by the Incarnation, Death, and
Sufferings of the Son of God: For God was not incarnate, if the Divine Nature
was not incarnate: And if there be but one singular divine Nature and Substance
in the Deity, though they could find a Trinity of Persons in this one singular
Nature, the Incarnation of this one singular Nature is impossible, without the
Incarnation of the whole Trinity. Men may wrangle as long as they please about
these Matters, but it is a manifest Contradiction to say, That the Divine
Nature is incarnate in the Son, and is not incarnate in the Father and the Holy
Ghost, when there is but one singular Divine Nature and Substance in them all;
which is to say, that the same one singular Nature is incarnate and is not
incarnate; and is, and is not, is a Contradiction, or there never can be a
Contradiction. And now I leave it to all impartial Judges on which side the
Impiety lies.

3. The third Charge is Heresy: But if it be neither false, nor impious, I
hope there is no Heresy in it neither: However, they would have done well to
have given this Heresy a Name, that we might have known where to find it, who
were the first Authors of it, in what Age of the Church it began, and by what
General Councils it was condemned: For I can find no Heresy in these censured
Words, but the Heresy of a real substantial Trinity, the Heresy of three
substantial Persons, or of three Personal Minds and Substances; and I do not
find any mention of this Heresy in the ancient Records of the Church, unless
those who called themselves Catholics were these Heretics; for this was
always their Doctrine, as some of our Modern Orthodox Zealots, and
Heresie-makers confess, and know not how to excuse them from Heresy upon this
account. Well! if this be the Case, we must be contented to be Heretics with
all the ancient Fathers, and the four first General Councils: but these
Gentlemen should have remembered, that the Church of England requires them to
expound Scripture, as the ancient Catholic Doctors expound it, and receives
the four first General Councils, where this Heresy is in great Perfection; and
it had not been amiss, if some body had minded them, that the Laws of England,
as I observed before, forbid the declaring any Doctrine to be Heresy, which is
not condemned for Heresy in the four first General Councils.

But let Fathers and Councils, Canons, or Acts of Parliament say what they
please, they have a greater and more venerable Authority than all of them: The
Animadverter has told them it is Heresy, and has told them what Heresy it is,
no less than the Heresy of Tritheism.

Now I confess, I am much to seek what this Heresy of Tritheism is. It is not
Paganism, for the Heathens did not stint themselves in the Number of their
Gods; they were Polytheists, not Tritheists, even the Platonists themselves,
though they owned a Trinity, a (...), or one Divinity, which extended it self
to Three, which was essentially distinguished from all created Nature, and from
all their Creature Gods; but they worshipped many Gods besides, as the rest of
the Pagan World did. Tritheism was never charged upon any Men but the
Worshippers of the Holy and ever Blessed Trinity, and it was charged upon them
from the beginning by Pagans and Heretics. The fear of this made Noetus and
Sabellius deny three real substantial Persons in the Trinity, and made Arius
deny the true eternal Divinity of the Son, and Holy Spirit: But the Catholic
Fathers despised this Charge, and owned three distinct real substantial
Persons, each of them by himself to be true and perfect God, but not Three
Gods, but One God: For thus the Scripture had taught them to believe and speak,
that there is but One God, and there are Three, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
who have all the Perfections of the Deity distinctly in themselves. So that
this Tritheism is a Christian Heresy if it be one, and was never charged upon
Christians by Christians for several Ages, but only by Heretics. The most
Orthodox Christians were always most charged with it; and some to avoid this
Charge, turned Heretics, and were condemned for such by the Catholic Church.

It is true, in the declining Monkish Ages of the Church, we sometimes hear of
these Tritheists; but it is a very dark part of Story, and I never could find a
satisfactory Account what their Opinions were, or why they were called so: It
is not improbable but that they might fall into the Hands of some malicious
Animadverter, who by Zeal and Faction might procure a new Name and Heresy to
be decreed them; for there is no new thing under the Sun. But this has made me
apt to suspect, that those who have been charged with Tritheism, for professing
the Faith and Worship of the ever blessed Trinity, have been the most Orthodox
Believers; and that those who have so minced the Matter as to escape the Charge
of Tritheism from Heretics, have been Heretics themselves: A real substantial
Trinity, in which each Person is by himself perfect God, has always been
charged by Heretics with Tritheism, for Three, each of whom is true and
perfect God, they say are Three Gods; and yet this is the true Christian
Trinity: But though Men may laugh at a Trinity of Modes, you shall never hear
them charge it with Tritheism; and what Heretics, who own but one personal
God, cannot charge with Tritheism, is no Christian Trinity; that is, has not
Three Persons, each of which is true and perfect God: So far are those
Gentlemen mistaken, who think it a piece of Art and Prudence to avoid all
Expressions which Heretics charge with Tritheism; for then they must renounce
all Words, which contain and express the ture Catholic Faith.

At least I think, this should warn all Men, who are not disguised Atheists and
Infidels under the profession of Christianity, to have a care of ridiculing
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, to be revenged of these Tritheist Heretics, as
the Animadverter profanely does, who so often scoffs at me for my Three Gods,
who never owned any other God than Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and pities the
Socinians as an unequal Match for me, because they have but One God, and I have
Three; nay compares Father, Son, and Holy Ghost to Pagan Gods, when he tells
the World, that I curse him by my Gods; which is a manifest and impious
Allusion to Goliath's cursing David by his Gods. Can he think that the Dispute
about Three Modes, or Three Minds in the Unity of the Godhead can justify such
Blasphemies as these, against Father, Son, and Holy Ghost? or is this to be
suffered in a Christian Church? Whether I curse him or not, (and I thank God, I
curse no Man, but pray for my worst Enemies) he may justly fear that such
Blasphemies will bring the Curse of the ever Blessed Trinity on him; and that
will be no Jest.

No Man, who believes but One Divine Nature, which is originally in the Father,
and is substantially communicated by the Father to the Son, as a distinct
subsisting Person, by an eternal and ineffable Generation; and to the Holy
Ghost by an eternal and substantial Procession from Father and Son, can be a
Tritheist, whatever inconvenient Expressions he may use, unless the Doctrine of
the Trinity it self be Tritheism.

But let us consider the reason of this Charge a little more particularly. They
ask us, Whether an eternal and infinite Mind be not ture and perfect God? Yes,
most certainly; and for this reason we must assert, that the Son is an eternal
infinite Mind, because he is true and perfect God. But if one infinite Mind is
true and perfect God, are not Three infinite Minds Three Gods? This is easily
answered, as far as we are concerned to answer these Men, only by changing
Minds for Persons. Is not an eternal, infinite Person true and perfect God? and
if every eternal Person, as a distinct Person, be true and perfect God, are not
Three such distinct Persons Three Gods? The Objection is the same; and let them
but answer for themselves, and they answer for us.

But if each distinct Person, and each distinct Mind is true and perfect God,
why may not the Term God be numbered and distinguished as Persons and Minds
are? Why may we not say that there are Three Gods as well as that there are
Three Persons, or Three Minds? This is the true Difficulty, which as much
affects the Doctrine of the Trinity it self, as any Terms or Expressions about
it, whether Three Persons or Three Minds: Nay though we give no Name to these
Three, the Difficulty is the same; for if we own Three, each of whom is true
and perfect God, why are not these Three three Gods, when each of them is
distinctly and by himself, true and perfect God? Now not to dispute this Matter
with the Socinians, which is not my present Business, there is a very plain
Account to be given of this to those who acknowledge a Trinity; why we may say
that there are Three infinite Minds and Spirits, each of which is true and
perfect God, and yet must not, and ought not to say, that there are Three Gods.

The Reason, why we may say, that there are Three distinct infinite Minds, is,
because there are Three, each of whom is a distinct infinite Mind, and Three,
each of whom is a distinct Mind, are Three distinct Minds; but the Reason, why
we must not say, there are Three Gods, is not, because there are not Three,
each of whom is distinctly, and by himself, true and perfect God, as every
infinite Mind is, for that is Sabellianism; but because there is but one and
the same Divinity, or Godhead, the (...) in them all; and therefore though
there are three distinct Persons, or Minds, each of whom is distinctly, and by
himself ((...)) God, yet there are not Three Gods, but One God, or One
Divinity: And if they will not allow, that the same One Divinity or Godhead,
may be entirely, and indivisible and inseparably in Three distinct Persons or
Minds, there is an End of a Trinity in Unity, of Three Persons and One God. For
if the whole Divine Nature cannot subsist entirely, indivisibly, and
inseparably, and yet distinctly in Three, either there cannot be Three, each of
whom is distinctly and by himself God, or there cannot be one God; whereas the
scripture Notion of the Unity of God, is not such an Unity as is only is one
Person, for then it could not enjoin the Faith and Worship of Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost; but such an Unity as can be between Three, when the same One Divine
Nature, is wholly and entirely communicated by the eternal Father, to the
eternal Son, and by Father and Son to the eternal Spirit; without any Division
or Separation; and that which is communicated whole and entire, without
Division or Separation, makes no Number, for it is but One still. A Mind, and
Mind, and Mind, must be three Minds, or Persons, by reason of their distinct
subsistence, which belong to them as three; but God, and God, and God, as some
of the ancient Father speak, are not Three Gods, but One God, because the same
One Divinity (totus ex toto, (...), as both the Latin and Greek Fathers speak,
concerning the Generation of the Son) is whole, entire, indivisible,
inseparable, in all Three; and Three distinct, whole, inseparable, sames, how
hard soever it may be to conceive, as to the Manner of it, is the most natural
and intelligible Notion of three and one; and this is the Catholic Notion of a
Trinity in Unity. I forbear prosecuting this any farther here, because I shall
do it at large elsewhere.

4. The next Charge is, that it is Disagreeing and contrary to the Doctrine of
the Catholic Church. I am truly sorry for this, because it must unavoidably
reflect on their Skill in Antiquity, and the Doctrine of the Catholic Church;
but if the Animadverter has imposed upon them in this too, they must thank
themselves, and take what follows: I shall not multiply Testimonies in this
Cause at present, because I have a Treatise by me, which is near finished, upon
this very Subject, to give an Account of the Judgment of Catholic Fathers, and
Councils concerning a real and substantial Trinity, and what their Notion of
Thritheism is. The Matter appeared to me so plain, and demonstrable, that I
began to be weary of it, as an unnecessary Work; but this Decree has convinced
me of the contrary, and I now thank God, that I am so well prepared to justify
the true ancient Catholic Faith, against the Pretenses of those, who judge of
the Doctrine of the Catholic Church by Inspiration or Prophecy, without
knowing what the Catholic Fathers have said about it.

As Confident as these Heads are, of the Doctrine of the Catholic Church;
those, even of their Mind, who have looked into the Fathers, are not willing to
stand to their Judgment in this Cause: Some of the Ante-Nicene Fathers, they
give up to the Arians, and they know not what to think of the Nicene Fathers
themselves; they spoke incautiously, and bordered very near upon Tritheism;
nay, some of them, they think, were down right Tritheists; and they are in the
right, for they were all so to a man, in this modern notion of Tritheism, that
I was glad to find, they would own the Doctrine of the Catholic Church, and
put the Cause upon that issue.

The present Dispute is about Three distinct infinite Minds, and Substances in
the Trinity, whether this be the Catholic Doctrine, or Catholic Language;
now, I suppose, if it appear, that they owned Three distinct Substances, both
Name and Thing, there will be no Dispute about three Minds, for the Substance
of the Deity can be no other, than infinite Mind.

Now this is a Wonderful Dispute, when the Schoolmen themselves own the Three
Divine Persons to be Three Substances, though they say, they are (not mere
Relations without a Subject) but relative Substances, and we say so too: That
their Substances, as their Persons, subsist in an inseparable Union, and
Relation, to each other: But relative Substances, Substances, which are not
absolute and independent, but essentially related to each other, as Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, are Substances still, and three distinct Substances, as
they are distinct Persons.

But this is not our present Inquiry, what the Doctrine of the Schools is, but
what was the Doctrine of the Primitive Fathers.

Now it is evident beyond all possibility of Denial, that the Catholic
Fathers, one and all, did assert Three substantial Persons in the Trinity,
against the Heresy of Sabellius, who owned but one substantial Person, with
Three Names, according to his different Appearances: now besides, that it is
impossible to make sense of Three substantial Persons, without three personal
Substances, for (...) must signify Three Substances; had not these Fathers
understood it in the Sense and Notion of three Substances, they had not opposed
Sabellius, whose fundamental Principle was the one singular, solitary,
Substance of the Deity.

They asserted indeed one Substance of the Deity against Arius, but it was only
in that sense, in which Arius denied the One Substance: He owned the Son to be
a substantial Person, who had a distinct Substance of his own, and this the
Nicene Fathers never quarelled with him for; but he denied, that the Substance
of the Son was (...), of the Substance of the Father but perfectly of a
different Kind and Nature, as not begotten of his Father's Substance, but made
by his Power. In Opposition to this Heresy, the Fathers taught, not one
singular Substance in God, which is Sabellianism, but such an Oneness of
Substance, as we know not how to express otherwise, than by a specific
Sameness and Unity, though that does not answer the complete Notion of the Divine
Unity; but this is one Way the Fathers commonly express it, by (...) and genus,
and such like Words, as among us signify the specific Unity of Nature; and
therefore they tell us, that by the Homoousion they only meant, that the Son
was so of the same one Substance with the Father, that he is God of God, Light
of Light, very God of very God; that is, true and perfect God, as his Father is
true and perfect God, considered in his own Person, as distinct from his
Father; that he is not (...) created out of nothing, as all Creatures are, but
is truly begotten of the Substance of his Father, and in that Sense
Consubstantial, or of one Substance with him, as all other Sons are
Consubstantial with their Fathers. Now had not this been a very wise Dispute on
both sides, if the Catholics, as well as the Arians, had not allowed, that the
Son had a Substance of his own, proper and appropriate to his own Person, and
as distinct from the Personal Substance of the Father, as the Person of the Son
is distinct from the Person of the Father, to contend whence he had his
Substance; of the Substance of the Father, or created out of Nothing, when he
has no Substance at all of his own, proper and peculiar to him as a Son?

One would think these two Extremes of Sabellianism and Arianism, both which
were rejected with equal Abhorrence by the Catholic Fathers, might satisfy
any Man what their Judgment was about a Trinity in Unity. For if these Fathers
understood both these Heresies, and rejected them both, asserted three
substantial Persons, in opposition to Sabellius, and one Substance, in
opposition to Arius, the Catholic Faith must lie between these two extremes;
and yet it is demonstrable that there is but one Medium between them. If it be
Haeresy to say, that there is but One Personal Substance in the Deity, as
Sabellius asserted, then three distinct substantial Persons must have three
distinct personal Substances: For this is the direct contradiction to the
Sabellian Heresy of one Substance; If the Arians denied one Substance, not in
the Sabellian Notion of One Substance, but as one Substance signifies perfectly
the same Divine Nature in Father and Son, then One Substance, as it is asserted
by the Nicene Fathers, in opposition to the Arians, must signify not one
personal Substance, but One Divine Nature, which is perfectly alike, and the
same in Father and Son. I challenge any Man living (always excepting the
Wonder-working Animadverter) to show me any Medium between the One Substance,
or the One Person, of Sabellius, and the Three Substances of different Natures
and Species of the Arians, but only the true Catholic Faith, of Three
substantial Persons, or Three personal Substances, of one and the same Nature,
both for kind, and by Generation and Procession.

The reason of the thing is plain and evident, which is the most I intend at
present; for I shall reserve Authorities, as I intimated before, for a
particular Treatise, which, if God permit, shall soon follow this; and
therefore St. Hilary, and the Alexandrian Synod, under the great Athanasius,
after the Catholic Bishops were recalled from Banishment, and restored to
their Sees by Julian the Apostate, shall serve now.

The Dispute is concerning One Substance, and Three Substances, in the Deity;
and it may be resolved into these three Questions. 1. Whether the Son, as
begotten of his Father, have a Substance and Nature proper to his own Person,
which is not the Personal Nature and Substance of the Father. 2. Whether Three
such Persons, who have, each of them, a pesonal Nature and Substance of his
own, may be called Three Substance. 3. In what sense then they are one
Substance? Whoever reads St. Hilary de Syn. adv. Arianos, will find all these
Questions fully and expressly resolved, I shall give but some few Instances of
each.

As for the first, he tells us, Quod vita in patre hic intelligitur substantia
significata; vita quoque in Unigenito, quae ex patre generata est essentia
intellecta -- quod enim in utroque vita est, id in utroque significatur
essentia and vita quae generatur ex vita, id est, essentia quae de essentia
nascitur -- natae and gignentis essentiae, id est, vitae quae habetur and data
est. --
that Life in the Father is Substance, and Life in the Son which is begotten of
the Father, is Essence or Substance; and that Life begotten of Life, is Essence
born of Essence; and owns this as a universal Maxim, which holds true in all
Births: That that which is born receives a Nature of its own from the Nature,
Quia omnis nativitas quaecunque est, in naturam suam ex natura gignente
consistit.
which begets, and subsists in its own Nature; Ex natura enim generante naturam
sumpsit genita natura.
that the begotten Nature receives its Nature from the Nature, which begets:
And giving an Account why Wisdom says sed quia Dei filius non corporalis
partitudinis est genitus exemplo, sed ex perfecto Deo perfectus, Deus natus
est, idcirco ait creatam se esse sapientia; omnes in generatione sua corporales
passiones excludens; at vero ut ostenderet, non creationis in se, sed
nativitatis naturam esse, subjecit and genitam, ut cum creatam se and genitam
confitetur, absolutam nativitatis suae intelligentiam praestaret, dum
indemutabilem patris naturam in creatione significat, and legitimam and
propriam ex Deo patre genitae suae naturae ostendit esse substantiam.
that she was both created and begotten: The first he tells us, is to exclude
all corporeal Passions from the Divine Generation; that the Nature of the
Father suffers no change or diminution in the Generation of the Son, no more
than in the Works of Creation; and by being begotten is signified, that the Son
receives his Nature not by Creation, but by Birth; and has a legitimate and
proper Substance of his own begotten Nature from God the Father.

Once more; In one of these Oriental Creeds, they anathematize those who make
the Et siquis intemporalem unigeni^i filii de patre substantiam, ad
innascibilem Dei essentiam referat, quasi filium patrem dicens, anathema sit.
Eternal Substance of the only begotten Son of the Father to be the unbegotten
Substance of God, thereby making the Son to be the Father.

This St. Hilary explains and approves, and acquaints us with the Dedisse
superior definicio occasionem haereti^is videbatur, cum tempus nativitatis
filii negaretur, quia nef^s esset si pater esset in tempore: in tempore autem
esset, si filius tempori subderetur: ut per hanc opportunitatem temporis
abnegati, sub filii nuncupatione pater, qui innascibilis esset, singularis
atque unicus, ipse sibi and pater and filius praedicaretur, quia ubi nascendi
tempus excluditur, illic opinio videtur innascibilitatis admitti, ut natus non
putetur, cujus nativitas non sit in tempore. Idcirco ne per hanc occasionem
temporis abnegati haeresis unionis irreperet, and haec impietas damnatur, quae
audeat intemporalem nativitatem ad unicam and singularem innascibilis essentiae
refer substantiam, cum aliud sit intemporalem esse; aliud sit esse non natum;
quorum unum habeat (licet extra tempus) nativitatem, aliud ipsum sibi, ad id
quod est, solus atque idem Author aternus sit.
Occasion of this Decree, viz. The Catholics asserting the eternal Generation
of the Son, that he was begotten before all Time, and in no Time; some
Heretics took advantage of this, to deny that there is any begotten Substance
of the Son, but only the unbegotten Substance of the Father, and that under the
denomination of the Son, the Father, who is undegotten, and but one singular
Person, is both Father and Son to himself: For to be born in no time seems to
signify, not to be born at all: this he calls The Heresy of Union, or
Sabellianism, which this Decree condemns, whereas, as he adds, to be eternal,
without any temporal beginning, and to be unbegotten, are two very different
things; that which is eternal may be begotten, though not in time; but that which
is unbegotten, is the sole eternal Author of its own being, and all that he is.

This I think is home to the purpose, to deny that the Son has a begotten
Substance, proper and peculiar to himself as a Son; or to say, that the Son has
no other Substance but the unbegotten Substance of the Father, is Sabellianism;
and which ought farther to be observed, to say, that the Father and Son have
not a distinct Substance of their own, but that the unbegotten Substance of the
Father is the Substance of the Son, makes Father and Son but one Person: which
shows that these Fathers and St. Hilary never dreamt of three Persons in one
singular Substance. Now if the three Persons in the Trinity are really distinct
in substance, and it is Heresy to say, that the unbegotten Substance of the
Father is the Substance of the Son, any man would wonder, what Haeresie it
should be to say, that there are three distinct personal Substances in the
Trinity.

But to put this Matter out of doubt, St. Hilary in the next place expressly
vindicates the Synod of Hisque nominibus (patris, and filii, and spiritus
sancti) non simpliciter, neque otiosis propositis, sed significantibus
diligenter propriam uniuscujusque nominatorum substantiam and ordinem and
gloriam, ut sint quidem per substantiam tria --
Antioch for attributing a proper Substance to each Divine Person, and
affirming, that they are Three in Substance, which he renders by Three
Substances, whereby he says, they did not mean Three diverse Substances of
different Kinds and Natures, but Three Substances, in opposition to the
Sabellian Heresy; which revived again after the Nicene Council, Volens igitur
congregata sanctorum synodus impietatem eam perimere, quae veritatem Patris,
and Filii, and Spiritus Sancti, nominum numero eluderet, ut non subsistente
causa uniuscujusque nominis, triplex nuncupatio obtinerer sub falsitate nominum
unionem -- Idcirco tres substantias esse dixeruntus subsistentium personas per
substantias edocentes, non substantiam Patris, and Filii, and Spiritus sancti
diversitate dissimilis essentiae separantes.
and gave these three Names to the Father, and by a Trinity of mere Names,
without a subsisting Cause or Subject for each Name, destroyed the truth and
reality of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and therefore they said, there were
Three Substances, thereby meaning three subsisting Persons; not dividing and
separating the Substance of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, by a
diversity and dissimilitude of Essences.

So that St. Hilary thought, that Three Substances, when they are not used in
an Arian sense, to fignifie a diversity of Nature, but only to signify Three
substantial subsisting Persons, in opposition to Sabellius, are very Catholic
Words, and contain a true Catholic sense: in this sense, and for the very same
reason we use these Expressions of Three distinct infinite Minds, and Three
Substances: And I hope these Heads will not take it amiss, if One St. Hilary
have more Authority with me than all they together.

3. As for One Substance, which was taught by the Nicene Council, and inserted
into their Creed, St. Hilary very plainly and frequently tells us, in what
sense we are to understand it: that there is one Substance of the same Kind and
Nature, in genere naturae, and secundum proprietatem naturae; not one
Substance, as that signifies one subsisting Person; but as it signifies
perfectly the same Nature, in every thing alike, without the least difference
or variation, that the Idcirco autem unius substantiae, non utunus subsistat
aut solus, sed ut ex substantia Dei natus, non aliunde subsistat, neve in
aliqua dissidentis substantiae diversitate subsistat.

Aut aliud hic testatur homousion, quam ut una and indissimilis duum sit
secundum naturae propaginem essentia, quia essentia filii non sit aliunde; quae
quia aliunde non est, unius recte esse ambo creduntur essentiae, quia
substantiam nativitatis filius non habeat, nisi de paternae autoritate naturae.
Credamus and dicamus esse unam substantiam, sed per naturae proprietatem, non
ad significationem impiae unionis; una sit ex similitudine, non ex solitudine.


Homoousion signifies one Nature perfectly alike, and the same by Natural
Propagation; because the Essence of the Son is from no other Cause, but the
Essence of the Father; and therefore Father and Son may both be said to be of
one Nature or Substance.

And for the sake of the Charge of Tritheism, which the Anim adverter makes
such a Noise with, it will be necessary to observe, that St. Hilary gives the
same account of the Unity of the Godhead, as he does of the Unity of the Divine
Substance and indeed they must be one in the same sense, for one divine
Substance is one God.

Anathematizat namque eos, qui tres Deos dicunt, quia secundum naturae
veritatem, numerum nuncupationum substantia ista non recipit, nisi ut in
hominibus and Angelis solet -- caeterum in natura Dei Deus unus est, ita tamen
ut and filius Deus sit, quia in eo natura non differens sit; and cum Deus ex
Deo sit, non potest non uterque Deus esse, quorum per generis differentiam non
discernatur essentia. Numerus autem nominis in nuncupatione respuitur, quia non
est in naturae qualitate diversitas, cum igitur Anathema sit duos deos dicens,
and anathema sit filium Deum denegans, absolute ostenditur unius ad uttumque
nominis unitatem de proprietate in differentis esse substantiae.
The Sardican Synod anathematized those who said there were Three Gods: And St.
Hilary gives this account of it, that speaking properly, the Divine Substance
or Nature will not admit of the plural Number, to say, that there are more Gods
than One, excepting when, the Title of God is given to Men or Angels, by way of
Honor, not of Nature: But in the Nature of God, there is but One God; yet so
that the Son is God, because he has the same Nature, without any unlikeness or
difference, with his Father; and when there is God of God, it cannot be but
that each of them must be God, because their Nature is not distinguished by a
different Kind or Species; and when he is anathematized, who says there are two
Gods, and he also is anathematized who denies the Son to be God, it is manifest
that the same Name of God, and One God, is applied to both of them, upon
account of the same Nature, without the least difference or diversity. Tamen ne
rursum unius Dei praedicatio, unicam ac sine progeny sua solitarii Dei velit
affirmare substantiam, statim etiam hanc condemnat temeritatem, quae quia Deus
unus est, unum ac solitarium Deum patrem, habentem in se nomen patris and filii
confitetur. Cum in generante parre and nascente filio, Deus unus esset ob
indifferentis ab invicem naturae substantiam praedicandus.

Cum in damnatione sit, patrem and filium duos Deos dicere, and rursum anathema
sit, filium Deum negare, substantiae diversae alterius ab altera opinio in
praedicandis Diis duobus excluditur, non enim est alia praeter illam Dei
patris, ex qua Dei filius Deus intemporalis est natus, essentia.

Non enim religiosa unitas nominis ex indifferentis naturae essentia constituta
personam genitae ademit essentiae, ut unica ac singularis Dei essentia per
unionem nominis intelligatur: cum utriusque essentiae nomen unum; id est, Deus
unus, ob indiscretae in utroque naturae indissimilem substantiam praedicetur.


And adds, that least the Doctrine of One God should seem to teach that there
is but one singular Subsistence of one solitary God without his Son; The same
Synod condemns those also, who under pretense of owning but One God, profess
only One singular and solitary God the Father, under the Name of Father and
Son; whereas the Father who begets, and the Son who is born, are to be
acknowledged One God, upon account of the same Nature in both, without the
least difference or variation.

Were it not to shorten this Discourse, I could easily furnish my Readers with
Numerous Quotations to the same purpose, out of St. Hilary, (to whom I now
confine my self, and particularly to his Book de Synodis, that these
Authorities may be the more easily found all together) to prove, That the
Catholic Notion of One Divine Substance, and One God, does not signify One
Personal Substance, nor One singular solitary God, who is but One Person; but
there is One Divine Substance, and One God, as the same Divine Nature is
communicated whole and entire by the Father to the Son, and by Father and Son
to the Holy Spirit, without the least difference, or change, or separation:
Which I shall explain more at large elsewhere.

Thus much for St. Hilary, who has always been allowed a Credible Witness of
the Catholic Faith; for which he suffered Banishment under Constantius, and is
now condemned for a Heretic by the Oxford Heads.

But it is more wonderful to me, that men who understand what Hypostasis
signifies, and in what sense it was used by the Nicene Fathers, should condemn
the Phrase of Three Substances in the Trinity, as False, Impious, and
Heretical, when (...), or Three Hypostases, which is the Catholic Language, is
neither better nor worse than Three Substances. In the Nicene Council it self,
(...) and (...) are used in the same sense, and both signify Substance: And
Petavius owns, that all the Ancient Fathers used Hypostasis in no other sense,
but to signify Substance; and then Three Hypostases are Three Substances. And
when afterward they more nicely distinguished between (...) and (...), they
still used Hypostasis in the notion of Substance, that which did actually
subsist; which is therefore often rendered by the Latins extantia.

But to set aside other Observations, the Alexandrian Synod under Athanasius is
sufficient to put an end to this Dispute. Athanasii Ep ad Antiochenses T. 1. p.
574 Et Council. T. 2 p. 810.
When the Catholic Bishops were recalled from Banishment by Julian, several of
them stopped at Alexandria, and met in Council to advise about the broken state
of the Church: Among other things that fell under consideration, there had a
Dispute happened among the Catholics themselves, concerning the (...), and
(...), whether they ought to say, That there is but One Substance in the
Trinity; or, That there are Three Substances; for so it is plain that both
sides understood Hypostasis in the notion of Substance. To compose this
Difference, the Synod called both Parties before them, and examined them in
what sense they used these words.

As for those who said there were Three Hypostases in the Trinity, they asked
them, Whether by this they meant, as the Arians did, Three Hypostases of a
different Kind and Nature, subsisting by themselves absolutely and
independently, as perfectly divided and separated from each other, as other
Creatures, and as the Children of men are; or as those things which have
different Natures, as Gold, and Silver, and Brass? Or whether by Three
Hypostases they meant, as some other Heretics did, Three Principles, or Three
Gods? All this they professed they had neither said nor thought. And being
asked again, Why they then used those Expressions of Three Substances? They
answered, Because they believed in the Holy Trinity, not a Trinity of Names,
but a Real Subsisting Trinity; a Father, who really and actually is, and
subsists; a Son, who in truth and reality is a substantial subsisting Son; and
the Holy Spirit, who actually is, and subsists: That they never said, There are
Three Gods, or Three Principles, but owned the Holy Trinity, and but one
Godhead, one Principle, and the Son consubstantial to the Father; and the Holy
Spirit neither a Creature, nor of a different Nature, but genuinely and
inseparably of the same Nature with Father and Son. All this was approved of as
very Orthodox. And then the Synod examined those who affirmed, That there was
but One Substance in the Trinity, What they meant by it? Whether they
understood it, as Sabellius did, to deny the Real Subsistence of the Son and
Holy Spirit, to make an Unsubstantial Son, and an Unsubsisting Spirit? This
they also denied; and told the Synod, that they thought Hypostasis signified
the same with Ousia, Essence, Substance, Nature: And therefore they owned but
one Hypostasis or Substance, because the Son is of the Substance of the Father,
and by reason of the Identity of Nature between Father and Son; for they
believed but One Divinity, and one Divine Nature; and not one Nature of the
Father, and another different Nature of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. This
Explication also was approved by the Synod; and thus this matter was
reconciled: Those who taught Three Substances in the Trinity, and those who
believed but one Substance, when they had given their several Explications,
were both owned by the Synod, and owned each other for Catholic Christians,
and both Condemned Arius and Sabellius; though the Synod thought it better to
adhere strictly to the words of the Nicene Creed; but soon after they
distinguished between (...) and (...); and then Three Hypostases (still in the
notion of Three Substances) and One Nature, was the Catholic Language; which
St. Basil gives a large account of, Ep. 300. of which more elsewhere. So that
Athanasius, and those Glorious Confessors for the Nicene Faith, in the
Alexandrian Synod, owned Three Substances in the very same sense in which we
now use those words, to contain the true Catholic Faith; and if they knew what
the Doctrine of the Catholic Church was, our Oxford Heads are out in their
guess.

5. The last Charge is, That Three distinct Minas and Substances is especially
contrary to the Doctrine of the Church of England, publicly received. What
they may mean by publicly received, I cannot tell; there may be some Doctrines
too publicly received in the Church of England, which are not the Doctrines of
the Church; and I doubt Sabellianism is one of them: But if they mean by
publicly received, the Doctrine of our Articles and Creeds; this is the very
same with the Doctrine of the Catholic Church. We make profession of the
Nicene Faith every Week, and that asserts a Real and Substantial Trinity, if
Athanasius understood it.

The only pretense, I can guess, they had for this charge, if they thought of
any themselves, must be the Form of the Athanasian Creed, which will not permit
us to say that in the Plural Number of all Three Divine Persons, which it
allows us to attribute distinctly to each distinct Person in the Singular
Number; we may say, the Father is Almighty, the Son Almighty, and the Holy
Ghost Almighty, but must not say that there are three Almighties, but one
Almighty. But will they hence frame an Universal Rule, That nothing must be
said of the Holy Trinity in the Plural Number, considered as Three? We will not
attribute any thing to the Holy Trinity in the Plural Number, which this Creed
forbids; we will not say, there are Three Almighties, Three Eternals, Three
Omnipotents, Three Infinites, Three Gods, or Three Lords; but this Creed does
not forbid us saying, There are Three Minds, or Three Substances; nay, it
teaches us to say, (...), which as you have already heard, in the Language of
the Nicene Age, and more expressly in After Ages, signified Three Substances,
and therefore must do so in this Creed.

The reason given in the Creed against this Plural Praedication is, Because
there is but One God, and therefore such terms, as immediately and directly
multiply the Deity and Godhead, must not be expressed Plurally; and thus the
Plural Praedication of any Divine Perfections in the abstract does; Three
Omnipotents, Three Infinites, Three Eternals, which are Equivalent to Three
Omnipotencies, Three Infinities, Three Eternities; and they to Three Deities,
and Three Godheads, or Three Divine Natures; but though we cannot distinguish
between the Person, and the Divinity, or Divine Nature of that Person, for
there is no Composition in God, or in a Divine Person, as there is in
Creatures; yet when the same Divine Nature, communicated from the Father to the
Son, and from Father and Son to the Holy Spirit, subsists distinctly, tho
inseparably whole and entire in Three; and that which really and actually
subsists, is Mind and Substance, with respect to these Three Subsistencies,
they are and must be Three Minds and Substances, though with respect to the
sameness and identity of the Divine Nature, which is Whole, and Entire and
Inseparable, and therefore but One in all, they are but One, not Three Gods.

This is all the sense I can make of that known distinction between
Substantives and Adjectives in a Plural Praedication; That we may say, there
are Three who Create, but not Three Creators; Three, who are Omnipotent, but
not three Omnipotents, etc. that in these Adjective Praedications, we consider
the Divine Person, Mind or Substance, as a subject of Jahaesion, and these
Divine Perfections as Essential Properties or Attributes, which may and must be
numbered with the Subjects in which they are; but Substantives have a more
absolute sense, and include pure nature, without relation to different
Subjects; and therefore to use them Plurally, is to multiply Nature, to make
more than One Infinite, Eternal, Incomprehensible, Omnipotent Nature, and
consequently to multiply Gods. But from this very distinction we learn, that
there are Three Suppositums or Subjects (and then they will easily be owned to
be Three Minds and Substances) to which all the Perfections of the Deity
belong; for when these Divine Perfections are Praedicated Adjectively, they
must suppose a Subject to which they belong; and they being such Perfections as
can be only in a Mind, they must suppose Three distinct Minds to which they
belong.

Thus I have considered, with all possible brevity, every particular of this
Charge; and if these Decreeing and Heresy-making Heads will be just to me, they
must own, that as they and the Animadverter had ordered the matter, it was
impossible for me to do otherwise, unless I would have been trampled on by
every Scribler: This is a good human reason; but I had a better reason for this
than any thing merely Personal: They have condemned the true Catholic Faith,
even the Nicene Faith, which is the Faith of the Church of England, for Herefy,
and they have exposed this Faith to the Scorn and Triumph of the Socinian
Heretics, who already make their boast, That they have a Decree against the
real Trinit arians; and they only want another against the Nominal ones, and
then their work is done to their hands; tho I think, they have Decrees enough
against them; even all the Fathers and Councils which condemned Sabellius,
condemned them, and if all this be not enough, the common Sense of Mankind, of
which every Plowman is a judge, condemns them: For Three Persons, who are not
Three distinct Minds and Substances, is not greater Herefy, than it is Nonsense.

In short, we have had these Gentlemen's Decree; and now we expect their
Reasons, which it had been much better they had thought of first, and then we
should have escaped their Decree.

FINIS.

