A SERMON Preached before the QUEEN AT WHITE HALL, JUNE 26. 1692.

By WILLIAM SHERLOCK, D. D. Dean of St. Paul's, Master of the Temple, and
Chaplain in Ordinary to Their MAJESTY'S.

Published by Her Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON: Printed for Will. Rogers, at the San over against St. Dunstan's Church
in Fleetstreet. MDCXCII.

The Dean of St. PAUL's SERMON Before the QUEEN, JUNE the 26th, 1692.

PROVE. XVIII. 14. The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity, but a wounded
spirit, who can bear?
ONE great Objection against Providence, is taken from the many Evils and
Calamities which mankind suffer; which would be a reasonable Objection, were
they more than are deserved, or more than are necessary for the wise Government
of the world. But besides other Answers that may be given to it, the Wise-man's
Observation in my Text, furnishes us with Two very plain Answers. 1. That the
Sufferings of this life are not disproportioned to our strength to bear them;
and when Afflictions and Misfortunes are necessary to the wise government of
the world, it is a sufficient vindication of Providence, that God lays no more
on us, than what the spirit of a man can bear; The spirit of a man will sustain
his Infirmities. And 2dly, That the only Evils that are intolerable and
insupportable, are wholly owing to our selves; and then we have no reason to
quarrel at the Divine Providence, when God is more merciful to us, than we are
to our selves. But a wounded spirit, who can bear?

For the Explication and Improvement of these Words, I shall 1. Enquire what is
meant by sustaining Infirmities. 2. By what means the spirit of a man can
sustain his Infirmities. 3. What is meant by a Wounded Spirit. 4. How
unsupportable a Wounded Spirit is. 5. Conclude with some Practical Inferences
from the whole.

1. What is meant by sustaining Infirmities: Now Infirmities in this place
being opposed to a Wounded Spirit, must signify only external sufferings,
whatever is grievous and afflicting, excepting the disorders and troubles of
our own minds. And by sustaining Infirmities, is not meant, that we must not
feel them, nor have any afflicting sense of them; for the Stoics themselves
would not say, that pain was not pain; for then there would be no need of
Patience to bear it; Non ego dolorem, dolorem esse nego, cur enim fortitudo
desideraretur, sed eum opprimi dico pationtia, si modo est aliqua patientia.
Cicer.
but that Patience, if there be any such thing, can conquer pain. And therefore
to sustain Infirmities, is to feel, but not to sink under the weight of them;
as that man sustains his burden, who can go upright, and not stagger, at least
not fall; though he feels the weight of it on his shoulders: That is, he who
can in any measure enjoy himself under suffering, does so far sustain it; and
the more perfectly we can enjoy our selves, though the brightness and gaiety of
our spirits may be a little sullied and overcast, the more complete and perfect
is our Conquest over all the Calamities of Life.

2dly. But the great Enquiry is, How the spirit of a man can sustain his
Infirmities; and that is done Three ways: 1. By Natural Courage, and Strength
of Mind. 2. By the Powers of Reason. 3. By the Diviner Aids and Succors of
Religion.

1. Natural Courage, and Strength of Mind: A man of spirit thinks it a reproach
to be easily disturbed and ruffled, to be put out of humor by every accident,
to sink under the common Calamities of life; nay, to be wholly mastered by the
most extraordinary and formidable Events. There is an inbred Greatness in human
Nature, which does not care to confess its own weakness, which will not yield,
or submit, or own a Conquest; an untaught Courage, which supports the rude and
illiterate part of mankind, even without Reason and Discourse; which is
improved by a sense of Honor in men of Fortune, increases by exercise and
discipline, by hard labor, and difficult trials, and is lost by ease and
luxury, and softness, which makes the Mind as tender as the Body, to feel all
the Vicissitudes of Fortune, as a crazy and distempered body does the change of
Weather. God has put a spirit into man, which can bear his Infirmity; and if we
have it not, it is our own fault.

2dly. The spirit of a man sustains his Infirmities by the Power of Reason,
which adds to our Natural Courage, gives us a more confirmed sense of Decency
and Honor, teaches us the true value of things, quiets our Passions,
undeceives our abused Imaginations, convinces us that some fancied evils are
none at all, others not so great as we thought, and that the worst condition
has its allays, which make it tolerable to a Wise and Good man.

I am far from thinking, That the mere Power of Natural Reason, and Moral
Arguments, is able to support us under all events, much less, that the
Arguments of the Heathen Philosophers, though they said a great many wise and
good things, were sufficient to this purpose; but yet it is certain, That
Reason is the strength of the Mind, and it is the Mind which must bear up under
external Sufferings; and it is as certain, that Nature furnishes us with a
great many Arguments to bear them easily without fainting: As for Instance:

We must consider the state of the world, which is in a continual flux and
motion, and does not long show the same face of things; that the various Lusts
and passions of men among whom we live, will create a great deal of trouble to
us; and that our mortal bodies are liable to pain and hunger, and many
Calamities. This is the state of all mankind in this world; and if after all,
it be desirable to live, to come into, and to continue in this world, upon
these terms, we must make the best of our condition, and bear our sufferings
patiently, and not repine, if we escape as well as the generality of Mankind:
In such a state of life we must not promise to our selves a complete and
undisturbed Happiness; for then we must be disappointed, and be very uneasy
and impatient at such a disappointment; but we must expect to suffer more or
less, and that will make us think we escape well, when our Sufferings are but
light; and teach us to arm our selves against those which are greater with
courage and patience.

Thus a Wise man sees through the frightful or flattering Disguises of things,
and judges by Nature, not by Fancy and Opinion; and then he finds no mighty
reason to be disturbed about many things, which are judged and resented as
great Calamities by unthinking Men. Reason teaches them, that Nature is
contented with a little, and that poor men enjoy themselves, and have their
Pleasures and Satisfactions, as well as the Rich; and therefore Poverty without
pressing Wants, is not so great an Evil, as it is thought by some men: and then
it can be no intolerable Evil neither, to fall from a high and prosperous
Fortune to a meaner State. Reason teaches them, that a good man, who is
conscious to himself of his own Virtue and Integrity, ought not to be concerned
for unjust Reproaches, which are the effects of Ignorance or Malice. That
undeserved Honors, unjust Praises and Commendations are only the
Entertainments of Fools; and that unjust Reproaches ought not to put Wise men
out of countenance. And thus it is in other Cases; There is a vast difference
between the natures of things, and men's Opinions; and were our Passions and
Resentments governed by Reason, and proportioned to the nature of things, not
to the Opinions of men about them, it would make our Condition in this World
much more easy and tolerable. But I cannot now particularly show you all the
variety of Arguments, whereby men may support themselves under several
Calamities of Life; it is sufficient to my present purpose, that Reason gives a
new strength and vigor to the spirit of a man to sustain his Infirmities.

Thirdly, But the greatest Supports of all, are the Arguments Religion
furnishes us with; as to name but two at present. 1. That whatever we suffer is
not the effect of a blind Chance, or fatal Necessity, but is ordered by a Wise
and Good Providence. 2. That if we bear our present Sufferings with patience
and submission to the Will of God, and make a wise use of them to our
improvement in Grace and Virtue, our very sufferings shall be greatly rewarded
in the next World. These two Principles are the Foundations of all Religion,
and as certain as any thing in Religion; all other Arguments without this
belief cannot support us, and there are no Sufferings too great for a man to
bear, who is thoroughly possessed with a firm belief and vigorous sense of these.

Can we our selves, or the kindest Friend in the World, choose better for us
than God? Do we suspect his Wisdom, or his Goodness? Can he mistake our
Condition, who knows our Frame? Can he be wanting in his care of us, or in good
will to us, who made us? What is it we desire, but to be happy? and if God
intends our happiness in his severest Corrections, why should we complain?
Religion teaches us, that the care of our Souls is of much greater concernment
to us than bodily Ease or Pleasure; and if God sees Pain and Sickness, Poverty
and Disgrace, necescessary to cure, or restrain our vicious and distempered
Passions, or to improve and exercise our Graces, have we any reason to complain
that God takes such severe methods to save our Souls? Had we rather be
miserable for ever, than suffer some present want and pain? The Soul is the
best part of Man; and to take care of a man, is to improve his better Part; and
this is the Design of God's Providence toward particular men, to train them up
to Virtue by such methods of Kindness or Severity, as he sees them want.

This I confess may be very grievous and afflicting at present, but then we
have the hopes of Immortal Life to support us; and can that man be miserable,
can he sink under present Sufferings, who has the hope of Immortal Life, as the
Anchor of the Soul, both sure and steadfast? To believe, that all things at
present are intended for our good, and shall work together for our good, if we
love God; and that when we have out-rid the Storms of this World, by Faith, and
Patience, and Hope, These light afflictions, which are but for a moment, shall
work for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory: This, if any
thing, will make all the Sufferings of this Life easy: if natural Courage, or
natural Reason fail, the Spirit of a man, supported by Religion, will sustain
his Infirmity.

Thirdly, Let us now consider what is meant by a wounded Spirit: This is a
metaphorical Expression, and signifies a Spirit which suffers pain and trouble.
A wound in the Body, is a Division of one part from another, which is always
painful; and tho a Spirit cannot be thus divided, yet because a Wound causes
Pain; a Spirit which is disordered, and suffers pain, is said to be wounded: As
for instance,

Some men's Spirits are wounded with the disorders and violence of their own
Passions; they love, or hope, or fear, or desire, or grieve immoderately; and
all Passions are very painful, when they are in excess. Upon this account the
Wicked are said to be like a troubled sea when it cannot rest, whose waters
cast up mire and dirt: there is no peace, says my God, to the wicked.

Other men's Spirits are wounded with a sense of Guilt; their own Consciences
reproach and shame them, and threaten the Vengeance of God against them; they
have gratified their Lust, or Revenge, their Ambition, or Covetousness; and
dreamt of nothing but ease and pleasure; the Temptation was very charming as it
came toward them, but now the heat and impetus is allayed, and the enjoyment
over, they cannot reveiw what they have done, without horror; their affrighted
Consciences draw the most amazing scenes of Judgment, and paint their Fancies
with all the blackest Images of Terror; The Sinners of Sion are afraid, fear
has surpised the Hippocrites, Who shall dwell with devouring fire, who shall
dwell with everlasting burnings?

3dly, This is the wounded Spirit, and such a wounded Spirit, who can bear?
This is Matter of Sense, and therefore for the Proof of it, we must appeal to
the Sense of Mankind; and there is no danger in this Appeal; for though some
Men may scorn to confess, what they feel, yet if all Men's Minds be of a make,
we can feel in our selves, what other Men feel: And then we all know, that
Anger when it grows immoderate, and increases into Rage and Fury, worries the
Mind, and sharpens it self into such a keenness, as cuts deep into our own
Souls; that an immoderate love of Riches or Honors or Pleasures creates us
infinite Trouble, torments with an impatient Thirst, with restless and uneasy
Expectations, distracts us between Hopes and Fears, kills with Delays and
Disappointments; and there are but few Men, who can long dissemble their inward
pain and uneasiness, but confess it in their Looks, and Words, and Behavior,
by external and visible Symptoms of Frenzy and Distraction.

And yet all this is nothing to the Agonies of a guilty Mind, as any Man must
confess who knows what it is to be Self-condemned, and to live under the
Apprehensions of God's Wrath, and the terrible Expectations of endless
Torments; for with what Courage and Patience can any Man bear such a Thought as
this, that he must be miserable for ever? some Men may laugh away the Thoughts
of Hell, but it is certain, that no Man who believes in good earnest, that
there is a Hell, and that he himself is in the most apparent danger of falling
into it, that can bear this Thought: The many sad Examples of despairing
Sinners, who at the last moment groan out their Souls in Agonies and Horrors,
are an undeniable Proof of this. Men who do not believe a Hell may laugh at it,
till they feel it; but for experiments sake let them only suppose that there
were a Hell, and that Hell were to be their Portion, and then let them tell me,
how they can bear such a Thought.

This is sufficient to satisfy us, how unsupportable a wound Spirit is, but to
give us a deeper and more lasting Sense of it, I shall further observe, that a
wounded Spirit has no refuge or retreat, has nothing left to support it self
with. The Spirit of a Man can bear his Infirmities, but when the Spirit it self
is wounded, there is nothing to support that; this wounds our Courage, our
Reason, makes all external Comforts tastless, and deprives us of all the
Comforts of Religion.

For 1st. What Courage can any Man have against Himself, against the Wounds and
Disorders of his own Mind? Courage is nothing else, but a firmness of Mind to
govern its own Resentments and Passions; to suffer Pain, and Reproach, and
other Evils without immoderate Grief, and to encounter dangers without an
amazing fear; but when the Mind it self is oppressed with Grief and Fears and
Cares, the Disease which Courage should prevent has already seized the Spirits.
Courage fortifies us against external Evils to keep them at a distance from
wounding our Spirits, but the Disorders of our own Passions are inward Wounds,
which we must feel and languish under. When our own Consciences reproach,
chide, and threaten us, the good Opinion and Courtships of the World cannot
defend us from our selves, we cannot stop our ears against it, we cannot harden
our selves against its Terrors, it is a domestic Fury, which when it is
provoked and awakened, will be heard, and will make us tremble, will make us
judge and condemn our selves, and begin our own Torments in frightful Horrors
and Agonies of Mind.

2dly, Whereas reason can fortify the Mind against all external Calamities,
when our Spirits are wounded, that little Reason we have left proves our
Tormentor. When we are under the Transports of violent and disorderly Passions,
Reason cannot be heard, or is bribed by Passion to justify its own Excesses.
Wise Counsels are lost on such men, as much as a Lecture of Philosophy would be
in the Noise and Distraction of an Alarm or Battle.

What a sullen and obstinate thing is Grief! how does it pore on its own
Misfortune, nourish its Disease, and despise all Arts of Diversion, that it is
commonly above the cure of any thing but Time, which weakens the Impression, or
tires men with their own Complaints.

When our Consciences are wounded with Guilt, this arms all the Reason we have
against us, for Reason in such Cases can never be on our side; then Reason
discovers our Shame and Danger, aggravates our Sins, and many times drives such
awakened Sinners into the very Horrors of Despair, disputes against the
possibility of their Pardon, and blots their Names out of all the Promises of
the Gospel, how large and universal soever they be. The Guides of Souls, who
are always consulted upon such Occasions, (how much soever they are despised at
other times) could tell a great many sad Stories of this kind, enough to convince
Sinners, that even Wit and Reason is a very dangerous Enemy, when a guilty
Conscience turns the edge of it against our selves.

3dly, When there is no Ease and Comfort within, there is no other Remedy, but
to seek for Support and Comfort from abroad; and there are a great many pretty
Diversions in the World to entertain Men, who are at leisure to attend them,
but these are no Entertainments to a wounded Spirit. When men are galled by
their own Passions, by Fear, Emulation, Jealousy, Discontent, in the very
midst of laughter the heart is sorrowful. As great as Haman was, all his Riches
and Power availed him nothing, while he saw Mordecai the Jew sitting at the
Kings Gate, 5 Esth. 13.

The good things of this World are very considerable, when there is an easy
and cheerful mind to enjoy them; but they cannot make a man easy and happy,
whose Mind is disturbed; they may entertain an easy Mind, but cannot quiet the
Tumults and Disorders of Passions, nor give any Ease to a wounded Spirit.

Much less can external things appease the Horrors of a guilty Conscience. Away
all ye vain Delights will such a man say, what have I to do with Pleasure, when
Torments, everlasting Torments, must be my Portion? Why do ye tell me of Riches
and Honors, when the great God is my Enemy, when I am despised and abhorred of
my Maker, and am thought worthy of no better Portion than Eternal Flames? I am
not at leisure to attend the Flattering Courtships of this World; my Thoughts
are taken up with a more dreadful Prospect of things to come. O Eternity,
Eternity, the never-dying Worm, the never-dying Death!

4thly, Nor can a wounded Spirit find any Support from the Considerations of
Religion, unless it find its Cure there. If the Belief of a Divine Providence
and another World can cure our Love to present things, it will give us quiet
and easy Passions too, but without this a wounded and distempered Spirit will
reproach God as well as Men, and rage against Heaven it self; like that wicked
King, This evil is of the Lord, why should I wait on the Lord any longer? As
Solomon observes, The foolishness of Man perverteth his ways, and his heart
fretteth against the Lord.

If the Fear of God, and of those Punishments He has threatened against Sin,
makes us true and sincere Penitents, conquers our vicious Habits, and reforms
our Lives, this is such a wounded Spirit, as God will bind up again, such a
broken and contrite Heart as God will not despise; but the Thoughts of God and
of a future Judgment are very terrible to Impenitent Sinners. It is a dreadful
Prospect to look into the other World, and to see those Lakes of Fire and
Brimstone, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. And this is all that Bad men
can see in the next World.

Thus we see how supportable all External Evils and Calamities are, how
insupportable a wounded Spirit is; and the comparing these two Cases will
suggest some very useful Thoughts to us.

As, First, This is a great Vindication of the Providence of God, with respect
to those Evils and Calamities that are in the World. Sufferings are very
necessary in this corrupt and degenerate State of Mankind, but though God sees
it necessary to punish Sinners, yet he has made abundant Provision to support
us under all external Sufferings: He inflicts nothing on us, but what the
Spirit of a Man can sustain, and support it self under; but our greatest
Sufferings are owing to our selves, and no more chargeable on the Providence of
God than our Sins are. Nothing that is external can hurt us, while our minds
are sound and healthful, but it is only a disordered or guilty mind which gives
a Sting to Afflictions: God corrects in measure, as we are able to bear, but we
our selves tie the Knots, or add the Scorpions to the Scourge*

Secondly* This greatly recommends the Divine Wisdom, in that Provision God has
made for our Support under Sufferings.

As, 1st, Since the generality of Mankind were not likely to prove any great
Philosophers, GOD has bestowed on them such a measure of Natural Courage, as
will bear Afflictions better than the Reason and Philosophy of more thinking
men, and we may generally observe, that those who make the least use of their
Reason, and have the least share of External Comforts, have the greatest
Portion of this untaught Courage, because they need it most.

2. God has provided the greatest Supports for the best men. Those who use
their Reason, and examine the nature of things, will more easily bear Poverty,
and Disgrace, and such other Evils, than men who judge by Opinion and popular
Mistakes.

Those who live by Reason, and govern their sensual Appetites and Inclinations,
and use the things of this World, so as not to be mastered by them, retain that
Courage and Strength of Mind, which is lost by Softness and Effeminacy.

But a truly devout man, who believes the Wisdom and Goodness of Providence,
and the Rewards of the next Life has the greatest Support of all. Whereas an
impenitent Sinner, who wounds his Conscience with Guilt, and an Atheist, who
believes neither a God nor a Providence, have nothing but Sottishness and
Stupidity to support them; and could things be better ordered for the
encouragement of Virtue and Religion. Good men, whatever their Condition be,
have the Advantage of the Wicked, even as to this present Life; they may be
easy, and enjoy themselves in all Conditions, for GOD has provided for their
present Support; but if bad men be Sufferers, they have nothing to support
them; and though they be prosperous, they feel such Disorders of Passions, or
such guilty Fears, as sour all their other Enjoyments.

3. God has so wisely ordered things, that we cannot support our selves under
Sufferings without making a wise and good use of them; for the best Arguments
to comfort us under Sufferings, will afford us no comfort unless they make us
better. It is a great comfort that Afflictions are appointed by a wise and good
God: But he who considers this, will naturally inquire into the Reason, why God
strikes, will search and try his way and turn unto the Lord, will hear the rod
and who it is, that has appointed it.

That Afflictions are ordered for our good will make us endeaveour to reap the
Spiritual Benefit of them: for that Afflictions are useful is no Comfort at
all, unless we make a wise use of them; unless they bring forth the peaceable
Fruits of Righteousness.

No Man can take Comfort in the Rewards of the next World, without bearing his
Sufferings well in this; for our Sufferings will have no reward, unless they
make us better; unless they purify our Minds, and exercise our Faith and
Patience and Submission to the Will of God.

3dly, I observe, That it is better to suffer then to sin even with respect to
our present ease, because sufferings may be born by an innocent and virtuous
Mind, but Guilt inflicts an unsupportable wound upon the Spirit, and those
Sufferings which the Spirit of a Man can bear, are rather to be chosen, than
what the Spirit of a Man cannot bear.

Lastly, I observe, that the Government of our own Passions contributes more to
our Happiness than any external Enjoyments. While our Minds are disordered with
violent and tumultuous Passions we can never be Easy and Happy, whatever else
we enjoy: for this gives such a Wound to the Spirits, as no external Enjoyments
can heal: But he who has his Passions under government, who knows how to Love
and Fear and Desire and Hope, though he may be a great Sufferer, can never be
miserable, because he can support himself under all other Sufferings. What a
wrong Course then do the generality of Mankind take to make themselves happy:
They seek for Happiness without, when the Foundation of Happiness must be laid
within, in the Temper and Disposition of our Minds. An easy quiet Mind will
weather all the Storms of Fortune; but how calm and serene soever the Heavens
be, there is no peace to the Wicked, who have nothing but noise and tumult and
confusion within.

To God the Father, God the Son, and and God the Holy Ghost, be Honor, Glory,
and Power now and for ever, Amen.
FINIS.
Books Published by the Reverend Dr. Sherlock, Dean of St. Paul's, Master of the
Temple, and Chaplain in Ordinary to Their Majesty's.
AN Answer to a Discourse, entitled, Papists Protesting against Protestant
Popery. Second Edition. 4to. An Answer to the Amicable Accommodation of the
Differences between the Representer and the Answerer. 4to. A Sermon at the
Funeral of the Reverend Benjamin Calamy, D. D. 4to. A Vindication of some
Protestant Principles and Church-Unity and Catholick-Communion from the Charge
of Agreement with the Church of Rome. 4to. A Preservative against Popery; being
some plain Directions to unlearned Protestants how to dispute with Romish
Priests. In Two Parts with the Vindication, in Answer to the Cavils of Lewis
Sabran, Jesuit. 4to. A Discourse concerning the Nature, Unity, and Communion of
the Catholic Church. First Part. 4to. A Sermon preached before the Right
Honorable the Lord Mayor, and Aldermen of the City of London, on Sunday
November 4th. 1688. 4to. A Vindication of the Doctrine of the Holy and Ever
Blessed Trinity, and the Incarnation of the Son of God, etc. The Second
Edition. 4to. The Case of the Allegiance due to Sovereign Powers stated and
resolved according to Scripture, Reason, and the Principles of the Church of
England. Sixth Editior. Quarto. A Vindication of the Case of Allegiance due to
Sovereign Powers, etc. Quarto. A Sermon Preached at Whitehall before the Queen,
on the 17th. of June, 1691. being the Fast Day. Quarto. A Practical Discourse
concerning Death. The Fifth Edition. Octavo. A Practical Discourse concerning a
Future Judgment. Second Edition. Octavo. A Sermon Preached before the
Honorable House of Commons at St. Margarets Westminster, January 30th. 1691/2.
Quarto. A Sermon Preached before the Queen at Whitehall, Febr. 12. 1691/2.
Quarto. The Charity of Lending without Usury, and the true Notion of Usury
stated, in a Sermon Preached before the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor at St.
Bridget's Church, on Tuesday in Easter-week, 1692. Quarto. A Sermon Preached at
the Temple-Church, May 29th. 1692. and Printed at the Desire of the Bench-Table
of the Honorable Society of the Inner Temple. Quarto.
Printed for W. Rogers.


