LICENSED.

ERRATA.
PAge 9. line 3. for usual, r. unusual, p. 21. l. 8. f. any r. an. l. 24. f.
(...), p. 22. Marg. l. 9. r. (...), p. 11. p. (...).

A DEFENSE OF Dr. SHERLOCK's NOTION OF A Trinity in Unity, In ANSWER to the
ANIMADVERSIONS upon his Vindication of the Doctrine of the Holy and ever
Blessed TRINITY. With a POSTSCRIPT Relating to the Calm Discourse of a Trinity
in the GODHEAD. In A Letter to a Friend.

LONDON, Printed for W. Rogers, at the Sun, over against St. Dunstan's Church
in Fleet Street, MDCXCIV.

A DEFENSE OF Dr. SHERLOCK's NOTION OF A Trinity in Unity, etc.
SIR,
I Had heard very often, and very much of the Animadversions upon Dr.
Sherlock's Vindication of the Doctrine of the Trinity; but I had also heard
such a Character of it, which both Friends and Foes agreed in, that I could not
persuade my self to read it; For a Satirical Wit is no diversion to a Wise Man,
except in a Play, and where it hurts no Body; and I could never think, that
true Divine Wisdom rests on an ill-natured and perverse Spirit. But your late
Letter awakened me; for I could not but think that Book, whatever other Faults
it had, must be worth reading, which you could think worth answering, and seem
so impatiently to expect, when the Dean, or some body for him, should Answer
it. As for the Dean, he has given Testimony to the World, that he has not been
Idle all this while, but much better employed: And, to speak my Mind freely, I
don't see how he is obliged to Answer, unless you think a Man bound to Answer
Ballads and Lampoons; for he is as little concerned in it as you are; that, had
it not been for the Title Page, and some particular Expressions, which the Dean
uses, and the Animadverter furiously opposes, without understanding them, I
could never have guessed against whom he had Writ. I had, a little before, read
over the Vindication, and the Notions lay fresh and easy in my Mind, but as
soon as I dipped into the Animadversions they were all on a sudden confounded,
and put into disorder. The Animadverter Disputes earnestly, subtly, and
triumphantly, opens his whole Armory of Metaphysics, and because they are
thin, airy Weapons, which do no great Execution, he points them with Wit and
Satyr, to make them pierce the deeper.

It was the Saying of a very Witty Man, that He who Writes lies down, but it is
to be supposed, he forgot it when he made the Experiment himself: But I must
say this for the Animadverter, That he is as fair an Adversary, upon this
account as one would desire; as he spares not those who lie down before him, so
he very civilly takes his turn, and lays himself as fairly open to Satirical
Wit, if the Dean, or any of his Friends, would condescend to exercise it upon
him. When he ventures upon any thing like Wit, he always makes himself a Jest,
and never so much insults and triumphs over an Enemy, as where he is certainly
himself in the Wrong: I will not entertain you with particular Remarks of this
Nature; read over his Book again, if you have the Patience, and see if this be
not true.

But, Sir, as well as I love you, I Am resolved to humble you, for giving me the
trouble of reading this Book, not by giving a particular Answer to the whole,
which would be too unmerciful, but by convincing you, that it needed no Answer;
and to let you see what a trifling Author you have either admired or feared,
will prove some little Humiliation to you: But I shall do it in short, to save
my self, as much as I can, the pains of Writing, and you of Reading, and
therefore shall consider only the main Points of Dispute between the
Animadverter and the Dean, concerning Self-Consciousness, Mutual-Consciousness,
and Three eternal and infinite Minds.

He rages furiously against the Dean, according to his Custom, in a whole long
Chapter, for discarding those good old Terms of Essence, Substance, Nature,
etc. for his own new-invented Terms of Self-consciousness, and
Mutual-consciousness; that any one who reads it, would believe, That the Dean
would not allow GOD to be a real Substantial Being, or to have any Nature or
Essence; whereas he no where denies, That these are very good Words, and not
only useful but necessary in some cases, but yet very apt to confound us with
Material and Sensible Images, when we go about to form a Notion and Idea of
GOD. We know not the naked Substance or Essence of any Thing, not of Matter,
much less of Spirit, and much less of an infinite and eternal Spirit; and
therefore, as we can form no other Idea of Matter, but by its sensible
Qualities, so we can form no Idea of a Spirit, but by such Attributes and
Powers as are proper and essential to a Spirit; which is so far from being a
Novelty, that it is to think and speak with all the considering part of
Mankind; but let this pass, which the Dean is no more concerned in, were his
Words and Sense truly and heartily represented, than the best Christian
Writers, both Ancient and Modern, as were easily shown, did I not fear the
Animadverter, should he know it, would rail at them all for his sake; for there
is not a more Capital Crime, than to speak any thing well of the Dean, or to
say any thing that he says.

That which the Dean is more immediately concerned in, is the Idea he has
endeavored to give us of a Trinity in Unity; and all that he positively
asserts of it is, That it is a possible and intelligible Notion, and no other
in Sense and Substance, than what the ancient Fathers made use of to represent
this great Mystery by, though expressed in other Terms.

To prepare you to judge equally in this Cause, you must remember, That the
Substance of the Article is not concerned in it; here is no Dispute about a
Trinity in Unity: This the Dean asserts in as full and ample words as the
Athanasian Creed it self, which some Trinitarians themselves boggle at, but
without reason as he thinks; for whoever will acknowledge Three Persons in the
Godhead, each of which distinctly considered is GOD, and has all the
Perfections of the Divine Nature, and yet are all Three but one GOD, must, as
he undertakes to prove, own the Terms and Explications of that Creed. He has
been careful to preserve a Real, not a merely Nominal, distinction of Persons,
and yet asserts the Unity of the Godhead in as high terms, as ever the Schools
did, even a Natural Numerical Unity; and there is no reason to suspect he
dissembles his Sense, for then he might have concealed it too, having no other
obligation to engage in this Cause, but a Zeal for this truly Ancient,
Catholic, and Apostolic Faith. Since then here is no Innovation made in the
Faith, nor any alteration of the least term in it, what is the Fault? Truly no
other than what the best Writers, both Ancient and Modern, have been equally
guilty of, if it can be called a Fault.

Those who are acquainted with this Controversy, know, that the great
Objection against the Catholic Faith of the Trinity in Unity, is not its
contradiction to any plain and express Principle of Reason, but the
unconceiveabless of it: It is certain, that Three should be One, and One Three,
upon different accounts, is no contradiction, and then what Principle of Reason
does a Trinity in Unity contradict? But we must grant, that we have no perfect
Example of any such Union in Nature, and therefore cannot frame a complete and
positive Notion and Idea of such an Union: and this some Men miscall
Contradicting Reason; but if every thing, which we have no positive Idea of,
must be allowed to contradict Reason, we shall find Contradictions enough; and
which is worse, must be forced to believe Contradictions; for we must confess a
great many things to be true, which we have no Idea of, and cannot conceive how
they should be.

But yet since the unconceivableness of this Union is the great difficulty, and
great Objection (though in truth it is no Objection at all to any one, who
considers, how unconceivable and incomprehensible the Divine Nature is) the
Ancient Fathers endeavored to help our conception and imagination of this by
some sensible Images: Such as the Co-essentiality and Union of the Sun, its
Light and Splendour, of a Fountain and its Streams, a Tree and its Branches, as
the Dean has observed, and as every one knows, whoever looked into the Fathers.

But these are Material Images, and may serve for Allusions, and to render the
Notion of a Trinity in Unity possible and credible; when we see some faint
resemblances of it in the Material World; but they cannot help us to conceive,
what kind of Union there is between the Divine Persons, the Union of Matter and
Spirit differing as much as Matter and Spirit do, which have no likeness or
resemblance to each other.

And therefore the Dean was certainly so far in the right, to seek for some
Image and resemblance of this Mysterious Union in the Unity of a Spirit: For a
Mind and Spirit is the truest Image of God, that is in Nature; for God is a
Spirit, and therefore it is more likely to find some Image of the Unity of the
Godhead in a Spirit, than in Matter, and yet we know nothing of a Spirit, but
what we feel in our Selves, and can Philosophize no farther about it; for as
Mr. Lock has truly observed, we can form no Idea but either from external
Impressions, or internal Sensations; and therefore we can know no more of the
Unity of a Spirit neither, than what we feel.

Now whoever considers, how he knows himself to be a distinct and separate
Person from all other Men, will be able to resolve it into nothing else but
Internal Sensation, which the Dean, not improperly; calls Self-consciousness.
The Unity of Matter consists in the Unity of its parts, and we can see, how far
its Unity extends, and where it ends; for its Unity extends, as far as the
continuity of its parts extends, and ends, where that ends: But we know of no
extension or parts in a Spirit, and therefore the very Nature of a Spirit
consisting in internal and vital Sensation, the Unity of a Spirit consists in
the continuity (if I may so speak) of its Sensation: So far as a Man feels
himself, or is Self-conscious, so far he is One entire Person; where this
Self-conscious Sensation ends, he becomes a distinct and separate Person: For
it is a Self-evident Proposition, that in an intelligent Self-conscious Being,
Self can reach no farther than he feels himself. And I would desire any
thinking Man to tell me, how he knows himself to be a distinct and separate
Person from all other Men, but only by this, that he feels his own Thoughts,
Volitions and Passions, Pains and Pleasures, but feels nothing of all this in
other Men.

I have been forced to explain this more at large, to help the Animadverter to
some conception of it, who I find understood not one word of it, as will appear
presently. But to proceed. The Dean having thus observed, that the Unity of a
single Mind or Spirit consists in such a Natural Self conscious Sensation, this
led him on to that other Notion of a Mutual-consciousness, which may be between
Three distinct Spirits, and make them naturally One, as much as Three can be
One. For if a Natural Selfconscious Sensation makes a Spirit One with it self,
why should not a natural Mutual-conscious Sensation unite Three into One? For
if natural Unity extends as far as Conscious Sensation, then if Conscious
Sensation extends to Three, why should not these Three be acknowledged to be
naturally One? That as a natural Self-consciousness makes One natural Person,
so natural Mutual-consciousness should make a naral Trinity in Unity? For my
part, I believe it is much easier to cry down this representation as a Novelty,
than to offer one word of Sense against it, or to make any other representation
of this Mystery, with so fair and natural an appearance of Truth and Reason:
For this Mutual-consciousness being a natural Sensation, is not a mere Moral,
but a natural Union, not a Cabal of Gods, as a Socinian Writer Profanely
speaks, but one supreme natural Deity.

This indeed forced the Dean to speak of the Three infinite and eternal Persons
in the Godhead, under the Character of Three infinite and eternal Minds, for
this conscious Sensation, whether Self-consciousness or Mutual-consciousness,
can belong only to Minds; and if every Person in the Trinity, considered as a
distinct Person, be not a distinct, infinite, and eternal Mind, there is, I
confess, an end of the Dean's Notion, but then, I doubt, there will be an end
of a Trinity of Persons also, and we shall have nothing left but a Trinity of
Modes and Postures, and Names, not in the Unity of the Godhead, but in the
Unity of one Person who is the whole Deity and Godhead. But if every distinct
Person in the Godhead considered as distinct, be an infinite and eternal Mind,
as it must be, if every distinct Person be GOD, unless any thing else than an
infinite Mind can be GOD, though it be an usual way of speaking to call them
Three eternal Minds, yet there is no Heresy in it, nor any intended by it, as
will appear before we part.

Nor ought this to pass for mere Fancy and Invention; for as the Dean has shown
the Phrases and Expressions of Scripture, whereby the Union between Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost is described, do naturally represent this conscious Union,
and cannot well be understood without it; for that the Father should be in the
Son, and the Son in the Father, so as perfectly to comprehend and be
comprehended, with several like Expressions, is made very possible and
intelligible by a mutual conscious Sensation, but nothing else will afford us
any Conception of it.

Now suppose, That after all these fair Appearances, a spiteful Wit could start
some difficulties in this Notion, (as it is not to be expected, that in a
matter of so high a Nature, we should have such a perfect comprehension of it,
as to leave no difficulties unexplained) ought not the Dean to have met with as
fair Quarter, as other Writers have done in the same cause? Has he not given us
as intelligible a representation (and it is intended for no more) of a Trinity
in Unity, as the Sun, its Light and Splendour, a Tree and its Branches, a
Fountain and its Streams, or a Mathematical Cube? Are not all these Accounts,
much more chargeable with Tritheism or Sabellianism? are not the Sun, its Light
and Splendour, as much Three, but not so much One, as Three Conscious Minds? Can
there be a Trinity in Unity, unless there be a real and substantial Trinity?
What work could our Animadverter have made with the Ancient Fathers, and some
late Writers, had he thought fit to have treated them as he has done Dr.
Sherlock? But it is in vain to expostulate, when the Man, not his Notions, is
in Fault; and the only Comfort in such cases is, That Malice is as blind as
Love, and so it has happened to the Animadverter, as I shall make appear.

But before I particularly answer the Animadverter's Arguments against
Self-consciousness and Mutual-consciousness, and Three eternal Minds, it will
be necessary to Discourse something in general concerning a Trinity in Unity,
and the words whereby to express it. For a Trinity in Unity is such a
distinction, and such an Union, as is peculiar to the Godhead; and though there
are some faint resemblances of it in Nature, yet Nature has nothing like it,
and then it is impossible we should have any words that can adaequately express
it. It may help to allay the heat and virulence of Disputation among those who
heartily believe a Trinity in Unity, (as I hope the Animadverter does) to
discourse this matter plainly and briefly.

The Scriptures, both of the Old and New Testament, every where assure us, That
there is but One GOD; and not to take notice now of the more obscure
intimations of a Trinity in the Old Testament, Christ in his Gospel, and his
Apostles after him, have ascribed the Name and Character and incommunicable
Attributes of GOD to Three, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; we are by the Command
of Christ Baptized in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost, and we are blessed in their Name, The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and the Love of God, and the Communion of the Holy Ghost, be with you all Amen.
Christ declares himself to be the Son of GOD, and to be One with his Father;
and St. John tells us, That he is that Word, which was in the beginning, and
was with God, and was God. That by him all things were made, and without him
was not any thing made, that was made. And the like Divine Attributes are
ascribed to the Holy Spirit; and therefore, though there be One GOD, we must
acknowledge, if we believe the Gospel, that there are Three, Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost in the Unity of the Godhead. This is the true simplicity of the
Christian Faith, to believe Father, Son, and Holy Ghost to be One GOD; that the
Father is not the Son, nor the Holy Ghost; that the Son is not the Father, nor
the Holy Ghost; that the Holy Ghost is not the Father nor the Son; but that the
Father is God, the Son God, and the Holy Ghost God; and all Three but One God.

Now one would have thought, that the Authority of Christ and his Apostles, had
been a sufficient Foundation for this Faith, without any farther enquiries; but
the Devil very well knew, That the whole Economy of our Salvation by Christ,
and consequently the whole Christian Religion, depended on this Faith; and that
the curiosity of Mankind, the weakness of their Understandings, and their vain
presumption in measuring GOD himself by their narrow Conceits, might easily be
managed to unsettle these Foundations; and therefore here he made some of his
earliest Attempts.

The ancient Christians, before this was made a matter of Dispute, contented
themselves with professing their Faith, in One God, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost; but when Heresies in several Ages of the Church were broached, and some,
to secure the Unity of the Godhead, made Father, Son, and Holy Ghost no more
than Three different Names, belonging to Three different Appearances and
Manifestations of the same One God; others (if they were not misunderstood or
misrepresented) did not only distinguish, but separate Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, and made Three absolute independent Gods of them, and others denied the
Divinity of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, which preserved the Unity of the
Godhead, by reducing the only begotten Son, and the Holy Spirit of God into the
rank of Creatures: This forced the Orthodox Fathers into a Dispute, where they
wanted Words adaequately to express their Sense.

The Doctrine, which they constantly affirmed and defended against Heretics of
all sorts, was this; That Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, were Three, as really
distinct from one another, as Three humane Persons are, and that each of them
is true and perfect God, and has all Divine Perfections in himself, and yet
that all Three are essentially One, and the same eternal and infinite God. But
when they came to say, what these Three are, and how they are One, by what Name
to call this wonderful distinction and Unity, here Words failed them, as of
necessity they must, because there is no such Distinction and Unity in Nature,
and therefore no Name for it. For the Names of distinction in ordinary use do
not only distinguish, but divide and separate their Subjects, and the Names of
Unity signify singularity also, which admits no number. And this has
occasioned most of our cavilling Disputes, and raised all the noise and clamor
about Absurdities and Contradictions in the Doctrine of the Trinity; and there
is no help for this, if Men will ask such Questions, as the proper and natural
signification of Words cannot reach the Mystery of, and not allow such a
Theological use of Words, as a little alters their natural Signification, to
accommodate them to represent some divine and supernatural Mysteries.

Thus for Example: A Person signifies a reasonable understanding Being, which
actually subsists, and is distinguished from all other Beings of the same kind;
but then it signifies more than this, not only a distinct, but a separate
Subsistence; for so all created Persons are, not only distinct, but separate
Beings, who have a complete, absolute, independent Subsistence of their own.
But when we use this Word Person in a Theological Sense, as applied to Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost in the ever-blessed Trinity, we only use it in the sense of
distinction, not of separation, to signify, that each of these Holy Three has
all the Perfections of infinite Mind and Understanding, distinctly, as other
Persons have, but not separately, as created Persons have. And since there are
Three in the Unity of the Godhead thus really distinguished from each other
without a separation, I know no reason why we may not use this Word Person in
this limited Sense, to signify Three, who are as really distinct from each
other, but not separated, as other Persons are: For when it is known in what
sense we use the Word, when applied to the Trinity, it is trifling to dispute
against Three Persons in the Godhead, from the signification of the Word
Person, when applied to Creatures; and yet this is the Sum total of all the
Socinian Arguments against Three Persons, and One God, and of all the
Contradictions they pretend to find in it. Three Divine Persons, they say, must
be Three absolute, complete, independent Gods, because Three Humane Persons are
Three complete, absolute Men, who subsist independently on each other; and
therefore it is as manifest a Contradiction, That Three Divine Persons should
be but One God, as it is, that Three Humane Persons should be but One Man;
which signifies nothing, if we do not use the Word Person in the same Sense
(and all the World knows we do not) when applied to the Holy Trinity, as when
applied to Men: For it is mere trifling to dispute against us from such a Sense
of the Word, as we reject, and declare to all Men that we do reject. The most
that can be made of this is, that we use an improper Word, and ought not to
call Father, Son, and Holy Ghost Three Persons, because that is to make Three
Gods of them, as Peter, James, and John are Three Men: But when the importunity
of Heretics forces us to find Names for that, which nothing in created Nature
can answer, if they will not give us leave, we must take leave to use the
properest Names we can find, though not every way proper; and such the Name of
Person is, when applied to the Persons of the Trinity: For all that this Word
Person signifies, except a separate Subsistence, belongs to the Persons of the
Holy Trinity. An intelligent Nature, and all personal Acts of Understanding,
Volition, etc. do as distinctly belong to each Person, as to any Humane
Persons; and it is this makes a Person, not a separate Subsistence, which
belongs only to finite and created, not to infinite and eternal Persons: And
therefore the Word Person is properly enough applied to the Three Divine
Persons, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, because all that is essential to the
Notion of a Person, belongs to each of them, though they do not subsist
separately, as Humane Persons do.

But yet Men are very apt to judge of the Divine Persons, by what they see in
Humane Persons, and to fancy these Three Persons in the Deity to be like Three
Men, who have the same Humane Nature, but subsist and act separately, and are
One only by a moral Consent and Unity: And therefore to prevent this
Imagination, which betrays Men to down right Tritheism, others, without
rejecting the Name Person, have thought fit more expressly to signify what kind
of Persons they are, by calling them Three Subsistences; that is, Three who
have all the Perfections of the Godhead, and do really and distinctly subsist;
for else they could not be Three Subsistences, but yet do not subsist as
separate Persons, but are essentially One God: For Subsistence does not
necessarily infer Separation, for Three may distinctly subsist, though
essentially and inseparably united. And this is the difference between Person
and Subsistence, that according to the most usual acceptance of the Word
Person, which it is hard to correct, (for that Idea which in common use belongs
to a Word, is apt to stick close to it,) Three Persons, signify Three who
subsist apart, and as separately as Three Men do: But Three Subsistences are
Three Persons who subsist distinctly without Separation: For Subsistence
necessarily signifies a distinct and real, but not a separate Subsistence; for
if Three really subsist without a Separation, they are Three real Subsistences;
and therefore it is in vain for the Socinians to dispute against Three Persons,
that they must be Three separate Persons, unless they can prove that they
cannot really subsist without a Separation, which none of them ever yet
undertook; and yet all their Talk of Contradictions and Three Gods, vanishes
without it.

What I have said of the Word Person, is with equal reason applicable to the
Word Mind. The Animadverter objects against the Dean, That a Mind or Spirit is
an absolute Being, Nature, or Substance; and I grant it is so in the common use
of the Word, as apapplied to created Minds and Spirits; but so is Person also,
as much as Mind; and if we allow of a Theological use of the Word Person, why
not of Mind too? to signify an intelligent Subsistence, which is a Mind too,
but not a separate Mind, and therefore not such an absolute Being, Nature, and
Substance, as a created Mind is. And when the Dean speaks of Three distinct
infinite Minds, which are essentially and inseparably One, he could mean
nothing more than three distinct intelligent, but not separate Subsistences:
And he needs ask no other Pardon, but for the use of a Word, which the Schools
have not consecrated.

But there is greater want of Words to express the Unity and Oneness of the
Divine Nature and Essence, than the distinction of Persons. The Nicene Fathers
in their Controversy with Arius, of which, (if there be occasion more
hereafter,) who denied the Divinity of Christ, and made him no more than a
Creature, though as perfect, and as like to God as a Creature could be, used
the Word Homoousion, which was not first invented by them to serve that turn,
but was used either in Words or Sense by the Anti-Nicene Fathers, as the
learned Dr. Bull has proved.

But what is this Homoousion, or Sameness of Nature? This is the difficulty;
for there is not any one Word to explain it by, which adequately answers the
full Notion of the Divine Unity; and that is no great wonder, because there is
no perfect Example in Nature of any such Unity.

They very often explain this by Examples of a Specific Unity: That the Father
and Son have the same Nature, as Abraham and Isaac have; and therefore they
call Men, who have the same Specific Nature, (...), and so they do the Sun,
its Light, and Splendour, the Tree and its Branches, etc. And this is in part a
true representation of the Homoousiotes, or Sameness of Nature in the Persons
of the Holy Trinity; for if there be not that which perfectly Answers, though
it much out-does also a specific Sameness and Unity, their Nature cannot be
the same, and accordingly they prove against the Arians, that Christ cannot be
the Son of God, if he be not Homoousios to his Father, because every Father
begets a Son in his own Nature.

But yet we must not say, nor did they intend it so, That the Unity of Nature
between Father, and Son, and Holy Spirit, is a mere specific Sameness. For we
must not make the Divine Nature a Species, which is common to more Individuals;
for then the Unity of the Divine Nature is no more than a Logical Notion, which
is the only Unity of a Specific Nature; whereas God is essentially and
numerically one. The Three Divine Persons are not individuals of the same
Nature; for then they must have Three individual subsisting Divine Natures,
which would as much make Three Gods, as Three individual subsisting Humane
Natures make Three Men: The Divine Nature would then be communicated by
Multiplication, as Humane Nature is, which must multiply Gods as well as Men.

Is this Sameness of Nature then one single or singular Nature, which has but
one single Subsistence? This the Fathers utterly deny, as being the Heresy of
Sabellius, and leaving no other Trinity of Persons in the Godhead, but a
Trinity of Names. The Divine Nature is One Individual Nature (as you shall hear
presently) but not One Single Nature; for one Single Nature can be but One
Person, whether in God or Man.

I shall not dispute this at large now; I may find a properer place for it, but
I shall only observe at present, That if there be but One only single Nature in
God, the whole Trinity must be Incarnate in the Incarnation of Christ, as
Sabellius asserted: For the Divine Nature was Incarnate in Christ, he was
perfect God, and perfect Man, and if there was but one single subsisting Nature
in all Three Persons, this one single Divine Nature was Incarnate; and
therefore the Father and the Holy Ghost, who are this one single Divine Nature,
as well as the Son, must be as much Incarnate as the Son was; for though it
were possible to conceive Three Divine Persons in One single Divine Nature, yet
it is absolutely impossible, that this One single Nature should be incarnate,
and not the Divine Nature of all the Three Persons be incarnate, when it is but
One single Nature in all: And it is absurd to say, that the One Divine Nature
of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost is incarnate, and yet none but the Son
incarnate. This is what Victorinus Afer teaches: Non oportet dicere, nec fas
est dicere, unam esse Substantiam, tres esse Personas; si enim ista ipsa
Substantia and egit omnia, and passa est, patripassiani and nos; absit. Bibl.
Patr. Tom. 4. We ought not, says he, to say, nor is it lawful to say, that
there is but One Substance, (that is, One single subsisting Nature,) and Three
Persons; for if this same Substance did and suffered all, we also must be
Patripassians; which God forbid; That is, we must say, That the Father suffered
as well as the Son, as Sabellius taught. It is such Animadversions, and such
unintelligible Notions, which make the Christian Faith ridiculed by Atheists
and Heretics.

But the great difficulty is, how to conceive One Individual Nature, which is
numerically One, but is not One single Nature: And yet thus it must be, if
there be a Trinity in Unity, Three real Hypostases and Subsistences in One
Divine Nature; which the Counterfeit Areopagite, but an ancient and learned
Writer, calls (...), a Monad or Unite, which thrice subsists, or has Three
Subsistences; whereas it is demonstrable, That One single Nature can subsist
but once, or have but One Subsistence: And therefore the ancient Fathers owned,
that Father and Son is alius and alius, and that God is solus, but non
solitarius.

That I may be the better understood, and give you some imperfect Conception of
this great and venerable Mystery, let us contemplate this individual Identity
and Sameness of Nature, in a Man and his Image.

A Man sees his own Image in a Glass, the exact Proportion of his Body, all the
Lines and Features in his Face, all his own Motions, and Postures, whether he
smiles or cries, sits or stands. Now suppose this were a real, living Image, as
exactly himself, both in Body and Mind, as the Image in the Glass represents
his external Shape and Features: That this living Image was coeval with
himself, and did subsist as necessarily as he did, and yet as much depend upon
him, as the Image in the Glass does on his Face and Presence: That this Living
Image did understand and will in the same Act with himself, and repeat all his
Motions and Passions, and Sensations, as his Face in the Glass does: That this
living Image knew himself to be but an Image, distinct from the Original, but
the same with him; and that the Man whose Image it is, knew himself to be
distinct from his Image, but yet the same; and that the Man and his living
Image felt each other, and all that is in each other, in themselves.

Now I desire to know by what Name you would call such a living Image? You
cannot deny him to be a Man, because he has Humane Nature in himself, and
distinctly in himself, as completely and perfectly as the Man has, whose Image
he is, or else he were not a complete and perfect Image: And yet you cannot say
that he is a distinct Man, or another Man, a Second Man, for he is but an
Image, and the very same with the Original, and therefore they are both but One
Man; naturally One, not as Two other Men are, who may be morally One, by a
Consent and Agreement of Understanding and Will, but by an individual Unity and
Sameness of Nature and Will: And yet you must confess them to be Two, though
not Two Men, not Two Humane Natures; for the Man is not his Image, nor the
Image the Man, whose Image he is: But if you will call the Man a Person, as
certainly every Man is a Person, then his Image, which is the same with
himself, must be a Person too, and not the same Person: So that here are Two
distinct Persons subsisting in One Individual Nature, not multiplied, but
repeated in its Image. There is indeed no such living Image as this in created
Nature; but yet this is the true Nature of any Image, and gives us an
intelligible Conception of the Unity of Nature in a plurality of Persons.

And this is the plain account of the essential Unity between God the Father,
and God the Son. Christ is expressly called (...), the Image of God, 2 Cor. 4.
4. and Col. 1. 15. and said to be (...), in the Form of God, Phil. 2. 6. and to
be the brightness of his Glory, (...), the express Character and Image of his
Person. And because there are several sorts of Images, the ancient Fathers
declare what kind of Image Christ is of God the Father; That he is not a dead
Picture, nor a mere Reflection in a Glass, but is a living Image of the living
God. (...), as Gregory Nazianzen speaks. Greg. Naz. Orat. 36. Hill. l. 11. de
Trinit.
Deum viventis Dei vivam imaginem, as St. Hilary tells us, that Christ is God,
the living Image of the living God. (...), as Damascen Damasc. l. 1.
deimaginibus.
speaks, That the Son is the living, natural, invariable Image of the invisible
God; having the whole Father in himself, and being upon all accounts
identically the same with him, excepting the Principle and Cause of Being; that
is, that He is begotten eternally of the Father, but the Father is unbegotten.

But then, though he be the Son, and the begotten Image of the Father, he is
not his Image merely as other Sons are the Images of their Fathers, who, though
they partake of the same specific Nature, may be very unlike them, and are not
the same; but as Gregory Nazianzen tells us in the place above cited, Christ is
the living Image of the living Father, (...): But a more invariable Image than
Seth is of Adam, or any Child of his Father; for the Nature of such simple and
unmixt things, as an Image is, is not to be partly like, and partly unlike, (as
Children are to their Parents,) but that the whole represents the whole, as the
impression does the Seal, and rather to be the same, than to be like.

But St. Gregory Nyssen gives us the most exact Description of Christ's being
(...). Greg. Nyss. contra Eunom. Orat. 12. p. 345.
the living Image of his Father, of his Will, and of his Goodness, which, he
says, is just as if a Man saw himself in a Glass; for the Image in the Glass
does in every thing conform it self to its Prototype; the Face which looks in
the Glass, being the Cause of the Face which is seen there; and therefore the
Image in the Glass neither moves, nor inclines it self of its own accord, but
as its Prototype moves or inclines, but always moves with it. Thus we say, the
Lord Christ, the Image of the invisible God, is immediately and instantly
affected together with his Father. Does the Father will any thing? the Son
also, who is in the Father, knows the Father's Will, or rather, is the Father's
Will. Whether this be not the Dean's mutual Consciousness, which must of
necessity be between a living Image and its Prototype, or that whereof it is
the Image, and is the most natural and inseparable Union of all, let any Man
judge.

It were easy to fill the Margin with such Quotations as these, as you who are
conversant in the Fathers, very well know; but I shall only farther observe at
present, that the Fathers made use of this Notion of the Son's being the living
Image of God his Father, both in their Disputes against the Arians and
Sabellians.

They proved from hence against the Arians, that the Son was (...), of the same
Nature with his Father, which is a plain and necessary Consequence, and needs
no proof; for if the Father and the Son be the same, as a Prototype and his
Image, there can be no Diversity of Nature between them. Thus St. Hilary, St.
Basil, St. Cyril, St. Ambrose, St. Athanasius, Greg. Nyssen, St. Austin, and
all the Fathers who were concerned in the Arian Controversy, reason at large.

And thus they proved against the Sabellians, That God was not One single
Person, distinguished only by Three Names; because the Son is the living
subsisting Image of the Father, and the Image and the Prototype cannot be the
same, but must be Two; no Man is his own Image, nor is an Image the Image of it
self. This is so self-evident, and so frequently occurs in the ancient Writers,
that I shall not detain you with particular Quotations at present.

This real distinction of Three in the same individual numerical Nature, the
Ancients expressed by the (...): That the same One individual Nature subsists
thrice, in Three real Subsistences, not by multiplying, but only by repeating
it self. As a Man and his living Image would be Two real Subsistences, but not
Two Men, nor Two Humane Natures, but the same Man and the same Nature
subsisting twice in Two different manners, not like Two Men, but as the
Prototype and the Image, which are really and distinctly Two, and yet but One
Man. Thus Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are really Three, but have the same
individual Nature, and are the same One God, and differ only in their manner of
subsisting; That the same Divine Nature subsists originally in the Father, and
subsists again in the Son, as in a living Image of the Father, and subsists a
third time in the Holy Ghost by an eternal Procession from Father and Son, in
eternal, living substantial Love.

In this Sense the Ancients understood the Word Subsistence, not in the
Abstract, as some modern Schoolmen do, and as the Animadverter seems to do, if
I understand him, or he understands himself; but in the Concrete, for that
which does really and actually subsist; which does exstare, and is called by
them Extantia and (...): And this is very intelligible, that there are Three
real Subsistences, or Three that really subsist in the numerical and individual
Unity of the Divine Nature. But to talk of Three Subsistences in the abstract
without Three that subsist, or of One single Nature, which has Three
Subsistences, when it is impossible, that in Singularity there can be more than
One Subsistence, is too fine and metaphysical for me, and I envy no Man that
can understand it. (...) among the Greeks is, res subsistens Petav. de Trin. p.
342. and alibi.
and substantiva, as Petavius proves; a subsisting and substantial thing: And
St. Ambrose abhors the thoughts, that the Son should not be a Substantial Son,
who gives Substance to other things; Non esse filium Ambr. l. 3. de fide, c. 7.
insubstantivum, qui aliis dedit habere substantiam: And Facundus tells us,
that these Words, Person, and Facundus pro defensione trium capit, c. 1. p 19.
Subsistence, were used by the Fathers in opposition to the Sabellian Heresy;
and therefore must signify Three that did really and substantially subsist; as
St. Hilary teaches, Non unum esse subsistentem, sed unam Hill. l. de Synod.
substantiam non differentem; That there is not One who subsists, but One
Substance without any diversity; that is, in three different Subsistencies.

There could not have been more proper Words thought on to represent a Trinity
in Unity, than Three Subsistencies in One individual Nature, which differ in
nothing from each other, but in their different manner of Subsistence. For it
is certain here are Three different kinds of Subsistence, which are not to be
found in any One thing in the World besides. Nothing else has any more than one
real Subsistence; for every Being in Nature besides is singular, or has but One
single Subsistence. Every Man and Angel is a single particular Creature,
subsists singly and separately by it self, and is singly One; but if there be a
Trinity in Unity, the same Divine Nature must subsist wholly, entirely, and
substantially in Three, but in a different manner to make them Three. And it is
as certain, that the Father and the Son, though they have the very same Nature,
yet subsist in a very different manner, the Father as Original Mind, the Son as
the perfect, living, substantial Image of the Father, which is as different as
the Subsistence of the Prototype and the Image; and every one will grant, that
a Man and his Image, though it were a living substantial Image, have a very
different Subsistence; for the Image has its whole Subsistence in dependence on
its Prototype; the Man subsists by himself, and gives Subsistence to his Image;
and the same we must conceive of the Subsistence of the Holy Spirit, though we
have not so apt a Similitude to represent it by.

And if we must call the Three in the Holy Trinity, by any other Name than
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Three Subsistences is liable to the least Cavil,
and does most properly express their general Character; for they are but One
Divinity, or One Divine Nature subsisting wholly and entirely Three times,
without multiplication, as a Man is not multiplied but repeated in his Image.
All other Names in their proper and usual Sense, signify an absolute,
complete, independent Being, such as Nature, Essence, Substance, God: And
therefore though each Divine Person have a natural, essential, substantial
Subsistence, and be true and real God; yet we must not say, that there are
Three Divine Natures, Essences, Substances, or Three Gods; because though the
whole Divine Nature, Essence, subsists in Three, yet it is but one and the same
in all; and though God be the most absolute, complete, independent Being, and the
Son be God, and the Holy Ghost God, yet neither the Son, nor the Holy Ghost can
be said to be an absolute, complete, independent God, because Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost are but One God; neither of which subsist absolutely, completely,
independently; that is, without each other; which is all that is meant by an
absolute, complete, independent Subsistence, that they can subsist apart
without each other; but the Father can no more subsist without the Son, than
the Son without the Father; nor the Holy Spirit without Father and Son; nor
Father and Son without the Holy Spirit; as a natural and necessary Image cannot
subsist without its Prototype, nor the Prototype without its Image, which is
essential to it; so that they are but One absolute, complete, independent
Deity, though the Three Divine Subsistences in the Godhead subsist in a mutual
respect, and a relative dependence on each other.

And this, I suppose, is what the Schools mean, when they call the Three Divine
Persons, Three Relations, or Three Relatives; for there must be Three real
subsisting Relatives, if there be Three Relations; for One Subsistence cannot
be the Subject of Three Relations, no more than one and the same Man can be
related to himself as Father and Son. But then the Father, and Son, and Holy
Spirit are such Relations, as there is no Example of in created Nature; for
their Relation to each other is not a mere external Respect and Denomination,
such as absolute independent Beings have to each other, but their very Nature
and Subsistence, as Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is relative. Though the Father
be eternal original Mind, yet it is essential to this eternal Mind to beget his
own living substantial Image; and therefore this eternal Mind is naturally and
essentially related to his Image: And I need not tell you, that the very Nature
and Subsistence of an Image is wholly relative; a natural and essential Image
subsists as necessarily as the Prototype, but its Nature is wholly relative.
Thus Father, Son, and Holy Ghost have the same common Nature; not common as a
generical or specific Nature, which is only a logical Notion, but as One
individual Nature, really and actually subsisting in each, without any other
difference than their different manner of Subsistence, and their different
Relations, as a Man and his living Image, have the same individual Nature
common to both, and differ only in their manner of Subsistence and Relations;
that is, as the Prototype and its living Image differ. And this I think gives
us an intelligible account of a Trinity in Unity in the most Orthodox Language
of Fathers and Schools.

This shows us, that the Son, and Holy Spirit, are not Divine Emanations from
the Father, as is represented in the Platonic Triad: For though the eternal
Generation and Procession be such Mysteries, as we cannot comprehend, nor frame
any Idea or Conception of, yet we know that an Image is not an Emanation, but a
Reflextion; and therefore is wholly and entirely the same with the Prototype,
which no Emanation can be; for the whole cannot be an Emanation: An Emanation
indeed is of the same Substance, and is specifically the same; and in this
Sense Homoousios; but it multiplies Natures and Substances, and is not
individually and identically the same as the Prototype and its Image; and
therefore the Fathers declare, That the eternal Generation of the Son is not by
Abscission and Passion, but think the aptest Representation of it in Nature,
(though that is very different) is by Splendour and Brightness, or (...), the
out-shining of the Deity; and when they call the Holy Spirit (...), it is not
in the Sense of Emanation, but of the mysterious Procession.

This also shows us, That this Holy Trinity is not Three Divine Attributes,
such as Wisdom, Power, and Goodness; for they are all Three the very same with
each other, the same Wisdom, Goodness, and Power, and therefore not Three Parts
or Attributes of the same Deity, but each is the whole, as a Prototype, and its
living Image is.

And this shows, That though the Son be true and perfect God, as the Father is,
yet the Son can never be a Father, because his Nature and Subsistence as a Son
is wholly relative; and a Son, whose Nature and Subsistence is relative, is
necessarily and essentially a Son, but can never be a Father, no more than the
Image can beget its Prototype.

And this gives a plain Account, why our Savior calls God, not only his
Father, but his God, and the only true God, and acknowledges, That he receives
all from his Father, and, That his Father is greater than he is; though he have
the very same Nature, and with respect to his Nature is equal in Power and
Glory; for this is the true difference between the Prototype and the Image,
though their Nature be the same. Had a Man a living substantial Image,
perfectly the same with himself, as God has, the Image must thus speak of his
Prototype, as the Son of God speaks of his Father. He must acknowledge that the
Prototype is his Man, for he is only the Image of the Man; and were there only
One Man in the World, as there is but One God, he must acknowledge the
Prototype to be the only true Man; for though the living Image would be a true
Man also, yet he is not originally Man, but Man of Man, a Man only by Relation
and Participation with its Prototype; and therefore the Prototype is greater
than its Image, and the Image receives all from the Prototype, depends on it,
and subsists and lives in and by it, as the Son acknowledges, That he lives by
the Father, John 6. 57. This is manifestly the Language of Scripture and
Fathers concerning the Son of God, his living and substantial Image; and I hope
you see, That this is proper and peculiar only to a living subsisting Image;
and can be applied to nothing else, but is the only proper way that we can
speak of such an Image, or that such an Image can speak of it self; this is
intelligible, though the Mystery of this eternal living Image is inconceivable.

This I suppose is what the Dean meant; when he said, That Some tolerable
Account might be given of the Terms and Distinctions of the Schools; and I
believe you begin to see, That this representation I have now made of this
Venerable Mystery, will contribute very much to the better Understanding both
of the Fathers and of the Schools, as may appear more hereafter; but at present
I shall only show you, That this is the true representation of the Dean's
Notion of a Trinity in Unity.

The Dean does professedly Teach, That the Three Persons or Subsistences in the
ever blessed Trinity, are Three real Substantial Subsistences, each of which
has entirely all the Perfections of the Divine Nature; Divine Wisdom, Power,
and Goodness; and therefore each of them is eternal, infinite Mind, as distinct
from each other, as any other Three Persons; and this I believe he will no more
Recant, than he will renounce a Trinity; for all the Wit of Man cannot find a
Medium between a Substantial Trinity, and a Trinity of Names, or a Trinity of
mere Modes, Respects, and Relations in the same single Essence, which is no
Trinity at all. And if the Son, as you heard, be the living Image of his
Father's Nature, Essence and Perfections, the Divine Nature, though it be not
multiplied, yet is repeated in the Son, and does as really and distinctly
subsist in the Son, as it does in the Father; as had a Man a living Image, his
Image would be as substantially and really Man, as the Prototype is, or as the
Man himself, whose Image it is, though the Man and his Image, which are really
and substantially Two, are not Two Men, but One Man. And thus the Dean might
very safely say, That there are Three in the Godhead, each of which is a
distinct, infinite, eternal Mind; and though Custom has not made the form of
Expression Orthodox, yet there is no Heretical Sense in it, to call them Three
infinite and eternal Minds, with respect to their Nature and real Subsistence,
to distinguish them from mere Names, and Logical Notions, if at the same time
it be declared, That they are individually and numerically One: As it would be
no Mortal Crime against Logic and common Sense to say, That a Man and his
Living Image are Two distinct Men, with respect to the real and actual
Subsistence of Humane Nature distinctly in each of them, though the Image is
not another Man, but the same with its Prototype.

This is the distinction which the Dean makes between the Three Divine Persons,
which yet could not be Three, were they not Three Self-conscious Subsistencies;
for there cannot be Three in a knowing and intelligent Nature, without knowing
themselves and their distinction from each other; That the Father knows himself
to be the Father, and not the Son, and the Son knows himself to be the Son, and
not the Father. This every Man feels in himself to be a real and natural
distinction of one Person from another, and the Scripture is express in it,
that Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are thus distinguished; and this the Dean
thought, and as far as I can yet see, with great Reason, to be the most easy
and sensible representation of a real and natural Trinity.

As for the Unity of these three Divine Persons, the Dean expressly Teaches,
That they are essentially and numerically One. And as the most sensible
Representation of this, he places their Unity in Mutual consciousness, that
they have as Conscious a Sensation of each other in themselves as they have of
themselves: And he is certainly so far in the right, that this is essential to
their Unity; That Three intelligent Subsistences cannot be One without this
Mutual consciousness, and that this Mutual consciousness cannot be in Three,
which are not essentially and numerically One. The Scripture plainly enough
Teaches this very Unity between Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as he has proved
at large; and if this either be, or prove, or necessarily supposes an essential
Unity, as inseparable from it, and essential to it, here is an intelligible
Notion of a natural Trinity in Unity, without any Contradiction, Absurdity, or
Confusion of Subsistences, which is all the Dean intended. But the Animadverter
and his Socinian Seconds, or rather Leaders, represent the Dean's Notion, as if
he made the Three Divine Persons, as absolute, complete, independent Persons,
as Three Men are, and that they are united only by Mutual consciousness, and
then they can fancy nothing but an Unity of Knowledge, or a Moral Unity and
consent of Wills: But this is either a mistake, or a wilful misrepresentation,
as every one may see with half an Eye, who considers the whole Notion together.

The Dean indeed, the better to convey this Notion of the natural Unity of
Mutual consciousness to our Minds, supposes a Case, which he knew very well,
never was, nor ever could be, which is very allowable in all Writers, within
the compass of decency, when we want some sensible Images to frame Vindic. of
Trin. p. 49.
our Conceptions by: And therefore says, That if there were Three created
Spirits so united, as to be conscious to each others Thoughts and Passions, as
they are to their own, he can see no Reason why we might not say, That Three
such Persons are numerically One. Though he knew, That Three such particular,
separate Natures never could be thus united, but in them we might the better
conceive, what kind of Union it was he meant. But from hence to conclude, That
the Dean owns no other Unity in the Divine Nature, than what
Mutual-consciousness would make between Three particular, absolute, complete,
separate Natures, is, I Am sure, false-reasoning, and looks like very foul Play.
The Dean asserts, That these Three Divine Persons are thus Mutually Conscious
to each other, and that this Mutual-consciousness is an essential Unity, and
that those, who are thus Mutually Conscious are numerically One; but then he
Teaches, that there are no other Three in the World that are thus Mutually
Conscious, and that these Three are not, and cannot be for this very reason,
Three particular, separate, subsisting Natures, but Three Subsistences in one
individual, numerical Nature: An Unity of Nature, and mutual consciousness may
be distinguished, but are inseparable: There can be no Unity of Nature between
Three intelligent Subsistences without Mutualconsciousness; and there can be no
Mutual-consciousness but in the same individual Nature; but yet, if we must
distinguish as far as we can apprehend these matters, Mutual-consciousness is
much more essential to the Unity of Three intelligent Subsistences than any
other Notion of Unity: For I cannot see, but that if it were possible, That
three created Spirits, who are not only Three distinct Subsistences, but have
Three particular, separate Natures, should be thus united by
Mutual-consciousness, it would destroy the individuation of their Natures,
though the individuation of their Subsistences or Persons would be preserved by
Self-consciousness: And, were it possible, the same individual Nature should be
repeated in its Image, without this Mutual-consciousness, it would divide this
One Nature, and make the Man and his living Image, as much Two Men, as any Two
Men in the World; But then the Image would cease to be an Image, how exact
soever, upon other Accounts, the Likeness or Sameness were; for the Image does
not only represent and resemble the Prototype, but moves and acts with it.

And this is that very Mutual-consciousness wherein the Dean places the
essential and numerical Unity of the Holy Trinity; such a Mutual-consciousness
as must be between the Prototype and its living Image. I shall not trouble you
with transcribing out of the Vindication, but referr you to some places to
consult at your leisure.

He always represents the Son, as the living Substantial Image of God the
Father; and the eternal Vindic. p. 130, 131, etc.
Generation by God's reflex Knowledge of himself; and in this places the
numerical Identity and Sameness of Nature between Father and Son, as there is
between the Prototype and its Image; and the Holy Spirit, whom the Fathers
represent, as God's eternal Love of himself in his own Image, has all the same
Divine Perfections repeated in eternal and substanstial Love: That yet this
numerical Identity and Unity of Nature cannot be understood without this
Mutual-consciousness, which makes them One Energy and Power, and is their
mutual In-being in each other.

That this Mutual-consciousness proves the perfect P. 122, 123, etc.
equality of all Three Persons in the Unity of the P. 81.
Godhead, as having the very same Perfections, without destroying the
Prerogative of the Father, or the Subordination of the Son, and the Holy
Spirit: As a living Image is in Nature equal with the Prototype, but
Subordinate.

That this gives an Account of the Modi subsistendi, or of the real and actual
Subsistence of the same individual, numerical Nature in Three, but in a
different manner; had these things been duly considered and compared, we should
not have heard so P. 83.
much noise and clamor about Mutual-consciousness, as if it made Three
absolute, complete, independent Gods, when it is impossible to conceive a more
close and intimate Union in Nature.

But there is one formidable Objection against all this, or rather against the
Dean for it, that he pretends by this means to make the Notion of a Trinity in
Unity as intelligible as the Notion of God: which is intolerable Vanity and
Presumption to pretend to explain Mysteries. But does the Dean pretend, That
his Explication leaves nothing Mysterious in the Doctrine of the Trinity in
Unity? Nothing, which we cannot comprehend? That, as the Ancients used to
speak, this is no longer a wonderful distinction, and a wonderful Union? This I
confess had been very vain and presumptuous: But are there no Mysteries in the
Divine Nature, because the Notion of One God is an intelligible Notion? If
there be, there may be Mysteries, very incomprehensible Mysteries in the
Trinity still, how intelligible soever the Notion be: The intelligibleness of
any Notion, whether it be true or false, consists in the terms in which it is
conceived; that they convey a distinct Idea to our Minds of something possible,
not which we can fully comprehend, but which we can understand without
confusion or contradiction; and this does great Service to Religion to deliver
Mysteries from absurdity and contradiction, though they are very
incomprehensible still.

The Notion of Eternity (for Example) is very Intelligible, to be without any
Cause, without Beginning, and without End; there is no contradiction in this,
and it is demonstrable, that something must be Eternal; and yet nothing can be
more incomprehensible than Eternity: Our Thoughts are presently lost, when we
endeavor to conceive an eternal Being: And thus an eternal Image of an eternal
Being, begotten without Beginning, is as intelligible, as an eternal Being is;
for if it be necessary and essential to an eternal Being, to have a living,
substantial Image, thought cannot divide their Existence; and it is as certain,
if there be such an eternal living Image, that this eternal Being, and his
eternal Image are Two, as the Prototype and the Image; and yet as essentially
One, and as intimately conscious to each other, as you have heard, they must
necessarily be; this is intelligible, but yet a very incomprehensible Mystery;
for who can conceive an eternal Generation, which has no beginning? the Divine
Nature repeated in its Image without multiplication? a Distinction without
Separation, and an Unity without Singularity, and without Confusion? If these
be not Mysteries enough for the Animadverter, though the Dean's intelligible
Notion were admitted, he is as much too fond of Mysteries, as other Men are too
much afraid of them; for whether he knows it or no, there is a very great
difference between a Mystery, and Contradiction or Nonsense.

I believe by this time you are less Fond than you were, of an Answer to the
Animadverter's Arguments, which some Men, who have despised his Wit and
Railery, have yet thought unanswerable; but I will be as good as my Word,
especially since a short Answer will serve.

In his third Chapter he Attacks the Dean's Notion Animad. c. 3.
of Self-consciousness, but he stumbles at the Threshold, and runs on furiously
as a Man does who runs headlong, and is never able to recover himself. He says,
It is evident, the Dean assigns Self-consciousness as the formal reason of
Personality, in all Persons universally, whether Finite or Infinite, Create or
uncreate; Page 70.
and therefore he undertakes to prove, That Selfconsciousness is not the formal
Reason of Personality, either in Finite or Infinite Persons.

The Dean says not one word about the formal Reason of Personality, nor is at
all concerned what it is. He only says, That the Unity of a Spirit with it
self, and its distinct and separate Subsistence from all Vindic. p. 48.
oher created Spirits, consists in Self-consciousness. So that if that be one
distinct, separate Mind, which is conscious only to it self, which feels all
that is in it self, and nothing else, and those be two distinct separate Minds,
each of which is thus conscious to it self, but not to each other, the Dean has
gained his Point, and the Animadverter has lost all his Arguments and Wit,
whatever becomes of the formal Reason of Personality.

The Dean did not enquire what makes a Mind, or Spirit, or if you please a
Person, but what makes a Mind or Spirit, or Person One, and either
distinguishes, or separates it from all other Minds, and Spirits, and Persons;
and if this be what he means by the formal Reason of Personality, I do affirm,
That Selfconsciousness is this formal Reason; and that for the very Reason he
urges against it, That wheresoever the formal Reason of Personality is, there
is Personality, and wheresoever Personality is, there is the formal Reason of
Personality: For wheresoever there is a Person, there is Self-consciousness;
that is, every Person is conscious to it self, and there can be no Person
without it; and wheresoever there is Self-consciousness, there is by Nature a
Person, unless its natural Personality be swallowed up in a Supernatural Union
to a Superior Person, of which more presently.

And yet to see what mere Mortals the nicest Scholastic Wits are, who can
spend Days and Years in picking Straws, and splitting Hairs, this great
Leviathan, the Witty, the Subtle, the Good-natured Animadverter, knows not the
difference between the formal Reason and such a natural Property as the
Logicians call proprium quarto modo, which belongs to the whole kind, only to
the kind, and always to the kind; for such Properties do exist convertibly, and
One mutually and essentially infers the other, which is his account of the
formal Reason; and thus Risibility is the formal Reason of Humanity, which
makes well for the Animadverter to prove him to be a Man, though he is seldom
in so good a Humor as to laugh without grinning, which belongs to another
Species.

But since he is pleased to let that pass for the formal Reason of Personality,
which is convertible with it, I hope Self-consciousness may escape pretty well,
and pass for the formal Reason of Personality. But let us hear his Arguments
against it.

1. The first is worth its weight in Gold, and yet Page 71.
will not much enrich the Buyer, that according to the natural Order of things,
Self-consciousness in Persons pre-supposes their Personality, and therefore is
not, cannot be the reason of it. Now suppose a Man should reason thus: Actual
Knowledge pre-supposes a Mind, and therefore Knowledge in its Principle is not,
and cannot be the formal Reason of a Mind; would the Animadverter for this
Reason deny, that the Principle of Knowledge is the formal Reason of a Mind,
that which makes and constitutes a Mind, because there can be no actual
Knowledge before there is a Mind? and yet the Argument is the very same; for if
Knowledge in its Principle, may be the Nature or formal Reason of a knowing
Being, or of a Mind, though there can be no one act of Knowledge, till there is
a Mind, then Self-knowledge, or Self-sensation, or Self-consciousness, may be
the formal Reason of Personality, though there must be a Person, before there
can be any actual Self-consciousness; that is to say, there must be a self
(which in this Dispute is all that can be meant by Person) before this Self can
feel it Self, and by this Self-feeling distinguish Himself from all other
Selfs. I could not but smile to see how gravely this wise Animadverter proves,
That there must be a Person, before there can be any Action proceeding from a
Person, and summons the whole Posse of Metaphysics to prove it: But I hope
notwithstanding this, that Self-consciousness in the Abstract (as the Dean uses
it, and as every one but such an Animadverter would understand it) is as
capable of being the formal Reason of a Person, as Rationality is of a
reasonable Nature, though there must be a reasonable Creature before he can
reason, as there must be a Selfconscious Nature before there can be actual
Self-consciousness.

But I have something more to say to our Animadverter before I leave his
Demonstration, as he calls it; For as Sophistical as his Argument is, the
Foundation of it is false, and absurdly unphilosophical: He says, That
Personality is the Ground and Principle of all Action, wheresoever it is. For
where there is a Suppositum, whether it be Rational (which is another Word for
Person) or not, still it is the whole Suppositum, that Acts. That it is the
Person that acts is certain; but where did he learn, That Personality is the
Principle of all Action? I was always taught otherwise, That Natura est
principium motus and quietis: Nature is the Principle of Motion and Rest, and
therefore of all Action: And is there no difference between Nature and
Personality? Is there no difference between being a reasonable Creature, and
being Peter or John? or do Peter or John perform the Actions of a reasonable
Creature, by Virtue of their being such distinct and particular Persons, or by
their being Men, by the Powers of Humane Nature, which are common to all? Men
are not distinguished from each other, nor act and subsist separately by Humane
Nature; and therefore neither Humane Nature, nor any of the Powers or Actions
of Humane Nature distinguish Men into particular Persons, or are the Reason of
Personality; but that which limits Nature, makes it particular, and a
particular subsisting rational Nature is a Person, is one with it self, and
distinguished and separated from all others: So that we must not seek for any
formal Constituent Principle of Personality (in a strict and proper Notion) as
we do of Nature, but see in finite Beings, where Nature ends, and what are the
utmost Bounds of it, and that distinguishes a common Nature into Persons. Now a
rational Nature extends as far as Sensation and Consciousness, and where that
ends, there are the Bounds of Nature, and that makes a particular Person, which
feels all that is in himself, and nothing else; and this is the Dean's
Self-consciousness, which sets Bounds to Nature, and by that makes a Person,
which is one with it self, and separated from all others, and therefore in this
Dispute is neither to be considered as a Power, nor as an Action of Nature,
neither direct nor reflex, but as the Bounds of it, which makes a particular
subsisting rational Nature, which we call a Person. For it is plain, that as
far as Sensation and Consciousness extends, a Spirit is One, where that ends,
common Nature divides, and subsists in Particulars.

I cannot but think how this Animadverter must look, when he reads over this
Argument again, especially his Triumphant Conclusion: This I look upon as a
Demonstration of the Point; and I leave it to our Author (who is better a great
deal at scorning the Schools, than at confuting them) to answer and overthrow
it at his leisure.

2. His second Argument, I confess, looks like something solid and substantial,
but proves a mere airy vanishing Spectrum, when you come near to handle it. It
is this: The Humanity, or Humane Nature of Christ is perfectly conscious to its
self of all the internal Acts, whether of Knowledge, Volition, Passion, or
Desire, (which is One of the Passions) that pass in it, or belong to it; and
yet the Humanity, or Humane Nature of Christ is not a Person, and consequently
Self-consciousness is not the formal Reason of Personality; for as much as it
may be in that, which is no Person. Now indeed had the Dean expressly taught.
That Self-consciousness is the formal Reason of Personality, here had been One
supernatural Exception against it, which does not alter the Reason of natural
Unions; and yet is no greater Objection against Self-consoiousness, than
against the most approved Definition of a Person: For if with Boethius, you
define a Person to be substantia individua naturae rationabilis; an individual
Substance of a rational Nature, the Humane Nature of Christ, which is an
individual Substance of a rational Nature, and yet no Person is an equal
Objection against it; and let the Animadverter try, how, according to this
Definition, he can keep off the Assertion of Nestorius, that there are Two
distinct Persons in Christ: And if Self-consciousness escape as well as any
other formal Reason of Personality, I believe the Dean desires no more; and yet
he needs not this, for he no where makes Self-consciousness the formal Reason
of Personality, but only of the Unity and Distinction of a Mind or Spirit; and
I hope he will grant the Humane Nature of Christ to be One, and to be distinct
and separated by Self-consciousness, from all other particular Humane Natures,
or Persons.

The short Answer is this: That Self-consciousness makes a Mind or Spirit one
with it self, and distinguishes or separates it from all other Minds or
Spirits, and such a distinct and separate Self-conscious Mind is a natural
Person, unless its own natural Personality be swallowed up in a Personal Union
to a Superior Mind. For this is the Account the Dean gives of a personal
Union, when Two Natures are united into One Person, they must be so united,
that the Superior Nature have the Government of the whole Vindic. p. 268.
Person, which is necessary to make them One Agent, without which there cannot
be One Person; and that there be One Consciousness in the whole: Of which more
presently.

3. His third Argument is draw out to a great length, but may be answered in a
few Words, becuse it proceeds upon the same Mistake, and is nothing to the
purpose. It is taken from the Soul of Man in a State Anim. p. 73*
of Separation from the Body; that the Soul in a separate State is conscious to
it self of all its own internal Acts or Motions -- and yet the Soul in such a
State is not a Person. And therefore Self-consciousness is not the formal
Reason of Personality. But whether the Soul be a Person or no Person, in the
Body or out of the Body, is nothing at all to the present Controversy: If the
Soul and all other Spirits are naturally One with themselves, and separated
from all other Souls and Spirits by Self-consciousness; this is all the Dean
desires, and all that his Hypothesis needs. And the Animadverter may
philosophize as he pleases about Personalities. The Truth is, to do him right,
he is a very notable Man, if he can draw you into a School-question, for he can
make a shift to read and transcribe, but he hates a (...) and (...)-Men at his
Heart, which is none of his Talent, for it requires thinking; put him out of
his way, and he is undone, which makes him so angry at the Dean for not
speaking the School-Language, nor confining himself to known Terms of Art,
which he has a great deal to say of, whether he understands them or not: and
because the Dean would not do this himself, he has done it for him, and put his
Notions into School-Terms, and made Self-consciousness the formal Reason of
Personality, and on my Word has disputed very notably against it, and it is
pity Three such dead-doing Arguments should be lost for want of the formal
Reason of Personality; and yet there is no help for it, he must begin all
again, and try how he can prove, that the Unity of a Mind, and its distinction
from all other Minds, does not consist in Selfconsciousness; and if he can
prove this, then the Dean is a lost Man for ever, and must be contented to
follow his Triumphant Chariot.

But yet, whether this Question of the Soul's being a Person, or no Person,
serve the purpose of the present Dispute or not, it abundantly serves the
Animadverter's charitable purpose (which is the only purpose of his writing
this Book) to expose the Dean; and therefore though the Matter is not worth
disputing, I shall make some short Reflections on it.

The Dean has upon another occasion asserted, That a Soul without a vital Union
to a Humane Body is a Person: In opposition to this the Animadverter asserts,
That the Soul of Man is not a Person, neither Anim. p. 74.
in its Conjunction with the Body, nor its Separation from it.

The Foundation of his Arguments, such as they are, is a very unphilosophical
and senceless Mistake, that because Man consists of Soul and Body (which he
very undeniably proves from the Athanasian Creed) therefore the Personality too
must be divided between the Soul and Body, that the Soul is but part of the
Person, as it is part of the Man, and then the Soul neither in nor out of the
Body, can be the Person, because a part cannot be the whole, Quod erat
demonstrandum.

Now I readily grant, That the Person of a Man, as it is used in common Speech
to signify a Man, must include both Soul and Body, as the constituent Parts of
a Humane Person; but when we enquire into the strict Notion of Personality,
that must be a simple uncompounded thing, as indivisible as self is, which
cannot consist of Parts, which may be separated from each other, that one part
of the Person may live and the other die; for though there are Two Natures,
there is but One Person, and the same One Person cannot both live and die at
the same time.

This is a very pleasant Notion, if well considered, of the two parts of
Personality, as there are two Parts of a Man, Soul and Body; for unless there
be two Personalities as well as two Natures, the two Natures cannot be two
Parts of the one Humane Personality, as they are the Parts of a Man: It is
impossible to prove from Two Natures, that there are Two Parts of Personality,
unless each Nature has a Personality of its own, the Personality of the Body,
and the Personality of the Soul, united into the One Personality of the Man;
for nothing can be a part of Personality, which has nothing of Personality it
self.

Will the Animadverter then venture to attribute any Personality to the Body,
as he must do, if he makes it part of the Personality? This will be a little
worse than (what he so rares the Dean for) calling a Beast a Person, tho* the
Dean gave notice of the impropriety of the Expression, and used it only by way
of allusion and accommodation, the better to represent the Union of Two Natures
into One Person, which are Two Persons, or something as like Two Persons as
their Natures will permit, when they subsist apart. And I should have thought
such a severe Censurer should have been more Cautious than to have attributed
any part of Personality to the Body in the same Chapter, wherein he so civilly
Schools the Dean for seeming to attribute Personality to a Beast, when
Personality belongs only to a reasonable Nature, and Beasts have no Reason;
which is more than he knows, (for why may not Beasts have some Reason, as well
as some Men have such brutish Passions) and more than as Wise Men as himself
think to be true; for there are various degrees of Reason; and where ever there
is a conscious Life, there must be some degree of it, and that entitles them to
as much share in Personality as they have in Reason; but no Man will pretend,
that a Humane Body, though united to a reasonable Soul, has any Reason, or any
Sense either, though, by its Vital Union to the Soul, the Soul feels all the
Impressions made on the Body.

And this brings us to a fair State, and an easy decision of this Question;
for if Personality belongs only to a reasonable Nature, it is certain, that the
Soul makes or constitutes the Person; or, if I may so speak, is the Center of
Personality, whatever else be vitally united to it, and by such a vital Union
is incorporated into the same Person. If there be but one principle of Reason,
Sensation, and a conscious Life, that is the Person; for a Person is the
individual Substance of a Rational Nature.

But is not a Humane Body part of the Person to whom it belongs? Answ. It is
part of the Man, and in that Sense part of the Person, but no part of the
Personality; that is, it does not make the Person, but is taken into the Person
by a vital Union, and so becomes part of the Man, and part of the Person, as
belonging to it.

I am of opinion, notwithstanding the Animadverter's Animus and Anima, that
there is but one Soul or Mind, or Spirit in Man, which performs all the Offices
of a Rational and Animal Life, which understands, reasons, wills, and feels all
the Impressions of the Body, whether Pain or Pleasure, though with respect to
such different Offices and Powers, it may be of some use, both in Philosophy
and Divinity, to call it by different Names. Now, if all Life, Reason,
Sensation, be only in the Soul, there must be the whole Personality, though the
Soul, when united to a Body, is not the whole Person; for the Person reaches as
far as the Self-conscious Life does by a Vital Union, but the Personality is
whole and entire in the Principle of a Rational Life, and is neither more nor
less a Person, though by vital Unions, or a dissolution of them, more or less
may belong to the Person: We may find some resemblance of this in Works of Art:
Whether you add or take away some Wheels from a Clock, it is the same Clock
still, while there is the same Spring of Motion, though it communicates Motion
to more or fewer Wheels. And thus the Body becomes One Person with the Soul,
neither by an hypostatical Union, which is the swallowing up a natural
Personality in its Union with a superior Person, which can never be between two
Beings, one of which by Nature is no Person, as the Body it self is not, and
cannot be: Nor by the Body being joined with the Soul, as one part, jointly
concurring with another, to the composition of the whole Person; which is the
Animadverter's way, and a very absurd one, as you have already heard, to talk
of a compounded Personality; but there is another way which he never thought
of, and that is, by a vital Union, which makes the Body part of it self,
without adding to its own Personality, by making all bodily Sensations its own.
And thus, though the Soul be an entire Person, a Man, when united to a Body
Animad. p. 75.
is not an imperfect, accidental Compound, which, he says, Philosophy calls
unum per accidens, a thing made up of two such Beings as cannot perfectly
coalesce and unite into One; for his own beloved Philosophy never called things
vitally united, unum per accidens, and I would desire him to inform us, how two
things can more perfectly coalesce than in One Life.

However, by the power of Metaphysics he can prove, That if the Soul be an
entire Person, a Man must be an imperfect accidental compound: For a complete
Being (as every Person essentially is) having received the utmost degree of
Subsistence, which its Nature can give it, if it comes afterward to be
compounded with another Being, whether complete or incomplete, it must
necessarily make such a loose unnatural Union and Composition.

I do not wonder he is so fond of School-Terms, for they serve him very often
instead of Sense; but before I particularly consider them, by his good leave, I
must ask him a Question or two: Whether the Divine (...) or Word before the
Incarnation were a complete Being, as he must be, if he be the second Person in
the Trinity, for every Person, he says, is essentially a complete Being; and
then, whether he will have the Humane Nature a complete or incomplete Being,
the Question is, Whether the Personal Union of the Humane Nature to the Divine
Word, be necessarily such a loose unnatural Union and Composition. To say, That
this is not a natural Union, is to say, That the Divine and Humane Nature are
not united into One Person in Christ; for I take a Union of Natures to be a
natural Union, by what Power soever it be done; at least so far, that there is
no natural repugnancy to such an Union, for then no Power could do it; and
therefore, according to this bold assertion, either the Hypostatical Union must
be loose and unnatural, or if the Divine and Humane Nature be perfectly united
into One Person, then the Union of two complete Beings does not necessarily
make such a loose unnatural Union and Composition.

But to quit these School-Terms, and to speak what we understand our selves,
and what others may understand; the Soul may be a complete and perfect Person,
and not a perfect Man; and therefore, notwithstanding it is a complete Being,
may require a vital Union to a Humane Body, to perfect its Nature: That is a
perfect Humane Person, which has entirely in it self all the Powers which are
essential to a Humane Person, such as Understanding, Will, and Sensation, which
are as entire and perfect in the Soul without the Body, as with it, though some
of them either cannot act at all, or at least not so perfectly, without a vital
Union to the Body, which conveys external Impressions, and by them excites
internal Sensations in the Soul.

To represent this plainly, let us consider a Soul vitally united to a Body,
but to such a Body whose Organs are so indisposed for Sensation, that the Man
can neither See nor Hear, nor Taste, nor Smell; but only just lives and
breathes, you will not say, this is a perfect Man; but the Animadverter himself
will acknowledge him to be a perfect Person, compounded of Body and Soul; but
if a complete Person may not be a complete and perfect Man, then the formal
Reason of Personality, and the natural Perfection of a Man are two things; and
though the vital Union of Soul and Body make a perfect Man, yet the whole
entire Personality must be in the Soul, if a Man be a perfect Person, who is
united to a Body, which is worse than none: For where there is a perfect Humane
Person, there must be the radical Principle of all Humane Actions, which can be
no where but in the Soul, when the Body is unfit for all the Actions of a
Rational or Sensitive Life, which is a much more imperfect State than to be out
of the Body, if we believe, that the Soul lives and acts when separated from
the Body. Something in the Shape and Figure of a Man, without the natural
Powers of Reason and Sensation, would very improperly be called a Man, or a
Humane Person; and therefore we must confess, that the Soul, which under all
these natural Impediments of acting, has still these natural Powers to be the
Person, or there can be none. The Soul is the Person, the Body only the Organ
or Instrument, which, at least in this state of Union, is necessary to the
exercise of our natural Powers, both of Reason and Sensation; but whatever
change there be in the Body, the Person is the same still, which could not be,
were the Body part of the Person, for then the change of the Body would be a
partial Change of the Person too; and yet our Bodies are in a perpetual Flux,
and change every day; some Atoms fly away, and others are united to us; that we
are no more the same for a Month or a Year, than a River is, whose Waters
perpetually flow and change their place; and yet we feel our selves to be the
same Persons still; and therefore certainly these fluid Atoms, of which our
Bodies are composed, are no part of our Personality, though they belong to our
Persons, while they are vitally united to our Souls. Suppose it were possible,
that the Souls of John and Peter could change Bodies, that the Soul of John
should be vitally united to the Body of Peter, and the Soul of Peter vitally
united to the Body of John, I would ask the Animadverter, whether he thinks,
that such a change of Bodies would make any change in their Persons? Whether
John would not as much feel himself to be John, and Peter to be Peter as ever
they did? I believe, indeed, an innocent, good-natured Soul would not be
willing to venture a Change of Bodies with every Body, for fear of some Moral
Infection, but the natural Person would be the same; for nothing makes any Body
ours, but a vital Union, and whose Body soever it was before, it becomes our
own, when our Soul informs it, and feels the Impressions of it. Now, if the
Soul be the Person, when united to the Body, it cannot lose its Personality by
going out of it; nay, if the Soul can subsist in separation from the Body, and
live, and perform all the Actions of a Rational Nature, it must be a Person, if
an individual subsisting Rational Nature is a Person, and if it be not, I would
know what to call it. But this Animadverter is a very Wagg, and Banters the
poor Dean most unmercifully, and demonstrates beyond all contradiction, that
The Soul, in a State of Separation, cannot be a Person, because it is neither
the same Person, which the Man himself was while he was living, and Animad. p.
76.
in the Body, nor another Person; and therefore it can be no Person. The
wording of this is very observable, and worthy of the Wit and Subtilty of its
Author: If the Soul in such a State (of Separation) be a Person, it is either
the same Person which the Man himself was, while he was Living, and in the
Body: Pray, what is this Person, which he calls the Man himself, which lives in
the Body? I hope, it is not the Body that lives in the Body, and then I know no
Man himself, nor Person, that lives in the Body, but only the Soul; and if it
be the same Soul that lives out of the Body, that lives in it, it is the same
Person, the same Man himself in a state of Separation, which lived in the Body.
And what does he mean by the same Person, which the Man himself was, while
living? For does the Man and his Person die? Then the Man is not Immortal, and
if the Man and his Person live, when the Body dies, then the Soul is the Man
and the Person, and the very same Person out of the Body that it was in it. So
St. Paul thought, when, speaking of himself, and his being taken up into the
Third Heavens, he thus expresses it. I knew a Man in Christ fourteen years ago,
(whether in the body, I cannot tell, or whether out of the body, I cannot tell,
God knows) such an one caught up into the third Heavens, 2 Cor. 12. 2. but
whether in the Body, or out of the Body, which he did not know, yet he knew
himself to be the same Man, and the same Person that ever he was.

But the Animadverter very learnedly proves, That the Soul out of the Body
cannot be the same Person with the Man, because the Soul is not the Soul and
Body too, as the Man is when the Soul and Body are united; which is well
observed, That the Soul is not the Body, nor a part the whole: but yet if the
Personality be not compounded of Soul and Body, the Soul may be the whole and
same Person in the Body, and out of it.

There is no need then to say, That the Soul in a State of Separation is
another Person, than the Man himself is while Soul and Body are united; though
this would serve the Dean's purpose as well, if the Soul be but a Person, and
be a distinct Person by Self-consciousness: And should the Dean prove cross,
and say this, the Animadverter could not help himself; for as for his absurd
Consequence, viz. That it is One Person that lives well or ill in this World,
to wit, the Man himself while he was personally in the Body, which (by the way)
is downright Nonsense, if the Person of the Man be Soul and Body, though we
confess the Body belongs to his Person, when united to his Soul, for the
personal Presence of the Man in the Body, must distinguish the Person of the
Man from the Body, in which he is personally present, and supposes, that the
same Man at other times may not be personally present in the Body; however he
thinks it a great Absurdity, That One Person should live well or ill in this
World and another Person pass out of the Body into Heaven or Hell, there to be
rewarded or punished, (at least till the Resurrection) (and I suppose at
longest too, unless it can be another Person when reunited to the Body, as well
as when separated from it) for what that other Person had done well or ill upon
Earth.

Well, let this be as absurd as it will, the Animadverter must say it, or say
something as absurd, unless he will allow a Soul in a State of Separation to be
the same Person that it was in the Body, or deny the intermediate Rewards and
Punishments of good and bad Men till the Resurrection. For if the Soul be a
Person, and not the same, then one Person sins and another suffers. If a Man be
a Person, and the Soul no Person, then the Person sins, and that which is no
Person suffers: If a Man be a whole Person; and the Soul only part of the
Person, then the whole Sins, and a part suffers for the whole. Let him choose
which he thinks looks most agreeable to the Principles of Reason and Divinity.

But does this profound Philosopher indeed think, that the Body either sins or
suffers? The Soul sins in and by the Body, and feels Pain or Pleasure from
bodily Impressions; and therefore as the Body may be made the Instrument of
Virtue or Vice, so it may be the Instrument of Rewards and Punishments; but
Virtue or Vice is seated only in the Soul, and it is the Soul only that can be
happy or miserable, rewarded or punished, in or out of the Body, and therefore
there is no danger, that one should sin, and another suffer, though the Soul
sins in the Body, and suffers out of it.

But it is worth observing how notably he winds up his Argument. If it be
intolerably absurd (as no doubt it is) That the Soul in the other World should
not be responsible for what the Man himself in Person had done in this: What
then? One would expect the Conclusion should be, then the Soul is the Man
himself in Person. But this he durst not say, because it was to un-say all he
had said; and he durst not say the contrary, for that is the Absurdity he is
exposing, that One, who is not the Man himself, should suffer for what the Man
himself did: and therefore he lets them both slip, and is very glad to get rid
of them, and concludes safely; Then it is altogether as absurd and intolerable,
for any one to represent and speak of these things under such Terms and
Notions, as must necessarily throw all Discourse and Reasoning about them into
Paradox and Confusion; which is to bilk a Conclusion, and to pay a reckoning by
running out at the Backdoor. He adds: And indeed to me the Soul's thus
changing its State forwards and backwards from one manner of subsisting to
another, looks very odd and unnatural. What does he mean by this? That it is
odd and unnatural, that the Soul should live in the Body and out of the Body,
and then return into the Body again? And is not this so? Does not the Soul
first live in the Body, and after what we call Death, live out of the Body, and
shall it not be reunited to the Body again at the Resurrection? And how does
this change the Soul's manner of subsisting, any more than the Body changes its
manner of subsisting, when it is naked and clothed? To live in the Body and
out of the Body, are Two different States of Life, but the Soul subsists still
in the same manner, for it owes not its Subsistence to the Body, and can
neither subsist more nor less in or out of the Body; for I know no degrees of
Subsistence in the Soul, though there are of Life and Action; what is, is, and
what subsists continues to be.

But that which is so odd and unnatural is, that from an incomplete State in
the Body, it should pass to a personal and complete State out of the Body
(which State is yet praeternatural to it) and then fall back into an incomplete
State again by its reunion to the Body at the Resurrection (which yet one
would think, should rather improve our principal Parts, in all respects, not
merely relating to the Animal Life, as the bare Subsistence of them, I am sure,
does not.)

It is hard to guess the meaning of such Gypsie-Cant, and therefore I hope you
and he will pardon me if I mistake, for I will do my best. By the Soul's
incomplete State in the Body, I suppose, he means, That the Soul in the Body is
an incomplete Person, and by the personal complete State out of the Body, that
the Soul is a complete Person out of the Body; this indeed sounds somewhat odd
and unnatural; but does he know any Man who says, that the Soul is an
incomplete Person in the Body, and a complete Person out of the Body? or who
calls this the incomplete and the complete State of the Soul? Those who affirm
the Soul to be the Person, say, That it is the same Person in the Body, and out
of it, but that it lives in different States in the Body and out of it; and
that its State in this mortal Body, is the most imperfect State a reasonable
Soul can live in; That the State of the Soul in separation from the Body, is to
good Men a more perfect and complete, because a more happy State, and therefore
not praeternatural, which can never be a more happy State; and that the
reunion of the Soul to an immortal spiritual Body at the Resurrection, is the
most complete and perfect State of all: So that here is no such unnatural
change as he dreams of, from an incomplete to a complete praeternatural State
(which is Nonsense) and then back again to an incomplete State at the
Resurrection, which so turned his own Stomach, (though not very squeamish) that
he was glad to qualify it with a Parenthesis, which I defy any Man to make
Sense of: But the natural progress of the Soul in this lapsed State is from a
less perfect to a more perfect, and from that to the most perfect State of
Life; which to me is proof enough that the Soul is the Person, and fitted by
Nature to live in all these different States, or it is impossible to prove
Peter or John to be the same Men in these different States.

At length the Animadverter grew sensible, Animad. p. 48.
that it sounds very absurdly to say, That the Soul in a State of Separation is
but part of the Person, when it subsists by it self, not in any Compound, and
feels it self to be the same, and lives and acts in a more perfect and happy
State, than when it lived in a mortal Body, and therefore he fences against
these Two Objections (which are stronger, when they are put into one) as well
as he can.

He says, the Soul in a State of Separation is but part of the Person, the
whole of which is a compound of Soul and Body, because of its essential
relation to a Compound. But what is this Compound which the Soul is essentially
related to? not the Body I hope, for the Body is no more the Compound, than the
Soul: Is it then the Man? and where is this Man that the Soul is essentially
related to? Does he then mean, that it is essential to the Soul to live in an
earthly Body? Then it cannot live in a State of Separation. If it be of the
Essence of the Soul to live in the Body, it is evident, That it can never live
out of it; and if it be not essential, then the Soul may be a whole entire
Person, when it subsists separate from the Body. But the Soul by its original
Designation is related to the Body; What? so that it cannot live without it,
and never should live without it? if not, this original Designation, does not
prove an essential Relation: But it has a natural Aptitude to be an Ingredient
in the Constitution of a Compound. What does he mean by the Soul's being an
Ingredient in a Compound? Is the Soul and Body mixed and blended together to
make a Man? Is it the same thing to be a part of the whole, and to be an
Ingredient in a Compound? Well, but the Soul has a natural Aptitude to live in
a Body; and so it has to live out of the Body; and what then? then the Soul,
which is the same Person still, is naturally fitted to live in different
States; and then its Relation to an earthly Body is not essential to it,
whatever strong Appetite and Inclination, as he says, it retains to return and
be reunited to the Body; which, whoever says it, no Man can know; and if it be
true of sensual Souls, who were wholly immersed in Sense, is demonstratively
false of all holy and pure Spirits, who are in a great measure weaned from this
Body, while they live in it, and rejoice at their Deliverance when they escape
safe out of it, who, with St. Paul, desire to be absent from the Body, and to
be present with the Lord. Holy Souls indeed in a State of Separation do
earnestly desire the Completion of their Happiness in the Resurrection of their
Bodies, but not to be reunited to these vile, earthly, corruptible Bodies, but
to glorified, immortal, incorruptible Bodies, when Christ shall at his
Appearance change our vile Bodies, and make them like to his own most glorious
Body; which though they had every individual Atome, which belonged to them
before, are yet in their Nature and Constitution no more the same Bodies, than
Earth and Heaven are the same. But the Spirits of just Men made perfect are in
a more perfect State of Life and Happiness out of these Bodies than they
enjoyed in them, and therefore are more perfect Persons too, are more perfectly
themselves, and enjoy themselves more perfectly, and therefore are in a State
more agreeable to the Perfection of their Natures (and that I take to be a
natural State) than living in these Bodies.

The Animadverter will not allow this to be a natural, but Supernatural
Perfection, which relates only to the Consummation of their Graces, and not to
the manner of their Subsistence. But is not the Perfection of our Graces, the
Perfection of Humane Nature? And is not the Perfection of Nature, a natural
Perfection? And if the Soul be more perfect in a State of Separation, is not
this a more perfect manner of Subsistence? This might have shamed the
Animadverter had he had a little more Consideration and less Confidence, to
deny the Personality of the Soul, which can subsist and act, and be more
perfect and happy out of the Body; which shows, that to be in the Body, or out
of it, does not concern the Personality, but the different States wherein the
same Person lives.

To proceed* The Dean had upon another occasion said, That all the Sufferings
and Actions of the Body are attributed to the Man, though the Soul is the
Person, because it is the Superior and Governing Power, and constitutes the
Person. This I should have thought very true and safe, but the Animadverter has
made very tragical Work with it. He says, That this proves Page 79.
the quite contrary, That the Man himself, to whom these personal Acts are
ascribed, must indeed be the Person, and that for the same Reason also the Soul
cannot be so. But does the Dean any where deny, That the Man, as consisting of
Soul and Body, is a Humane Person? or, when united to a Body, affirm, that the
Soul is the whole Person? He says indeed, That the Soul is the seat of
Personality, the only Principle of Reason, Sensation, and a Conscious life,
which consequently in a State of Separation is the Person, and when united to
the Body constitutes the Person, and therefore may both be the Person, and
constitute the Person. When a Body is vitally united to a Soul, Soul and Body
are but One Person, because they are but One voluntary Agent, and have but One
Conscious Life; but it is the Soul constitutes the Person, as being the
Principle of all personal Acts, Sensations and Passions which the Body is only
the Instrument of, but being a vital Instrument is united to the Person, and
becomes One Person with the Soul; for the Person reaches as far as the same
Conscious Life does; but it is only this vital Union to the Soul, which
receives the Body into the Unity of the same Person, not as part of the Person,
but as an animated Instrument of Life and Action, which as it were, cements
Soul and Body into One Person. A Soul vitally united to a Body, is an embodied
Person, in a State of Separation it is the same Person still, but without a
Body, which makes a great change in its Sensations, and manner of acting, but
no more changes the Person, than the Man would be changed clothed or
uncloathed, were his Cloths as vitally united to his Body, as his Body is to
his Soul. This is plain Sense; and if the Animadverter knows not how to reduce
it to Terms of Art, I cannot help it. The Soul, I grant, as he wisely observes,
Cannot constitute the Page 80.
Person efficiently, by Creation or Generation, nor formally as a constituent
part, for the Soul is not properly part of the Person, but the Soul constitutes
an embodied Person, by living and acting in the Body, which unites Soul and
Body into one Life, and that makes one embodied Person, or Soul and Body one
Man. And now, as for those Questions, which, with so much Triumph and Scorn he
asks the Dean, I leave to himself to Answer them, and to you to laugh at them.
The rest of this Chapter is nothing but Ignorance and Raving, and has been
answered already.

If you will Pardon this long excursion about the Personality of the Soul,
which is nothing at all to the present Controversy, having given you this one
sufficient taste of the Wit and Philosophy of the Animadverter and his great
exactness in speaking and reasoning, I promise you to let pass an hundred other
Absurdities and Fooleries, and to make shorter Work with him, without letting
slip any Argument, when I can find it.

The Title of his Fourth Chapter is an Answer to Anim. Chap. 4. p. 90.
it self, and proves, That it is nothing to the purpose. For he undertakes to
prove, That Self-consciousness is not the formal Reason of Personality in the
Three Persons of the blessed Trinity, nor does the Dean say it is. The Question
is only this, whether Three Self-consciousnesses do not prove Three Persons,
each of which is thus Self-conscious to himself, to be really distinct from
each other? Whether Three Persons who feel themselves to be themselves, and not
to be each other, are not Three really distinct Persons? This mistake has been
so fully exposed already, that I need say no more of it; for the Mistake is the
same, and the Answer is the same, when applied to finite or infinite Persons.

To keep my Word with you, I shall take no notice at present of his Nine
Considerations, which are ushered in with a kind of Mathematical Pomp, as if we
were to expect nothing less than demonstration; when I see what end they serve,
they shall be examined. But now for his Arguments, which will be answered in
almost as few Lines, as they take up Pages in the Animadversions; for when the
Question is mistaken, all Arguments are lost.

Arg. 1. No Personal Act can be the formal Reason Page 94.
of Personality in the Person whose Act it is (nor, I suppose, in the Person
whose Act it is not) But Self-consciousness is a Personal Act, and therefore
cannot be the formal Reason, etc. This Argument we have met with, and answered
before; The Dean neither considered Self-consciousness as a personal Act, nor
assigned it as the formal Reason of Personality; and yet if we consider
Self-consciousness as a Personal Act, though it cannot make the Person, yet it
distinguishes one Person from another; by this actual Self-consciousness every
Person feels himself to be himself, and not to be another.

Arg. 2. Proceeds upon the same mistake, as to the formal reason of
Personality, but has some peculiar Absurdities of its own; for he proves, That
Selfconsciousness cannot make a Person, because it cannot make the Relations,
which distinct Persons stand in to each other. That Self consciousness cannot
make a Father, because it cannot beget a Son: For this is the Sum of his
Argument, That the Three Persons in the Trinity are related to each other, as
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and therefore Self-consciousness, which is an
absolute and irrelative thing cannot be the formal Reason of Personality,
because it is not the formal Reason of these Relations: As if (let the formal
Reason of Personality be what it will) the fundamentum relationis, or the
foundation of the Relation between Persons, and the formal Reason of
Personality were the same thing: Does that which makes John a Person, make him
a Father, or that which makes Peter a Person, make him a Son?

This, I suppose, will be acknowledged very absurd in Humane Persons, where
every Person has a distinct absolute Nature to be the subject of these
Relations, for then the Personality and the Relation must differ; but it is
otherwise with the Persons of the Trinity, whose Personalities are mere
Relations. But with the Animadverter's good leave, this makes no difference: In
what Sense the Divine Persons are Relatives or Relations, I have already
explained; That they subsist relatively to each other, as the whole Subsistence
of the Image is relative to its Prototype; but the same Divine Nature which
subsists distinctly in each of them, is a complete, absolute Nature, and
Self-consciousness may distinguish the same Nature into different Persons,
though they subsist in relation to each other: For has the Person and his
Relation the same Notion and formal Reason? Is the Father his Paternity, the
Son his Filiation, and the Holy Ghost his Procession? if not, then the formal
Reason of Personality in the Father and Son, differs from the Foundation of the
Relation between Father and Son; and Self-consciousness might be the formal
Reason of the Personality, though not of the Relation.

But, have each of these Three Persons, who, as he says, are purely Relative, a
Self-consciousness of their own, that the Father knows himself to be the
Father, and not the Son; and the Son knows himself to be the Son, and not the
Father, etc. This distinguishes the Persons, and proves them to be really
distinct, which is all the Dean desires.

Arg. 3. His next Argument is just as much to the Page 101.
purpose as the former. If Self-consciousness be the formal Reason of
Personality in the Three Divine Persons, then there is no repugnancy in the
Nature and Reason of the thing it self, but that there might be Three Thousand
Persons in the Deity, as well as Three. Now, had the Dean said, That
Self-consciousness made the Trinity, this had been a notable Argument, but, I
hope, Self-consciousness may distinguish the Three Persons in the Trinity, and
prove them to be Three really distinct Persons, though there be but Three, and
not Three Thousand Persons in the Godhead. Though it be not repugnant to the
Nature of Selfconsciousness, it may be repugnant to the Nature of the Deity,
that there should be more than Three Persons in the Godhead. Self-consciousness
proves the distinction, though it does not limit the number of Persons, which
no Man ever dreamt of, and none but an ingenious Blunderer, whose subtilty is
too great for his Understanding, could ever have thought of.

And yet this Argument is as very a Non-sequitur as ever I met with; for
suppose Self-consciousness were the formal Reason of Personality, how does it
follow, that there may be Three Thousand Persons in the Deity; for does the
formal Reason of Personality make or limit the number of Persons? The Nature of
the thing, and the Will of the Maker may, but whatever be the formal Reason of
Personality, there can be no more Persons than Nature will admit; and if the
eternal, uncreated Nature will admit but of Three Persons, it is impossible
that Self-consciousness, though it were the formal Reason of Personality could
make more; for there can be no more when the Divine Nature will admit but of
Three Self-Conscious Persons, though a created Nature will admit of as many as
God pleases to make. In short, that which naturally distinguishes Three Persons
from each other, would distinguish Three Thousand, if there were so many; but
does not prove, That there may be Three Thousand Persons in the Godhead; for
though it is no contradiction to the distinction of Persons, by
Self-consciousness, that there should be Three Thousand, yet it may be a
contradiction to the Perfection of the Divine Nature, because every Divine
Person is eternal, and whatever is eternal does necessarily exist; and
therefore if there be but Three Divine Persons, Father, Son and Holy Ghost,
there never can be, nor ever could have been more.

Arg. 4. His fourth and last Argument is a great Masterpiece of profound
Reason and Judgment. If Three distinct Self-consciousnesses formally constitute
Page 104.
Three distinct Personalities, then Three distinct Selfcomplacencies will
constitute Three distinct Personalities too. He might as well have added
Self-Love, and Self-Displeasure, and Self-Condemnation, and as many Selfs as he
could think of, only the Danger then was, That the Personality should alter
with the Judgment or Passion, that the Person should not be the same, when he
is pleased and displeased, when he applauds and acquits, or condemns himself.
Had he added Self-conscious to all this; as a Self-conscious complacency (for
then it is the same thing, whether Self or any other Being be the object of the
complacency) a Self-conscious Love, or Fear, or Hatred, or Desire, every one of
these Acts would prove a distinct Person, because they are the Acts of
Self-consciousness, which distinguish one Person from another, as every Act of
Reason proves a reasonable Creature, because it is the exercise of Rationality;
but yet no Man will say, that it is every Act, but the principle of Reason,
which makes a reasonable Creature; and no more does any particular Act, but the
principle of Self-consciousness, distinguish between Self-conscious Persons,
much less such Acts as may be separated from the Person, as, I doubt,
Self-complacency is from Damned Spirits, or if he will not allow Souls to be
Persons, as it will be from Damned Men. He has drawn this Argument out to such
a length, and has so many pretty Remarks, that I have much ado to keep my word
with you, but let him go like a wrangling Wit as he is, and I Will go on.

As Self-consciousness makes a Person one with it self, and distinguishes it
from all other Persons, so the Dean apprehends, That a natural
Mutual-consciousness makes Three Persons as naturally One, as it is possible
for Three to be One; and that is the Unity of the Godhead, not the Unity of One
Person, but the Unity of Three, or a Trinity in Unity: And this is his next
Attempt, to prove, That the Unity of Three Divine Persons in the Godhead cannot
consist in Mutual-consciousness. He proceeds upon the same mistake, and
therefore the same Answer will serve: By Self-consciousness he understood, as
you have seen, the acts of Self-consciousness, and then the act Supposing a
Person could not be the formal Reason of Personality; and thus by
Mutualconsciousness he understands the Acts of Mutual-consciousness, which
supposes the Unity of Nature, and therefore cannot be the cause or reason of
it; now, though I know not of what use that Dispute is, about the Priority of
Being, and the first Modes and Affections of it to any Act of Knowledge, or any
other Acts; especially when we speak of the Divine Nature, which we know has no
Modes and Affections, no Priority so much as in Conception, if we conceive
aright of him, between his Being, and a pure and simple Act; yet I will not put
the Animadverter out of his way, when there is no need of it, an easy obvious
distinction between the Principle and the Act answers all: A Self-conscious
Principle, without which we cannot conceive a Mind, makes a Mind one with it
self, and distinguishes it from all other Minds, and by the Acts of
Self-consciousness, which suppose the Principle, every Mind feels it self to be
One, and distinguished from all others: And thus the natural Principle of
Mutual-consciousness between Three Persons unites them inseparably in One
Nature, and the Acts of Mutual-consciousness are the Acts of Unity, whereby
they know and feel themselves to be essentially in each other, and therefore to
be essentially One: Just as we consider Reason, either as the Principle or as
the Act, the first constitutes a reasonable Nature, the second is the actual
exercise of Reason; and thus all his Arguments vanish like Smoke, rise in a
dark Cloud, but immediately disperse and are seen no more, till they return, as
such Vapors use to do, in Thunder and Lightning, or some threatening Storm.

1. His first Argument is this. No Act of Knowledge Page 107.
can be the formal Reason of an Unity of Nature in the Persons of the blessed
Trinity: But an Act of Mutual-consciousness is an Act of Knowledge. Ergo.
Nothing will satisfy the Animadverter but formal Reasons, whereas the Dean no
where asserts, That Mutual-consciousness is the formal Reason of this Unity,
but that Three Persons, who are thus Mutuallyconscious to each other, must be
essentially One; nor does the Dean place this Unity in an Act of
Mutual-consciousness, which signifies the Principle as well as the Act, and
then Mutual-consciousness (if it were no more than Knowledge, of which
presently) must not be considered as an Act of Knowledge.

Arg. 2. If Unity of Nature in the Divine Persons be the Cause, Reason, or
Principle of Mutual-consciousness in the said Persons, then their
Mutual-consciousness is not the Cause or Reason of the Unity of their Nature;
but the former is true, and therefore the latter is so too.

If by this he means, That these Divine Persons could not be thus Mutually
conscious, except they were essentially One, it is true, but nothing to the
purpose, for they may be thus essentially One by Mutual-consciousness, or
Mutual-consciousness may be essential to this Unity, though they could not be
thus actually conscious to each other, unless they were thus united, as to have
and to feel each other in themselves. If by the Unity of Nature in the Divine
Persons, he means the Sameness and Homoousiotes of Nature; this I grant is a
necessary Foundation for Mutual-consciousness, without which they could not be
One, nor mutually conscious to each other; but I deny that it is the immediate
Cause, Reason, or Principle of Mutual-consciousness: The ancient Fathers were
very sensible, That when the same Nature subsisted distinctly in Three distinct
Persons, the mere Sameness and Homoousiotes of Nature could not make this
essential Unity; and therefore they added, their Perichoresis or the mutual
In-being of these Divine Persons in each other, which the Dean calls
Mutual-consciousness, which is the only natural Union and In-being of Minds.

He proves, That Unity of Nature is the Cause and Principle of
Mutual-consciousness, because Mutualconsciousness is an essential Property
equally belonging to all the Three Persons, and therefore as all Properties and
internal Attributes do, must issue and result from the Essence and Nature, and
therefore can have no antecedent causal influx upon the same Nature, so as to
constitute either the Being or the Unity of it. Now, I grant, That
Mutual-consciousness does equally belong to all Three Persons, for they are all
mutually-conscious to each other, and I grant, that it is essential to the
Divine Nature, as to subsist in Three distinct Persons, so in Three
mutually-conscious Persons; but yet Mutual-consciousness belongs not
immediately to Nature but to Persons, and is that intimate Union of Persons
which consists in feeling each other in themselves.

The Dean will leave the Animadverter to Philosophize by himself concerning
antecedent causal influxes on the Divine Nature, to constitute the Being or the
Unity of it; He pretends to no such Knowledge of Created Nature, much less of
an eternal, self-originated, simple, uncompounded Nature: It contents him to
know what is essential, not absolutely to the Unity of the Divine Nature, but
to the Unity in Trinity, and if Mutual-consciousness be essential to this
Unity, that the Three Divine Persons are thus united, and cannot be One without
it, he will contend no farther with any Man about it. And it is certain, This
is essential to his Notion of an identical and numerical Unity of Nature in the
Divine Persons, when the same individual Nature is repeated in its living
Image, for it is essential to the Notion of a living Image, not only perfectly
to represent the Nature, but to feel all the Motions of the Prototype, to live,
and move, and act with it, as the Face in the Glass answers all the Features
and Motions of the Face it represents.

But the Animadverter mistakes the whole Matter, as is evident from what
follows: The Divine Nature or Essence being one and the same in all the Three
Persons, there is upon this account, one and the same Knowledge in them also;
and they are not One in Nature, by Virtue of their Mutual-Consciousness; but
are therefore mutually-conscious, because the perfect Unity and Identity of
their Nature makes them so.

If by one and the same Knowledge, he means knowing the same things, this I
grant is owing to the Sameness of Nature, but is not Mutual-consciousness; for
Three Persons, who have the same Nature, may know the same things, without
feeling each others Thoughts and Knowledge in themselves: If by one and the
same Knowledge he means, That the Knowledge of the Divine Nature in Three
Persons, is but One individual Act, as the Knowledge of One single Person is,
this destroys the distinction of Persons, which cannot be distinct without
distinct personal Acts, as Knowledge is, and destroys Mutual-consciousness; for
there is no place for Mutual-consciousness, or Mutual-Knowledge, where there is
but One single Act of Knowledge: If by one and the same Knowledge he means what
Gregory Nyssen calls, (...) (...), One motion and disposition of the good will,
which passes through the whole Trinity (...), without any distance of time, or
propagating the Motion from one to the other, but is distinctly in them all by
one Sensation, like One Thought in One numerical Mind; this is that very
Mutual-consciousness the Dean means, and is essential, not to the Unity of the
Divine Nature absolutely considered, but as repeated in its Image: Three such
distinct Subsistences of the same individual Nature, are by
Mutual-consciousness essentially One; and thus he may take his Risibility
again; for he is undone if he parts with it.

3. Arg. To affirm Mutual-consciousness to be the cause of the Union of the
Three Divine Persons in the same Nature, is to confound the Union and Communion
of the said Persons together.

To affirm, That the Three Divine Persons are essentially One by
Mutual-consciousness is not to affirm, that Mutual-consciousness is the Cause
of the Union, but that Persons thus united, whatever makes this Union, are
essentially One: The Union of the Father and Son in the same Nature, is by
eternal Generation, or the Father's begetting a Son in his own Likeness, not
without but within himself, and the Union of the Holy Ghost, with Father and
Son, is by his eternal Procession from Father and Son, without Separation, or
going out of either; but this In-being of these Divine Persons in each other is
their Mutualconsciousness; for they are in one another, as Minds, not as
Bodies, and we know no other natural Union or In being of Minds, but this
natural intimate Consciousness to each other.

But his Argument consists in confounding the Union and Communion of these
Divine Persons; for it seems their Communion consists in this
Mutual-consciousness; and if their Union consists in it too, then their Union
and Communion is the same: And what if it be? Can he tell of any Communion
between Persons essentially One (excepting such personal Acts as are peculiarly
ascribed to each in the Economy of our Salvation, which are not the Communion
of Mutual-consciousness) distinct from their essential Unity. In separate
Persons, who have no natural Union, Unity and Communion are Two things; for
where there is no natural Union, Communion can only signify a Moral or
Political Union; but all Communion is Union; and where the Union is natural,
Union and Communion must be the same: For Persons which are essentially One,
which is the most perfect Union, can admit of no lower Degrees of Union, which
are only Imitations of Nature, to supply the want of natural Unity. So that the
Animadverter has unawares proved the essential Union of the Divine Persons to
consist in Mutual-consciousness; for if their Communion consists in it, as he
grants, then their Union must.

But he has made a very false Representation both of Mutual-consciousness, and
of the Communion of the Divine Persons with each other. For to prove
Mutual-consciousness to be Communion, he says, That all Acts of several Persons
upon one another (as all that are Mutual must be) are properly Acts of
Communion, by which the said Persons have an Intercourse amongst themselves, as
acting interchangeably one upon the other; which may be true of separate
Persons, and of all other Mutual Acts, excepting Mutual-consciousness: But
Persons, though distinct, yet not separate, but essentially One by
Mutual-consciousness, do not act upon each other (which must signify an
external Impression, which one Person makes upon the other, and that supposes
them to be separate Persons) but see, and know, and feel each other in
themselves, as every single individual Mind feels its own Thoughts and
Passions. Had the Dean made such a Separation between the Divine Persons, as
this loose Description of Communion infers, what tragical Exclamations should
we have heard?

But this severe Censurer of other Men ought to have been more cautious than to
have said, That all Acts of several Persons upon one another, are Acts of
Communion, which makes Boys in a State of Communion with each other at Boxing;
and a match at Scolding another State of Communion; that had the Dean but been
pleased to have returned Mutual Acts, he and the Animadverter might long before
this, have been in very strict Communion with each other.

After all this huffing and swaggering, this notable Dispute issues in a mere
Metaphysical Subtlety about the natural Order of our Conceptions of things. The
Animadverter grants all that the Dean says, and all that he has need to say in
order to form a Notion of a Trinity in Unity. In the Dispute about
Selfconsciousness, he no where denies, but in all his Arguments supposes, that
every individual Person has a Self-consciousness of its own, and that every
such Self-conscious Person is thereby one with it self, and distinguished from
all other Persons; but he will not allow Self-consciousness to be the formal
Reason of Personality, which the Dean no where says it is; and as for
Mutual-consciousness, he allows the Three Divine Persons, to be thus
mutually-conscious; and that this Mutual-Consciousness may suppose an Union of
Nature (the Dean would have said Unity of Nature, though an Union of Persons;
for Unity is Oneness, Union is a Conjunction of more than One; and therefore
there can be no Union of Nature, unless there be a number of Natures united
into One, but there is an Union of Persons in the Unity of Nature) and that
Mutual-consciousness may result from this Union, and upon the same account may
infer and prove it, but it can never give or cause it; for their Essence and
Personality (what but One Personality, as One Essence in Three?) must still go
before their Mutual-consciousness, since the Three Persons must be really One
in Nature before they can know themselves to be so. To be so? How is that? To
be One? That they must be One, before they can know themselves to be One? What
is that to the purpose? Can they be One before they are Mutually-conscious,
even in the order of conceiving it? Can they be One before they are in one
another? Or is there any other mutual In-being of Minds, but
Mutual-consciousness?

But what confounded work does this make with the pure, simple, uncompounded,
eternal Nature of God to prove a Priority or Posteriority of Being, or
Causality in the Divine Nature from the order of our Conceptions? When we
certainly know, that the Divine Nature is eternal, and therefore has nothing
before, nor after in it; that it has no Parts or Composition, and therefore
nothing in order of Nature before or after, nothing that can be conceived as a
Cause or Effect, is it not demonstrable, that all such Conceptions, reduced
into such exact Order and Method, are false, because there is nothing in the
Divine nature, that answers to them? And though the imperfection of our
Knowledge makes it necessary to distinguish the Divine Nature into different
Conceptions, as far as we can know any thing of God, and can form distinct
Notions, which we can view by Parts; Is this a Reason to frame Ideas of
Priority and Posteriority, of Causes and Effects, of formal Reasons and
essential Properties, when we know there is no such thing in God, and can form
no distinct Conceptions of them? Is it not a wise Dispute, whether Essence,
Subsistence, Personality, the distinction of Persons, or the Unity of Nature,
Self-consciousness, and Mutual-consciousness, be first or last, which is the
Cause, and which the Effect; when we know that the Divine Nature did eternally
subsist in Three Self-conscious, and mutually-conscious Persons, and have no
other Conception of their Distinction and Unity?

But let those distinguish and methodize their Conceptions into unconceivable
Confusion, that please; if Self-consciousness necessarily results from, and
infers and proves a distinction of Persons, and Mutual-consciousness supposes,
results from, infers, and proves, the Union of the Divine Persons in the
essential Unity of the Godhead, it will satisfy the Dean without disputing the
formal Reasons of Personality and Union: For this proves a Trinity in Unity,
and gives us as intelligible a Notion of it, as we have of Three distinct
Self-conscious Persons, which are mutually conscious to each other, which
either makes or proves an essential Distinction and Unity; and to dispute about
the Cause of Self-consciousness or Mutual-consciousness, is to dispute about
the naked Essences, or essential Properties of things, which the Dean rejected
Vindic. p. 8.
from the beginning, as without the Compass of Humane Knowledge.

4. His fourth and last Argument discards the Notion Page 100.
of Self-consciousness and Mutual-consciousness, not only as new and
suspicious, but as wholly needless in this Subject. Why so? Pray what hurt have
these seemingly innocent Words done? Are they not English? Do they signify
nothing? Or cannot he understand them? The last is the truth of the Case, and it
is a hard case, that the Dean must be bound, at the peril of having a great
scolding Book writ against him, to furnish the Animadverter with Understanding,
if he venture upon any Terms, which he cannot find in some Orthodox Schoolmen,
for Peter Lombard will not pass muster with him.

But the Sum of all is, That nothing can be signified by these Words
(Self-consciousness and Mutual consciousness) which is not fully, clearly, and
abundantly signified by that one plain Word, and known Attribute, the Divine
Omniscience. Now suppose this; Why may not that One Comprehensive Attribute of
Omniscience very properly receive different Names, according to its different
Objects, as the several Arts and Sciences do? If, as he says, by this
Omniscience every Divine Person knows himself, and the same Person, by the very
same Omniscience knows all that is known by the other Two Persons, and the
other Two Persons by the same knows all that is known by him; yet to know
himself and to know whatever others know, though it may belong to the same
Omniscience is not the same Knowledge, because it has not the same Object; for
Self and Others, are as distinct Objects as Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are
distinct Persons; and therefore this Knowledge may be distinguished by
different Names, as it is by different Objects.

And since, as he confesses, the general Notion of Omniscience does not
distinguish Persons as Selfconsciousness does, nor Unite them into One, as
Mutual-consciousness does, these Terms were necessary to express something,
which Omniscience does not express, viz. wherein these Divine Persons are
distinguished, and wherein they are One.

But, after all, this is a Mistake; for though Selfconsciousness and Mutual
consciousness may in some Sense be called Knowledge, yet they are of a
different Kind and Species from what we strictly call Knowledge, that is, they
differ as Speculation and Sensation. Self-Knowledge properly signifies to
contemplate our own Natures in their Idea, to draw our own Image and Picture as
like the Original as we can, and to view our selves in it: But
Self-consciousness is an intellectual Self-Sensation, when we feel our selves,
and all the Thoughts, Knowledge, Volitions, Passions of our Minds, and know
what is Self, and what belongs to Self by feeling it: He, who knows not the
difference between intellectual Sense and Knowledge, is as unfit to meddle in
this Controversy, as a Blind-Man is to dispute of Colors. Thus the
Mutual-consciousness of Three Persons is not their mutual Knowledge of each
other, though they know each other as perfectly as they know themselves, but
their Mutual-Sensation and feeling each other in themselves, which makes them
naturally One. An omniscient Being knows all things, but feels himself; and
Omniscience, as the Animadverter observes, belongs to Nature, but
Mutual-consciousness to Persons, which might have satisfied him, That there is
a great difference between Omniscience, and Self-consciousness, and
Mutual-consciousness; between knowing all things, whether the Object be Self,
or any other Being, and feeling himself and other Persons in himself.

This is sufficient to justify the Dean's Notion of Self-consciousness and
Mutual-consciousness, and a little more fully to explain it, which, it seems,
he thought, that every one, who was acquainted with the workings of his own
Mind, must have understood without a Comment: And, I hope, if the Animadverter
think fit to try his skill again, we shall hear no more of his formal Reasons
of Personality and Union, but that he will be pleased to speak to the true
point, whether a Self-conscious Person be not one with himself, and
distinguished from all other Persons, and whether he does not feel himself to
be thus One, and thus distinguished by Self-consciousness; and whether Three
Divine Persons, who are thus Mutually-conscious to each other, be not naturally
and essentially United into One Supreme Being, or One God. All other Disputes
are beside the Question; for if this hold true, then we have a natural
Distinction, and a natural Unity between these Three Divine Persons, Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost; and that is a natural Trinity in Unity, without the least
appearance of Absurdity or Contradiction, or impossibility in its Notion.

Hitherto, though the Assault has been furious and insulting, we have met with
no heavier Charge, (excepting some usual Complements) than Ignorance in
Philosophy and Metaphysics, and Scholastic Terms, and where that Charge
falls, I will now leave you to judge; but this is but the beginning of Sorrow:
Tritheism follows next, which is a terrible Accusation, though I do heartily
thank the Animadverter, that he has been so civil to the Dean, as not to charge
Anim. Chap. 5. p. 118.
this upon him, as his Opinion, but as the consequence of his Principles, which
I believe will prove no more than the Animadverter's Ignorance, not the Dean's
Heresy.

Before I Answer his Arguments, it will be necessary briefly to state this
Matter in Controversy; for the Sting of all his Arguments consists in forcing
such a Sense on the Dean's Words, as he never intended.

The only thing that needs any Excuse or Apology is the Phrase of Three eternal
and infinite Minds; the Fault of which is, That it is an unusual way of
Speaking, and gives advantage to an ignorant or cavilling Adversary to affix
some uncouth and Heretical Sense on it. What led the Dean to this, I observed
before, viz. His explication of the distinction of the Three Divine Persons by
Self-consciousness, and of their essential Unity by Mutual-consciousness; now
since Self-consciousness and Mutual-consciousness can be in nothing but Minds,
he thought the fairest and easiest representation of this Matter, was to
consider them under the Notion and Character of Minds; for every Man can feel
in himself, that a Mind is distinguished from all other Minds by
Self-consciousness, and if there may be, and is, such a Mutual-consciousness
between Three, as the Dean describes, they must be as naturally and essentially
One, as Three can be One, and we must seek for no other Unity in Trinity, than
what is reconcilable with a real Trinity, or a real distinction between Three.

But had the Dean been aware, what kind of Men he should have had to do with,
such as have no regard to the plain and manifest Sense of an Author, if they
can but pick a Quarrel with his words, he might easily have prevented all this,
without having injured his main Argument: If instead of Three eternal and
infinite Minds, he had but said, Three eternal, infinite, knowing, intelligent
Persons, he had kept the Orthodox Language, and yet expressed all that he
intended by Three Minds; for a knowing intelligent Person is a Mind, if
Knowledge can be only in a Mind; and then Three such intelligent Persons may be
distinguished from each other by Self-consciousness, and united in One Godhead
by Mutual-consciousness. This is the Account the Dean himself gives, what he
means by a Mind, That a Mind is an intelligent Person, Vindic. p. 66.
and that every intelligent Person is a Mind, and therefore thought it as
innocent in this Sense, to say, That there are Three eternal and infinite
Minds, as to say, That there are Three eternal and infinite Persons; and I
believe it will appear, That excepting the unusualness of the Expression, the
objection of Tritheism will equally lie against both, with this difference,
That it is more easily Answered by considering the Powers and Properties of a
Mind. And in this Sense only he affirms, That to say, they are Three Persons,
and not Three distinct infinite Minds, that is, not Three distinct intelligent
Persons, is both Heresy and Nonsense; it is Nonsense to Talk of a Person, who
is not an intelligent Person, that is, as he explains it, a Mind, which
contradicts the Notion both of a Person and Mind; and to say, That there are
Three Persons, but not Three intelligent Persons, is Heresy, even the Heresy
of Sabellius; for there is no Medium between a Trinity of intelligent Persons,
and a Trinity of Names; for Powers and Faculties, and Modes, will prove no
more, when distinguished from intelligent Persons: And it is evident, That this
is all he intended by it, by the opposition he makes between Three Minds and
Three intelligent Persons, and Three Powers and Faculties of the same Being;
for Faculties are not Persons, no more than Memory, Will, and Understanding,
are Three Persons in One Man: And he proves, That the received Catholic Notion
of a Person is such a Being as has Understanding, and Will, and Power of
Action, from the Arguments universally urged against the Socinians, to prove
the Holy Ghost to be a Person, and not merely a Divine Power, because all the
Properties of a Person belong to him, such as Understanding, Will, Affections
and Actions. So that the Dean does not charge those with Heresy and Nonsense,
who barely refuse to use these Terms of Three eternal and infinite Minds,
which, it may be, no body ever so expressly used before him, and which he will
not contend about; but the Heresy and Nonsense is to assert Three distinct
Divine Persons, who are not Three distinct, eternal, infinite, intelligent
Persons, and he has Authority and Reason enough to call this both Heresy and
Nonsense.

This is a sufficient Answer to that Charge the Animadverter draws up against
the Dean, That he calls the Three Divine Persons Three eternal and infinite
Minds, by which he understands no more than Three intelligent Persons; and if
He thinks an intelligent Person to be a Mind, let the Animadverter confute him,
if he can; and if he means no more by Three Minds than Three intelligent
Persons, (as it is evident he could mean no more) how inconvenient soever this
expression may be thought, let the Animadverter try his Skill to make Tritheism
of Three Minds, and excuse Three intelligent Persons from the same Charge. And
now let us consider his Arguments, which he shows with great Pomp in Mode and
Figure.

Arg. 1. Three distinct infinite Minds or Spirits, Page 119.
are Three distinct Gods. But the Three Persons of the Blessed Trinity are not
Three distinct Gods. And therefore the Three Persons of the Blessed Trinity,
are not Three distinct infinite Minds or Spirits.

Now let us but change the Term of Minds into Intelligent Persons, and it is
the very Argument the Socinians urge to confute the Doctrine of Three Divine
Persons, or to charge it with Tritheism, and runs thus:

Three distinct, infinite, intelligent Persons, are Three distinct Gods. But
there are not Three distinct Gods. And therefore there are not Three distinct,
infinite, intelligent Persons in the Godhead; and consequently to assert Three
such distinct Persons is to assert Three Gods.

His proof of the Major Proposition will serve as well for an eternal,
infinite, intelligent Person, as for an eternal infinite Mind. For God and
eternal, infinite, intelligent Person, are Terms as equipollent and
convertible, as God and infinite Mind or Spirit. God being as truly and
properly an infinite, intelligent Person, as an infinite Mind or Spirit, and an
infinite, intelligent Person being as truly and properly God, as an infinite
Mind.

If the Animadverter think fit to Answer, That One God, and One infinite Mind
are convertible Terms, but One God, and One infinite, intelligent Person are
not convertible Terms, because there are Three such infinite Persons in the
Godhead, and but One infinite Mind; the reply is easy, That the bare Terms,
from which he argues, do not prove this distinction; For though in the Doctrine
of the Trinity, custom has more reconciled us to the Term Person than Mind;
yet, setting aside this Dispute, all Mankind understand the same thing by an
infinite Mind, and an infinite intelligent Person; it is plain the Socinians
do, and hence conclude, That there is but One Person in the Godhead, because
God is but One infinite Mind. Whether there be One or Three infinite Minds, or
infinite intelligent Persons in the Unity of the Godhead, is a Dispute of a
higher Nature, and cannot be determined by Convertible Terms; for though the
ancient Philosophers and Poets (as he Learnedly proves, what every Schoolboy
knows) did acknolwedge God to be a Mind or Spirit, that is, an understanding,
intelligent, immaterial Being, yet most of them by Mind understood no more than
One single Mind, or One single Intelligent Person, and he might have known,
that Plato, to whom he appeals, though he acknowledged God to be a Mind, yet he
owned Three such Minds in the Unity of the Godhead. And therefore could not
think, That One God, and One infinite Mind, were equipollent and convertible
Terms; because he asserted Three infinite Minds to be but One God.

But since the Animadverter has only made God, and infinite Mind or Spirit,
equipollent and convertible Terms, we may allow him this, and still deny his
Major Proposition, that therefore Three distinct infinite Minds or Spirits, are
Three distinct Gods; for though God is an infinite Mind, and an infinite Mind
is God, it does not follow that Three infinite Minds are Three distinct Gods,
no more than Three infinite intelligent Persons are Three distinct Gods; but
only as it is expressed in the Athanasian Creed, That we are compelled by the
Christian Verity to acknowledge every Person by himself ((...), singly,
distinctly) to be God and Lord, and yet are forbidden by the Catholic Religion
to say, there be Three Gods or Three Lords. If God be an infinite Mind, and
there be Three infinite Minds, it must follow, That each of these Three
infinite Minds, distinctly, and by himself considered, is God, not that these
Three are Three distinct Gods, but One God.

Indeed the Animadverter's Argument from Convertibility and Commensuration,
that whatsoever may be affirmed or denied of the One, may with equal Truth and
Propriety be affirmed and denied of the other, proves all that the Dean would
desire, viz. that every distinct Person in the Godhead is distinctly by himself
an infinite Mind, because he is distinctly by himself God, and God is infinite
Mind, and therefore every Person, who is God, is infinite Mind; for no Person
can, by himself be God, who has not by himself all the Perfections that belong
to the Idea of God: So that here are Three Persons in the Godhead, each of
which by himself is infinite Mind. And therefore, though it may be improper, in
an absolute Sense to say, there are Three eternal and infinite Minds, when we
acknowledge this infinite Mind is, and eternally was essentially and
inseparably One; yet we must say, that this One infinite Mind is essentially
distinguished into Three infinite intelligent Persons, whom, in any other case,
we should call Three Minds, and are as much Three as is consistent with the
essential Unity of the Godhead; and this is reason enough to consider the
distinction of Persons, and the Unity of the Godhead, as we would the
Distinction and Unity of Three Minds; and then this One eternal infinite Mind,
may be distinguished into Three intelligent Persons* by Three Self
consciousnesses, and be essentially One by a natural Mutual-consciousness,
which is all the Dean intended, or had occasion to assert. And if this be all
he means by the Godhead, and infinite Mind, which is common to all Three
Persons, the Dean readily agrees with him, and in this Sense will no more say,
that there are Three infinite Minds, than that there are Three Gods.

The Animadverter was aware of this, That the same Objection of Three Gods,
would as well lie against Three Persons as against Three Minds; and let us
consider how he avoids the blow. The difference he makes between them is this,
That Three infinite Minds or Spirits are Three absolute, simple Beings, or
Essences, and so stand distinguished from one another by their whole Beings or
Natures. The Sum of which is no more but this, That Three distinct Minds are
Three distinct Gods, because they are distinguished; but if notwithstanding
their distinction, they are essentially and inseparably One, they are not Three
distinct Gods, but a real Trinity of Divine Persons in the Unity of the
Godhead, which all Men must own, who believe a Trinity in Unity. But are not
Three infinite intelligent Persons, as much Three absolute, simple Beings and
Essences, as Three Minds? No! by no means! The Divine Persons are Three
Relatives, (or One simple Being or Essence under Three distinct Relations) and
consequently differ from one another, not wholly, and by all that is in them,
but only by some Mode or Respect peculiar to each, and upon that account
causing their Destinction. This is perfect Gibberish, which I am certain he
understands not one Word of himself; But let us examine it.

The Divine Persons, he says, are Three Relatives; very right; for Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, are Three, and are related to each other. But what are Three
Relatives? that comes in by way of Parenthesis, One simple Being, or Essence
under Three distinct Relations. That these Three Persons, thus related to each
other, are One simple Being, or Essence we readily grant, for they were from
eternity inseparably united in One infinite Essence, or One Supreme God; but
the Question still remains, what these Three Persons are, into which this One
Being, or Essence, is distinguished by these Three distinct Relations? Three
Relatives are not Three Relations, but Three things related to each other; What
then, are these Three Persons in the Unity of the Divine Essence? Three
Relations, Three Modes, Three Respects, without some Being, which though
essentially One, is really and substantially Three, is Nonsense in Logic; for
there must be as many real, substantial Relatives and Correlates, as there are
Relations, unless the Relation between Father and Son can subsist without a
real Father and Son. The Person then of the Father, the Person of the Son, and
the Person of the Holy Ghost, are not the Relations between Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, but real, substantial Persons, thus related to each other: And if
these are Three intelligent Persons, let him make, if he can, Three Gods of
Three Minds, and excuse Three real intelligent Persons from the same Charge.
But the Truth is, to prevent the Charge of making Three Gods, he distinguishes
the Three Divine Persons, into Three Logical Relations, or Modes of
Subsistence; and if we will be contented with a Trinity of Modes, he is for us;
but this looks very like renouncing a Trinity of Persons, to secure the Unity
of the Godhead; and I fear will prove no better when thoroughly examined.

In what Sense the Three Divine Persons are Three Relatives, or Three
Relations, I have explained above; their Nature is complete and absolute, if
the Divine Nature be so, but their Subsistence is Relative, as it must of
Necessity be, when the same individual Nature is repeated, and subsists
distinctly in Three, If it be essential to the Father to be a Father, he
subsists with a necessary Relation to his Son; if it be essential to the Son to
be a Son, the perfect living Image of the Father, his Subsistence is wholly
Relative, as the Subsistence of an Image is, which depends upon the Prototype.
And therefore though each Divine Person be eternal and infinite Mind, and with
respect to their Three real Subsistences, may be called Three infinite eternal
Minds, (as the Dean ventured to call them) yet these Three are not Three
absolute simple Beings or Essences, which stand distinguished from one another
by their whole Beings or Natures, but One absolute eternal Mind repeated in
Three Relative Subsistences without multiplication: As a Man and his living
Image, though each of them have distinctly Humane Nature, and upon that account
might be called Two Men, yet they have but One complete, absolute Humane
Nature, though it be repeated in the Image, and are but One Man in Two Persons,
or Two Humane Subsistences.

Had the Dean indeed made Three complete, absolute, eternal Minds, he had been
justly chargeable with making Three Gods, but the same eternal and infinite
Mind repeated in Three Subsistences, necessarily and essentially related to
each other, are but One eternal God.

2. His second Argument is this.

Three distinct Minds or Spirits, are Three distinct Substances.

But the Three Persons in the Blessed Trinity, are not Three distinct
Substances.

And therefore they are not Three distinct Minds or Spirits.

The Dean does not pretend to know any thing of the Substance of a Mind, much
less of God, who is an infinite Mind: He is contented to know, That a Mind is a
thinking and understanding Being; and though Understanding, and Being, and
Nature, or Substance, may be distinguished in finite, created Minds, yet St.
Austin has taught him, that in God, Ideo Ipsa mirabilis simplicitas commendatur
quia non ibi, (in Trinitate) aliud est esse, aliud intelligere, vel siquid
aliud de dei natura dicitur. Anima vero quia est, etiam dum non intelligit,
aliud est quidem esse, aliud est quod intelligit. Aug. Evod. Ep. 102.

Proinde in unum Deum Patrem and Filium and Spiritum Sanctum credamus, ita ut
nec filius credatur esse qui pater est, nec pater qui filius est, nec pater nec
filius, qui utriusque spiritus est -- Sed haec tria aequalia esse, and
coaeterna, and omnino esse una natura. Ibid.


to be is not One thing, and to understand another, or whatever else can be
said of the Divine Nature, and therefore not Substance neither. So that if in
the Unity of the Godhead there be but Three such distinct Understandings, or
Minds or intelligent Persons, who are not each other, and do not understand by
each other, but distinctly by themselves, as St. Austin expressly observes,
Deinde quis audeat dicere patrem non intelligere per semetipsum, sed per
filium? Ibid.
That no man will say, That the Father does not understand by himself, but by
his Son, he is not concerned about distinct Substances, which are the same with
to be, and to understand in God.

But his Proofs of both Propositions are entertaining. His Major, That Three
distinct Minds are Three distinct Substances, he proves from the Definition of
a Mind or Spirit, that it is Substantia incorporea intelligens; an intelligent,
incorporeal (or immaterial) Substance; and therefore Three distinct Minds or
Spirits must be Three such distinct Substances. Now if a Man should deny his
Definition, and say, That a Mind is res cogitans, a thinking Being, he would be
undone for want of his Substances; but I shall only cap Definitions with him at
present, That a Person is Substantia individua naturae rationabilis, the
individual Substance of a Rational Nature: And therefore if there be Three
distinct Persons, there are Three such distinct Substances in the Godhead, and
let us see how he will bring off Three Persons from being Three distinct
Substances, and I will undertake the Dean shall do as much, and do it as well,
for Three Minds.

But if a Mind were not a Substance, what could it be else? Let us know first,
what Substance is, and then we'll tell him. Not quod substat accidentibus I
hope, for then he immediately proves, That God is no Substance, because no
accident can be in God, nor need he fear, that the Dean will make a Mind a Mode
of Subsistence in his Sense of it, but a true and real Mind, which does really
and actually subsist, though these Three eternal Minds are but Three eternal
Subsistences of the same One individual eternal Mind.

As for the Minor, viz. That the Three Divine Persons in the blessed Trinity
are not Three distinct Substances, he proves first from Authority; and he is as
dangerous a Man at Authorities, as ever I met with.

He cites Tertullian, St. Ierom, St. Austin, and some Page 123.
others, and he might have produced the Authority of all the ancient Fathers,
to prove, that there is but One Substance in God; but this is nothing to his
purpose, for by One Substance they plainly meant the Homoousion, that Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, were of the same Nature, and by denying Three Substances,
they principally rejected Three diverse Natures, of different Kinds and Species,
in opposition to Arianism, which denied the Son to be of the same Nature with
his Father; this he might have learnt from what he cites from his Orthodox
Father, Bellarmine, That to assert, that the Father and the Son differ in
Substance is Arianism; for the difference the Arians made, and the Catholics
opposed, was not in the real distinction of their Persons, but in the diversity
of their Natures; and the Reason he adds, will not help it out: And yet (he
adds) if they were Two distinct Substances, for them not to differ in Substance
would be impossible; as if to be distinct, and to differ in Substance were the
same thing: As if Two Men were not unius Substantiae, of one and the same
Substance, as St. Austin and all the Fathers assert, because they are Two
distinct Men, and each of them has a distinct Nature of his own? Or if he will
call this a Difference, as if to differ in number and in Substance or Nature
were the same thing? or as if to differ in number proved a diversity of Nature
too. It is a tedious thing to dispute with Men, who must be taught to construe
the Fathers, and to understand common Sense.

But if Authority will not do this, he is resolved Reason shall, and he has as
peculiar a Talent at Reason as he has at Authorities. He proves, That the Three
Persons cannot be Three distinct Minds, because they are not Three distinct
Substances. Now the Dean may very safely deny this Consequence, and try how the
Animadverter will prove it; That if Three Minds are Three intelligent Persons,
and a Mind is a Substance, therefore Three distinct Minds, or Persons, are
Three distinct Substances; for Three distinct Minds may subsist distinctly, and
yet inseparably in One Eternal and infinite Substance, as Three intelligent
Persons do. Though the true and short Answer is, That the same Substance
repeated in Three distinct Subsistences, is not Three Substances, but One, as I
have often observed in the Case of the Man and his Image.

But suppose Three Persons were Three distinct Substances, inseparably united
in One: What then? What then? It is a Terrible then: For then Two Substances
will concur in, and belong to each Person; to wit that Substance, which is the
Divine Essence, and so is communicable or common to all the Persons, and the
Substance, which constitutes each Person, and thereby is so peculiar to him, as
to distinguish him from the other, and consequently to be incommunicable to any
besides him, to whom it belongs.

I am heartily ashamed and sorry to see such Stuff, as must necessarily expose
our Holy Faith to the scorn of Atheists and Infidels, and that I may not
contribute to it, all this Nonsense shall escape the lash of my Pen. In short,
the Dean knows no Divine Substance or Essence distinct from the Three Divine
Persons, nor knows any distinction between the Divine Essence, and a Divine
Person, but that the Essence makes the Person. That the whole Divine Essence or
Nature is originally in God the Father, that this same whole Divine Nature and
Essence was by eternal Generation, communicated by the Father to the Son, and
subsists distinctly in him; That this same whole Divine Nature by eternal
Procession, is communicated by the Father and the Son, to the Holy Ghost, and
subsists distinctly in him; and these Three Divine Persons by an inseparable
Union, dwelling in each other, is that Supreme and Sovereign Being, who is the
One God, or a Trinity in Unity.

It is amazing to think what strange Conceits this Man must have of a Trinity
of Persons, and Unity of Essence or Substance: For I am sure no Man has any
Idea of an intelligent Nature and Essence distinguished from a Person, or of
Persons distinguished from a rational Nature; of a Divine Essence and
Substance, which is no Person; and of Divine Persons, which are no Substances,
as it seems, they cannot be in the Animadverter's way, unless he also will
compound every Person of Two Substances. What is the Divine Essence and
Substance, but an infinite and eternal Mind? And is not an infinite and eternal
Mind a Person? The Divine Essence then must be acknowledged to be a Person, and
to be a substantial Person, or the Divine Substance; so that there is a Person,
that is a Substance, and if there be but One such single and solitary Divine
Essence, there can be but One such single and solitary Person: Will he then
make four Persons in the Godhead; the Divine Essence, which is a substantial
Person, and Three Persons, which are no Substances? Or will he own God to be,
what Pascentius objected to St. Austin, and he rejected with Scorn; Triformis
Persona, One Divine Ep. 176, 177.
Person under Three Forms: this or something more Senceless is the Truth of the
Case, as may appear more hereafter: but I will now proceed.

3. His third Argument is this.

If it be truly said, that one and the same infinite Mind or Spirit is Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost (I mean all Three taken together) and it cannot be truly
said, that one and the same infinite Mind or Spirit is Three distinct infinite
Minds or Spirits, then it follows, that Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are not
Three distinct infinite Minds or Spirits.

This Logic is a very troublesome thing, when Men want Sense. The whole of
this Argument is this, That One infinite Mind cannot be Three infinite Minds,
nor Three infinite Minds One infinite Mind, and that Three Persons, who are One
infinite Mind, cannot be Three infinite Minds; that is, That Three cannot be One,
nor One Three; which if it be universally true, there is an end of a Trinity in
Unity; if it be not universally true, that is, if Three may be One, and One
Three, the mere opposition between Three and One, which is the whole force of
his Argument, is childish Sophistry: For if they be Three and One in different
Respects, this is no Contradiction. Every Divine Person is an infinite Mind,
and as distinctly so, as he is a distinct Person, and yet by their essential
and inseparable Union to each other, all Three are but One eternal infinite
Mind, as they are but One God. But when these Three Divine Persons, are said to
be Three, and to be One eternal and infinite Mind, they are Three and One Mind
upon different Respects; every Person by himself, as a distinct Person, is an
eternal infinite Mind, that is, is a knowing intelligent Being, and has all the
Perfections of an infinite Understanding, distinguished from the other Persons
by Self-consciousness; and all Three Persons by their inseparable Union to each
other, are but One eternal infinite Mind, as having each other in themselves by
Mutual-consciousness; and let the Animadverter show where the Contradiction is,
That there should be Three Self-conscious infinite Minds, as there are Three
infinite Persons, united into One mutualconscious Mind, as Three distinct
Persons are united in the Unity of the Godhead: especially when this One
eternal Mind is entirely and perfectly repeated without the least change in
Three eternal intelligent Subsistences; each of which is distinctly an eternal
Mind, but the same One individual eternal Mind.

4. His fourth and last Argument is this:

Whatsoever Attribute may be truly predicated of all and each of the Divine
Persons in the Athanasian Form, so belongs to them all in common, that it can
belong to none of them under any Term of distinction from the rest.

But the attribute (infinite Mind or Spirit) may be truly predicated of all and
each of the Divine Persons in and according to the Athanasian Form.

And therefore it can belong to none of them under any Term of distinction from
the rest.

This is a wonderful Argument, if it be well considered. For,

1. Infinite Mind or Spirit is no Attribute, but the Divine Nature and Essence
it self, and our Metaphysical Animadverter uses to distinguish between Essence
and Attributes in God; and disputes earnestly without an opponent, that
infinite Mind is God; and therefore, That there is but One infinite Mind, as
there is but One God; Is God himself then an Attribute? What will he make of
God at last, when the Divine Essence is an Attribute, and a Divine Person a
mere Mode?

2. But let infinite Mind or Spirit be an Attribute or the Divine Essence,
since it may be truly predicated of all and each of the Divine Persons, it must
so belong to them all in common, that it can belong to none of them under any
Term of distinction from the rest. If by this Term of distinction from the
rest, he means it cannot belong to each of them considered distinctly as such
distinct Persons, then it cannot be predicated distinctly of them neither; for
nothing can, without manifest absurdity, be distinctly predicated of Three
distinct Persons, if it do not distinctly belong to each of them: If the
Father, considered as the Father, and as a distinct Person from the Son, and
from the Holy Ghost, be not an infinite Mind, it cannot be truly said, That the
Father is an infinite Mind; and if the Son, as a distinct Person from the
Father and the Holy Ghost is not an infinite Mind, it cannot be truly affirmed
distinctly of the Son, that he is an infinite Mind. Predication, if it be true,
must follow Nature, and therefore nothing can be particularly and distinctly
predicated of any Person, which does not distinctly belong to him. What is
common to Three, cannot be so peculiarly appropriated to any One, as to exclude
either of the other Two; for it is not common, if it be not common to all; and
no more is it common, if each of them have it not as distinctly as they
subsist: For distinct Persons, that subsist distinctly, must distinctly have
what they have, or they cannot have it at all; though Humane Nature is common
to all Mankind, yet every distinct Man, distinctly enjoys Humane Nature; for
there is no other way of distinction of Persons in a common Nature: There is
indeed a great difference between the distinction of Humane Persons, and of the
Divine Persons in the Sacred Trinity, and between the Divine Nature, being
common to all Three Divine Persons, and Humane Nature, being common to all
Mankind, as I have often observed; but there is so much likeness and Analogy
between them, as to make it very absurd to say, That what is common to Three
distinct Persons, does not belong distinctly to each.

3. Nor does the form of the Athanasian Creed forbid us distinctly to attribute
to each distinct Person of the Trinity, what is common to all Three; for the
Creed it self does this expressly in every point; The Father uncreate, the Son
uncreate, the Holy Ghost uncreate. The Father Incomprehensible, Eternal,
Almighty, God and Lord; and the Son Incomprehensible, Eternal, Almighty, God
and Lord; and the Holy Ghost Incomprehensible, Eternal, Almighty, God and Lord.
And that the Christian Verity compels us to acknowledge every Person by himself
((...), which, I think, is distinctly) God and Lord.

Well! but the Creed expressly denies, That therefore there are Three Uncreate,
or Three Incomprehensibles, or Three Eternals, or Three Almighties, or Three
Gods, or Three Lords: I grant it, but not for the Animadverter's Reason,
because what is common to all Three, does not distinctly belong to each, or to
all of them, for the Creed expressly affirms, that it does; but because these
Three Divine Persons, each of which have distinctly all these Perfections of
the Divine Nature, and the whole Divine Nature in them are so inseparably
united, as to be essentially One: And therefore, though there are Three
Eternal, Incomprehensible, Almighty Persons, each of which is God and Lord, yet
there is but One Eternal, Incomprehensible, Almighty God and Lord; and thus it
must be, if we will maintain with the Athanasian Creed, the real distinction of
Persons, and the Unity of the Godhead: If there be Three Persons, each of which
is by himself, Uncreate, Eternal, Incomprehensible, Almighty, I will venture
any Man, who can understand plain Sense, and dares own it, to deny, if he can,
That there are Three Uncreate, Eternal, Incomprehensible, Almighty Persons. And
in this Sense the Dean has not transgressed the Form of the Athanasian Creed,
by Three infinite Minds, if we understand them of Three infinite, intelligent,
Persons; and it is certain he could understand nothing else by them, when he
unites these Three infinite Minds into One infinite Mind, which can signify
nothing else but Three Persons and One God.

This is enough in Answer to the Animadverter's Arguments, and I belive you are
sensible by this time, what a profound Reasoner he is; in the next place we
should consider his Authorities, but I am very weary of this work, and I guess,
you think it a pretty long Letter already, but if you desire it, and will have
a little Patience, neither you nor the Animadverter shall long complain for
want of an Answer, though I cannot but think it a needless undertaking; for no
Man, who ever looked into the Fathers, can want an Answer, and those who cannot
consult the Fathers themselves, will believe as their Inclinations and
Affections lead them. I will undertake, the Fathers shall absolve the Dean from
the Imputation of Tritheism, let the Animadverter fence as well as he can
against Sabellianism. His Socinian Friends and Admirers declare, they will not
dispute with him about a Trinity of mere Modes and Postures in the Singularity
of the Divine Essence; for though they have too much Sense to own and profess
such a Trinity, yet they think it not worth disputing: It is a real,
substantial, subsisting Trinity they are afraid of, and dispute against; such a
Trinity the Dean asserts, and has vindicated from Absurdity and Contradiction,
and this is the Trinity, which both the Scripture Teaches, and the ancient
Catholic Church always taught; and this I undertake to prove.

There is indeed a third part of the Animadversions, if that may be called a
part, which runs through and inspires the whole, in which the Animadverter is
by much an Over-match for any Man who is a Christian; I mean his scolding part,
for it would Profane the Name of Wit to give it that Title. This I don't
pretend to Answer, and you your self confess it should be despised, not
Answered: Let him then here securely Triumph, and receive the Reward of such
Heroical Actions; Ut pueris placeas, and declamatio sias.

And therefore I shall only add, That if you want an Answer to the Preface, you
should read the Dean's Defense of the Knowledge of Jesus Christ and our Union
and Communion with him, which was published many Years since, and silenced all
his Adversaries then, that he heard no more of that till the Animadverter
revived the Quarrel, who could have given you the Dean's Answers to his own
Objections, if he had so pleased; for they are not new, but borrowed from such
Wits as Mr. Alsop, without any new strength given to them.

Where the Animadverter charges the Dean with Absurdities and Contradictions,
turn to the place, and read it with its context, and tell me what you cannot
Answer, and I will.

But if you, or any body else, can be persuaded by the Animadverter, That the
Dean understands neither English, Latin, nor Greek; neither Logicks,
Metaphysics, or Common Sense; I need wish you no other Punishment, than when
ever you Write to fall into the hands of such an Adversary; for, I believe,
there are very few Writers, but might be exposed in the same manner by a
spiteful Critic, not the Animadverter himself excepted, who begins his
Animadversions with a notorious Blunder in deriving a Mystery from (...), or
(...); whereas a Mystery does not signify in English the word Mystery, but the
thing signified by that word; and therefore, though the word Mystery may be
derived, a Mystery is derived from no Word; and to Talk of deriving a Mystery
is neither English nor Sense.

But though it were Justice to return some of his Complements to the Dean upon
himself, yet his Example is too scandalous to be imitated, and there is no need
to expose him, more than his own Pen has done. I am,

SIR, Your very Faithful Friend.

A POSTSCRIPT, Concerning the Calm-Discourse of the Trinity in the Godhead.
SIR,
SInce my writing this Letter, I have met with a Book, Entitled, A Calm and
Sober Enquiry concerning the possibility of a Trinity in the Godhead, Written,
as is said, by a Man of great Reputation among the Dissenters: I do not intend
to examine the Book, nor to approve, or disapprove it, though there seem to be
very obnoxious Passages in it, should he fall into such hands as our
Animadverter: He has taken great care, That no Man should suspect that he
favors the Dean in his Notions; and I believe, the Dean will thank him for
that, for if I understand him, he would never have said, and would be as
unwilling that any Man should think he has said, what the Enquirer has.

But all I design by this Postscript, is only this, to let you see, that
though the Enquirer does not in every particular say what the Dean says, yet he
says what will justify the Dean against the heaviest Charge the Animadverter
himself could frame against his Hypothesis, and that is Tritheism.

The pretense of this is, what the Dean says concerning Three distinct,
eternal, infinite Minds, and the Objections and Answers you have already heard;
and if I can understand the Enquirer, he says this as plainly, and in more
obnoxious Terms than the Dean has done.

To prove the possibility of a Trinity in the Godhead, he argues from the
possibility of God's uniting two Spirits by as close an Union, as he has united
Spirit and Body, which make One Man; and if it were possible to him (God) to
unite Two, would it not be as possible to unite Three: So that he represents
Calm Discourse p. 19, 20, 21.
the Trinity in Unity, by the Union of Three Spirits; which are distinguished
by their own individual Essences, and remain distinct by their singular
Essences; so as to be everlastingly united, but not Identified, and by Virtue
of that Union be some one thing, as much, and as truly as our Soul and Body
united do constitute One Man.

Now from the possibility of such an Union with such a distinction in created
Spirits, he concludes the possibility of such an Union unmade; or that is
original Page 23.
and eternal, in an unmade or uncreated Being; that is, That Three eternal,
unmade, uncreated Spirits may be thus united in One Godhead; that is, That
there are, or may be (for whatever he thinks, which may be easily guessed at,
he will not positively assert it) Three eternal, uncreated Minds in the Unity
of the Godhead.

This he proves from the Incarnation, That the Union of the Two Natures, the
Humane (made up of Page 25.
an Humane Body and Humane Soul, which are Two exceedingly different Natures)
with the Divine (which is a Third, and infinitely more different from both the
other) in One Person, viz. of the Son of God, cannot certainly appear to any
considering Person, more conceivable or possible, than that which we now
suppose (but assert not) of Three distinct Essences united in the One Godhead.

And that Father, Son, and Holy Ghost have their distinct Essences, he proves
also from the Doctrine of the Incarnation, since the Man Christ is confessed to
be in Hypostatical Union with the uncreated Spiritual Being of God, not as that
Being is in the Person of the Father, nor as in the Person of the Holy Ghost;
for then they should have become Man too; but as it was in the Person of the
Son only, why should it be thought less possible, That Three uncreated
Spiritual Beings (which the Animadverter will no more allow of them of Three
eternal Minds) may be in so near an Union with each other, as to be One God, as
that a created Spirit (and Body too) should be in so near an Union with One of
the Persons in the Godhead only, as therewith to be One Person? Will it not
hereby be much more apprehensible, how One of the Persons (as the common way of
speaking is) should be Incarnate, and not the other Two? Will not the Notion of
Person it self be much more unexceptionable, when it shall be supposed to have
its own individual Nature? -- Will it be Tritheism and inconsistent with the
acknowledged invioluble Unity of the Godhead?

A great deal more to this purpose you may find in his first Letter to Dr.
Wallis, p. 100, etc. and whether this be Tritheism or not, he had best ask the
Animadverter, who charged the Dean's Hypothesis with Tritheism, with much less
Reason: And, I confess, I am amazed, that after all this he should so
industriously Vindicate himself from Dr. Sherlock's Notion of Three infinite
Minds or Spirits, for Three Page 40.
distinct Substances the Dean does not assert; and if the Enquirer has not all
this while been proving, Three Spirits, Three distinct Essences, Three
individual Natures in the Godhead, no Man living can guess what he means; for
my part, I cannot tell where the difference is, unless it be in the Term of
infinite; for his Three Spirits, and Essences, and individual Natures, which
make up his Unity of the Godhead, as he has represented it, do not seem to be
infinite.

But he shelters himself from the Animadverter, whom he seems to be terribly
afraid of, in Academick uncertainty, and thinks he may safely dispute as he
pleases, and all on one side, so long as he asserts nothing; though I cannot
see how the Dean was more dogmatical than the Enquirer, who proposed his
Hypothesis only as a possible and intelligible Notion; every Body indeed might
guess, what the Dean's private Opinion was, and so they may, what the Enquirer
conceives about it, but he was far enough from imposing upon other Men, by
asserting, That thus it must be, and it cannot be otherwise: He was only
concerned to represent a possible and intelligible Notion; and that the
Enquirer pretends to as much as he, and therefore falls under the same
Condemnation: Nay, the Enquirer is much more exposed to the Charge of
Tritheism, by asserting, Three distinct Essences, Three individual Natures, and
Three spiritual Beings, than the Dean was, who never said any such thing, and
the Animadverter charges him with it only by consequence, That Three Minds are
Three distinct Substances and Essences, which he may deny, and I deny for him;
but the Enquirer says it in express words. The Dean allows but One Divine
Essence, and One individual Nature in the Godhead, repeated in Three Persons,
but without multiplication, as I have already explained it; and how to own
Three Essences, and Three individual Divine Natures in the Godhead, without
making Three Gods, seems to have some difficulty in it. For Three individual
Natures in the Deity, seem to sound very like Three individual Natures in
Humanity, which make Three Men.

But though the Enquirer has distinguished Father, Son, and Holy Ghost by their
singular Essences, much more than the Dean has, yet he thinks he has also made
a more close Union between them, and therefore is not so liable to the Charge
of Tritheism. For as he says, reflecting upon the Dean's Notion, Page 45.
An Hypothesis in this Affair, which leaves out the very Nexus, the natural and
eternal Union, or leaves it out of its proper place, and insists upon
Mutualconsciousness, which, at the most, is but a consequence thereof, wants
the principal thing requisite to the salving the Unity of the Godhead. If Two
or Three created Spirits had never so perfect a mutual Perspection of one
another, that would not constitute them One thing, though it probably argue them
to be so, and but probably. This is all a mistake of the Dean's Notion of
Mutual-consciousness, as I have sufficiently shown, which is not a
Mutual-perspection, or Mutual-insight into one another, but a feeling each
other in themselves; and if such an internal vital Sensation be not an
essential Union, I believe no Man can tell me what it is. It is certain, the
Dean took it to be so; and therefore he did not leave out a natural, eternal
Union. Whatever the Nexus, as he calls it, be, if they are united into a
Mutual-conscious Life, they are essentially One, and I am sure he can never
form any Notion of the Union of Spiritual Essences without it.

But I have said enough of this already, and therefore shall now briefly
consider, how the Enquirer unites these Three distinct Essences, Three
spiritual Beings, Three individual Natures in the Unity of the Godhead. And I
believe the Dean will like his Unity of the Godhead, as little as his
distinction.

He represents this by the Union of Soul and Body, which makes One Man; and by
the Union of the Divine and Humane Nature, which makes One Christ, as you see
by what I have already cited: But these are Personal Unions, and therefore
cannot be the Unity of the Godhead, in which is a Trinity of distinct Persons.
And yet, as far as I can possibly understand him (and if I mistake him, I shall
be glad for many Reasons to be better informed) no other Unity will satisfy
him, but such an Union of Three Spiritual Beings, and individual Natures, as by
their composition constitute the Godhead, as the composition of Soul and Body
make the Man.

For this reason he disputes earnestly against the universal, absolute,
omnimodous simplicity of the Divine Page 28, etc.
Nature, and will not allow, that Wisdom, Power, and Goodness, are the same
thing in God, and distinguished into different Conceptions by us, only through
the Weakness of our Understandings, which cannot comprehend an infinite Being
in one Thought, and therefore must as well as we can contemplate him by Parts.

This prepared his way to make Three spiritual Page 31.
necessary Beings of these Three Divine Attributes, Goodness, Wisdom, and
Power, the natural Union of which make One God, and a natural Trinity in Unity.

If you object, That this gives us the Notion of a compounded Deity, or of a
composition in it; he answers this difficulty, by giving us a new Notion of
Page 34.
a Compositum; which, he says, seems to imply a praeexisting component, that
brings such things together, and supposes such and such more simple things to
have praeexisted apart, or separate, and to be brought afterward together into
an united State: that is to say, That how many Parts soever any thing consists
of, you must not say it is a compound Being, unless its Parts were once
asunder, and put together by some other Being: That if a Man suppose, who
consists of Body and Soul, had been from Eternity without a Maker, and his Soul
and Body had never subsisted apart, he could not have been said to have been a
compound Creature, though he would have had the same Parts then that he has
now, that is, Soul and Body; and therefore, though God does consist of Parts,
of those Three spiritual Beings, and individual Natures, the Union of which
makes the Godhead, yet he is not a Compounded Deity, because he eternally and
necessarily is, what he is, without a Maker; and these Three spiritual Beings,
never did praeexist apart, but were eternally united to each other: The Sum of
which is no more but this, That God is not a made Compound, but an eternal
unmade Compound; but a Compound he is, as a Compound signifies a Being, which
consists of distinct Parts, united to each other.

But I always thought, That the whole Christian World, who have always denied
any Parts or Composition in God, did not by this mean, that he was not made,
but that he had no Parts; and one principal Argument against all Parts and
Composition in God, is, That he is eternal and unmade, and whatever has Parts
must have a Maker.

There can be but One eternal Nature, and yet if there be Three eternal Parts
of the Deity, there must be Three eternal Natures, not only distinct, but
different Natures, or else they could not be Parts in the Composition, for they
would be the same: Three Spiritual Beings, One of which is Goodness, another
Wisdom, and a third Power, are Three different eternal Natures, how closely
soever they are united; for, as he argues, Goodness is not Wisdom, nor Wisdom
Power, nor Power Wisdom or Goodness, and Three different eternal Natures is a
new Notion among Christians.

And though we have a natural Notion of an eternal Being, we have no Notion of
an eternal Union of eternal Parts, or of Three eternal Parts in the Deity,
which necessarily coexist in an eternal Union.

Once more, We have no Notion of an eternal and necessary Existence, but in an
absolutely perfect and infinite Nature; but if there be Three Parts in the
Deity, Three Spiritual Beings of distinst and different Natures, neither of
them can be absolutely perfect and infinite, (though we could suppose their
Union to make such a perfect Being) because they are not the same, and neither
of them is the whole; and therefore they cannot necessarily Exist, and yet a
Deity, which consists of Parts, cannot necessarily Exist, unless its Parts
necessarily Exist; for a Compounded Being can Exist no otherwise than its Parts
Exist.

But there is something in this, which seems to have a very ill Aspect upon the
Trinity it self, as well as on the Unity and Simplicity of the Divine Nature.
He Professes, Page 37.
indeed, not to Judge, that we are under the precise Notions of Power, Wisdom,
and Goodness, to conceive of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; though he has
been for several Pages together Vindicating such a representation of the
Trinity, and teaching us thus to conceive of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and
thinks That this gives ease to our Minds, by their being disentangled from any
apprehended necessity of thinking these (Power, Wisdom, and Goodness) to be the
very same things, and if they be not the same thing, but Three really distinct
Spiritual Beings, we must thus conceive of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and
then the difficulty is in a Compounded Deity, by what name to call the Three
Parts of the Composition, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, whether, as we are
taught in the Athanasian Creed, we must own each of them by himself, to be God
and Lord? For if all Three, by this Composition are but One God, neither of
them by himself is true and perfect God; no more than a Part can be the Whole:
This might be thought a very invidious consequence, had not he himself expressly
owned it. The Father, Son, and Spirit, being supposed Page 47.
necessarily existent in this united State, they cannot but be God, and the
Godhead by reason of this necessary Union cannot but be One. Yet so, As that
when you predicate Godhead, or the name of God, of any one of them, you herein
express a true, but inadaequate conception of God, i. e. The Father is God, not
excluding the Son and Holy Ghost; the Son is God, not excluding the Father and
the Holy Ghost; the Holy Ghost is God, not excluding the Father and the Son. As
our Body is the Man, not excluding the Soul, our Soul is the Man, not excluding
the Body.

This Comparison of the Soul and Body, which are the Parts of a Man, and whose
Union makes a complete and perfect Man, explains what he means by the
inadaequate Conception of God, when we apply the Name God distinctly to Father
Son and Holy Ghost, and in what Sense he says, the Father is God, but not so as
to exclude the Son, etc. All Orthodox Christians own, That the Father is God,
not excluding the Son, and the Holy Ghost; and that the Son is God, not
excluding the Father, and the Holy Ghost, etc. but then by this they mean, That
the Father is true and perfect God, has the whole entire Divinity in himself,
but yet the same whole entire Divinity distinctly and inseparably subsists in
the Person of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, that the same whole undivided
Divine Nature subsists entirely in Three distinct Persons, Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, and therefore each of them by himself in the most proper and
adaequate Conception is true and perfect God, though all Three are but one and
the same God. But the Inquirers Notion of God, as applied to each Person, is a
very inadaequate Notion, for it signifies only a part of the Deity, That the
Father is God, because he is a part of the Godhead, and the Son, and the Holy
Ghost, God, as parts also of the same One Godhead; as the Soul is the Man,
because part of the Man; and the Body also the Man, as part of the Man; and
therefore Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are each of them God, but so as not to
exclude each other, as no One essential Part can exclude the rest.

This is such a Notion of the Unity of the Godhead, as neither the Scriptures,
nor the ancient Church knew any thing of; and I think there is little need to
confute it. In short, as it makes a compounded Deity, so it makes but One
compounded Person; for if the Godhead be but One by Composition, as the Man is
by the Union of Soul and Body, if God be a Person he can be but One: For if you
call the Three Parts of the Godhead* Three Persons, yet neither of them is God,
but in a very improper and figurative Sense, as a Part is called by the Name of
the whole; so that either there is no Person in the Godhead, who is true and
perfect God, or there must be but One compounded Person, as there is One
compounded Godhead, and there is an end of the Christian Trinity. Some late
Socinian Writers have been willing to compound this Dispute of a Tinity of
Divine Persons, for the Three Attributes of Power, Wisdom, and Goodness; and if
you have a mind to call these Three Spiritual Beings, I believe, they will not
contend much about it; for they are not so much afraid of Three Parts of a
Deity, as of Three Divine Persons, each of which is true and perfect God.

This also necessarily destroys the Homoousion, or Sameness of Nature, which
the ancient Church asserted in the Persons of the Holy Trinity; for Three
Spiritual Beings, which are the Parts of this compounded Deity, cannot be the
same, no more than Soul and Body are; for the Parts of a compound, how closely
soever they are united, cannot be the same; for Three Sames, are not* Three
Parts, but Three Wholes. As to take his own Representation of it: If Power,
Wisdom, and Goodness* be Father* Son, and Holy Ghost, it is certain* and he
ow^^, that Power is not the same with Wisdom* and Goodness; nor Wisdom the same
with Power and Goodness; and therefore the Son is not of the same Nature with
his Father.

Which is another thing to be considered in the Enquirer's Notion, that it
destroys the Relations of the Ever-blessed Trinity; for if Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, be Three Parts of a compounded Deity, though we should grant, that
their Union might make One God, yet these Parts could neither beget, nor be
begotten, nor proceed from each other, and therefore could not be related to
each other, as Father, and Son, and Spirit, but only as Three parts of the same
Compositum. If Power be the Father, and Wisdom the Son, how comes* Wisdom to be
the Son of Power, and not to be Power* as the Father is, since a Father begets
his own Likeness? This destroys the natural Order and Subordination of the
Persons in the Trinity; if Power, Wisdom and Goodness be Three real distinct
things, and Three Spiritual Beings, which completely constitute the Godhead,
let any Man tell me, which of these Three in order of Nature is the first,
second, or third; why one is the Father, the other the Son, and the third the
Holy Ghost. This makes me wonder to hear him talk of Promanations; for an
Emanative Cause never produces any thing but of its own Nature, as Light
naturally flows from the Sun.

But I will not (...) this Postscript into another long Letter; this is
sufficient to my present Design, to give you a (...) and plain Representation
of the (...), and leave you ^o judge of (...)*

SIR, Yours.

FINIS*
ADVERTISEMENT.
A Commentary on the Five Books of Moses: With a Dissertation concerning the
Author or Writer of the said Books; and a general Argument to each of them. By
the Right Reverend Father in God, Richard, Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells. In
Two Volumes. Octavo.

Reason and Religion: In some useful Reflections on the most Eminent Hypothesis
concerning the first Principles and Nature of things; with Advice suitable to
the Subject, and seasonable for these times, Twelves.

A Defense of the Dean of St. Paul's Apology for writing against the Socinians,
in answer to the Antapologist. Quarto.

Printed for William Rogers.


