Imprimatur Liber cui Titulus, A Vindication of both Parts of the Preservative
against Popery, etc.

Guil. Needham, R. R. in Christo P. ac D.D. Wilhelmo Archie pisc. Cant. a Sacr.
Domest.
July 4. 1688.
A VINDICATION OF Both PARTS OF THE Preservative AGAINST POPERY: IN ANSWER TO
THE CAVILS OF LEWIS SABRAN, Jesuit.

By WILLIAM SHERLOCK, D. D. Master of the Temple.

LONDON: Printed for William Rogers at the Sun, over against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleetstreet. 1688.

TO THE READER.
I Must confess, F. Lewis Sabran of the Society of Jesus, as he writes himself,
has all the good Qualities belonging to his Order, excepting that Learning,
which some of his Order have formerly had, but he is excusable for that,
because of late, that has been the least of their care; but what they want in
Learning, they make up in Confidence and Noise, which is a nearer conformity to
the temper and spirit of their first Founder.

When I first saw his Sheet which he wrote against the First Part of the
Preservative, I read it over, and laid it aside, as I thought it deserved; for
I easily perceived, that he could not, or would not understand the plainest
sense, and I saw nothing he had objected, which could impose upon the most
unlearned Protestant; and I had no mind to engage with a Man, who has not
Understanding enough to be Confuted: But the honest Footman thought fit to call
him to an account, and I believe all impartial Men thought the Footman had the
better of him, and yet the Jesuit had an honorable occasion to retreat, had
his Wit served him to take it; for no Man would have expected that a Jesuit
should have encountered a Footman; but here his Courage out-ran his Wit, as it
often happens to Knights Errant in their bold Adventures.

I do intend as little as possibly I can to concern my self in the Dispute
between the Jesuit and the Footman; the Footman is able to Defend himself, and
I even quake for the Jesuit for fear he should; but having a little leisure at
present, I will spare some few hours to Vindicate the Preservative from this
Jesuite's Cavils, for it will appear, that they are no better. As for those
many good words he has bestowed on me, I take them for Complements on course,
and to be plain with him, they are all lost upon me, for when I have Reason and
Truth on my sid^ I am perfectly insensible of all the Sportings of Wit and
Satyr, for there are no Jests bite, but those that are true.

I do not intend to pursue this Jesuit in all his rambling Excursions, but
shall keep close to my business, to Vindicate The Preservative, and that in as
few words as I can; and this will come into a very narrow compass; for he has
as little to say, as ever man had, if you keep him out of his Commonplace
Disputes; but if you suffer him to draw you into those beaten Roads, there is
no end of him; for he has the Confidence of a Jesuit to repeat all the old
baffled Arguments without blushing.

I confess, I am a little ashamed to meddle with so trifling an Adversary, and
know not how I shall Answer it to the Ingenious Gentlemen of the Temple, to
whom he so often Appeals against the Master, for spending my time so ill,
unless his Character of a Jesuit will plead my excuse, which has been a
formidable Name in former Ages: and if this will do, I have a very honorable
and a very easy Task of it, an Adversary to encounter with the glorious
Character of a Jesuit, but without the Sense of a Footman.

A VINDICATION OF THE FIRST PART OF THE Preservative.
THE Charge against me is very formidable, Answer to Preservative p. 4.
that I advance such Principles in the Preservative, as make void the use of
Reason, Faith, Fathers, Councils, Scripture, and Moral Honesty, if he had said
less, he might sooner have been believed, or might have proved it better, when
such wild and extravagant Accusations confute themselves; but Jesuits commonly
spoil all by over-doing. Let us examine particulars.

SECT. I. The Principles which are pretended to overthrow all right Use of
Common Sense Vindicated.
THE first instance of this nature is, Ibid.
that I Charge Catholics with this great Crime, that they will not allow the
reading Heretical Books, and prove my Charge, because God not only allows, but
requires it. The Paragraph he refers to is in p. 3. of the Preservative, in
these words:

Men of weak judgments, and who are not skilled in the Laws of Disputation, may
easily be imposed on by cunning Sophisters, and such as lie in wait to deceive:
the Church of Rome is very sensible of this, and therefore will not suffer her
People to dispute their Religion, or to read Heretical Books, nay not so much
as to look into the Bible it self; but though we allow all this to our People,
as that which God not only allows but requires, etc. from hence he charges me
with saying, that God not only allows but requires People to read Heretical
Books, But the honest Footman plainly told him, what the meaning of Heretical
Books was, that I spoke the Language of their Church, which calls all Books
Heretical which are not of the Roman stamp: and this is all that I meant by it,
as every honest Reader would see. Does not he use the very same way of speaking
himself in the same Paragraph, when he retorts this Crime upon us, that we use
all endeavors to hinder our Flocks from hearing Catholic Sermons, Answer p. 4.
and reading Catholic Books, for are any Christians so absurd as to forbid
People to hear Catholic Sermons, and to read Catholic Books? No sure, not
what they think Catholic: and why may not I use Heretical, as well as he use
Catholic in the sense of the Church of Rome? by Heretical meaning such Books
as the Church of Rome calls Heretical, as by Catholic he means such Books as
the Church of Rome calls Catholic; for they are both equally Heretical and
Catholic.

But he complains in the Preservative Considered, p. 4. That he had asked three
very material Questions, and the Footman had not vouchsafed an Answer to them,
and I believe the Footman was in the right, for they deserved none. But let us
hear them, This (says he) seemed to me extravagant, not to say impious, and to
all those who have inherited from St. Paul that Faith to which he exacts so
firm and unwavering an adherency, that if an Angel from Heaven should teach us
any thing in opposition to it, we ought not to mind him, or return him any
other Answer than Anathema. How can, said I, this positive certainty stand with
an obligation of reading Heretical Books which oppose that Faith, to frame by
them, and settle a judgment. But now, if these Heretical Books do not oppose
that Faith, which was Preached by St. Paul, I hope, there was no need of
answering this Question; and if the Catholic Books do, I would desire him to
Answer the Question; and if there be a Dispute depending, which of them
contradicts St. Paul's Doctrine, I would desire him to tell me, How we shall
know, which of them does it, without examining them? When we know these Books,
which contradict St Paul's Doctrine, we will reject them with an Anathema, and
for that reason we reject the Council of Trent, whose Authority we think to be
inferior to an Angels, and that shows, that we do not think rejecting and yet
reading such Books to make void common Sense; for though we reject the Council
of Trent, yet we read it, as they find to their cost.

His next Question (or else I cannot make three of them) is, By what Text does
God deliver this Injunction? viz, of reading Heretical Books; which in his
Sense of Heretical Books is a very senseless Question; for no man pretends,
that God commands us to read Books, which we know to be Heretical; though a man
who is inquiring after Truth, must read such Books, as the several divided
Sects of Christians may call Heretical.

But his killing Question is to come. I asked further, How standing to the
first Principles of Common Sense, a Church which declares all men bound to
judge for themselves, could countenance Laws which exact of Dissenters, that
they stand not to that their Judgment, but comply against it, and that
constrain their liberty of judging by the dread of Excommunications,
Sequestrations, Imprisonments, etc. which is to make it Death not to act
against a strict Duty of Conscience, acknowledged by the Persecutors to be such.

But what is this to reading Heretical Books? Is there any Law in the Church of
England, thus to punish men for reading Heretical Books? There is we know in
the Church of Rome, where besides other Heretical Books, to have and to read
the Bible in the vulgar Tongue without License, which is rarely granted, and
ought not to be at all, brings a man in danger of the Inquisition, which one
word signifies more than any man can tell, but he who has felt it, witness the
late account of the Inquisition of Goa.

Well, but to allow a liberty of Judging, and not to suffer men to stand to
their Judgment, is contrary to Common Sense: It is so, but who gives a liberty
of Judging, and forbids men to stand to their own Judgment? I am sure, the
Church of England accounts any man a Knave, who contradicts his own Judgment
and Conscience. There is no Inquisition for men's private Opinions, no
ransacking Consciences in the Church of England, as we know, where there is.

Yes! We constrain this liberty of Judging by the dread of Excommunications,
Sequestrations, Imprisonments, Exclusion from the chiefest Properties of free
born Subjects, even by Hanging and Quartering; which is to make it Death not to
act against a strict Duty of Conscience, acknowledged by the Persecutors to be
such. It is a blessed time for these Jesuits, who like that no body should be
able to Persecute but themselves, to rail at Persecution; but let that pass. It
seems then it is contrary to Common Sense to allow a liberty of Judging, and to
deny a liberty of Practice; for God, suppose, to allow men to choose their
Religion, and to Damn them, if they choose wrong. That is to say, a Natural
liberty of Judgment, and by the same reason, the Natural liberty of Will, is
inconsistent with all Government in Church and State: If this were so, it would
indeed make Persecution (as he calls it) in a free-judging Church very absurd,
but it is very reconcilable to Common Sense, for a Church which denies this
liberty of Judging, to Persecute too; and this justifies the Persecutions of
the Church of Rome: Let Protestants here see, if such Jesuits could rule the
Roast, what it will cost them to part with their liberty of Judging; they loose
their Argument against Persecution: for an Infallible Church which will not
suffer men to Judge, may with good Reason Persecute them, if they do: that all
men, who like Liberty of Conscience, are concerned to oppose Popery, which it
seems is the only Religion, that can make it reasonable to Persecute, nay,
which makes it unreasonable not to Persecute, for it is as much against Common
Sense for a Church, which denies a liberty of Judging to allow a liberty of
Conscience, as for a Church to deny Liberty of Conscience, which allows a
liberty of Judging. Thus far the Preservative is safe, and let his following
Harangue against the liberty of Judging shift for it self, that is not my
business at present.

His next Quarrel is, that ( Preser. p. 4, 5.) I advise Protestants not to
dispute with Papists, till they disown Infallibility. Answer, p. 4.
I own the charge, and repeat it again, that it is a ridiculous thing to
dispute with Papists, till they renounce Infallibility, as that is opposed to a
l^berty of Judging; for so the whole Sentence runs: Here then let our
Protestant fix his Foot, and not stir an inch, till they disown Infallibility,
and confess, that every man must Judge for himself in Matters of Religion,
according to the Proofs, that are offered to him. This the Jesuit either
designedly concealed, or did not understand, though it is the whole design of
that Discourse: For the plain state of the Case is this. The Church of Rome
pretends to be Infallible, and upon this pretense she requires us to submit to
her Authority, and to receive all the Doctrines she teaches upon her bare Word,
without Examination; for we must not Judge for our selves, but learn from an
Infallible Church: Now I say, it is a ridiculous thing for such men to pretend
to Dispu^e with us about Religion, when they will not allow that we can judge
what is true or false, for it is to no purpose to Dispute, unless we can Judge;
and therefore a Protestant before he Disputes with them, ought to exact this
Confession from them, that every man must Judge for himself, and ought not to
be overruled by the pretended Infallible Authority of the Church against his
own Sense and Reason, and this is to make them disown Infallibility, as far as
that is Matter of Controversy between us and the Church of Rome, to disown
Infallibility as that is opposed to a liberty of Judging. If it be absurd to
Dispute with a man, who denies me a liberty of Judging, then I must make him
allow me this liberty before I Dispute, and then he must disown the overruling
Authority of an Infallible Judge, which is a contradiction to such a Liberty.

By this time, I suppose, he sees to what little purpose his Objections are;
that to require such a disowning of Infallibility, is to say, It Is impossible
to convince a man that in Reason, he ought to submit his Judgment to any other,
though Infallible: No Sir! but it is to say, that I cannot make use of my Reason
in any thing, till I am delivered from the Usurping Authority of such an
Infallible Judge, who will not suffer me to use my Reason, or to Judge for my
self: It does not make void the use of Common Sense and Reason, when it should
lead us to submit to any just Authority; but to submit to such an unjust
Authority, makes void the use of Common Sense and Reason, because he will not
allow us to use our Reason. The Jews had no Reason, as he pretends to reject
St. Paul's Disputation, till he had renounced Infallibility, because he never
urged his own Infallibility, as the sole Reason of their Faith, and to debar
them from a liberty of Judging, as the Church of Rome does; if he had, it had
been as vain a thing for the Jews to have Disputed with St. Paul, as it is for
Protestants to Dispute with Papists.

His next Exception is against those Words, ( Pres. p. 6.) What difference is
there betwxit men's using their private Judgments to turn Papists, or to turn
Protestants? To this he answers* The same as betwixt two sick men, the one
whereof chooses to put himself in an able Doctors hands, whom he knows to have
an infallible Remedy* (which none but Mountebanks ever had yet) whilst the
other chooses his own Simples, and makes his own Medicines.

The case is this; I was giving a reason, why Papists, who have any modesty
should not dispute with Protestants, because it is an appeal to every man's
private judgment: if ever they make Converts, they must be beholden to every
man's private judgment for it, for I think men cannot change their opinions,
without exercising a private judgment about it* and I suppose when they dispute
with men to make them Papists, they intend to convert them by their own private
judgments: now what difference is there between men's using their private
judgments to turn Papists or to turn Protestants? one indeed may be false, and
the other true, but private judgment is private judgment still; and if it be so
great a fault for men to use their private judgments, it is as great a fault in
a Papist, as it is in a Protestant. So that all that I said is, that there is
no dif^erence with respect to men's using their private judgment, whether they
use their private judgment to turn Papists, or to turn Protestants, for both is
but private judgment; and to confute this, he tells us, that there is a great
difference between turning Papist, and turning Protestant, which I granted
there was; but is nothing to the present Argument. I say, there is no
difference as to the principle or cause of their change, when the change of
both is owing to private judgment, and he learnedly proves, that the change
itself is different, as widely different, as Papist and Protestant differ. But
though the Footman had plainly told him this, the Jesuit had not wit to
understand it, and therefore ( Preservative Consid. p. 11.) adds, is there no
difference then betwixt one, who follows his fancy in choosing his way, and him
who chooses a good guide, and follows him, because they both choose? do both
equally rely on their fancy? I grant, there is a difference between these two,
as there is between a Protestant and a Papist; but when the dispute is, whether
they shall follow their own reason and judgment, or give up themselves to
follow a Guide with a blind and implicit faith, and every man must determine
this by his own private judgment, which is the case I proposed, which way so
ever they determine this question, whether to follow their own reason, or to
follow a Guide, in this point, they both equally rely on their own private
reason, and judgment, or as he calls it, fancy.

In the next place he says, I take the Catholics part, Answer, p. 4.
and though faintly, yet speak well in so clear a cause. The intention of those
Disputes is only to lead you to the infallible Church, and set you upon a Rock,
and then it is very natural to renounce your own judgment, when you have an
infallible Guide, This I do allege as the most plausible pretense to justify
Papists in disputing with Protestants, that the end of it is to lead us to an
infallible Church. Preserv. p. 9.
That our own judgment must bring us to the infallible Guide, but when we have
found him, we have no farther use for our own judgment.

I offered two Answers to this, neither of which he durst meddle with, but
nibbles at a Passage in each.

The 1. he thus represents, they cannot with any sense dispute with us about
the particular Articles of Faith, because the sense given of Scripture and
Fathers takes its Authority from the Church understanding it so.

But my Answer was this; That if Disputes be only to lead us to the infallible
Church, then it puts an end to all the particular Disputes of Religion between
us and the Church of Rome: We may dispute on about an infallible Judge, but
they cannot with any sense dispute with us about the particular Articles of
Faith, such as Transubstantiation, the Sacrifice of the Mass, etc. for these
are to be learnt only from the Church, and cannot be proved by Scripture or
Fathers without the Authority of the Church. Which is a demonstration if Faith
must be resolved into the infallible Authority of the Church, for then no
Arguments are a sufficient foundation for Faith without the Authority of the
Church, or if they be, there is no necessity of resolving our Faith into Church
Authority, because we have a good foundation for Faith without it.

Answer to Pres. p. 4.
He answers, This is false. The sense (of Scripture) takes its authority from
God* who spoke that Word, though we are certain, that we have the true sense of
that Word, because we receive it from the Church, which is protected and guided
in delivering us both the letter and sense, by the infallible Spirit of God,
that is to abide with her for ever, according to Christ's promise, John 14.16.

This is a choice Paragraph. The Question between us is, Whether they can by
Scripture convince a man, who does not yet believe the infallible Authority of
the Church, as we Protestants do not, that their Doctrines of
Transubstantiation, the Sacrifice of the Mass, the Worship of Images, etc. are
true Gospel-Doctrines: This I say they cannot, if they be true to their own
Doctrine, that we cannot be certain, what the true sense of Scripture is,
without the infallible Authority of the Church of Rome. For a man cannot be
convinced by Scripture, till he be sure, what the true sense of Scripture is,
and if we cannot be sure of this without relying on the Authority of the Church
in expounding Scripture, then a Protestant, who disowns such an Authority, can
never be sure, what the true sense of Scripture is, and therefore cannot be
convinced by Scripture-Proofs, which shows how absurd it is for a Papist, who
professes to believe all this, to attempt to persuade a Protestant who rejects
the Authority of their Church, of the truth of Popish Doctrines from Scripture:
either he thinks these Doctrines so plainly contained in Scripture, that a man,
who rejects the Authority of the Church, may be forced to acknowledge, that
they are in Scripture, and then he must reject the necessity of
Church Authority for the understanding of Scripture, which is to yield up a
very concerning point to Protestants; or else he must confess, that he does
very foolishly or knavishly in urging Scripture-Proofs to a man, who rejects
the Authority of their Church, without which he knows there are no
Scripture-Proofs of any Authority.

But this, which was the true state of the Controversy, the Jesuit takes no
notice of; all that he says is this: That the sense of Scripture takes its
Authority from God, that is, is ultimately resolved into God's Authority, who
intended such a sense in it, but as to Catholics, (for such he must mean)
their certainty of the sense of Scripture is resolved immediately into the
Authority of the Church, which is guided in expounding Scripture by an
infallible Spirit: Now is not this the very same, that I sai^, that all
Scripture-Proofs must be resolved into the Authority of the Church, and are not
good without it, as it is impossible they should be, if we cannot certainly
know, what the true sense of Scripture is, but from the Exposition of the
Church. And yet if the Church of Rome be no more infallible in delivering the
sense of Scripture, than in delivering the letter of it, there is no great
encouragement to rely on her infallibility: as is evident from the many
Corruptions of their Vulgar Latin, which one Pope corrected after another, and
yet it is not corrected still; that it was a little oversight in this Jesuit,
(though possibly he knew nothing of the matter) to make the Church equally
infallible in delivering the letter and the sense of Scripture.

But to do him right, he seems to offer at something of sense in his dispute
between John and William, which is the right way to a place. For, says he, is
John disabled from convincing William of his mistake by reasons, because he
has with him a Guide who certainly knows the way, and that he himself would
certainly pass by those reasons, if his Guide assured him, that he applied them
ill and wrongly to that way. This has something of argument in it, and
therefore shall be considered, and I am glad to meet with any thing, that
deserves to be considered.

The sum of his Argument (which I shall represent fairly for him, because he
has not shown it to the best advantage) is this. That Roman Catholics have two
ways of finding out the sense of Scripture, either by the use of Reason, or by
the Expositions of an infallible Guide: but that Reason must be subordinate to
the Guide, and if Reason dictates one sense of Scripture, and the Church
teaches another, Reason must submit, and a true Catholic must embrace the
sense of the Church, though it be against his Reason; but yet if Reason, and
his Guide be both of a side, and he can prove by Reason, that to be the true
sense of Scripture, which the Church gives of it, he may then wave the
Authority of the Church, when he disputes with those, who reject such
Authority, and argue from the reasons of things, and the natural interpretation
of Scripture it self. As John may convince William, who rejects the
infallibility of John's Guide, which is the true way by plain reason, while his
reason is not contradicted by his Guide: and if our Jesuit can make more of
this Argument himself, let him. I am sure he has spoiled it by repeating it in
his Preserv. Consider. p. 11. John is not disabled of convincing William of his
mistake, because he receives the reasons he uses from an infallible Guide.
Where he has set it upon another bottom, and a very silly one for his purpose:
for if the force of his Reasons be resolved into the Authority of an infallible
Guide, it is all lost to him, who disowns the infallibility of the Guide: or if
he means, that John is taught such Reasons by an infallible Guide, as are able
by their own evidence to convince William without any regard to the
infallibility of the Guide, we desire no more than to see such Reasons, and to
be left to judge for our selves; but this ends in a Protestant Resolution of
Faith, for every man to judge for himself according to the evidence of Reason,
which in it self is neither more nor less evident, for being proposed or learnt
from a fallible or infallible Guide. And yet by what follows, he can mean no
more, but that the Authority of an infallible Judge must overruled every Man's
private Reason; for he appeals to the learned Gentlemen of the Temple, hoping
they will join with him maintaining against their Master, that all the Judges
of the Land may very reasonably convince by Law an impertinent Party, though he
should oppose, that they may not do it, because their interpretation of the Law
is to deliver the true sense of it. Which is glorious Nonsense, that all the
Judges of the Land can convince a man, who is not convinced, but declares
still, that they have not given the true sense of the Law. In all Civil Causes
there must be a final judgment, and every private man must submit to the
decision of Authority, whether his own reason be satisfied or not; but it is
not so in matters of Religion, in which no man at the peril of his Soul must be
overruled by any Authority, till he be first convinced. So that the Jesuit
had said a good thing by chance, but for want of understanding it, had lost it
again; and any man may see, that I could as easily have lost it, as he, had I a
mind to it; but I will not part with it without an Answer, because it is the
most plausible thing, that can be said, and possibly other men may understand
it, who cannot answer it, though he don't.

His Argument then as first proposed is this, That they allow of Reason in
expounding Scripture, so long as they do not contradict the Sense and
Exposition of the Church; and therefore they may dispute with Heretics from
Scripture, without concerning the Authority of the Church in the dispute. Now
in answer to this, there are some material Questions to be asked. As,

1. Whether they can dispute with Protestants by Scripture-Arguments without
allowing them to judge of the sense of Scripture by their own private Reason?
and whether this be agreeable to the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, that every
man may judge of the sense of Scripture by his own private Reason?

2. Whether the Scripture be so plain and perspicuous, especially in the
Doctrines in dispute between us and the Church of Rome, that every honest
impartial Inquirer may find the true sense of them without an infallible
Interpreter? if they be, I think, they never ought to talk of the obscurity of
Scripture, nor the necessity of an infallible Judge more; if they be not, and
if they know, that they are not, then they know before hand, that the evidence
of Scripture alone is not sufficient to convince a Protestant, who rejects an
infallible Judge, and then it is a senseless thing for them to attempt the proof
of such Doctrines by Scripure. Good Catholics are satisfied with the Authority
of the Church, and Heretics who reject such an infallible Authority, cannot be
confuted and convinced by mere Scripture.

3. I ask again* Whether the evidence of Reason in expounding Scripture be a
sufficient Foundation for a Divine Faith? if it be, then Protestants, who
disown an Infallible Judge, may have a true Divine Faith without the
Infallibility of the Church, and then we may be true Believers without being
Roman Catholics; and I should be glad to hear that out of the mouth of a
Jesuit, for there is good use to be made of such a confession: if Scripture as
expounded by Reason without an Infallible Judge is not a sufficient Foundation
for a Divine Faith, then to what end does their disputing with Protestants from
Scripture serve, if this cannot make them true Believers.

4. I ask once more, Whether the belief of the Scriptures themselves must not
be resolved into the Authority of the Church? whether any man can believe the
Scriptures to be the Word of God without it? if they cannot (and I would be
glad to hear the Jesuit say they can) then I am sure the Scripture is no proof
of any thing without the Churches Authority, and it is an absurd thing for
those who think so to dispute from Scripture against those who deny the
Authority of the Church.

From hence I think, it evidently appears, that the Authority of the
Scriptures, and the Authority of the Church, are not two distinct Arguments in
the Church of Rome, for then I grant, they might use either way of proof, and
dispute from Scripture against those, who deny the Authority of the Church; but
if the Authority of the Scripture as to us is resolved into the Authority of
the Church, then the Scripture alone is no Argument, but the Authority of the
Church is all. Whereforedo you believe the Scripture? Because the Church tells
me it is the Word of God; Wherefore do you believe this to be the sense of
Scripture? Because the Church so expounds it: Is not this the true Resolution
of the Roman Faith? Is this Misrepresenting too? But if it be the truth, does
not every man see, that as to us the Scripture has no Authority, no sense, but
from the Church, and therefore can prove nothing separated from the Authority
of the Church.

If they allow of any Proofs from Scripture separated from the Authority of the
Church, then whether they will or no, they must allow of the Protestant
Resolution of Faith; that is, to resolve my Faith into the Authority of the
Scriptures, as expounded with the best reason and judgment I have, in the
careful use of all such means, as are necessary for the understanding that Holy
Book: now if they will allow this to be a good Resolution of Faith, we will
allow of all their Scripture-proofs, and give them leave to make us Converts to
the Church of Rome by Scripture, if they can: but if they do allow of this,
then we Protestants are in a very good way already as to the Resolution of our
Faith, and so that Controversy is at an end; and if they will not allow this,
then they confess, that Scripture-proofs of themselves are not good, for if
they were, we might certainly resolve our Faith as Protestants do, immediately
into the Authority of Scripture.

And thus much for John and William and the Infallible Guide; if John has any
Reasons independent on the Authority of his Guide, he may then try his skill
upon William, who rejects his Guide, but if all his other Reasons are resolved
into the Authority of his Guide, and are no good Reasons without it, then he
may spare his Reasons till he has made William submit to his Guide. And this is
the case between the Scripture and the Church, in the Church of Rome: the
Scripture wholly depends both for its Authority and Interpretation on the
Authority of the Church, and therefore can signify nothing and prove nothing,
but what the Church makes it signify and prove. The Scriptures may be supposed
to be the Word of God, and to have some sense antecedent to the Churches
Authority, but no man can know this without the Church, and therefore as to us
both the Authority and Interpretation of the Scripture depends upon the
Authority of the Church, and is no Argument, to prove any thing by itself.

But I cannot pass on without taking notice of a pleasant Answer the Jesuit
gives to a very substantial Argument of the Footman, To prove that at least
some Doctrines of the Church of Rome by their own confession, cannot be proved
by Scripture without the Authority of the Church, he shows that Petrus de
Alliaco, Scotus, and Tonstal do confess, that Transubstantiation is not founded
upon any necessary Scripture-proofs, but on the Authority of the Church, for
the Scripture might, and that very reasonably too, be expounded to another
sense, had not the Church determined otherwise. Now what does the Jesuit say
to this? 1. He prevericates like a Jesuit in repeating the Argument,
Preservative Considered, p. 11.
That the Words of Scripture brought in proof of Transubstantiation might be
taken in a different sense from that which the Catholic Church has ever
received and delivered; and that had not the Church ever taught that sense, one
might believe otherwise, for all the letter of Scripture: for the Authors
alleged by the Footman do not say, as the Jesuit makes them, that the
Catholic Church has ever received and delivered that sense of
Transubstantiation, which the Church of Rome now teaches; but Tonstal expressly
declares the contrary in the words there cited, That it was free for all men,
till the Council of Lateran to follow their own conjectures as concerning the
manner of the Presence. Which supposes, that this Doctrine was never determined
by the Church till the Council of Lateran, and therefore not ever received, and
delivered, and taught by the Catholic Church. 2. In a Parenthesis he adds, how
truly (this is said of the Catholic Divines, that they did affirm this) it
belongs not to my present purpose: very truly said, it is not to his purpose,
but very much against it: but if he means, that he was not concerned to know,
whether these passages are truly cited from these Authors, it seems he is not
concerned to defend his Argument, for that is very much concerned in it, it is
a plain confession he had nothing to say, and therefore would not be concerned
about it: and will our Learned Jesuit confess, that he is so ignorant as not
to know that this was said by Petrus de Alliaco, Scotus, and Tonstal? or will
he so easily give up such men as these, and let the ingenious Footman run away
with them and his Argument together.

3. He answers, let it be so; but what follows here? but the necessity of an
unerring Interpreter? What follows? why it follows, that they cannot prove
Transubstantiation from Scripture without the Authority of the Church, and
consequently that it is not Scripture but their Church they rely on for the
proof of their Doctrines, which is the thing the Footman intended to prove by
it, and has done it effectually: but how an unerring Interpreter follows from
hence, I cannot see, unless it be to prove that to be in Scripture, which the
most searching and inquisitive men cannot find there: and this indeed is the
true use of an unerring Interpreter in the Church of Rome, to impose upon men's
Faith to believe that to be in Scripture, which no man can see there; for what
men can see there, one would think they might believe to be there, without an
unerring Interpreter. As for what he adds, that the Arians gave as natural a
sense of 1 John 5.7, 8. as the Catholics did, is to be answered at present
only with abhorrence and detestation. But to proceed.

In the next place, to show them, how absurd it is to dispute even about an
infallible Judge, I direct our Protestant to ask them, Whether the belief of an
Infallible Judge must be resolved into every man's private judgment?
Preservative, Part ^ p. 11.
Whether it be not necessary to believe this with a Divine Faith? And whether
there can be any Divine Faith without an Infallible Judge? To this the Jesuit
answers ( Ans. p. ^) There can be no Divine Faith without a Divine Revelation,
nor a prudent one without a Moral Evidence in the Motives of Credibility, on
which may be grounded the evident obligation to accept it. This he calls a
Moral Infallibility, and shows by what steps, it may fasten on God's Veracity,
and with a submission not capable of any doubt, embrace the revealed Truth. Now
all this amounts to no more than Protestant certainty, void of all doubt, which
the Church of Rome would never yet allow to be a Divine and Infallible Faith.
But what is this to my Question? Which was not, Whether a Divine Faith required
a Divine Revelation, but whether there can be any Divine Faith without an
Infallible Judge? which it seems, he durst not own, nor say one word to. And
yet here lay the force of the Argument, as I told him in the same place, If we
must believe the Infallibility of the Pope or Church of Rome, with an
infallible Faith, there is an end of Disputing; for no Reasons or Arguments,
not the Authority of the Scripture itself (which I hope he means by his Divine
Revelation) without an infallible Judge, can beget an Infallible Faith,
according to the Roman Doctors. For this Reason they charge the Protestant
Faith with uncertainty, and will not allow it to be a Divine, but Humane Faith,
though it is built upon the firmest Reasons, the best Authority, and the most
express Scripture, that can be had for any thing; but because we do not pretend
to rely upon the authority of a living infallible judge, forsooth, our Faith is
uncertain, humane, and fallible. This he knew to be true, and yet knew, that he
could not build the belief of an Infallible Judge upon the authority of an
Infallible Judge, unless he could find one Infallible Judge to give testimony
to the Infallibility of another, and a third to give testimony to the second,
and thus to dance round in a circle of Infallibility, without finding any
beginning or end; and therefore he slips this pretense of an Infallible Judge,
and would found a Divine Faith upon revelation, or prudential motives of
credibility, which indeed is to quit Infallibility, and to take up with a
Protestant moral certainty, or moral infallibility as he calls it, that he may
retain the name at least, when the thing is lost.

Nay, he gives a substantial Reason against an Infallible Faith of the Churches
Infallibility. For if the Infallibility of the Church were more than Morally
Evident, it were impossible, that any Heresy should be, the wisest word, that
he has said yet, but I shall make him repent of saying it, before I have done;
for this is an evident demonstration against Infallibility.

He says, we can have no more than a Moral Evidence for the Infallibility of
the Church; and if this be true, and our Faith be founded upon the Authority of
the Church, then we can have no more than a Moral Evidence for the Truth of the
Christian Religion, or any Article of it: for as I argued in that very place.
Though the Judge be Infallible, if I be not infallibly assured of this, (if I
have only a Moral Evidence of his Infallibility) I can never arrive to
Infallibility in any thing, (or can never get higher than a Moral Certainty)
for I can never be more certain, that his Determinations are Infallible, then I
am, that he himself is Infallible, and if I have but a moral assurance of this,
I can be but morally assured of the rest, for the Building cannot be more firm
than the Foundation is; and thus there is an end to all the Roman Pretenses to
Infallibility. Though he slipped this at first Reading, I hope he may judge it
worth Answering upon second Thoughts.

But how he will get rid of his own Reason, I cannot guess, if the
Infallibility of the Church were more than Morally Evident, it were impossible,
that any Heresies should be: by which he either means, that de facto the Being
of Heresies in the World is a sensible Argument, that there is no Infallible
assurance of the Infallibility of the Church; for an Infallible Proof cannot be
resisted, and then all the World must believe the Churches Infallibility, and
give up themselves to the Directions of the Church, and then there could be no
Heresies: or else his meaning is, that since there must be Heresies in the
World, as the Apostle tells us, therefore God has given us no more than a Moral
Evidence of the Infallibility of the Church; because an Infallible assurance of
this would have prevented all Heresies, which God, it seems, for very wise
Reasons, did not intend thus irresistibly to prevent.

Now rightly to understand this Matter, I would desire to know why they say God
has bestowed Infallibility on the Church? Was it not to prevent Heresies and
Schisms? Is not this the Popish Objection against the Protestant Resolution of
Faith, that for want of an Infallible Guide men fall into Errors and Heresies,
and divide and disturb the Peace of the Church with Schisms? Is not this the
great Reason they urge for the necessity of an Infallible Guide to prevent all
Heresies and Schisms? and yet now it seems, there must be no more than a Moral
Evidence for the Infallibility of the Church, that there may be Heresies: How
often have they been told by Protestant Divines, that if God intend an
Infallible Judge to prevent all Heresies, the Being of an Infallible Judge
ought to be as evident and demonstrable, as that there is a Sun in the Heavens,
that all men might see him, and believe him: and now they tell us, This
Infallible Judge must not be thus Evident, that men might not know him, that
there may be room for Heresies to creep into the World. Now methinks it is
pretty odd, that there should be an Infallible Judge to keep Heresies out of
the Church, and that the Being of this Judge should be no more than Morally
Evident, that Heresies may creep into the Church. It seems the Romish
Resolution of Faith leaves as great Scope for Heresies to come into the Church,
as the Protestants does, and therefore from henceforward, all the Arguments for
Infallibility from the necessity of keeping Heresies out of the Church, are
given up; and they must never more object against the Protestant Rule of Faith,
that by this means Heresies get into the Church. His Argument, I confess,
concludes fully against any Infallible Certainty of an Infallible Judge; and
the reason is to the full as good against an Infallible Judge, as against an
Infallible way of knowing, that there is one, And now since I cannot be
Infallibly assured of this Infallible Judge, I will trouble my head no further
about him, and therefore leave his Preservative Considered, p. 13, etc. to any
Footman that pleases to answer it.

His next Objection is much of the same nature. That Protestants cannot
reasonably be disputed into Popery, Answer to Preser. p. 5.
as that signifies, resolving our Faith into the infallible Authority of the
Church to believe whatever the Church believes, and for no other reason, but
because the Church teaches it, and the reason, whereby I proved it, is, because
no Arguments or Disputations can give me an infallible certainty of the
infallibility of the Church. And this he has just now granted, that we cannot
have an infallible certainty, but only a moral evidence for the infallibility
of the Church, and if there can be no more than a moral evidence for this, then
no Arguments can give us an infallible certainty of it, because this cannot be
had. And what has he to say now? a very shrewd Objection I assure you, and it
is this: We saw Dr. Sherlock just now pleading for the Jews against St. Paul,
(that I have accounted for already) now he reasons against Christ our God,
blessed for ever more. His words prove that Christ, who owned himself
infallible, did imprudently to Preach or work Miracles; for since they could
not give an infallible certainty, (an evident one he means by his whole
Discourse) no prudent Jew, nor Gentile, could be disputed by him into Faith.
Those who corrected his first Paper for him, which they have done in several
places, as being sensible the Footman had great advantage of his loo^e way of
Writing, have made some Alterations here in the Preservative Considered, p. 24.
This Position proving, that Christ our Lord, who owned himself infallible, did
imprudently to Preach or work Miracles, by which he exacted a certain firm
Faith grounded upon his Infallibility in Teaching: for since his Preaching and
Miracles did not give an evident infallible certainty of his Infallibility,
(and such an evident one Dr. Sherlock must mean, for the certainty we have of a
real Infallibility cannot be in reality fallible) no prudent Jew or Gentile
could be disputed by Christ into Faith. This is expressed with greater art and
subtilty than the first, but however they palliate it, it is equally absurd and
senseless. The Fallacy lies only in this, that by an infallible certainty, they
will have me mean only a certain firm faith, or an evident certainty, whereas I
plainly mean such an infallible certainty, as the Church of Rome opposes to the
certain firm faith, and evident certainty of Protestants.

The Papists perpetually object against Protestants, that their Faith is
uncertain; we assert, that our Faith is not uncertain; that we have all the
evident certainty, that the thing is capable of: but this will not satisfy
them, unless we can produce some such infallible certainty, as they pretend to
have; and by this Argument they persuade men to forsake our Communion, and to
go over to the Church of Rome, that they may have the certainty of
Infallibility for their Faith: This I tell our Protestants, they cannot be
disputed into, because no Reasons or Disputations can give them an infallible
certainty of the Infallibility of the Church, and yet unless they can be
infallibly assured of that, they are no nearer to Infallibility in the Church
of Rome, than in the Church of England: now had our Jesuit read this, as he
ought to have done before he answered it, had it been possible for him had he
not been a Jesuit, to have said, that by infallible, I meant evident? for we
Protestants pretend to evident certainty, and this we have, and Jews and
Gentiles might have of Christ's Preaching and Miracles, and when I opposed this
Infallible Certainty to Protestant Certainty, surely I meant as much more by it
then Evident as Papists do, when notwithstanding all our Protestant Evidence,
they charge us with the want of Infallibility. And yet for ought I can perceive
now, they are contented to let Evident Certainty pass for Infallible, and the
Corrector of F. Sabran's Sheet has given us a notable reason for it, for which
Protestants are bound to thank him, for he has made them all infallible. For
the certainty we have of a real Infallibility cannot be in reality fallible.
That is to say, when the Object is infallibly true, our Faith or Assent to it,
cannot be fallible: and thus before they can prove us Protestants to be
fallible Creatures any more, they must prove, that what we believe, viz. the
Holy Scriptures, and the Apostles Creed, are not infallibly true. Though I
thought the Infallibility of Faith had not been owing to the Object of our
Faith, but to the Evidence of it.

Defense of Pr^s. p. 7.
This the Footman plainly saw, and therefore minds him of the difference between
True Certainty and Infallibility. Does Dr. Sherlock say, that the Jews could
not be disputed into Faith, unless that Faith were infallible? No, he leaves
that to be talked of by you, who are the great Pretenders to it. The Jesuit is
very angry at the Reverend Licenser for this. What do you own, that we only are
to look on the Faith even as preached by Christ, to be necessarily infallible?
Is it no part of your belief that you are any way concerned in, that that
certain Faith which Christ exacted from the Jews, St. Paul from each Christian,
must of necessity be infallible? Fair and softly! we believe, whatever Christ
and St. Paul taught to be infallibly true, but we know, that a fallible
Creature, as all private Christians at least are, cannot believe with an
infallible Faith; that is, no man, who knows himself fallible, though he may be
very certain of what he believes, can say he is infallible in his Faith, unless
there be a Divine Promise, that he shall never err; for if he be not
infallible, he can be infallible in nothing. Protestants believe Christ to be
an infallible Teacher, and the Christian Faith to be infallibly true, and this
they believe with all the firmness and certainty of assent; but this is not,
what the Church of Rome used to call Infallibility, though the Jesuit (if it
be not mere want of understanding in him) seems to be hammering out a new
notion of Infallibility; but it is but a rude and imperfect Embryo yet, we
shall see, what they will make of it in time.

And here I find my self obliged to look a little backwards, to see how he
states the Churches Infallibility, for he mightily complains of Protestant
Misrepresentations about it. Preservat. Consider. p. 13.


Our Guide then, he tells us, is the Catholic Church, either diffusive in its
whole extent, (that is, as it contains or signifies the whole number of
Christians all the World over) or representative in its Head and Bishops, the
Pope and a General Council. The Church diffusive, or the whole number of
Christians on Earth, is most certainly the true notion of the Catholic Church
on Earth; is that Church, to which, most of the Promises made to The Church in
Scripture, are made; but how this Church diffusive should be our Guide, wants
to be explained: if the Church diffusive, or the whole number of Christians, is
the Guide, who is to be guided, unless the Guide is to be a Guide only to
himself: However, I hope then every particular Christian will be allowed a
private judgment of his own; for the Church diffusive will be a very strange
Guide, if it cannot use its own reason and judgment; and how the whole, which
consists of all particular Christians, should judge for itself, when no
particular Christian must judge, is somewhat mysterious: that is, that all
Christians must judge, and yet none must judge. But I will not dispute with him
about this, but whenever he will collect the Votes of the Church diffusive, or
of all the Christians in the World, I promise to subscribe to their Definitions

The Representative Church, is the Head and Bishops, the Pope and a General
Council. I thought, the Pope in Jesuits Divinity, had been the Church virtual,
and a General Council the Church representative. A Discourse conc^rning the
Nature and Unity of the Catholic Church.
But I have in a late Discourse proved, that the Pope is not the Head of the
Catholic Church, nor a Council of Bishops the representative of it, and he may
try his skill upon it, when he pleases.

Now it seems, the Church diffusive has the keeping of the general faith of
Christians, first received from Christ and his Apostles, and preserved by all
Bishops in their respective Diocesses, and in the minds and actions of each
faithful Believer in the whole Catholic Church. Strange! that our Jesuit
should now at last turn a mere Blackloist, or Traditionary Divine. This general
Faith of Christians he compares to the common Laws of the Land, to show I
suppose his skill in the Law, and make the learned Gentlemen of the Temple to
pity or scorn The Master's ignorance: well let that be as it will, for I
pretend to no skill in Laws, but as for this general Faith of Christians,
whatever it be like, I would gladly learn from the Church diffusive, what it
is; for I matter nothing else, but the General Faith of Christians; but how to
learn this, he has not told us; it is preserved, he says, by all Bishops in
their respective Diocesses, and in the minds and actions of each faithful
Believer in the whole Catholic Church. Well then, must we examine all Bishops
and every particular Believer about this? this is impossible to be done: will
any one Bishop, or any one particular Believer, (since every Bishop, and every
particular Believer has it) suffice to tell us, what this general Faith of
Christians is? is this an infallible Conveyance of the Faith to depend upon the
Tradition of Bishops and Christian People? is there no faithful and authentic
Record of this Faith, from whence we may learn, what Christ and his Apostles
delivered to the Church? So one would think by this Jesuit's account, who takes
no notice of the Holy Scriptures, as if the common Faith of Christians could
not be learnt from them, but from the tradition of the Church diffusive.

Thus much for Common Law, but the Church has her Statute Laws too, and they
are the Decisions or Canons of General Councils, declaring and applying to
particular Instances the Common Law and Belief of the Church: but how does the
Pope and a General Council, or the Church representative, as he calls it, come
to have the power of declaring and applying the common Faith of Christians,
which is in the keeping of the Church diffusive, and therefore one would think,
could be declared by none else? do the Pope and a General Council infallibly
know the Sentiments and Opinions of all the Christian Bishops and People in the
World? This they must do, or else they cannot declare the common Faith of
Christians, unless they can infallibly declare, what they do not know: If their
Authority be only to declare the common Faith of Christians, how shall we know,
that they declare nothing but the common Faith of Christians? for if they do,
their Decrees are not valid, for they declare that which is false.

This Jesuit has greatly entangled and perplexed the Cause by laying the whole
stress upon the declarative and applying Power. Had he said, that the Pope and
a General Council had Authority to declare what is the Christian Faith, and
though they declared that to be the true Faith, which the Church diffusive
never heard of before, yet after their decision, it must be received as the
common Faith of Christians, though it had not been so formerly, there had been
some sense in this, though no truth: but when he says the Church can only
declare what is, and always has been the common Faith of Christians, if I can
find by ancient Records, that what the Council declares to be the common Faith
of Christians now, was either not known or condemned in former Ages; if I
certainly know, that she declares that to be the Faith, which at the very time
of the Council was so far from being the common Faith of Christians, that it
was not the common Faith of the Council, but was contradicted by the wisest and
best part of it; then I certainly know, that the Council has not declared the
common Faith of Christians, and therefore that its Decrees are of no Authority.

But he proceeds. We hold, that this general Faith received from the Apostles,
and preserved in all the Members of the Catholic Church, explained upon
occasion by the Church representative, is infallibly true, and this is all the
Infallibility the Catholic Church pretends to. And there is no Protestant but
will own this Infallibility. That the Faith at first received from the
Apostles, the same Faith, which was delivered by the Apostles, preserved in all
the Members of the Catholic Church, and the same Faith explained upon occasion
by the Church representative, so that it is evident after the explanation, that
it is the same Faith still; I say, every Protestant will acknowledge, that this
Faith is infallibly true; for we believe the Faith delivered by the Apostles to
be infallibly true, and if it appears, that the same Faith is still taught by
the Church, whether in or out of Council it matters not, it must be infallibly
true still. But yet there is a little difference between us and the Jesuit; He
believes, and would have us believe, that the present Faith of the Church of
Rome, viz. the Doctrine of the Council of Trent, is that Faith, which was
received from the Apostles, preserved in all the Members of the Catholic
Church and only explained upon occasion by the Council of Trent, which was the
Church representative; this we deny: this we know, this we can, and often have
proved to be false. And I beseech you, what greater infallibility can any
Church pretend to, than to have the World receive all her Decrees as infallibly
true?

But they do not pretend, that either the whole Church* or any person, or
persons in it, are held to possess any intrinsic Infallibility, which they own
to be proper to God alone. Thank 'em for nothing, they do not believe, that the
Church or Pope or Council are by nature infallible, for all the World would
laugh at them, if they did. We do not say, (as he adds) that they cannot of
themselves deceive us, but that God according to his Promise directing them by
his infallible Spirit, it cannot possibly happen, that they should deceive us.
The Modesty of a Jesuit! who claims no more Infallibility for the Pope and
General Council, than the Apostles had, and wonders any man should grudge them
this, since they do not pretend to an intrinsic Infallibility, not to be
infallible by Nature, but only by Grace. Thus he adds, that they do not pre^end
to new Revelations and Lights, nor admit any new Article of Faith; though where
a doubt arises the Church-hath infallibly power to declare what has been
revealed by Christ to the Apostles, and preached by them, which perhaps some
part of the Church might have had a less clear understanding thereof; but this
is done, not by making any new Article of Faith, but more clearly delivering
what was ever believed by the Apostles, and all Catholics from their time to
this: That is to say, what ever the Church determines, though the Christian
Church in former ages knew nothing of it, yet it must not be called a new
Article of Faith, but a declaring what had been revealed by Christ to his
Apostles, and preached by them, though the world had long since forgot it:
whatever the Church determines to day, we must believe to have been the Faith
of the Apostolic Age, though there are no other evidences nor symptoms of it,
but because the Church which is infallible says so. And this is all the
Infallibility the Church pretends too! a very small matter to be denied her by
Christians, it is only to believe whatever she says, without disputing or
examining her Faith; nay to believe that to be the old Faith, which the most
authentic Records of the Church prove to be new. I have thus stepped out of my
way, to see what fine thing he had to say of the Churches Infallibility, which
he promised a very favorable representation of; but it is all the old cant
still, a little disguised by some ignorant blunders, or artificial Nonsense;
as for his proofs of this Infallibility, I am not concerned with them at
present, and after so many discourses on that Argument they need no answer.

Another Argument whereby I proved, that no man can be disputed into Popery,
which denies us the use of our own Reason and Judgment in matters of Religion,
was this, Because it is impossible by Reason to prove, that men must not use
their own Reason and Judgment in matters of Religion: For to dispute is to
appeal to Reason, and to dispute against the use of Reason in Religion, is to
appeal to Reason against the use of Reason: in Answer to this he tells us, That
men must use their Reason to come to this knowledge, that God has revealed
what they believe. Now I would desire no more but this to prove that we must
use our Reason in matters of Religion: for no man at this day can know what is
revealed without it. I do assert, and let him disprove me when he can, that
since God has given us reason to judge of the truth or falsehood of such things,
as are knowable by the light of Nature, and a standing Rule of Faith and
Manners in the writings of the Old and New Testament, for matters of
Revelation, we must believe no Man's or Churches pretenses to Infallibility, who
either teaches any Doctrine, which plainly contradicts the light of Reason, or
a standing revelation; and therefore we must judge of men's pretenses to the
Spirit, by the Doctrines they teach, and therefore must particularly judge of
their Doctrines too: This is the fair state of the Controversy between us, and
here I leave it, and let him take it up again, when he pleases.

And here he returns back to the Conference between a sturdy Protestant and a
new Convert, which belonged to the former head, the design of which is to show
the new Convert, that by going over to the Church of Rome he has gained no more
Infallibility, than a Protestant has, nay has lost some degrees of certainty,
which he might have had before: for thus the Protestant tells him: You rely on
your own reason and judgment for the Infallibility of your Church, and
consequently of all the Doctrines of it, and therefore your infallible Faith is
as much resolved into your own fallible Judgment, as the Protestant Faith is:
So that the difference between us is not, that your Faith is infallible, and
ours fallible, for they are both alike, call it what you will, fallible or
infallible -- We have more rational certainty than you have, and you have no
more infallible certainty than we. You think you are reasonably assured your
Church is infallible, and then you take up your Religion upon trust from your
Church, without, and many times against Sense and Reason, according as it
happens. So that you have only a general assurance of the Infallibity of your
Church, and that no greater than Protestants pretend to in other cases, viz.
the certainty of Reason and Argument, but have not so much as a rational
assurance of the truth of your particular Doctrines, that if you are mistaken
about the Infallibility of your Church, you must be miserably mistaken about
every thing else, which you have no other evidence for. But now we are in
general assured, that the Scriptures are the Word of God, and in particular
assured, that the Faith which we profess, is agreeable to Scripture, or
expressly contained in it, and does not contradict either Sense or Reason, nor
any other principle of Knowledge: so that we have as much assurance of every
Article of our Faith, as you have of the Infallibility of your Church, and
therefore at least have double and triple the assurance that you have.

I have repeated this at large, that the Reader might see what the dispute is,
and indeed the very repetition of it is a sufficient justification, for it
carries its own evidence along with it. Now as to what I said, that we are in
general assured, that the Scriptures are the Word of God. To this he answers,
The conclusion would be this, Catholics are as certain of the sense of
Scripture, as Protestants are that they have the letter. Now I believe any
Reader will be as much puzzled to guess, how this comes in, or what relation it
has to this dispute, as I am. I tell the new Convert, that his old Protestant
Friend has as much certainty of his Religion as he has; for though he flatters
himself with the conceit of an infallible Church, yet his belief of the
Churches Infallibility is founded only on Reason and Argument, as the
Protestant Faith is, and therefore his Faith is no more infallible than the
Protestant Faith is, and so far they are equal. But then I add, that the
Protestant has at least as good assurance, that the Scriptures are the Word of
God, as the Papists can pretend to have, that the Church is infallible, and so
far they may be allowed equal still, that the one thinks he has an infallible
Guide, the other an infallible Rule of Faith: Now how can the Jesuit's
conclusion come in here? Catholics are as certain of the Sense of Scripture, as
Protestants are, that they have the Letter. For the comparison did not lie
between the Sense and the Letter of Scripture, but between that Evidence
Papists have of the Infallibility of their Church, and Protestants have, that
the Scriptures are the Word of God; both which is not infallible, but a
rational Evidence, and therefore so far equal: and this he has nothing to say
to. In the Preserv. Consid. p. 29. he represents it otherwise: This is the
case; On one side there is supposed an infallible Interpreter of the Christians
great Law-Book, (for thus Dr. Sherlock states the case) on the other are some
men (far the greater part unlearned and weak) who allow not any Sense to this
Book, which seems to them to contradict their Sense or Reason, or any other
principle of their Knowledge. And I am asked, Whether I proceed more prudently
in receiving the Sense of the Law from that Interpreter (which is actually
supposed infallible) or in proceeding by the second Method. Now this is as wide
of the mark as the other; I never suppose an infallible Interpreter; never make
any dispute, whether I should submit to an infallible Interpreter, or follow my
own Reason; which were indeed a ridiculos question, supposing the Interpreter
were actually infallible; but our only dispute was, Whether a man, who by the
appearing evidence of Reason, is persuaded to believe an infallible Judge,
believes more infallibly than a Protestant does, who believes also upon the
evidence of Reason and Argument? This is the Question he cannot answer, and
therefore would lose, if he could.

But then I added, that Protestants had much the advantage of Papists, because
besides that general assurance they had, that the Scriptures are the Word of
God, and the infallible Rule of Faith, they are in particular assured, that the
Faith they profess is agreeable to the Scripture, or expressly contained in it,
and does not contradict either Sense or Reason, nor any other Principle of
Knowledge; whereas Papists have no other evidence for the particular Articles
of their Faith, but the infallible Authority of their Church, which is the last
resolution of their Faith, and that many times in contradiction to Sense, and
Reason, and Scripture, as far as fallible men can judge of it: So that we have
as much assurance of every Article of our Faith, as they have of the
Infallibility of their Church: The meaning of which is, that we have a rational
assurance of every Article of our Faith in particular, as they think, they have
the assurance of Reason and Argument, that their Church is infallible. To which
he answers, If he means, they have the same proofs for this, which Catholics
have for the Infallibility of the Church -- it is false. No, Sir, I do not mean
the same, for I hope they are better, but proofs of the same kind, i. e. from
Reason and Argument, which are the only proofs they can pretend to, for the
Infallibility of their Church; and therefore our Assurance (for that I said,
not Proofs) is of the same kind too, a moral rational Assurance, not
infallible, for that they have not for Infallibility itself, as our Answerer
confessed above.

But the Argument he hints in his Answer, p. 5. is so very new, and so very
pretty, that I cannot pass it: If he means, they have the same proofs for this,
which Catholics have for the Infallibility of the Church, that is, for the
being of that Church which declares her self Infallible (for a Church erring in
such a point, would cease to be the Church of Christ) then it is evidently
false. The Argument is this, that the Infallibility of a Church, which declares
herself infallible, is as evident as the being of that Church; for if she
declares her self infallible, and is not infallible, such an Error as this
makes her cease to be the Church of Christ. So that the Church of Rome is
either an infallible Church, or no Church: Well, for Argument's ^ake, we will
say she is no Church, and try then, how he can prove her Infallibility. But he
has another bold stroke in what follows: That the Christians of this Age have
the same evidence of Her (he must mean the Church of Rome) being the Church of
Christ, and of her teaching Truth, and consequently of her Infallibility, which
she has of Christ, viz. Prophecy, Miracles, etc. What will no less evidence
serve his turn? is it full as evident, that the Church of Rome is the Church of
Christ, and speaks Truth, and consequently is Infallible (which it seems every
one that speaks truth must by consequence be) as that there was such a person
as Christ, the true Prophet and Messiah? I hope by Prophesies, he does not mean
the Revelations of St. John, nor by Miracles, the School of the Eucharist.

His next exception is against that Argument: If you must not use your Reason
and private Judgment, then you must not by any Reason be persuaded to condemn
the use of Reason; for to condemn is an act of Judgment, which you must not use
in matters of Religion: So that this is a point which no man can dispute
against, and which no man can be convinced of by disputing, without the
reproach of self contradiction. Here our Jesuit is as pleasant as his wit would
serve him; the sum of his Answer is, That a man may be convinced by Reason,
that he ought to choose a Guide, and not to trust his Reason in all things. I
readily grant it, for this is to use our Reason; but the inquiry is, Whether
Reason can convince any man, that he ought to follow this Guide in
contradiction to his own Sense and Reason: whether because Reason will direct a
sick man to choose a Physician, it will direct him also to submit to this
Physician when he certainly knows that he gives him Poison.

The next Principle, which overthrows the use of common Sense and Reason (for
that is his charge against me) is this, That we must allow of no Reason against
the Authority of plain and express Scripture. This he allows to be a true
Catholic Principle; and therefore I hope the Principle does not overthrow
common Sense, unless Catholic Principles may do it. But he does not like an
instance or two I give of it in the first and second Commandments: I say, such
an express Law is that, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall
thou serve. No reason in the World can justify the worship of any other Being,
good or bad Spirits besides God, because there is an express Law against it,
and no Reason can take place against a Law. A rare consequence (says the
Jesuit) to infer a Negative from an Affirmative antecedent. Answ. to Preserv.
p. 6.
But I thought, Him only shall thou serve, had signified thou shall serve none
but him; and that I think excludes all other Beings from any share in our
Worship. Now to take his own instance, were there such a Law, that a Subject
should love his King only, this would exclude Father or Wife, or any other
Friends or Relations from a share in our love. Here he begins to distinguish
between that worship they pay to Creatures, and to God, and alleadges St.
Austin's Authority for it; but if he have a mind to renew that Dispute about
the sense of the Primitive Fathers, as to Invocation of Saints, he knows his
man, and had best keep to him, or at least do him right, before he engages any
farther. It had been more to the purpose, to have examined that explication I
gave of the first Commandment, and how I proved, that it is an express Law
against the worship of any other Being, but the Supreme God, but what is most
to the purpose, is seldom most to his purpose.

The next instance I gave of this rule was the second Commandment: Thou shall
not make to thy self any graven Image; and there the Jesuit stops with an etc.
for he durst not trust good Catholics, who might read his paper, though they
will read nothing else, with the whole Commandment; and this I affirmed* and
affirm still, is so express a Law against Image Worship, that no reason must be
admitted for it. What (says he) if you be told, that although the Jews had
perhaps a command of making no graven Image, etc. again why not and not to
worship it; we do not say they were forbid to make any graven Image, but they
were forbid to make them for worship; and therefore his following instances of
Bezaleel and Solomon, who made no Images or likenesses of things in Heaven or
Earth for worship, are nothing to the purpose; he adds, yet this being a
positive Law, and not confirmed in the Gospel, does not oblige us; will this
reason be admitted? He answers for me, No; but I answer yes, if it be true and
he dare stand to it; but this is no reason against an express Law, but an
exception to the Law itself, as of no force. I do affirm, that if the second
Commandment be still in force, it does so expressly condemn all Image Worship,
that no reasons can justify Image Worship against such an express Law; but if
it be a Law no longer, the case I confess is altered, and I desire to know,
whether he will stand to this; but he had best advise with some wiser men
first, who understand the sense of the Church and of the Fathers, and of their
own Divines a little better about this matter. But before they abrogate this
Law, I would desire them to make it a Commandment by it self, and call it the
second Commandment, as we do, for fear of abrogating the first Commandment with
it, of which they make it a part: though the truth is, the Church of Rome could
spare them both, and thank you too.

His parting blow is a very terrible one. Preserv. Part 1. p. 44, 45.
I direct Protestants never to admit any Arguments merely from the usefulness,
convenience or pretended necessity of any thing, to prove that it is. As for
instance: A supreme Ecumenical Bishop and an Infallible Judge of
Controversies, are thought absolutely necessary to the Unity of the Church, and
certainty of Faith, and confounding of Schisms and Heresies. -- Now if I
thought all this were true (as I believe not a word of it is) I should only
conclude, that it were great pity that there is not an Universal Pastor, and
Infallible Judge Instituted by Christ; but if you would have me conclude from
these Premises, Ergo, there is an Universal Pastor and infallible Judge, I must
beg your pardon for that; for these Arguments do not prove that there is such a
Judge, but that there ought to be one, and therefore I must conclude no more
from them. This, he says, is not only to misuse humane Reason, but to deny
Wisdom and Reason in God; Alphonsus the Royal Mathematician, was ever looked on
as guilty of a horrid Blasphemy, for having said he thought he could have
ordered some things better than God did, at the first Creation. It Is one of as
deep a dye, to think God ought to have done, what we belive, that ^e has not
done.

But do I any where say, that God ought to have done, what I believe he has not
done? do I any where say, that God ought by necessary and infallible means to
have prevented Schisms and Heresies? Dare our Author himself say this, who
assigns this as the reason, why the Infallibility of the Church is no more than
morally evident, because otherwise it were impossible that any Heresy should
be: which at least supposes, that God did not intend to make it impossible,
that there should be Heresies and Schisms; and therefore though we should grant
it absolutely necessary to prevent all Heresies and Schisms, that there should
be an Ecumenical Pastor and Infallible Judge; is this to grant it necessary,
that there should be one, or to say, that there ought to be one, unless I had
said also, that it were absolutely necessary that all Heresies and Schisms
should be prevented? Is there no difference between saying, that such a thing
is absolutely necessary to such an end, and to say, that such an end is
abfolutely necessary.

But however, where do I say, that God has not done that which I believe he
ought to have done? is it the same thing to say, such a thing is not, and such
a thing is not proved by such an Argument? and yet this is the utmost that I
say, that the supposed necessity of an infallible Judge, does not prove* that
there is such a Judge, but only that there ought to be one, and I must conclude
no more from it; and does this overthrow the use of Reason, to conclude no more
from an Argument, than the Argument will prove? whatever any man apprehends
necessary, to be sure, he is mightily inclined to believe, but whoever will
believe like a reasonable creature, must have good evidence for what he
believes, and yet that we believe it necessary is no evidence, that it is; not
that God will not do, what is necessary to be done, but because that may not be
necessary, which we vainly and presumptuously imagine to be so: which is the
very reason I assign for it in the words immediately following. Indeed this is
a very fallacious way of reasoning: because what we may call useful,
convenient, necessary, may not be so in itself; and we have reason to believe
it is not so, if God have not appointed, what we think so useful, convenient,
or necessary: which is a truer and more modest way of reasoning, than to
conclude, that God has appointed such a Judge, when no such thing appears, only
because we think it so useful and necessary, that God ought to do it. Which is
not to excuse a bad Saying with a good one, as the Jesuit pretends in answer
to the Footman, ( Preservat. Consider. p. 36.) but to justify a good Saying
with a good Reason. But if it were such blasphemy in Alphonsus to say, that he
thought he could have ordered some things better than God did at the first
Creation, let the Jesuit consider what it is, to mend what God has done in the
work of our Redemption, upon a mere supposition, that it may be mended: for
Popery is nothing else but a mending* or more properly speaking, a corrupting
the Gospel of Christ with a blasphemous opinion of mending it. And I think to
say, that God has done, what there is no other proof he has done, but only that
we think he ought to have done it, is to say, that God ought to have done, what
it does not appear he has done; and if not to be, and not to appear, be the
same in this case, then this is equivalent to saying, that God ought to have
done, what he has not done. And this I hope is sufficient for the Vindication
of those Principles, which are pretended to overthrow the Use of Common Sense
and Reason.

SECT. II. The Principles pretended to make void all Faith vindicated.
HE begins with proving the Protestant Faith, not to be a Divine Faith, Answer
to Prese^v. p. 6.
because it is not a certain one; which if it were true, is like proving a man
not to live, because he is weak: for if there be as much certainty, as is
absolutely necessary to the essence of Faith, it may be a true Faith, though
weak, as a weak man is alive still: and Faith receives its denomination of
Divine or Humane Faith, not from the Certainty or Uncertainty of it, but from
the Authority on which it rests; a Divine Authority makes a Divine Faith,
Humane Authority an Humane Faith, and both these may be either certain or
uncertain, or, to speak properly, strong or weak: so that to prove, that the
Protestant Faith is not Divine, because it is not Certain, is like disproving
the Essential Properties by Changeable Accidents, that a Man is not a
reasonable Creature, because he is not strong: for there is no more necessary
connection between Faith being Divine, and being Strong or Certain, than between
Reason and Bodily Strength; a weak Man may be a reasonable Creature, and a weak
Faith may be Divine, if it be founded on a Divine Authority.

But I wish the Jesuit had told us, what that degree of Certainty is, which
makes a Faith Divine, whether any thing less than the certainty of
Infallibility can do it; for this used to be the old Argument, that our Faith
is not Divine nor Certain, because it is not infallible, but if they will abate
any thing of Infallibility, we will vie all other degrees of Certainty with
them, and that he very fairly quitted before, when he owned and proved, that
there could be no more than Moral Evidence for the Infallibility of their
Church, and then I am sure, they can have no more than a Moral Evidence for the
rest of their Faith, which is all founded upon their Churches Infallibility.

Well, having proved, that our Faith cannot be Divine, because it is not
certain, he next undertakes to prove, that our Faith is not certain: because we
cannot have an Act of Faith of any One Article, till our Rule of Faith proposes
it, i. e. till we know certainly what Scripture teaches of it, not by any one
Text, but by comparing all the Texts that speak of that Subject. Very well, we
cannot believe any thing upon the Authority of Scripture, which is our Rule of
Faith, till we know, that it is in Scripture; wisely observed, and we grant it.
Let us see, what follows. 1. Then a Protestant must certainly know, that he
has all the Books of Holy Writ. 2. That all those, he owns for such were
really written by inspired Pens. The second we accept of, but there is no need
to submit to his first Condition. That a Protestant must certainly know, that
he has all the Books of Holy Writ; that is, he must be able to prove, that
there never were any other Books written by the Apostles or other inspired Men,
but what we receive into our Canon of Scripture; which is to prove a negative,
which is always thought unreasonable, and at this distance from the Apostolic
Age is impossible, but whenever the Church of Rome will prove this of their
Canon of Scripture, we will prove it of ours. In the mean time it is
sufficient, that we reject no Books, which have been always acknowledged by the
Universal Church, and that the Books we receive have been received for inspired
Writings by the Universal Church; and if ever there were any other Books
written by the Apostles or Evangelists, which are now lost, we have reason to
believe, that the Church does not need them, but has a perfect Rule of Faith
and Manners without them; for the Divine Providence would never permit, that
the Church should want any necessary part of the Rule of Faith.

He proceeds. 3 ly. And (since the Letter kills) that he understands the true
sense of each Text which relates to the Object of that Act of Faith. 4ly. That
he remember them all, so as comparing them, to see which is the clearer to
expound the obscurer, and what is the result of them all, (for any one he
understands not, or has forgotten, may possibly be that one that must expound
the rest) he cannot have one Act of Faith.

Now, not to take notice of his ridiculous, not to say blasphemous,
misapplication of Scripture in that Parenthesis, the Letter kills, by which St.
Paul understands the Law, which he calls the Letter, or an External
Administration, and the Ministration of Death, and of Condemnation, in
distinction from the Gospel, which is the Ministration of the Spirit, and the
Ministration of Righteousness, 2 Cor. 3.6, 7, 8, 9. but our learned Jesuit
understands it of the Letter of the Gospel as distinguished from the Sense of
it, which is such a distinction as no men of sense ever thought of, till the
Church of Rome found it necessary to distinguish the Letter and the Words of
Scripture from the Sense of it, and to separate them too, which they have
effectually done; but yet how the Letters, which are very innocent things in
all other Books, should be such killing things in Scripture, is worthy of the
Wit and Learning of a Jesuit to unriddle: But I say, to let this pass, I grant
a Protestant must understand the true sense of Scripture (which must be done by
venturing to understand the killing Letter of it) before he can know, much less
believe, what the Scripture teaches; but that they should understand and
remember every place of Scripture which relates to such a Subject, I see no
reason for; if we have one or two or more plain and express places for it, it
is enough, at least for ordinary Christians, and a great deal more than the
Church of Rome has for any of her new Articles of Faith. For we are sure, what
is plainly and expressly said in one place cannot be contradicted by another;
and therefore if I had no more than that one plain Text, Thou shall worship the
Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve, I should think it a sufficient
Proof against the Worship of Saints and Angels, though there were no other Text
in the Bible against it. Now whatever Papists say (for we desire to hear them
prove as well as say) this is so far from being impossible to any, or almost
any man, that every considering Protestant has sufficient assurance of all this
to found a Divine Faith on.

Well, but what says Dr. Sherlock to give Protestants any certainty? Truly not
one word, for that was not my business to show what positive certainty
Protestants have, but to show upon what vain pretenses Papists charge the
Protestant Faith with uncertainty.

And 1. I observe, that could they prove the Protestant Faith uncertain, this
is no sufficient reason to turn Papists, because Protestants are uncertain,
Preservat. p. 79.
does this prove the Church of Rome to be infallible, because the Church of
England is fallible? must certainty be necessarily found amongst them, because
it is not found with us? is Thomas an honest man, because John is a knave? Yes,
he says, if the stolen goods were found with John, an honest Jury he conceives
would bring Thomas in not guilty. And if Protestant Uncertainty, and Popish
Infallibility, were to be decided by an honest Popish Jury, we might guess
pretty near at their Verdict. But he says, there is a true Faith, and
consequently a certain Rule of Faith. Protestants on one side choose one Rule,
viz. the Holy Scriptures, for we have no other Rule; Catholics another;
therefore not the Holy Scriptures, for that is the Protestant Rule: but here he
ignorantly misrepresents his own Church; for the Church of Rome does own the
Scriptures to be the Rule of Faith, though not a complete and perfect Rule; but
the dispute between Protestants and Papists, is not so much about the Rule, as
about the Judge; but he seems not to understand this distinction between the
Rule and the Judge of Faith. But now for his conceiving! I conceive then, that
if the Protestant Rule be proved uncertain, (that is, the Holy Scriptures) it is
plain, the Catholic Rule must be the certain one. But when the Scriptures are
proved uncertain, I fear, there will be no Rule at all. But however, his
Argument is so far true, that if he could prove, that there are but two Rules,
that one is false, and the other true; then when he has proved one to be false,
I grant without any more disputing, that the other is true: but now, though
there can be but one true Rule, there may be a great many false ones, and then
both the Rules in competition may be false and uncertain. In the Preservat.
Consider. ^. 38. he endeavors to salve this; and now does not put the question
about two Rules of Faith, for that he says, we are agreed on. That the
Scriptures are the Word of God, that if we understood the full extent of its
sense and meaning, there would never be Error or Heresy amongst us. Which
shows, that, as I observed before, he did not understand the difference between
a Rule of Faith, and a Guide or Expositor, till some wiser m^n had told him of
it. Well, now the thing in question is, by what method we ought to come to that
knowledge, as far as it is necessary to a Christian. And I say, that all the
methods are reduced to these two heads: that we are guided to the certain
knowledge of what God has revealed, either by a knowledge communicated to each
of us, or by a knowledge communicated only to Guides appointed to direct the
rest. What he means by this communicated knowledge I cannot tell; for we think
the Scriptures may be understood without either public or private Enthusiasms,
as all other Books are to be understood, by considering the use and
signification of words, the scope and design of the place, and by comparing one
Text with another, and the like: Thus the Guides of the Church must understand
Scripture, and by their assistance thus private Christians may understand
Scripture. This all Mankind confess to be one way of understanding Scripture,
the same way that all men use to understand any Writing, nay the only natural
way, that we know of: No, says the Church of Rome, there is another possible
way, for God to direct the Guides, the Pope of Rome, or General Council by an
infallible Spirit in expounding Scripture: right say I, this is possible
indeed, for God can do it, if he pleases, but it does not follow, this is any
way at all, till it appears, that God has revealed, that he will take this way:
so that before there can be any competition between these two ways of
expounding Scriptures, it must be proved, that there are two ways; the
Protestant way is acknowledged by all Mankind, for Nature teaches no other way
of understanding Books, whether of Humane or Divine Composition; that there is
such a way as the Popish Method must be proved by Revelation, for it depends
wholly upon the Will of God, and therefore can be proved only by Revelation:
now to make a competition between two ways of expounding Scripture, before it
is proved there are two ways is ridiculous; and much more ridiculous to prove
the certainty of the unknown and unproved way, from the uncertainty of the
known way: if they can prove, the Protestant way of expounding Scripture, which
is the only way we know of, to be uncertain, the consequence is, that there is
no certain way of expounding Scripture, not that the Church of Rome is the
infallible Interpreter of Scripture: and therefore any Protestant who is
persuaded to own the Infallibility of the Church of Rome, because he is told,
that the Protestant Faith is uncertain, is a very foolish Convert, and has so
little sense and reason, that it were fit, he had an infallible Guide, if he
were to be found.

So that he is a little too forward, when he says, that all the Methods (of
coming to the knowledge of Scripture) are reduced to these two heads, for we
know, but of one way of expounding Scripture, till he proves another; and when
he can prove his infallible Guide, we will give up Protestant certainty, as I
told him before, but till he has in another way proved the infallible Authority
of his Church in expounding Scripture, though he could prove our Faith
uncertain, this cannot prove his own to be infallible.

In the next place I directed our Protestant to ask these Popish Disputants,
what they meant by the uncertainty of the Protestant Faith. Preserv. p. 80.
For this may signify two things, either, 1. That the Objects of our Faith are
in themselves uncertain, and cannot be proved by certain reasons. Or, 2ly, That
our persuasion about these matters is uncertain and wavering. The Jesuit
answers, that this is not a true di^ision, for there is a third thing also, to
wit, that whatever Reasons there may be for a thing, he who believes it, has
for the motive of his belief those certain Reasons. -- For he that believes in
Christ only because his Mother has taught him so, has a very uncertain,
Answer, p. 7.
and no Divine Faith. But suppose this Mother be the Church, and he believes it
only, because the Church has taught him so, Has this man a divine and certain
Faith? No doubt must our Jesuit say, because the Church is Infallible. But
suppose this man can no more prove the Church to be infallible, than that his
natural Mother is infallible; What difference is there between those, who
believe upon the Authority of the Church, and of their Mother? I can assign
none, and shall be glad to learn the difference from our Jesuit. He who
believes the true Christian Faith, and lives in conformity to it, shall
certainly be saved, or else I fear we must at least damn half the Christians in
the World, whether Protestants or Papists, for want of understanding the
reasons of their Faith. Nay I am afraid all Traditionary Christians must be
damned, who believe this is the true Faith to day, because their Fathers and
Mothers were taught so and believed so yesterday. So that I guess upon second
thoughts our Jesuit will compound this matter with me, and let fall the third
part of the division, and I am contented at present, till I hear farther from
him.

But he might have observed that I said, not only that the Objects of our Faith
are in themselves certain, but that they may be proved by certain Reasons. And
therefore for him to say, that they are indeed in themselves certain, but not
to any Protestant, whose Rule of Faith cannot make him certain of any one
Article, without offering to show, that the Reasons, why we believe are
uncertain, is to drop half of the first branch of the division, and then to
complain of the want of it. When the Footman had minded him, that our Rule of
Faith is the Scripture, and therefore if what he says be true, the Scripture
cannot make us certain of any one Article of Faith, instead of answering this
Blunder, his Superiors only correct his Words in a Parenthesis, Preserv.
Consid. p. 40. The Protestant Rule of Faith (considering the Method he applies
it by) cannot make him certain, etc. which is a plain confession, that the
Footman was too hard for the Jesuit, but then he should have shown us, how we
had misapplied, and what the uncertainties of our Reasons are, but I suppose,
he will take time to consider that.

As for what he calls my Rule of Faith, which he says justifies Turk, Jew, and
Gentile. We believe all that God has revealed, and nothing else, is not all,
that he has revealed certain? Though I grant a Divine Revelation is the only
Rule of my Faith, yet here I spoke not of the Rule but of the Objects of my
Faith, and challenge him to show, that we do reject any thing that God has
revealed in the Gospel of his Son, or believe any thing else; and dare him, as
I well might all professed Christians, to deny the truth or certainty of what
is revealed in the Gospel: but Turks and Jews believe what they think in their
judgments God has revealed, that is their Rule, and it is yours. And is there
any fault to be found with this so far? Do Papists believe, what they think in
their judgments, God has not revealed, or what they think, he has revealed? If
they believe, what they think God has revealed, then they justify Jews and
Turks too, as much as Protestants. No says the Jesuit, Your own private
judgments are on both hands your Guides, Preservat. Considered, p. 40.
and not any authority established by Almighty God. Now I confess, I am not
ashamed to own, that Turk and Jew and Gentile, that is all Mankind except
Papists, agree with Protestants in this, that all men must believe with their
own judgments, and that there is no other faculty to believe with: and much
good may it do Papists, that they have found out a way to believe without
judgment, wherein they differ from the rest of Mankind. As for their Authority
appointed by God, on which they must rely without using their own Judgment,
when they can prove any such Authority we will submit to it.

I proved that the Articles of the Christian Faith, which Protestants believe,
are certain and founded on certain Reasons, as they themselves must grant,
unless they renounce the Christian Religion, for here Infallibility itself
cannot help them out. For Infallibility cannot make that certain, which is in
its self uncertain, an infallible man must know things as they are, or else he
is mistaken and ceases to be infallible, and therefore what is certain he
infallibly knows to be certain, and what is uncertain he infallibly knows to be
uncertain; for the most certain and infallible Knowledge does not change its
Object, but sees it just as it is. Now this he says is notoriously false, since
she (the Church) is not infallible by any light of her own, but by the guidance
of the Spirit of Truth. Now this is nothing to the purpose by what light the
Church sees, the Question is, Whether an infallible Church can know that to be
certain, which is uncertain? if she can, then she infallibly knows that which
is not true. But were not the Apostles certain of what Christ told them, when
they acknowledged him the Son of God before he gave them certain Reason for it?
But was not Christ's telling them so a certain Reason? If they believed without
Reason, I am of opinion* how blind an impiety soever it be, that they believed
too soon. I envy no Church the privilege of believing infallibly without
Reason or Evidence, but it is well for the Church of Rome if she have this
privilege, for unless she can be Infallible without Reason, nay in
contradiction to it, I am sure, she is not infallible. But what tergiversation
is here? Does the Church of Rome infallibly know, that the Christian Religion
is certainly true? Does she infallibly know, that the certain Truth of
Christian Religion is founded upon certain Reasons? if so, then the Christian
Religion is certain and founded on certain Reasons; and then those who believe
the Christian Religion for the sake of such certain Reasons have a certain
Faith, whether they believe upon the Authority of the Church or not, unless a
Faith built upon certain Reasons may be uncertain, or cannot be certain: for if
the Church infallibly knows, that there are certain Reasons for the truth of
Christianity, then there are certain Reasons distinct from the Infallibility of
the Church, and they may be a Foundation for a certain Faith without the
Churches Infallibility.

I observed, that their great Argument to prove the uncertainty of the
Protestant Faith is, that there is a great variety of Opinions among
Protestants, and that they condemn one another with equal confidence and
assurance. He says, I should have added, tho they use the same Rule of Faith,
and apply it by the same means. But there was no need of adding this, it was
supposed in all the Arguments I used, which he answers only by saying, It Is an
unanswerable Argument against your Rule of Faith, and evidently proves it
uncertain. What does it prove the Scripture to be uncertain? for that is our
Rule, or does he mean this of our Way of applying it, that is by using the best
Reason and Judgment we have to understand it: and then his Argument is this,
some men misunderstand Scripture, and therefore no man can rightly understand
it; some men reason wrong, and therefore no man can reason right; some men are
confidently persuaded, that they are in the right, when they are in the wrong,
and therefore no man can be certain when he is in the right: an Argument which
in all other cases mankind would hiss at. Some men believe they are awake, when
they are in a dream, therefore no man can know, when he is awake: there are
silly confident people, who are cheated with slight appearances of things,
therefore no man can distinguish between appearances and realities. Or to put
but one case, which will sensibly affect him: some men, nay the greatest part
of Chris^ians, do not believe the Infallibility of the Church of Rome, and
therefore no man can be certain, that the Church is Infallible: For here are
all his Conditions, the same Rule, applied the same way, for he confessed above
that there can be no more than a Moral Evidence for the Infallibility of the
Church. Now in Moral Evidence every man must use his own Judgment; thus we do,
we consider all the Arguments they allege for the Infallibility of their
Church from Scripture, from Promises, from Prophesies, from Bellarmin's Fifteen
Notes of the Church, or whatever other Reasons and Arguments they use; upon the
whole we conclude, that the Church of Rome is not Infallible, they that it is:
now if he will stand to his Argument, That variety of Opinions, when men use
the same Rule, and apply it the same way, is an unanswerable Argument, that the
Rule is uncertain, then it is impossible that they should have so much as a
Moral certainty of Infallibility; since all mankind besides are against them.

His Answer to Dr. St.'s Arguments, to prove that the Scriptures may be a very
certain Rule, though men differ in expounding them, are so very senseless, that
I have no patience to answer them, especially since he grants all that the Dean
intended to prove, that a Rule may be a certain Rule, though men, who do not
understand it, may mis-apply it. But the principle he has laid down for mine, I
confess, is very extraordinary and surprising, that if two men have the Bible,
read it, endeavou^ to understand it, and believing they do, draw from the same
Scriptures two different Conclusions, two opposite Articles of Faith, both are
bound to stand to their private judgment, Preserv. Considered, p. 42.
and to believe themselves in the right, though all the World should accuse
them in lieu of the true pretended Rule, to have used a false One. I affirm,
that one man may expound the Scripture right, and know, that he does so, though
another expounds it wrong; and he makes me say, that when two men expound the
Scripture to different and contrary senses, they are both bound to believe,
that they are in the right: this it is certain they will do, and there is no
remedy against it, but what is worse than the disease, that men should not use
their own Judgments, and then they dare not believe themselves when they are in
the right, which is as bad, as to believe themselves in the right, when they
are in the wrong: but that for this reason, all the World should accuse them in
lieu of the true pretended Rule to have used a false one, is very senseless,
unless by all the World he means the World of Roman Catholics, for no other
men, as I have already shown, nay not he himself, if he will stand to his own
word, will accuse the Rule to be false, because men make a false judgment of
it; for to call every man's private judgment of the Rule his Rule, which is the
substance of his following harangue, is to resolve neither to think, nor speak,
like other men: for that no man thinks his own private judgment to be his Rule,
is evident from hence, that upon better Information he alters his judgment,
without changing his Rule.

I concluded this Section concerning the uncertainty of the Protestant Faith
with this observation, that this very Argument from the different and contrary
opinions of Protestants to prove the uncertainty of the Protestant Faith,
signifies nothing as to our disputes with the Church of Rome: for ask them,
what they would think of the Protestant Faith were all Protestants of a mind?
would their consent and agreement prove the certainty of the Protestant Faith?
then the Protestant Faith in opposition to Popery is very certain, for they all
agree in condemning the Errors and Corruptions of the Church of Rome. And thus
I think they get nothing by this Argument: for if the dissensions of
Protestants proves the uncertainty of their Faith, as to such matters wherein
they differ, then by the same Rule their agreement in opposition to Popery,
shows their great certainty in such matters. And this I suppose is no great
inducement to a Protestant to turn Papist.

Our Jesuit had so much Wit in his Anger, as to conceal the force of this
Argument, and to represent it thus, Were all Protestants of a mind would their
consent and agreement prove the certainty of the Protestant Faith. By which
alone no man living could guess, what I was proving; and to this he answers,
Not at all, and I agree with him in it; for mere agreement does not prove the
certainty of Faith, no more then mere disagreement, or variety of Opinions
proves the uncertainty of Faith. But they prove them both alike, as I observed,
which he calls a ridiculous Inference, and as he has reported it, he has made
it ridiculous enough, This is the same Rule, and their disagreement proves not
their uncertainty. This is to mangle and transprose an Argument that it may not
be understood: but to confute this he says, all Union is no Argument of the
Spirit of God, for People may combine to do ill: But what is this to agreement
in Opinions? May not that argue the certainty of Faith, because some men agree
to do ill? for a general consent and agreement of men's understandings, may be
an argument of the truth of what they consent in, though the agreement of their
Wills may not be a virtuous but a wicked Combination. But yet St. Paul assures
us, disunion and dissension is a certain mark of the absence of the Spirit of
God, that is, Contentions and Quarrels and Schisms are indeed so far the Works
of the Flesh. But when two men or two Churches differ in their opinions of
things, can neither of them be in the right? Is the Spirit of God with neither
of them? Is truth on neither side? Then the Controversies between the Church of
Rome, and the Church of England, prove that the Spirit of God is no more with
the Church of Rome, then with the Church of England.

The plain case is this; our Roman Adversaries persuade Protestants, that they
can have no certainty of their Faith, because Protestants are so much divided
about it, and therefore they must go to the Church of Rome, which alone
pretends to Infallibility. But say I, why should these differences among
Protestants oblige them to go over to the Church of Rome, when Protestants have
no difference about this matter, but are all agreed, that the Church of Rome is
so far from being infallible, that she is a very corrupt Church: I do not say,
that the differences of Protestants is a good Argument to prove the uncertainty
of their Faith, nor their bare agreement to prove the certainty of it, but I
say, one proves as much as the other, and therefore it is a better reason to
Protestants not to turn Papists, that all Protestants are agreed, that the
Church of Rome is not infallible, but has greatly erred, then it is for
Protestants to go to the Church of Rome for Infallibility, because they differ
in some things among themselves; especially considering that many points they
now differ about, will not be reconciled by their going to the Church of Rome;
for the same points are as fiercely disputed among them too, as to instance at
present only in the Quinquearticular Controversy.

CHAP. III. A Vindication of some Positions, which are pretended to make void
all Scripture Proof, all use of Fathers and Councils, and of Civil Charity, and
Moral Justice to our Neighbors.
AS for Scripture Proof: I was directing Protestant^ what kind of
Scripture Proof to demand for Transubstantiation: and having shown that the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation does manifestly contradict the evidence of all
our Senses and the most necessary principles of Reason, I told them, that it is
but reasonable, that the evidence for Transubstantiation should at least be
equal to the evidence against it, and therefore they must demand such a
Scripture Proof of Transubstantiation, as cannot possibly signify any thing
else; or else it will not answer that evidence which we have against
Transubstantiation: Pres. p. 72.
for sense and reason pronounce Transubstantiation to be naturally impossible;
and therefore unless it be as impossible to put any other sense upon Scripture,
as it is to reconcile Transubstantiation to sense and reason, there is not such
good evidence for Transubstantiation, as there is against it. This he repeats
after his usual manner, to take care that no body shall understand what it
relates to, or see the force of the Argument; and in answer to it he gives us a
new instance of his good will to the Doctrine of the Trinity. He says, A Text
which cannot possibly have another sense, Answer p. 2.
does not leave it in any one's liberty, who owns Scripture to be an Heretic;
therefore the Church produced no such Text against the Arians or Nestorians;
whence it evidently follows, that according to Dr. Sherlock, the Arians and
Nestorians were not bound to believe the Trinity and Incarnation of Christ. But
did I say, that nothing can be proved but by such express Texts, as it is not
possible to understand otherwise? I said, this was necessary to prove any
Doctrine which sense and reason declare to be absolutely impossible. And will
he say the Doctrine of the Trinity is such a Doctrine? No he says, Preservative
Considered, p. 45. But they so appeared to the Nestorians and Arians, and that
is the case put by Dr. Sherlock: but I put no case about mere appearing, but of
such palpable contradictions as the sense and reason of all Mankind agree in:
as Papists themselves cannot deny, and know not how to justify, without
pressing the Almighty Power of God to make good their absurd Imaginations. Now
where there is only an appearance of contradiction, where a Doctrine only lies
cross to men's natural reason, there such express Texts as do more evidently
prove that Doctrine, then that Doctrine does evidently contradict reason, is a
sufficient foundation for the belief of it, because in this case there is more
evidence for it than against it: and did not the Church allege such
Scripture-proofs for the Trinity? And are there no such Proofs to be alleged?
He thinks they did not, because then the Arians could not have continued
Heretics; for a Text which cannot possibly have any other sense, does not
leave it in any ones liberty to be a Heretic. But I suppose, he will allow,
that I spoke not of a natural but of a moral impossibility; now a moral
impossibility of interpreting Scripture otherwise is, when a man cannot
reasonably do it without offering manifest violence to the words, and this a
wilful and obstinate Heretic may do, how plain and self-evident, how incapable
soever the words are of any other possible sense to a reasonable and impartial
Inquirer. This principle, I confess, makes void all Scripture Proof of such
Doctrines as sense and reason pronounce absolutely impossible, but this is no
injury, but the greatest right we can do the Scripture. But I cannot without
some indignation observe, how the Doctrine of the ever blessed Trinity is upon
all occasions introduced by these men as contradicting sense and reason, which
would make one suspect, they kept it for no other reason but to justify the
absurdities and contradictions of Transubstantiation.

As for the making void the use of Fathers and Councils to unlearned men, it is
the thing I designed, and I am very glad if I have done it: but as for learned
men they may make such use of them still, as such Writings are designed for;
not to make them the Rule of Faith, but either to learn what was the Doctrine
and Practice of the Church in their days, or what their private Opinions were,
or how they expounded Scripture and the like: that I call it squabling about
the sense of Fathers, if the expression be undecent, it is owing to himself and
some such late Scriblers, whose Disputes have been nothing else but Squables.
But I cannot blame him, that he is so angry, that I direct the Protestant to
inquire, Whether such Books were written by that Father, whose Name it bears,
for he knows such an inquiry has very lately cost him dear, I was going to say
a blush, but that is impossible. If such Questions as I ask cannot be answered
to the satisfaction of learned men, they are of no more use to them, than they
are to the unlearned, who cannot answer them themselves, and want the Learning
which is necessary to make them capable of a satisfactory Answer, and this is
all the Answer I shall return to this Charge.

His next Charge is a dreadful one: Such Principles as make void all use of
Civil Charity and Moral Justice to our Neighbors. He lays it in the very last
Section of the Preservative, Concerning Protestant Mis-representations of
Popery. Wherein I showed, how vain and silly this charge was, and he has not
one word to say in defense of it. Among other things I observed, that these
men, who complain so much of Mis-representing, endeavor to make the Doctrines
of the Church of Rome look as like Protestant Doctrines, as ever they can, as
if there were little or no difference between them. -- The truth is, the chief
Mystery in this late Trade of Representing and Mis-representing is no more but
this, to join a Protestant Faith with Popish Practices, to believe as
Protestants do, and to do as Papists do. This I gave some few instances of out
of the Representer, and showed that their Faith, as he Represented it, came
very near and in some cases was the very same with the Protestant Faith, but
their Practice was Popish. How is this contrary to Civil Charity and Moral
Honesty? He says it is this, When a man's exterior Actions are naturally
capable of a good and pious meaning, and he ever and clearly declares, that it
is his, yet to fasten upon him another opposite design and meaning. But how
does this concern me, who fasten no meaning at all upon their Actions, but only
barely relate, what they profess to believe, and what they practice. He
instances in two, and let all the World judge, who makes void Civil Charity and
Moral Honesty, He, or I.

To insinuate, says he, that a Catholic thinks the Virgin Mary more powerful
in Heaven than Christ, he tells you, that he says Ten Ave-Maries for one Pater
Noster; whereas all that I say is, He (the Papist Represented) believes it
damnable, to think the Virgin Mary more powerful in Heaven than Christ, which
is Protestant Doctrine. But yet he prays to her oftener than either to God or
Christ; says ten Ave-Maries for one Pater Noster; which is a Popish Devotion.
Is here any breach of Moral Honesty in this? is not all this true? do I put any
sense or interpretation upon this action? I believe all men will think, that
this does more than insinuate, what a belief they have of the power of the
Virgin; and this the Jesuit was sensible of, and therefore says, that I
insinuate it, but I will leave it as I did at first, to what judgment all
indifferent men will make of it.

In the next place, he says, I charge the Catholics with worshipping the
visible Species in the Eucharist: Hear my words again; He believes it unlawful
to commit Idolatry, and most damnable to worship any Breaden God; which is
spoke like a Protestant: but yet he pays Divine Adoration to the Sacrament,
which is done like a Papist. Here is nothing about worshipping the visible
Species in the Eucharist: but whatever is the Sacrament, they worship, and must
do so by the Doctrine of their Church; if they can make a Sacrament of the Body
and Blood of Christ, without the visible Species, then according to their
Doctrine, they need not worship the visible Species, if they cannot, they must,
for they must adore the Sacrament; and if the Sacrament should prove to be
Bread and Wine, not the natural Body and Blood of Christ, and it is strange, if
it should not, then I need not tell them what they worship. But those matters
have been debated often enough of late.

He concludes with an advice to Protestants, urging the Argument against
Scriptures, which I had before done against Fathers. Amongst Christians, there
is not one in an hundred thousand, who understand all Scripture, and it is
morally impossible they should; and therefore certainly there must be an easier
and shorter way to understand Christian Religion than this, or else the
generality of Mankind, even of professed Christians, are out of possibility of
Salvation. I grant every word of it to be true, if understanding all Scripture,
as he puts it, were necessary to Salvation; but the only easier and shorter way
is to understand so much of the Scripture as is necessary to Salvation, and let
him when he pleases, if he dare venture the Blasphemy of it, prove that this is
morally impossible to the generality of Mankind, even of professed Christians.

A VINDICATION OF THE SECOND PART OF THE Preservative against POPERY.
HEre our Jesuit gives me a great many hard Words, but nothing of Argument; He
talks tragically of Calumnies and Misrepresentations, how much he proves of it,
unless a bold Accusation must pass for a Proof, I dare leave to every ordinary
Reader, who will compare my Book with his. He is much off of his bias here,
for I did not dispute directly against any Popish Doctrines, but used such
collateral Arguments, as are very evident and convincing to ordinary Readers,
but so much out of the road, that the Jesuit could find nothing in his
Commonplace Book about it, and therefore does not pretend to answer any one
Section of my Book; but yet out of every Section he picks some single Sayings,
and if he meets with an Argument, that he cannot answer, he takes some few
words of it, and calls it Calumny and Misrepresentation; the only way I have to
write such an Answer to him, as may be fit to be read, is to give a short
Abstract of each Section of my Book, and to take notice, where those Passages
come in, which he calls Calumnies and Misrepresentations.

SECT. I. Concerning Idolatry.
I Showed the great Design of our Savior was more perfectly to extirpate all
Idolatry. To this purpose he has more perfectly instructed us in the Nature of
God. To this end he confines all Religious Worship to God alone. Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, 4 Matthew. 10.
and him only shall thou serve. It is his answer to the Devil, when he tempted
him to fall down and worship him; but he gives such an answer, as excludes all
Creatures, not only good, but bad Spirits from any share in Religious Worship.
For he does not deny to worship him merely because he was the Devil, but
because we must worship none but God. Which is as good a reason against the
Worship of the most glorious Angels, as of the Devil himself. This he calls a
Misrepresentation, Preserv. Consid. p. 61.
and to make it so, first very sillily misrepresents my words, and says, that I
charge the Church of Rome, that she does not pay to God alone, that degree of
Worship, which the tempting Devil demanded of Christ. But I say not one word
there about the Church of Rome, though the application was obvious and he made it
for me: but then I do not blame them, that they do not pay that degree of
Worship to God, which the Devil demanded of Christ; which was but an inferior
degree of Worship, and therefore not proper for the Supreme Deity; but that
they pay any degree, how inferior soever, of Religious Worship to Saints and
Angels, or any other Being besides God, for that is the import of our Savior's
Answer to the Devil, and answers the pretense of the Church of Rome, that she
does not give latria, or that Sovereign Worship, which is due to the Supreme
God, but only dulia, or an Inferior Worship to Saints and Angels; whereas our
Savior's Argument proves, that no degree of Worship is to be given to any but
God. He says farther, p. 64. That Christ, by refusing himself all Worship to
God's Enemy the Devil, teaches us to pay none at all to God's Saints and
Angels, is an inference that no one but Dr. Sherlock was ever able to make.
Then it seems, I have the honor of inventing a good Argument, which this
Jesuit dares not attempt to answer: let him show me if he can, that to Worship
none but God, excludes only the Worship of the Devil, not of Saints and Angels.

As a farther proof of this, I add, Our Savior denies to Worship him, though
the Devil made no terms with him about the kind or degrees of Worship. He does
not require him to offer Sacrifice to him, (which is the only Act of Worship
the Church of Rome appropriates to the Supreme God) but only to bow down before
him, as an expression of Devotion. This he calls a Misrepresentation, that
Sacrifice is the only Act of Worship, which the Church of Rome appropriates to
the Supreme God; which is the first time this was called a Misrepresentation;
and yet he himself owns, p. 64. that Sacrifice is indeed the only exterior
Worship inseparable from latria, and therefore never to be offered to any but
God. And is not this what I said? did I deny, that the Church of Rome paid any
other Worship to God, but Sacrifice? but I say, and so says our Jesuit, that
there is no other external Act of Worship so peculiar to God, that it can be
given to no other being, but only Sacrifice; and therefore since the Devil did
not demand of Christ to sacrifice to him, he did not demand of him that degree
of Worship, which alone the Church of Rome thinks peculiar and appropriate to
God, and yet Christ tells us of all other Acts of Worship, which the Church of
Rome thinks may be separated from latria, and therefore given to Creatures,
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.

I added, that to prevent the Worship of Inferior Demons, who were worshipped
as Mediators to the Supreme God, God advances his own Son to be the Universal
Mediator, and the Supreme and Sovereign Lord of the World, that all Mankind
should make their Addresses and Supplications to him, and offer up their
Prayers only in his Name, that in him they should find acceptance, and in no
other Name. Hence he concludes, that I charge the Church of Rome, (though I did
not mention her) that they offer not their Prayers only in the Name of Christ,
that in him they may find acceptance. And this he calls a Misrepresentation;
and I will venture to be a Misrepresenter for once, and charge them with it:
for if they pray to God in the Name and Merits of Saints and the blessed
Virgin; if they pray to them to intercede for them with God, as appears in all
their Offices, then they do not pray only in the Name of Christ, nor expect to
be accepted only for his sake.

I summed up this Argument thus: Now this being so apparently one end of
Christ's coming into the World to suppress the Idolatry of Creature-Worship,
and to confine all Religious Worship to one Supreme Being, in opposition to the
many Gods of the Heathens, and to teach us to make our Applications to this One
God, by One Mediator, (this, he says, is another Misrepresentation, that they
make not their Applications to One God by One Mediator, which is true, if by
One he means only One, for they have Many) in opposition to the Worship of
inferior Deities; can any man imagine, that the Worship of Saints and Angels
and the Virgin Mary, can be any part of the Christian Religion? which is not a
direct Proof against the Worship of Saints and Angels, but an Argument from
what is likely, fit and congruous, and consistent with our Savior's design, to
root out all remains and all appearances of Idolatry; which makes it improbable
and incongruous to the utmost degree, that Christ should permit the Worship of
Saints and the Virgin Mary, as it is practiced in the Church of Rome; with
Temples and Altars and Images, with Solemn Prayers and Vows, and Solemn
Processions, which has so much the external appearance of that Idolatrous
Worship, which the Heathens paid to their Gods, that there is no visible
distinction between them. And if Christ intended to root out Idolatry, it is
highly improbable, that he would allow, so much of the external pomp and show
of it, if it were no more: Those who think this may be, may believe the Worship
of Saints and Angels to be a Gospel-Doctrine, notwithstanding this Argument;
but such Arguments as these are thought by most men to have some weight in
them; as for instance, That a Man, who is very curious to preserve his Wives
Chastity, will not suffer her to receive all Amorous Addresses and Courtships
from Strangers, no not from his dearest Friends; That a Prince, who is so
jealous of any Rivals and Partners, as to make it Treason to usurp the meanest
of the insignia Majestatis, will not suffer the greatest Favorite to wear the
Imperial Crown, nor to sit on his Throne, and receive the Addresses and Homage
of his Subjects upon the knee. As I observed before, that how dear soever the
Saints are to God, they are but his Creatures, and if Sovereign Princes will
not receive their greatest Favorites into their Throne, much less will God.

This is another of his Misrepresentations, that I say, the Papists, by their
worshipping Saints, Angels, and the Virgin Mary, put them in the Throne of God;
but this I do not say, but only that God will not take any of his Creatures
into his Throne. But yet if giving Religious Worship placed the Heathen Deities
in God's Throne, I would gladly be satisfied, why the Worship of Saints and
Angels should not be thought to do the same: I am sure to worship Saints in the
same Temple and at the same Altar, and with the same humble Prostrations, and
in the very same Prayers, that we worship God, looks very like placing a
Favorite on the same Throne with his Prince; but yet this is not the dispute,
whether they do so or not, but whether it be not so like it, that it is
unreasonable to think, that Christ, who came to root out all Idolatry, will
allow or command it.

Another kind of Idolatry the Heathens were fond of, was, the Worship of Images
and Pictures, whereby they represented their Gods as visibly present with them.
For they wanted some material representations of their Gods, in which they
might, as it were, see them present, and offer up their Petitions to them, and
court them with some visible and sensible honors.

To cure this kind of Idolatry under the Law, though God forbad the Worship of
Images, yet he appoints them to erect a Tabernacle or Temple, where he would
dwell among them, and place the Symbols of his Presence, the Mercy-seat, and
the Cherubims covering the Mercy-seat; which was a symbolical Representation of
God's Throne in Heaven, where he is surrounded with Angels, as the Holy of
Holies itself was the Figure of Heaven. Thus under the Law to give them
assurance of his presence with them, though they could not see him, he had a
peculiar Place for Worship, and peculiar Symbols of his Presence, but no Images
to represent his Person, or to be the Objects of Worship.

And here I took notice of that Pretense of the Church of Rome for
Image Worship, that the Cherubims were worshipped by the Jews, and particularly
answered the Arguments of the late Bishop of Oxford to prove it, and it had
been worthy of the Jesuit to have made some reply to this, but he was wiser
than to meddle with it: among other things, the Bishop had urged David's
Exhortation to the People to Honor the Ark, Bow down to or worship his
Footstool, for it; or he is holy, 99 Psalm, to prove, that the Jews worshipped
the Cherubims; this I said, was very strange, when he himself, four Pages
before had told us, that the Ark was God's Footstool, and the Cherubims his
Throne; now suppose David had exhorted the people to Worship the Ark, which, as
he says, is God's Footstool, how does this prove, that they must Worship the
Cherubims, which are God's Throne: this he calls a misrepresentation, and so it
is indeed, and a very gross one too, but it is his own; for he represents this
as my Argument against the Worship of the Cherubims, that they were commanded
indeed to Worship the Ark, which was God's Footstool, but not the Cherubims,
which were his Throne: whereas I never granted, that by the Footstool of God
was meant the Ark, but all that I said was, that if the Ark, as the Bishop
affirmed, was meant by God's Footstool, and the Cherubims were his Throne,
then though there had been such a Command to (...) God's Footstool, this could
not prove the worship of the ^^erubims, which in his Divinity were not the
Footstool, but the Throne of God. This he could not be ignorant of, because I
expressly proved, that by the Footstool of God could not be meant the Ark, for
the Ark was in the Holy of Holies, which was a figure of Heaven; and neither
the Heaven, nor any thing in it, but the Earth is in Scripture called God's
Footstool; as the Psalmist expressly applies it to Zion and the Holy Hill. And
this I observed, is a sufficient confutation of his Exposition of the words, to
bow down to, or worship his Footstool; for Mount Zion or the Holy Hill was not
the Object of Worship, nor Symbol of God's Presence; but there God was present,
and that was reason enough to worship him at his Footstool, and at his Holy
Hill, as our English Translation reads it.

I added, Suppose the Jews were to direct their Worship toward the Mercy-seat,
which was covered by the Cherubims, where God had promised to be present, how
are the Cherubims concerned in this Worship? the Worship was paid only to God,
though directed to God, as peculiarly present in that place, which is no more
than to lift up our eyes and hands to Heaven, where the Throne of God is, when
we pray to him: but, he adds, the very Image (for example) of Christ crucified,
is the Object of the Worship of Papists, which is certainly true; but he should
have given my own words. The Bishop had said, that bowing to or toward any
thing, was the same thing; this I granted, if they bowed to or toward any
thing as the Object of Worship; and therefore had the Jews either bowed to or
toward the Cherubims as the Objects of their Worship, as the Papists bow to or
toward their Images, they had been equally guilty of Idolatry, and the breach
of the Second Commandment; but when bowing to signifies bowing to an Object of
Worship, and bowing toward signifies bowing to this Object of Worship, only
toward such a place, where he is peculiarly present, this makes a vast
difference. And this he calls a Misrepresentation, that I say, Papists bow to
their Images as Objects of Worship; but this has been so often proved upon them
in the several Answers to the Representer and M. de Meaux and his Vindicator,
that it would be as foolish in me to prove it again, as it is impudent in him
to deny it.

But I observed farther, that in the Gospel God has provided a more effectual
remedy against Image Worship in the Incarnation of his Son. Mankind have been
always fond of some visible Deity, and because God cannot be seen they have
gratified their superstition by making some visible Images and Representations
of an invisible God: Now to take them off from mean corporeal Images and
Representations, which are both a dishonor to the Divine Nature and debase the
Minds of Men, God has given us a visible Image of himself; has clothed his own
Eternal Son with Humane Nature, who is the brightness of his Father's Glory,
and the express Image of his Person. -- Now when God has given us a visible
Image of himself, his eternal and incarnate Son, whom we may worship and adore,
can we think he will allow us to worship material and sensible Images of Wood
and Stone? And here the Jesuit finds another Misrepresentation, that by the
Incarnation God is visibly represented to us in our nature, but the Papists not
contented with this contrary to the design of God, made man, make and adore
other Images of God. Here he has concealed what my Argument was, but the thing
is true: that though God gave us a visible Image of himself to cure the
Idolatry of Image Worship, yet this is still retained and practiced in the
Church of Rome.

In summing up this Argument, I said, Since it was one main design of Christ's
appearance to root out Idolatry, is it credible, that the Worship of Saints and
Angels and the Virgin Mary, the Worship of Images and Relics, as it is
practiced in the Church of Rome, should be any part of the Christian Worship,
or allowed by the Gospel of our Savior? if Creature-Worship and Image Worship
were so offensive to God, here is the Worship of Creatures and Images still,
and therefore all the visible Idolatry, that ever was practiced in the World
before. This is another of his Misrepresentations, but very true. No
understanding Papist, that has any modesty, can deny, that they worship
Creatures and Images, for that they should be worshipped is determined by their
own Councils; now if there be any salvo to deliver the Church of Rome from the
guilt of Idolatry in worshipping Creatures and Images, when the Heathens were
Idolaters for doing it, yet here is the visible Worship of Creatures and
Images, that is, all that was visible in the Idolatry of the Heathens. This was
my Argument to show how improbable it was, that Christ, who came to extirpate
all Idolatry, should still allow the external and visible Worship of Creatures,
which if it be not Idolatry, yet is all that was visible in the Idolatry of the
Heathens: and it had better become him to have answered this Argument, than to
have called it a Misrepresentation.

I observed farther. That the great difference the Papists can pretend between
their Worship of Saints and Images, and what the Heathens did, whereby to
excuse themselves from Idolatry, notwithstanding they worship Creatures and
Images as the Heathens did, is that they have better Notions of the Worship of
Saints and Angels and Images than the Heathens had; but I said, whether they
had or no, would be hard to prove: The Pagan Philosophers made the same
Apologies for their Worship of Angels and Demons, and Images, which the
learned Papists now make, and whether unlearned Papists have not as gross
Notions, about the Worship of their Saints and Images, as the unlearned
Heathens had is very doubtful, and has been very much suspected by learned
Romanists themselves. This he puts down for another Misrepresentation, though
all learned men know it to be true. Had he ever read Origin against Celsus, he
would have known, that that Philosopher had taught the Roman Doctors, how to
defend the Worship of Saints and Images, and that the Father had confuted them
long since; and had he looked into Vives upon St. Aust. de Civitate Dei, he
would have found that learned Man make n^ great difference between unlearned
Christians and Heathens as to th^se m^tters, to name no more at present.

I added, Can we think, that Christ, who came to make a more perfect
reformation, should only change their Country-Gods into Saints and Angels and
the Virgin Mary, and give new Names to their Statues and Images? This he calls
a Misrepresentation too, though it neither represents nor misrepresents any body,
that I know of, but only argues, what Christ was likely to do. For had Christ
only forbad the Worship of Pagan Gods, and set up the Worship of Saints, it had
not been to extirpate Creature-Worship, but only to change those particular
Creatures, who were to be Objects of Worship, and instead of the Images of
Jupiter and Bacchus to set up Images to Saints.

Thus I have considered the Misrepresentations charged upon the first Section
of the Preservative; as for his own representation of the Faith and Practice of
the Catholics, as to their Worship, I am not concerned with it. There are a
great many late Treatises, wherein those Matters are fully debated. Such as,
The Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome truly represented. The Object
of Religious Worship. The Answer to Papists protesting against Protestant
Popery. The late Answers to M. de Meaux and his Vindicator; and a Book, which
this Jesuit has some reason to know, The Primitive Fathers no Papists. And to
these I refer my Reader, who needs any farther satisfaction.

SECT. II. Concerning the great Love of God to Mankind, etc.
HE has found but six Misrepresentations and Calumnies in this Section, which
is pretty moderate; and some few Arguments against Purgatory, and our recourse
to Saints for their Prayers; which he says he has collected, (not one omitted)
but when I read them over, I could not find any one of them: I confess, it is a
very dull and troublesome task to answer him; for he transcribes several
Passages out of my Book, without representing their connection with what goes
before or what follows, or without telling, what their fault is, or offering
one word to confute them: that whoever will but take the pains to put every
Sentence into its proper place, will need no other answer. And this I shall do,
as briefly as I can.

Having shown, what great assurance the Gospel of our Savior gives us of the
love of God to sinners, I came to show, how irreconcilable the Doctrine of
Purgatory, and the Invocation of Saints and Angels, as our Mediators with God,
is with the Gospel-Notion of God's Love, and that Security it gives us of
Pardon, through the Merits and Intercession of Christ.

1. The Doctrine of Purgatory, where the Punishments are as severe as in Hell
itself, only of a less continuance, and yet they may last some thousand Years,
unless their Friends or the Priests be more merciful to them. This I said was a
barbarous Doctrine, and so inconsistent with the Gospel-Account of God's Love,
that it is not reconcilable with any Notion of Love and Goodness; Preserv.
Consid. p. 68.
you may call it Justice, you may call it Vengeance, if you please, but Love it
is not. These words he cites as an Argument against Purgatory, without
representing on what it is founded, viz. that glorious discovery of God's love
to sinners in the Gospel of Christ: now if to damn men, whose sins are
pardoned, for a thousand or two thousand Years, (for so long sure a man may lie
in Purgatory, or else the Pope is a great Cheat for selling Pardons for ten and
twenty thousand Years, if no man be in danger of lying one thousand Years in
Purgatory) I say, if this be not reconcilable with the Gospel-Notion of God's
Love, then Purgatory can be no Gospel-Doctrine. This Argument he never
mentions, and never pretends to answer in his Catholic Doctrine of Purgatory.
He says the Doctrine of Purgatory is God's Justice, tempered with Infinite
Mercy: Ibid. p. 70.
but I desire him to show me, where this Infinite Mercy is, to torment a
humble, penitent, pardoned sinner for some thousand Years in Purgatory? I
believe I spoke the sense of Mankind, when I said, I should rather choose to
fall into nothing, when I die, than to endure a thousand Years torments to be
happy for ever; for humane nature cannot bear the thoughts of that: This he
severely censures, and says, that man is unworthy ever to see the face of God,
who declares with Dr. Sherlock, that did God offer him the eternal possession
of himself on this condition, that he should first suffer a thousand years, he
would absolutely refuse it. I wish he had kept to my own words, for I never
would suppose so much Blaspemy, as that God should offer the enjoyment of
himself upon such terms, but I am of the same mind still; though I prefer the
enjoyment of God before all the World, and would suffer all the Miseries and
Calamities of this Life to obtain it, yet a thousand years torment in
Purgatory, which is as intolerable as Hell, is a temptation to big for humane
Nature; and if most men think as I do, I believe most men will be at a loss to
find out the infinite Mercy of Purgatory.

I observed, that there are two extravagant Notions whereon the Doctrine of
Purgatory is founded.

1. That God may forgive sins, and yet punish us for them, for no man can go
into Purgatory according to the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, whose sins are
not already forgiven, and I appealed to all mankind, how irreconcilable these
two are, to forgive and to punish. For what is it men are afraid of when they
have sinned? Is it not that they shall be punished for it? What is it, men
desire, when they desire pardon? Is it not, that they may not be punished?
Which shows, that no man thinks, he is forgiven, when he is punished. Here he
represents me to say, That men desire nothing when they ask pardon, but merely
not to be punished; which declares, that they value not God's love and favor
as Children, but merely fear the lash like Slaves. But I never said any such
thing. Does it follow, that because all men, who desire pardon, desire not to
be punished, that therefore they desire no more? and yet pardon in its strict
notion signifies only the remission of punishments; that pardoned Sinners shall
be rewarded too, is the abundance of Grace through Jesus Christ: but yet I say,
the first act of God's love is not to punish, and he who values God's love and
favor, in the first place desires not to be punished: for this was the
Argument I insisted on, that such a Notion as this, that God pardons Sinners,
and yet punishes them some thousand years in Purgatory, is inconsistent with
God's goodness declared by his Son Jesus Christ; for no man thinks such a
pardon an expression of love, which does not remit the debt nor the punishment.
That it is in our power, as he says, to attain Salvation without suffering in
Purgatory, makes Purgatory no more an act of goodness, Ibid. p. 70.
than Hell is, which it is in our power by the Grace of God to escape too: but
the best account he gives of God's goodness with respect to Purgatory is this:
That God restores his favor to us, before our hearts be as perfectly converted
to him, as his justice might well require: that is, he takes us into his
favor, before we have thoroughly repented of our sins and reformed them, but
then Purgatory-fire must expiate the defects of our repentance and reformation:
now this is a great deal more and a great deal less than the Gospel teaches us
of God's love to Sinners. For the Gospel promises no mercy to any, but to true
penitent and reformed Sinners, and therefore to receive men into favor before
their hearts are thus perfectly converted, (which I suppose he means of an
Evangelical not of a Legal Perfection of Conversion, that is, true and sincere
Repentance) is more mercy than the Gospel promises; and to torment such men in
Purgatory, who are received to favor, is a great deal less; and it is somewhat
hard to understand the favor of a thousand years punishment, though it may be
thought favor to receive Sinners, before they are perfectly converted. And yet
he has told the plain truth of the case; for this is the only thing, that can
reconcile men to the thoughts of Purgatory, or make them think it an Act of
Grace, that it is in exchange for the pleasures of Sin, which they are so very
fond of; and those who will venture Hell to enjoy their Lusts, may well think
it an Act of Grace to turn Hell into Purgatory: but this is not the Gospel
representation of God's love to Sinners; which is to pardon none but true
Penitents, and not to punish those in the next World, who are actually pardoned.

I granted, it is something, To exchange the eternal punishment of Hell, which
is due to sin, into the temporal punishment of Purgatory, but asked, Whether it
would not have been a more perfect expression of love and goodness to have
remitted the temporal punishment also of, it may be, some thousand years
torment in Purgatory? Whether this might not have been expected under a
Dispensation of the most perfect Love? And from that God, who sent his only
begotten Son into the World to save Sinners? This is the force of the Argument,
which the Jesuit conceals, that though Purgatory be more mercy than Hell, yet
it does not answer that representation the Gospel makes of God's infinite love
and compassion for penitent Sinners through Jesus Christ.

2. I observed, that in Purgatory, God does not only punish those whom he has
pardoned, but he punishes for no other reason but Punishments sake. For thus
the Roman Doctors tell us, that the Souls in Purgatory are in a state of
Pardon, and in a state of perfect Grace, that they suffer the pains of
Purgatory not to purge away any remains of Sin, or to purify and refine them,
and make them more fit for Heaven, but only to bear the punishment due to Sin,
for which they had made no satisfaction while they lived: now I dare boldly
affirm, this is irreconcilable with any degree of love and goodness: a just
punishment respects the guilt of Sin, but there is no guilt when the Sin is
pardoned; to make it an Act of Goodness, it must respect the reformation of the
Sinner, which cannot be, when he is in a perfect state of Grace and needs no
amendment; and such punishments as neither respect the guilt of Sin, nor the
reformation of the Sinner, are neither just nor good, which is the exact Notion
of Purgatory. This he sets down as a Mis-representation (p. 68.) but does not
tell us why: this Doctrine is taught by Roman Divines, as I suppose he knows,
or if he don't, let him consult Bellarmin or such good Catholic Writers.

I summed up this Argument thus: Our Protestant need not dispute much about
Purgatory; let him only ask a Popish Priest, How the Doctrine of Purgatory can
be reconciled with that stupendous love of God declared to penitent Sinners in
his Son Jesus Christ? For it is a contradiction to the Notion of Goodness among
men, to inflict such terrible punishments in mere Grace and Love, even when the
sin is pardoned and the Sinner reconciled, and no longer in a state of
discipline and trial. This is the force of the Argument, and here the Jesuit,
if he likes it, may try his skill.

Secondly, Another Argument I urged against Purgatory was this, that it
destroys or weakens that security the Gospel has given Sinners of their
Redemption from the Wrath of God, and the just punishment of their Sins. And
that upon two accounts.

1. As it destroys men's hopes in the Merits of Christ, and the Atonement and
Expiation of his Blood. For if the Blood of Christ does not deliver us from the
punishment of Sin, what security is this to a Sinner? Yes, you will say, Christ
has redeemed us from eternal, though not from temporal punishments, and
therefore penitent Sinners shall not be eternally damned. This he puts down as
a Mis-representation, p. 67. and says, p. 73. That Christ truly obtained
remission from all temporal as well as eternal pain, and that whoever is
regenerated by Baptism, he not only is not adjudged to eternal torments, but
neither does he suffer after death any Purgatory pains, if he die in that state
of recovered innocence. This I grant they own, that unless men sin after
Baptism, they are neither in danger of Hell nor Purgatory; and yet it is
evident they deny that Christ has expiated the temporal punishments due to sin
either in this World, or in Purgatory; for if he had, there were an end both of
the Popish Sacrament of Penance and Purgatory: and if Christ by his death had
expiated the temporal punishments of sin, I would desire to know, why the
temporal punishment of sin is not as well remitted by the Sacrament of Penance,
as by Baptism; since the expiation of Christ's Blood, as they pretend, is
applied to us in both: and therefore this is a mere fallacy; for though a
Sinner in Baptism is delivered from all punishment due to sin, yet he is not in
a proper sense delivered from what they call the temporal punishment of sin,
for there was no such punishment due to sin before Baptism. Hell, not
Purgatory, is the punishment of all sin before Baptism, and therefore a
baptized Person is delivered by Christ from Hell, which is the only punishment
due to Sins before Baptism; and if he die before he commits any actual sin
after Baptism, he escapes Purgatory and goes immediately to Heaven, not because
Christ's death has delivered him from the temporal pains of Purgatory, but
because he had done nothing to deserve it. For what they call the temporal
punishment of sin is only the pains of Penance, and no man is capable of the
Sacrament of Penance, who is not a baptized Christian; and yet Purgatory is of
the same nature with the pains of Penance, for there men complete the expiation
of their sins by enduring the pains of Purgatory, which was wanting to perfect
their Penance in this World. And therefore Baptism does not remit the temporal
punishment of sin, because there is none due till men sin after Baptism: it can
no more remit the temporal pains of Purgatory, than the temporal pains of
Penance, which none but a baptized Sinner is obnoxious to: and therefore it is
false (according to their Doctrine) to say, That Christ obtained remission from
all temporal, as well as eternal pain, unless they will say, that Christ
obtained remission of the pains of Penance, and then farewell Penance and
Purgatory together. And this very bottom our Jesuit sets it on, p. 75. where
he tells us, Those who say, that it were a greater mercy in God to remit all
the punishment due to sin, blame Christ for Preaching Penance, and account him
on that score less merciful: which justifies what I said, that the pains of
Purgatory answer the pains of Penance, and therefore this temporal punishment
of sin, was not expiated by the Death of Christ no more then Penance is: and
when he can prove, that Christ Preached such Penance as this, we will
acknowledge Purgatory.

But to return; I desired to know, how any man can be satisfied from Scripture,
that Christ by his death has delivered us from eternal punishments, if he have
not delivered us from the temporal punishments of sin in the next World. For if
those Texts which prove our Redemption by the Death of Christ, do not prove,
that Christ has redeemed us from the whole punishment d^e to sin in the next
World, they prove nothing, and then there is not one place of Scripture to
prove, that Christ has redeemed us from eternal punishments. For if Christ's
dying for our sins, making atonement for sin, being a propitiation through
faith in his blood; if remission and forgiveness of sins, being justified,
having peace with God, being reconciled to God, and saved from wrath, do not
signify taking away the punishment of sin, I desire one Text to prove, that a
Sinner who is pardoned and justified shall not be eternally punished for sin:
and if they do signify taking away the punishment of sin, how can a Sinner,
who is pardoned and justified be punished for his sins, so that these
Scriptures either prove, that there is no Purgatory, or they cannot prove, that
we shall be delivered from Hell. This Argument he slightly mentions, p. 69, but
has so much wit as to say nothing to it.

I asked farther, whether there are two kinds of punishments due to sin,
temporal and eternal, of such a distinct nature that the promise of forgiveness
does not include both, nay that God cannot forgive both, that God can only
forgive eternal punishment, but the Sinner himself must endure the temporal. If
this were the case, I would grant, the promises of forgiveness could extend
only to eternal punishments; but if the Curse of the Law be eternal death, and
all other punishments are only parts of the Curse and a partial execution of
it, then to forgive eternal punishments must include the forgiveness of
temporal punishments as parts or branches of it: and this I showed was the case
here, that there is no other threatening in all the Gospel against sin, but
eternal death, and therefore all other punishments are inflicted by virtue of
this Law, as included in it; and consequently he who is delivered from this
Curse of the Law, from eternal punishments, is delivered from the whole
punishment due to sin, though not from correction and discipline, which is not
properly the Curse of the Law, nor the Wrath of God. A little piece of this he
cites, p. 69, but without an answer. In his following harangue indeed for
Purgatory, he endeavors to prove by some examples of God's punishing those,
whose sins were forgiven, and by some Sayings of the Fathers, that after the
guilt of sin is forgiven, there remains an obligation to undergo punishment;
but these have been answered often enough, and are no Answer to the Argument of
the Preservative, and therefore I am not concerned about them.

I asked farther, why they call Purgatory, which is a place of punishment in
the other World, a temporal punishment? which is an abuse of the Language of
Scripture, which makes this World temporal, 2 Cor. 4.18.
and the next World eternal. The things which are seen are temporal, but the
things which are not seen are eternal: and therefore temporal punishments
signify the punishments of this World, but the unseen punishments, as well as
the unseen rewards, of the next World are eternal; which is a demonstration,
that there is no Purgatory, unless it be eternal. This he thus repeats, p. 69.
The things which are seen (that is, of this World) are temporal; but the
things, which are not seen (that is, of the next World) are eternal. This is a
demonstration, that there is no Purgatory: which is both to conceal the force
of the Argument, and to pervert it; for he should at least have added, there is
no Purgatory, unless it be eternal. But his answer to this is extremely
pleasant, p. 76. St. Paul never taught that all things, that are not seen, or
of another World, are eternal, or else God would be eternally judging, and so
never rewarding his Servants, or punishing his Enemies. But it is plain the
Apostle by things that are seen, or not seen, signifies things which are to be
enjoyed or suffered by us, not any transient Acts of God or Creatures; and thus
if there be any such thing as Purgatory in the other World, it must be eternal.

To this I added; The state of the next World is called either life or death,
11 John 25, 26.
eternal life, or eternal death. Those who believe in Christ shall never die.
Now I desire to know the difference between living and dying and perishing in
the next World. For bad men do not cease to be, nor lose all sense in the next
World, no more than good men; and therefore life can only signify a state of
happiness, and death a state of misery. Now if good men must not perish, must
not die in the next World, they must not go to Purgatory, which is as much
perishing, as much dying, as Hell, though not so long. This he thus recites, p.
69. Who believes in Christ, shall never die; therefore good men must not go to
Purgatory, which is as much perishing and dying as Hell, but not so long. Which
you see, is still to conceal the force of the Argument, but the comfort is, he
says nothing against it, unless his repeating it must pass for a confutation.
But he immediately adds, as if it were in the same period; otherwise Purgatory
may be everlasting life for all I know, and so the pains of it eternal. But
this is several periods off. In summing up this Argument I inquired, how a
Papist, who believes a Purgatory-fire, wherein he shall be tormented (God knows
how long) for his sins, can prove, that a penitent sinner shall not be damned
for his sins* After other proofs, which, I thought, it was reasonable for them
to urge, (and I am sure they can urge no better) I alleged this in their
behalf; that Christ has promised, that those who believe in him, shall not
perish, but have everlasting life: and that proves, that the pains of Purgatory
cannot be for ever, for then Christ could not perform his promise of bestowing
everlasting life on them: To this I answer, So I confess one would think, and
so I should have thought also, that when Christ promised, that such believers
should not perish, and should never die, that he meant, that such men should
not go to Purgatory: but if falling into Purgatory, he not perishing and not
dying, it may (...) ^verlasting life too, for ought I know, and then the pains
of Purgatory may be eternal.

I hope the Reader is by this time sensible, how easy it is to render any
Discourse ridiculous by taking half Sentences, and joining those passages
together, which have no connection and dependence.

I observed farther, That the Doctrine of Purgatory destroys our hope and
confidence in the mediation of Christ, as it represents him less merciful and
compassionate or less powerful than the necessities of sinners require him to
be.

1. As for his Compassion. It is no great sign of tenderness and compassion to
leave his Members in Purgatory-fire, which burns as hot as Hell. Could I
believe this of our Savior, I should have very mean thoughts of his kindness,
and not much rely on him for any thing -- it is a wonderful thing to me, that
when a merciful man cannot see a Beast in torment without relieving it, it
should be thought consistent with the mercy and compassion of our Savior, to
see us burn in Purgatory for Years and Ages. Part of this he repeats, and I
suppose thought all the World would take it for an ill saying, and therefore
leaves it, as he found it; but I shall stand to it, till he confutes it.

2. If it be not want of Compassion, it must be want of Power in our Savior to
help us: -- and if he want Power to deliver from Purgatory, I should more
question his Power to deliver from Hell; for that is the harder of the two: if
his Blood could not expiate for the temporal punishment of sin, which the
Merits of some superer^gating Saints, or the Pope's Indulgencies, or the
Priests Masses can rede^m us from, how c^uld it make expiation for eternal
punishment? i^ h^s int^r^st in the Court of Heaven cannot do the less, how can
(...) do the greater? This he calls a Misrepresentation, and truly as he has
recited it, it is a very great one. P. 68. That the Blood of Christ could not
expiate for the temporal punishment of sin, which the Merits of some
supererogating Saints, or the Priest's Masses, or Pope's Indulgencies can
redeem us from; how then can that Blood make expiation for eternal punishment?
I say, if it cannot do one, which is the greater, much less can it do the
other, which is the less; he makes me say, that it cannot do one, which is the
less, and therefore cannot do the greater: This is Popish Liberty of Conscience
with a witness.

From the Doctrine of Purgatory, I proceeded to the Invocation of Saints and
Angels, (...) our Mediators; whether this does not also disparage the Gra^^ of
the Gospel, the Love of God, and of our Mediator and Advocate Jesus Christ, to
penitent sinners.

Now I observed 1. with respect to God; That no man can believe, that God is so
very gracious to sinners for the sake of Christ, who seeks to so many Advocates
and Mediators to intercede for him with God. To imagine, that we want any
Mediator with God, but only our High Priest, who mediates in virtue of his
Sacrifice, is a reproach to the Divine Goodness. This the Jesuit recites, but
what he has to say to it, he does not tell us. I there showed at large, that
God does not want Entreaties to do good, though his Wisdom and Justice may
require a Sacrifice and a High Priest to make atonement for sin.

To prevent that obvious Objection, that God commands us to Pray for one
another on Earth; I observed, that this is not by way of Interest and Merit, as
the Church of Rome pretends the Saints in Heaven Pray for us, but by Humble
Supplications, which I showed was very reconcilable with the Wisdom and
Goodness of God; from those excellent ends it serves in this World; this he
calls a Misrepresentation, p. 68. but I pray why? do not they Pray to God in
the Name and Merits of the Saints? are not all their Offices full of such
Prayers? do they think the Saints in Heaven Pray only as humble Supplicants,
when the very reason the Council of Trent gives, why they should fly to their
Aid and Succors, is, that they Reign with Christ? do they not, as he adds, take
the Virgin Mary, Angels and Saints for Mediators to incline God to be good to
peculiar persons? which he calls another Misrepresentation; why then do they
Pray so frequently and devoutly to them? why do they tell of so many miraculous
Deliverances wrought by the Virgin Mary in favor of her Clients, and of other
Saints in favor of their Devotoes? English Protestants know these things too
well, to be imposed on at this time of day by the bawling and confidence of an
ignorant Jesuit.

2. I observed, That it is not less injurious to the Love of our Savior to fly
to the Prayers and Aids of Saints and the Virgin Mary; as if Christ either
wants interest with God, or wants kindness to us, and either will not intercede
for us at all, or will not do it unless he be prevailed with by the
Intercession of Saints, or the Entreaties or Commands of his Mother. And having
showed what assurance we have of the Love and Compassion of our Savior, I
added, This one would have thought should have given the greatest security to
sinners of his readiness to help them. But it seems Christ is not merciful and
pitiful enough: his Virgin Mother has softer and tenderer Passions, and such an
interest in him, or authority over him in the right of a Mother, (as some of
them have not without blasphemy represented it) that she can have any thing of
him; and thus they suppose the other Saints to be much more pitiful than Christ
is, and to have interest enough to protect their Supplicants, or else it is not
imaginable, why they should need or desire any other Advocates. This he calls
another Misrepresentation, and makes me ^ay, that the Church of Rome professes
to believe all this; but I say no such thing, but only this is the natural
interpretation of their seeking other Advocates and Mediators besides Christ:
when he can give a better account of this Practice, I will acknowledge, I was
mistaken in my Argument, but am no Misrepresenter; for to Argue ill, and to
Misrepresent, are two things, as the Representer himself, I suppose, has learnt
by this time.

SECT. III. An Answer to the Thirty Misrepresentations and Calumnies, and some
Fanatical Principles said to be offered in the Third and Fourth Sections.
HEre our Jesuit foams and rages; and I will make him rage a little more,
before I have done with him. For bad Spirits are apt to rage most, the more
they feel the power of Exorcism, and then there is no way to make them quiet,
but to cast them out.

The third Section of the Preservative concerned the Nature of Christian
Worship, what Christ has reformed in the Worship of God, and what Worship he
has prescribed.

1. As for the first, I said, that Christ has taken away every thing that was
merely external in Religion; not external Acts, nor the necessary external
Circumstances of Worship, but such exernal Rites, as either by the Institution
of God, or Superstition of Men, were made Acts of Religion, to render us more
acceptable to God. This I showed was agreeable to the nature of Christian
Religion, which has none of those ends to serve, for which these external Rites
were instituted by God under the Jewish Law, or invented by Men. For 1. There
is no Expiation or Satisfaction for Sins under the Gospel, but only the Blood
of Christ, and therefore there is no place now for any Expiatory Rites and
Ceremonies. 2. The Gospel makes no difference between Legal Cleanness and
Uncleanness, and therefore distinctions of Meats and External Washings and
Purifications are now out of date. 3. Nor is there any Symbolical Presence of
God under the Gospel, which puts an end to the Legal Holiness of Places and
Things. 4. Nor are Material and Inanimate Things made the Receptacles of Divine
Graces and Virtues, to convey them to us merely by Contact and External
Applications, like some Amulets or Charms to wear in our Pockets, or hang about
our Necks. 5. The Christian Religion admits of no External or Ceremonial
Righteousness -- Now this cuts off every thing, which is External in Religion
at a blow, because it cuts off all hopes and relyances on an External
Righteousness. 6. Hence it appears, that the Christian Religion can admit
nothing, that is External, but only some Faederal Rites; such as the two
Sacraments of Baptism and the Lord's Supper are. -- And such Rites as these are
necessary in all instituted Religions, which depend upon free and volunta^^
^^venants. For since Mankind has by sin forfeited their natural rig^t to God's
favor, they can challenge nothing from him now, but by Promise and Covenant,
and since such Covenants require a mutual stipulation on both sides, they must
be transacted by some visible and sensible Rites, whereby God obliges himself
to us and we to him. This he calls a Fanatical Principle, but why I know not.
And says, that this is destroyed by my former Principle of taking away all
Rites that are Acts of Religion. This is a severe Man, who will not allow me to
make one Ex^eption from a General Rule, which no man yet was ever denied;
especially when I give such a peculiar reason for the Exception, as is
applicable to nothing else: that an instituted Religion is and must be founded
on a Covenant, that a Covenant must be transacted by visible and sensible
Rites; for there cannot be a visible Covenant, nor a visible Church founded on
this Covenant without visible and sensible Rites. And this I suppose he will
think a sufficient Answer to what he says. That on this Principle I ought to
teach, that the mutual stipulation betwixt God and us must be made by his
interior Graces, and our interior Worship, Preserv. Consid. p. 86.
because God must be worshipped as a mere Spirit. That God must be worshipped
as a mere Spirit, and therefore without any external Acts of Worship I never
said, much less did I assign it as my reason here against a mere external
Worship, that God must be worshipped as a mere Spirit, but that the nature of
the Christian Religion will not admit of such an external Worship. And yet if
he can tell me, how this Stipulation or Covenant can be made betwixt God and us
by interior Graces without some visible covenanting Rite, how the Christian
Church, which is a visible Society distinguished from the rest of the World by
a visible Covenant, can be thus visibly incorporated by interior invisible
Graces, I will confess then, that there had been no need, had Christ so
pleased, of any visible Sacraments.

He adds, upon whatever account that interior Covenant (but we speak of an
external visible Covenant, which requires visible Pledges and Seals) requires a
visible sensible Mark, and our actual Communion with Christ another, all the
Communications of God's Graces to us, all our return of Worship and Adoration
will equally admit of sensible Signs and Rites. Let us apply this then to those
Instances I gave of this external Worship, and see whether there be the same
reason for that, as there is for some visible signs of a visible Covenant. The
same reason and necessity, for instance, of some external Rites to expiate sin;
now the Gospel declares, there is no expiation of sin, but the Blood of Christ,
that there is of Gospel-Sacraments to apply the expiation of Christ's Death to
us. The same necessity of external Washings and Purifications, distinction of
Meats, etc. Now the Gospel has put an end to all legal Uncleanness, as there is
of Baptism to wash away our Sins, or of the Lord's Supper to strengthen and
refresh our Souls by a Spiritual feeding on the Body and Blood of Christ: the
same external holiness of Places to sanctify our Worship, now God has
declared, that he has no symbolical Presence on Earth, the same necessity of
material and inanimate receptacles and conveyances of Divine Graces and
Virtues, the same necessity of an external and ceremonial Righteousness, which
is such a contradiction to the whole design of the Gospel, as there is of the
Gospel-Sacraments to receive us into Covenant, and to convey the Blessings of
the Covenant to us. As for external Acts and Circumstances of Worship and
Adoration, I allowed the necessity of them under the Gospel, but these are very
different things from external religious Rites, and if he knows no reason, why
the conveyances of Grace should rather be confined to the two
Gospel-Sacraments, then to Holy Water, or Agnus Dei's, or the Relics of
Saints, or such other Popish Inventions, I will tell him one: because the
Spirit of Grace is the Spirit of Christ and derives his influences only to the
mystical body of Christ, all our Graces are the immediate influxes of the
Divine Spirit, and nothing can entitle us to the Graces of the Spirit, but
being Members of Christ's Body, and there are no visible Sacraments of Union to
Christ, but Baptism and the Lord's Supper, and therefore no visible Rites of
conveying the Graces of the Divine Spirit to us but these. Again, As our
Spiritual Life consists in our Union to Christ, so this Union makes us New
Creatures, for he that is in Christ is a New Creature: Now there are but two
things necessary to a New Creature, a new birth, and a constant supply of
nourishment for its increase and growth. Baptism is our Regeneration or New
Birth, whereby we are incorporated into Christ's Mystical Body, and receive the
first Communications of a Divine Life from the Holy Spirit; the Lord's Supper
is the constant Food and Nourishment of our Souls, wherein we receive fresh
supplies of Grace, as our Natural Bodies do new Spirits from the Meat we eat.
Now let any man tell me, what more is necessary to a New Creature, than to be
born and to be nourished by fresh supplies of Grace, till it grow up to a
perfect man in Christ Jesus: all this is done for us by Baptism and the Lord's
Supper, and if all Divine Grace must be derived to us from our Union to Christ
as the Members of his Body, nothing can be more congruous than that the
Sacraments of our Union to Christ, should be the only visible and external
Rites of conveying all supernatural Grace to us: so that unless Holy Water and
Relics, etc. be new Sacraments of our Union to Christ, they can be no Gospel
conveyances of Grace; and by the way, whoever well considers this, will think
it little less than a demonstration, that there can be but two Gospel
Sacraments, because there are no other visible Rites of uniting us to Christ,
and consequently of conveying supernatural Grace to us, which is the Notion of
a Sacrament. But to proceed,

I came to apply this Discourse to Popish Worship to see, how consistent it is
with that Reformation Christ had made of the Worship of God under the Gospel.
And I observed in general, that whoever only considers the vast number* of
Rites and Ceremonies in the Church of Rome, must conclude it as Ritual and
Ceremonial a Religion as Judaism itself: the Ceremonies are as many, more
obscure, unintelligible and useless, more severe and intolerable than the
Jewish Yoke itself, which St. Peter tells the Jews neither they nor their
Fathers were able to bear. The first part he has nothing to say to, and by his
silence confesses, it to be true, and that is proof enough, that it is no
Christian Worship. But he will by no means allow, that they are as severe and
as intolerable as the Jewish Yoke: P. 80.
this he calls a Mis-representation, and looks about to see, what it should be,
that is so intolerable; he suspects I mean their Fasts in Lent, or on Fridays
and Saturdays, but he is much mistaken; I know all these are very easy and
gentle things in the Church of Rome; or that Prayer and Almsdeeds may be these
terrible things. And here he comes pretty near the matter, for I look upon it
very intolerable to say over so many Prayers and Masses every day without
understanding one word they say, which is the daily Task of many thousand
Priests, who understand no more what they say, than the People do. To part with
their real Estates, many times to the great damage of their Families, out of a
blind Devotion to deliver their Souls from the imaginary Flames of Purgatory,
which they call Almsdeeds: to whip and macerate their Bodies (if they be so
blindly devout) with severe Fasts (for men may fast severely in the Church of
Rome if they please) with long Watchings, hard Lodging, tedious and expensive
Pilgrimages, not to cure, but to expiate their sins. He says, If the Ceremonies
used in the Liturgy, he should have said in their Mass Book and Rituals, and
Breviaries, be a burden, surely the Clergy or Religious must feel the weight of
it, yet I am sure not one ever owned it. Is he sure of this? Has he confessed
all the Nuns and Monks? but if they have not owned it, Have they never felt it
neither? Will he himself say this? but suppose they neither felt nor owned it,
May it not be as intolerable as the Jewish Law? Did the Scribes and Pharisees,
who were so fond of the Rites of Moses, own it to be a heavy Yoke? And yet does
not St. Peter say it was so? Superstition will bear very heavy yokes of
external Rites and Ceremonies without complaining, to be delivered from what
they think a more terrible yoke of mortifying and subduing sin, but yet they
are very unsupportable Yokes still to ingenuous and virtuous Minds.

Hence I proceeded to a more particular consideration of their Worship. 1. That
most of their external Rites are professedly intended as expiations and
satisfactions for sin. This he durst not deny, and therefore all their
expiatory Rites are no part of Christian Worship, which allows no expiation for
sin, but the Blood of Christ.

Secondly, Those distinctions between Meats, which the Church of Rome calls
fasting (for a Canonical Fast is not to abstain from Food, but from such Meats
as are forbid on fasting days) can be no part of Christian Worship, because the
Gospel allows of no distinction between clean and unclean things, and therefore
of no distinction of Meats neither; For meat commends us not to God, 1 Cor.
8.8.

Here is another Mis-representation; That a Canonical Fast is not to abstain
from Food. Does he deny this? Yes he says, this is most false, P. 80.
but one Meal being allowed of on Fasting days. A terrible Penance this! which
most of our Merchants, and Citizens endure all the year round, and eat later
too generally than they do on fasting days: But is there no Repast of Wine and
Sweetmeats to be had at night for those who can purchase them?

I added, There is no imaginable reason, why it should be an Act of Religion,
merely to abstain from Flesh, if Flesh have no legal uncleanness; and if it
had, we must all have been Carthusians, and never eat Flesh more: for how it
should be clean one day, and unclean anoth^r, is not easy to understand. This
is another of his Mis-representations; for that is the word, right or wrong. He
says, I would insinuate that they Iudaize. Whereas I expressly said, Ibid.
that they did not Judaize, but did something more absurd: for they do not make
such a distinction between clean and unclean Beasts, as the Law of Moses did,
and therefore are the more absurd, in forbidding to eat Flesh, or any thing
that comes of Flesh. But, he says, when God by Jeremy praises the Rechabites
for abstaining from Wine, was it because Wine was held by them to have a legal
uncleanness? No, nor is Wine Flesh. But, Is taming of the flesh, the curbing of
sensuality, no reason at all for abstinence? And does abstinence consist merely
in abstaining from Flesh? Will not good Fish and good Wine pamper the Flesh
too? To place abstinence in delectu ciborum, as in abstaining from Flesh, is a
senseless piece of Superstition: if it serve the ends of Mortification, it is
well; if it be made essential to a Religious Fast, it is absurd, and no part of
Christian Worship.

Thus I showed, 3ly, that the Church of Rome has infinitely outdone the Jewish
Law, in the Religion of holy Places, Altars, Vestments, Utensils, etc. which he
passes over silently. 4ly. That they attribute divine Virtues and Powers to
senseless and inanimate things, as is evident from that great Veneration they
pay to Relics, and those great Virtues they ascribe to them: from their
consecrations of their Agnus Dei's, their Wax-Candles, Oil, Bells, Crosses,
Images, Ashes, Holy Water, for the health of Soul and Body, to drive away evil
Spirits, to allay Storms, to heal Diseases, to pardon Venial and sometimes
mortal Sins, merely by kissing or touching them, carrying them in their hands,
wearing them about their necks, etc. -- These things look more like Charms than
Christian Worship. -- Indeed they argue, that such men do not understand what
Grace and Sanctification means, who think that little Images of Wax, that
Candles, that Oil, that Water and Salt, that Bells, that Crosses, can be
sanctified by the Spirit of God, and convey Grace and Sanctification, by the
sight, or sound, or touch, or such external applications. -- He who thinks that
inanimate things are capable of the Sanctification of the Spirit, or can convey
this Sanctification to us by some divine and invisible effluviums of Grace; may
as well lodge Reason, and Understanding, and Will, and Passions, in senseless
matter, and receive it from them again by a kiss or touch. Here are three of
his thirty Mis-representations all together; and yet the Jesuit is more tame,
than the Devil is usually represented to be, when he is frighted with Holy
Water. But let us hear him: All these are Mis-representations of our Faith,
Page 19.
which teaches us nothing of all this. Well, however this is pretty moderate;
here is no Hectoring yet; no Minister Oats, and Minister Sherlock. What we
believe, is, that nothing can free us from the guilt of any sin, which is
external, and does not affect and change the heart. But this is not the
Question, Sir, but whether Agnus Dei's, Holy Water, etc. can deliver from the
guilt of sin, and drive away the Devil, and work a great many Deliverances for
us; whether with or without the change of heart: if they can affect and change
the heart, that is the better way; and then they effectually convey Grace,
which is the thing I said, and which he dares not deny: if they cannot forgive
sin, I desire him to tell his People so, who like that better than changing the
heart; and then they will purchase no more Agnus Dei's, nor trade in such Roman
Merchandise. But they believe, That all Creatures of God are good, and that
they are sanctified by the Word of God and Prayer. What! to forgive Sins, to
give Grace, to allay Storms, to drive away Devils? Was this the Apostle's
meaning in those words? Is there any word of Promise in the Gospel for this?
Which is the meaning of being sanctified by the word. Neither does Faith teach
us, that any material thing has any other than moral connection with Grace,
either obtained for us by the Prayers of the Church, offered for us at the
blessing of those things, or of those blessed Saints whom we honor, and call
upon by that Veneration, or by the Sacraments, according to the Institution and
Covenant of Christ; but we do not believe, that God's Grace is inherent, but in
the Souls of the Faithful, or that any sin is remitted, without a due
disposition in a repentant sinner. As for the Sacraments, I have already given
an account of their Virtue and Efficacy, that they are instituted signs and
means of our Union to Christ, and that intitles us to the influences of the
divine Grace: Whether it be a natural or moral connection between Grace and such
inanimate things, is not the Question, but it seems Grace is annexed to them;
which is all I affirm: But however Grace is annexed to them, the conveyance of
Grace from them to the Soul, by mere external applications, as by lighting up,
or carrying a consecrated Taper, by sprinkling Ashes on our heads, by
sprinkling our selves with Holy Water, by wearing an Agnus Dei, or some Relics
about us, etc. look as if it was done, not by a moral but a natural efficacy;
for what moral efficacy can such things have upon our minds? But let it be done
how it will, it seems such divine Virtues and Powers are naturally or morally
annexed to inanimate and senseless things, and naturally or morally conveyed
from them to the Soul, by external applications, and I desire him to show me
the difference between such Observances and Pagan Charms. He has confessed
enough, and as much as we could desire of him, when he adds, Or any Virtue to
be nowadays communicated otherwise by insensible things, than it was to the
woman that touched the hem of Christ's Garments, (for Christ felt Virtue to
pass from him, and therefore it was a very real Communication) or by the
handkerchiefs of St. Paul, or shadow of St. Peter: And here were real and
sensible effects, without any moral, but only natural or rather supernatural
efficacy upon the Patient. And if Holy Water, and Agnus Dei's convey Grace at
this rate, I assure you, they are very notable things. His undertaking at last
to prove, Whenever required, that they use no other blessings (or Consecrations
of such inanimate things to such spiritual purposes) but what they find in the
Records of the Primitive Church to have been ordered by the Apostles, is bold
and brave, and I here challenge him to make it good; but I hope he will produce
better Records for it, than his Homily of St. Austin of the Assumption of the
blessed Virgin.

5 ly. I observed farther, that all this encouraged men to trust in an external
Righteousness. For, 1. Such external Rites are very apt to degenerate into
Superstition. Especially, 2. When they are recommended as very acceptable to
God, as satisfactions for our sins, and meritorious of great Rewards. And this
is that use they serve in the Church of Rome: They assert the necessity of
humane satisfactions; and what are these satisfactory works? Fastings,
Whippings, Pilgrimages, etc. all which men may do, without the least sorrow for
sin, without any true Devotion to God, without mortifying any one Lust. To make
this a Mis-representation, Page 79.
he repeats it thus: They account satisfactory works, Fastings, Acts of
Penance, Prayers, Alms, though done without the least sorrow for sin, etc.
Whereas I say, they account these satisfactory works, and they may be done
without the least sorrow for sin. Now are not these satisfactory works? That he
dares not deny. May not all these be done, without sorrow for sin? That he
dares not deny neither. And this is all I said; but then he will not allow,
that they are satisfactory works, without sorrow for sin: I would to God he
could persuade all the Members of his Church of the truth of this. But let me
ask him one Question: Are these Acts of Penance in the Church of Rome intended
as expressions of sorrow for sin, or as satisfactions for the punishment due to
it? Are they necessary, before Absolution, to qualify men to receive the
pardon of their sins, as the signs and demonstrations of a sincere repentance?
or to be performed after the sin is forgiven, not to express our sorrow for
sin, but to undergo the punishment of it? Are they always the voluntary choice
of the sinner, as the expressions of a hearty sorrow are, or the sentence of a
Judge, imposed by the Priest upon Absolution, or by the fears of Purgatory? Now
if such Acts of Penance are only intended to satisfy for the punishment, I
think to undergo punishment, whether with or without sorrow for sin, does
satisfy for the punishment of sin: Sorrow may be necessary to Absolution; but
when the guilt of sin is pardoned, if men can undergo their penance without
sorrow, the satisfaction is never the less: and should he promote this
Doctrine, that the works of Penance avail nothing, unless they be done with a
hearty sorrow for sin, men would not be so easily persuaded to undergo their
Penances, especially if the Priest be fevere.

I observed farther, that the true reason why any thinking men are so fond of
an external Righteousness, is to excuse them from true and real Holiness of
Life -- All men know, that in the Offices of Piety and Virtue they can never do
more than is their duty; and therefore as nothing can be matter of merit, which
is our duty, So the true intention of all merits and works of Supererogation,
are to supply the place of Duty, and to satisfy for their sins, or to purchase
a Reward, which they have no title to by doing their duty: that is, because
they do not their duty. But then the Jesuit represents it, as if I said, Page
81.
They could have no reward for doing their duty, and therefore they add works
of Supererogation; which is Jesuit like: they may be rewarded for their duty,
if they would do it, though they cannot merit by doing their duty.

3ly. I observed, that to make these meritorious and satisfactory Superstitions
more easy, one man may satisfy for another, and communicate his Merits to
him: this the Jesuit confidently says, is a sham; for each man is bound to
satisfy for himself, fulfilling the Penances imposed on him. Now suppose that
men are bound personally to perform those Penances which are imposed on them by
their Priests in Confession, what I said was not confined to Penances imposed
in Confession; and I presume he will grant there are other satisfactions and
penances necessary besides these. Did he never hear of men, who have been hired
to whip themselves for some rich and great sinners? to say such a number of
Ave-Maries for them? If one man cannot satisfy for another, what becomes of
their Indulgences, which are the application of the Merits of Supererogating
Saints to those who need them?

Another Mis-representation is, that I say, Page 79.
They pay for Indulgences with Money, and buy Satisfactions and Merits. But
though Indulgences are not to be had without Money, it is a sad
Mis-representation to call this Buying, which should only be called Alms-deeds:
but the thing is the same, let them call it what they will; Alms-deeds, if they
will call them Alms-deeds, and that at a set rate and downright Bargain, are
the price of Indulgences and Satisfactions; and if this were the reason of
giving Alms, were there such an express Bargain and Sale in the case, I am of
his mind, that every Alms-giver might with as much justice be accused to have
bought of God his Grace and Pardon for a sum of money.

From hence I proceeded to show, what kind of Worship Christ has prescribed to
his Disciples, and the general account we have of it. 4 John 23, 24. But the
hour comes and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in
spirit and in truth, for the Father seeks such to worship him: God is a
spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and in truth. In
which description of Gospel Worship, there are three things included. 1. That
we must worship God under the notion of a pure and infinite Spirit: 2. under
the character of a Father. 3. With the Mind and Spirit. But he has found little
here to except against, only two or three Fanatical Principles, which shall be
briefly considered.

Page 85.
The first. God being a Spirit, must not be sought for in Houses of Wood and
Stone: because he must be worshipped in Spirit (as a Spirit it should be, which
differ greatly) he must not be worshipped by any material or sensible
Representations (by material Images and Pictures) those words except your
righteousness exceeds the righteousness of Scribes and Pharisees, you shall in
no wise enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, cuts off every thing, that is
external in Religion. Here he has jumbled things together of a different
nature. I shall begin with the last first, because it concerns what I have
already accounted for. That the Christian Religion admits of no external nor
ceremonial Righteousness: the great design of the Gospel being to make us truly
good, that we may be partakers of the Divine Nature. There is nothing our Lord
does more severely condemn than an external and Pharasaical Righteousness --
Except your Righteousness exceed the Righteousness, etc. Now this (not these
words merely, but this rejecting an external Righteousness) cuts off every
thing that is external in Religion at a blow, because it cuts off all hopes and
reliances on an external Righteousness, and I believe men will not be fond of
such Superstitions, when they know, they will do them no good. Now what is the
fault of this? do not these Principles remit all Christians to the silent
Meetings of Quakers? exclude singing of Psalms? that is, because it excludes an
external Righteousness, it excludes all external Acts of Worship. Well rhymed
Father, Brains and Stairs.

Since God will be worshipped as a Spirit, he will now confine his peculiar
Presence to no place, as he formerly did to the Temple at Jerusalem, -- for
though for typical reasons he had a typical and symbolical presence under the
Jewish dispensation, yet this was not so agreeable to his nature, who is a
Spirit, and will now be worshipped as a Spirit, and therefore must not now be
sought for in Houses of Wood and Stone: This, says he, excludes the use of
Churches rather than Barns. That is, because God does not confine his presence
to one place, because he has no symbolical presence, therefore there must be no
places set apart from common uses for Religious Worship. Thus God will be
worshipped as a Spirit, and therefore not by Images, or material
Representations, which are so unlike a Spirit; that is, says he not by such
material Representations as singing of Psalms. Well guess't for a Jesuit!

The second Fanatical Principle is this. Ibid.
God and Christ are not present in the Assemblies of Christians by a figurative
and symbolical Presence: There is no symbolical Presence of God under the
Gospel. Though God fills all Places, it is a great absurdity to talk of more
symbolical Presences than one: for a symbolical Presence confines the unlimited
Presence of God to a certain place, in order to certain ends, as to receive the
Worship, that is paid to him, and to answer the Prayers, that are made to him;
now to have more than one such Presence as this, is like having more Gods than
one. To which he answers, to say nothing of the absurdity of this Discourse,
which makes that Christian an Adorer of two Gods, who by Faith adoring God in
Heaven and in his own Soul, worships him in both places. Truly he had better
have said nothing, than nothing to the purpose; for is God symbolically present
in Heaven, or in the Souls of Men? in Heaven he is really present, in the Souls
of Men he is present by his Grace and Spirit, but in neither by Symbols and
Figures of his Presence, as he was present in the Temple. But he has a terrible
Argument to come. Does not this destroy the very essence of your Sacrament, the
Bread and Wine in the Lord's Supper, which you own to be a symbolical Presence
of Christ? but no Place nor Object of Worship. And yet though we grant the
Eucharist is a Symbol and Figure of Christ's Body and Blood, it is no Symbol of
Christ's bodily and personal Presence, unless it be a Symbol of Christ's bodily
Presence on the Cross, for it is a Symbol only of Christ's broken Body and of
his Blood shed for us; and the intention of it is not to represent Christ
bodily present with us, but to be a Memorial of him in his bodily absence, and
therefore it is no symbolical Presence of Christ; for the Figures and Symbols
of his Body and Blood, if they be a symbolical Presence, must be the Symbols of
his bodily Presence.

His third Fanatical Principle is this. If God be better worshipped before an
Image than without one, then the Worship of God is more confined to that place,
where the Image is. I cannot see, how to avoid this, whereas there is no
appropriate place of Worship under the Gospel: and it is the same case, though the
Image be not appropriated to any place, but carried about with us; for still
the Image makes the Place of Worship. Most of these are my words, but he has
transplaced them so, as to lose the Argument. The force of the Argument is
this. If the Worship of God must not be confined to any Place or symbolical
Presence, then he must not be worshipped by an Image, for an Image is a
representative Presence of God, or of the Saints, and Men go to Images as to
Divine Presences to Worship; so that wherever the Image is, which is a
symbolical Presence, whether fixed in a Church, or carried from one place to
another, it makes it a peculiar place of Worship, as having a symbolical
Presence. So that the whole force of the Argument, lies upon an Image being a
symbolical Presence. And this he tells us is an Argument for all Dissenters
against a Liturgy, or Set-Form of Prayer, (I suppose he means the Book of the
Liturgy, or Forms of Prayer) for if God be better worshipped by a Set-Form of
Prayer, than without it, then the Worship of God is more confined to that
place, where that Set-Form of Prayer, that Set-Liturgy is used; and it is the
same though no set place be appointed for that Set-Form of Prayer. The Parallel
is exact. It is so indeed, if he can prove the Common Prayer Book to be a
symbolical Presence of God, as an Image is, but till then it is ridiculous.

At the conclusion of this Section I observed, that to worship God in Spirit,
is to worship him with our Mind and Spirit. And from hence I showed the
absurdity of Praying to God in an Unknown Tongue, when neither our
Understandings, nor Affections can join in our Prayers. For I suppose no man
will say, that to pray to God or praise him in words which we do not
understand, is to worship God in Spirit, unless he thinks, that a Parrot may be
taught to pray in the Spirit. This he calls a Calumny. Page 81.
He would insinuate, that Catholics when they assist to (present he should
have said at) Prayers, which they do not understand, are not commanded to pray
in Spirit by devout Thoughts and pious Affections. Now I insinuate no such
thing: when they are present at Prayers which they do not understand, they may
have other devout thoughts for ought I know, but I say they cannot offer those
Prayers to God with their understanding, which they do not understand, and in
such Prayers they do not pray with the Mind and Spirit, and therefore all such
Prayers are absurd, and contrary to the nature of Christian Worship, which is
to worship God in Spirit.

But my work is not at an end yet; there are some other Misrepresentations and
Calumnies, which he has picked out of the fourth Section of the Preservative,
which must be considered.

The fourth Section concerns the reformation and improvement of Humane Nature,
which I showed to be the great design of the Gospel, and that particularly with
respect to Knowledge and Holiness; and I examined how far the Principles and
Practices of the Church of Rome did comply with this great Gospel Design.

1. As for Knowledge, I supposed, neither the Church of Rome nor any one for
her would pretend that she is any great Friend to Knowledge, which is so apt to
make men Heretics. That knowing Papists are not beholden to their Church for
their Knowledge, which deprives them of all the means of Knowledge; will not
allow them to believe their senses, but commands them to believe
Transubstantiation, which is contrary to the evidence of sense; forbids men the
use of Reason in matters of Religion; suffers them not to judge for themselves,
nor examine the Reasons of their Faith; and denies them the use of the Bible,
which is the only means to know the revealed Will of God: and when men must
neither believe their Senses, nor use their Reason, nor read the Scripture, it
is easy to guess, what knowing and understanding Christians they must needs be.

Against this it may be objected, that the Church of Rome does instruct her
Children in the true Christian Faith, though she will not allow them to read
the Scriptures nor judge for themselves, which is the safer way to teach them
the pure Catholic Faith without danger of Error or Heresy. To this I
answered, This were something, did the Church of Rome take care to instruct
them in all necessary Doctrines, and to teach nothing but what is true; and
could such men, who thus tamely receive the dictates of the Church, be said to
know and to understand their Religion: so that here were two Inquiries, 1.
Whether the Church of Rome instructs her Children in all necessary truth, and
nothing but the truth. 2. Whether she so instructs them, that they may be said
to know and understand. How far the Church of Rome is from doing the first, I
said, all Christians in the World are sensible but themselves, but that is not
our present Dispute. But our Jesuit it seems will make it the Disp^te, or it
shall pass for a perfect Slander, P. 87.
for thus he repeats it, they take no care to instruct m^n in all nec^ssary
Doctrines. Which I did not positively affirm, b^t since he will have it so, I
do now affirm, That they do not instruct men in all necessary Doctrines, and
that they teach them a great many false Doctrines. But then he must remember,
what I mean by instructing, it is not merely to teach them to repeat the
Articles of their Creed, but to give them the true sense and meaning of them;
and I do affirm, and am ready to prove it, and possibly may do so, when leisure
permits, that they do not rightly instruct men in the great and necessary
Doctrine of forgiveness of Sins in the Name of Christ, nor in the nature of
Christ's Mediation and Intercession for us, nor in the nature of Justification,
or of Gospel and Obedience, but teach such Errors as overthrow the true Gospel
notion of these great and necessary Doctrines.

Then as for their manner of Teaching, to require men to believe what they say
merely upon the Authority of the Church, without suffering them to examine,
whether such Doctrines are taught in Scripture, or to exercise their own reason
and judgment about it, can make no man a knowing and understanding Christian.
For no man understands his Religion, who does not in some measure know the
reasons of his Faith, and judge whether they be sufficient or not; who knows
not how to distinguish between Truth and Error, who has no Rule to go by, but
must take all upon trust, and the credit of his Teachers, who believes whatever
he is told, and learns his Creed as Schoolboys do their Grammar, without
understanding it: this is not an active, but a kind of passive knowledge: Such
men receive the impression that is made on them, as Wax does, and understand no
more of the matter. These Sayings that are marked out, are more of his
Misrepresentations, which need no other Vindication, but to be shown in their
own light, and proper places.

And yet I did not deny, but some men might be so dull and stupid, as to be
capable of little more than to be taught their Religion as Children, but
certainly this is not the utmost perfection of knowledge, that any Christian
must aim at: which he thus represents, With them this is the utmost perfection
of Knowledge, that any Christian must aim at. This I did not say, but this I
say, that it is the utmost perfection of Knowledge, which any man can attain
to, who will be contented with the Methods of the Church of Rome, not to
examine his Religion, but to take all upon the credit of the Church.

Well, How does our Jesuit confute this heavy Charge and perfect Slander? Does
he show, that they teach all necessary Truths, and nothing but Truth? Does he
prove that men may be very knowing Christians without understanding the Reasons
of their Faith? Not one word of this, which alone was to his purpose; but he
says, hundreds of thousands of Religious men are employed in instructing the
Ignorant, and teaching Children; and whoever denied this, that they do teach
Men and Children after their fashion? But does this prove, that they teach them
all necessary Truths, and nothing but truth? Or that they make them ever the
wiser for their teaching? As for those ignorant Protestants he has had to deal
with, if he made Converts of them, I believe they were very ignorant; otherwise
if there were Ignorance between them, it was as likely to lie on the Jesuite's
side.

Having laid down this as a Principle, that one great design of the Gospel is
to improve the Knowledge of Mankind, I hence inferred, 1. That to forbid People
to read and meditate on the Word of God, can be no Gospel Doctrine, unless not
to read the Bible be a better way to improve Knowledge than to read it. 2. This
is a mighty presumption also against Transubstantiation, that it is no Gospel
Doctrine, because it overthrows the very fundamental principles of Knowledge,
as I showed at large, and wonder he has not one word to say for
Transubstantiation. 3. The Authority of an Infallible Judge, whom we must
believe in every thing, without examining the reasons of what he affirms, nay
though he teaches such Doctrines as appear to us most expressly contrary to
Sense and Reason and Scripture, is no Gospel-Doctrine, because it is not the
way to make men wise an^ understanding Christians, for to suspend the exercise
of Reason and Judgment, is not the way to improve Men's Knowledge; and here I
distinguish between an infallible Teacher and an infallible Judge. The first
teaches infallibly, but yet he that learns, must use his own Reason and
Judgment, unless a man can learn without it. But the Second usurps the Office
of every Man's private Reason and Judgment, and will needs judge for all
Mankind, as if he were an universal Soul, an universal Reason and
Understanding, which is to unsoul all Mankind in matters of Religion. And
therefore though there have been infallible Teachers, as Moses and the
Prophets, Christ and his Apostles, yet none ever pretended to be infallible
Judges but the Church of Rome. -- Though there may be an infallible Teacher,
there never can be an infallible Judge, to whom I must submit my own Reason and
Judgment without examination, because I cannot know, that he teaches
infallibly, unless I am sure, that he teaches nothing, that is contrary to any
natural or revealed Law, and that I cannot know, unless I may judge of his
Doctrine by the light of Nature and Revelation: for he is not infallible, if he
contradicts any natural or revealed Laws. I gave an instance of this in Moses
and the Prophets, and in Christ himself: for when Christ appeared, there was a
written Law, and all the Miracles he wrought could not have proved him a true
Prophet, had he contradicted the Scriptures of the old Testament. And therefore
he appeals to Moses and the Prophets to bear testimony to his Person and
Doctrine: and then Miracles gave Authority to any New Revelation he made of
God's Will, when it appeared, that he had not contradicted the Old. The Law of
Nature and the Law of Moses were the Laws of God, and God cannot contradict
himself; and therefore the Doctrine of all new Prophets, even of Christ himself
was to be examined, and is to be examined to this day by the Law and the
Prophets; and therefore though he was certainly an infallible Teacher, yet men
were to judge of his Doctrine, before they believed; and he did not require
them to lay aside their Reason and Judgment, and submit to his infallible
Authority without examination.

This our Jesuit makes a horrible outcry about, which has made me transcribe
the whole of this Argument. He will hardly allow either the Author, or the
Licenser to be Christians, and reserved this for the concluding Blow to end his
Pamphlet with: Page 87.
What Jesus our God blessed for evermore, even when owned the Son of God, even
from us Christians, cannot exact a submission to his infallible Authority,
without examining the truth of what he says, by comparing it with the
principles of humane reason: this is the sum of all his Answer, the rest is
raving and senseless harangue. But the fallacy of all this lies in a few words,
Jesus the Son of God blessed for evermore, even when owned the Son of Son, even
by us Christians. For those who own him the Son of God, no doubt will submit to
his infallible Authority, and therefore all professed Christians must do so; but
that which I said is this, that no man could, nor to this day can own him, upon
wise consideration, to be a true Prophet, and the Son of God, till he is
satisfied that he neither contradicts the plain light of Nature nor the L^w of
Moses; and therefore thus far we are to examine his Doctrine; but when it is
evident he contradicts no former Revelations, and confirms his Authority by
Miracles, then we are to believe any new Revelations he makes upon his own
Authority. And therefore in my own Name, and the Name of the Licenser, I here
profess, that when by examining the Doctrine of Christ by the Light of Nature
and the Law of Moses, I find he has contradicted neither, and by the great
Miracles he wrought, I am satisfied he is an Infallible Teacher, then I own him
for such an Infallible Teacher (or Judge if he pleases) that I must not judge
of his Doctrine (excepting the case of the Light of Nature and the Law of
Moses) but believe it, and submit to him; and in these cases, I submit to his
Infallible Authority without examination; I receive all his Dictates as Divine
Oracles.

I do not wonder the Jesuit is so much disturbed at this, for if it appears,
that Christ himself did not pretend to be such an Infallible Judge, as he would
have us believe the Pope or Church of Rome to be, they must for shame give up
this kind of Infallibility: and therefore if he has a mind to Confute this
Principle thoroughly, that he may understand my mind plainly, I will reduce all
to some few Propositions, which he may try his skill upon, when he pleases.

1. That no Prophet is to be believed in contradiction to such plain and
evident Principles of Nature, as all Mankind agree in.

2. That the first Prophet, who appears in the World, before any revealed Law,
and confirms his Authority by plain and evident Miracles, is to be believed in
every thing he says, while he does not contradict the plain and evident
principles of natural Knowledge. And for that reason Moses was to be believed
in every thing, which did not contradict the light of Nature, because he was
the first Prophet, who made a Public Revelation of God's Will to the World.

3. That succeeding Prophets, who confirm their Authority with Miracles, are to
be believed in all new Revelations they make, which neither contradict the
Light of Nature, nor any former Revelations; and therefore Christ is absolutely
to be believed, when it appears, that he neither contradicted the Light of
Nature, nor the Law of Moses.

4. When the Revelation is complete and perfect, and has no new additions to be
made to it, (as the Gospel-Revelation is) how infallible soever any Teachers
may be, we must believe them in nothing, which either contradicts the light of
Nature, or the standing Revelation, or is not contained in the Revelation.

And this shows us, how far we are to submit our own Reason and Judgment to an
infallible Teacher; that is, when we are convinced of his infallibility, we
must then believe him upon his own word, but not till then. And therefore we
must of necessity judge of all Prophets, till we can prove them true Prophets,
and then we must believe them without judging. The Miracles Moses wrought were
a sufficient reason to believe him to be a true Prophet, while he did not
contradict the Laws of Nature, and thus far all men were to judge of him, and
not to rely upon his Authority; but when by his Miracles and the agreement of
his Doctrine with natural Principles, they were satisfied, he was a true
Prophet, they were to judge no farther, but to receive every thing else upon
his Authority.

When Christ appeared in the World, men were to judge of him, before they
believed, and that not only by Miracles, and the Conformity of his Doctrine to
the Light of Nature, but by his Agreement with the Law of Moses, which was a
standing Revelation: and when by these Marks he was known to be the true
Messiah, they were to believe every thing else he said upon his own Authority.

But Christ having now given us a perfect Revelation of God'^ Will, to which no
additions must be made; we are to believe no men, how infallible soever, any
further than they agree with the Gospel-Revelation, and therefore must judge
for our selves both of the sense of Scripture, and the Doctrine they teach;
which is a plain demonstration, that as there never was such an infallible
Teacher, whom we must in all cases believe without examination, (which is what
the Church of Rome means by an infallible Judge) for Moses his Doctrine was to
be examined by the Light of Nature, and Christ's by the Light of Nature and the
Law of Moses; so now especially can there be no such infallible Judge, because
the Gospel is the entire and perfect Rule of Faith, and we must believe no man,
against or beyond the Gospel-Revelation; and therefore must judge for our
selves, and compare his Doctrine with the Rule; which confounds the
Infallibility of the Church of Rome. This is the Scheme of my Principles; and
now he knows, what he has to answer, when he has a mind to it.

4 ly. I observed farther, To pretend the Scripture to be an obscure or
imperfect Rule, is a direct contradiction to the design of the Gospel, to
improve and perfect Knowledge. He says nothing about the Obscurity of the Rule,
as for the Imperfections of it, I observed, they pretended to supply the
Defects of Scripture by Unwritten Traditions. The first Answer I gave to this,
which alone he pretends to say something to, was this. If the Sriptures be an
imperfect Rule, then all Christians have not a perfect Rule, because they have
not the keeping of unwritten Traditions, and know not what they are, till the
Church is pleased to tell them; and it seems it was a very great while before
the Church thought fit to do it: for suppose all the new Articles of the
Council of Trent, were unwritten Traditions, fifteen hundred Years was somewhat
of the longest to have so considerable a part of the Rule of Faith concealed
from the World. Which the Jesuit thus repeats; The Catholics by unwritten
Traditions, Page 77.
that make up a part of their Rule of Faith, mean such things as may be
concealed from the World for 1500 Years, never heard of before in the Church of
God, kept very privately and secretly for several Ages, and totally unwritten.
Whereas I said nothing at all of this, but that if the Twelve new Articles of
Pope Pius his Creed in the Council of Trent, be pretended (as they do pretend)
to be the Tradition of the Church, then de facto this Tradition was concealed
for near 1500 Years, for there was no such Tradition known before, nor at the
time of the Council of Trent, as has been proved as to several Articles, by the
learned Dean of St. Paul's; and, when our Jesuit pleases, he may try to confute
him.

5 ly. I observed, that an implicit Faith, or believing as the Church believes,
without knowing what it is we believe, can be no Gospel Doctrine, because it is
not for the improvement of Knowledge. And here I observed, that some Roman
Doctors think it sufficient, that a man believes as the Church believes,
without an explicit knowledge of any thing they believe; but the general
Opinion is, that a man must have an explicit belief of the Apos^les Creed, but
as for every thing else it suffices, if he believes as the Church believes.
That is, as I inferred, it is not necessary men should so much as know, what
the new Articles of the Trent Faith are, if they believe the Apostles Creed,
and in other things resign up their Faith implicitly to the Church. From
whence I concluded, that by their own confession all the Doctrines in dispute
between us and the Church of Rome are of no use, much less necessary to
salvation, for if they were they would be as necessary to be known, and
explicitly believed, as the Apostles Creed; and therefore Protestants who
believe the Apostles Creed, may be saved without believing the Trent Creed, for
what we need not know, we need not believe. What does our Jesuit say to this?
Page 82.
is an implicit Faith no Doctrine of their Church? have I misrepresented their
Doctrine? he says nothing of this. But this Calumniator (he says, meaning poor
calumniated me) confounds what is to be known necessitate medii, so that he who
through no fault of his has not learned it, is however incapable of salvation
(which is all contained in the Creed) with what must be known necessitate
praecepti, because God has commanded all those who are in the occasion and in
the capacity of being instructed in it, to learn it. Whatever I confounded, I
am sure, this is a distinction would confound any man to reconcile it with an
implicit Faith. Some things are so neces^ary to be known, that a man shall be
damned merely for not knowing them, though he had no opportunity to know them
(which some will say is very hard) other things are necessa^y to be known to
those who have opportunity to know them, for that I suppose he means, by
occasion and capacity, or he means nothing but a trick; and what place is here
for an implicit Faith? when they must know all that is a necessary means of
salvation, at the peril of their salvation, and must know every thing, as far
as they have opportunity of learning it; and therefore must never take up with
an implicit Faith. He says, Each man is not bound to know all that Christ has
taught, but yet all that Christ has taught as necessary to him in his station:
So that if all Christians are not bound to have an explicit belief and
knowledge of any thing but the Apostles Creed, then the knowledge of all the
peculiar Doctrines of Popery, it seems, are not necessary for them in their
station; and if they be not necessary for all Lay-Christians suppose in their
station, they are necessary for no body but the Pope and his Clergy; and that
is the truth of the story: for they are the only people that get any thing by
them, and it concerns them only to know these matters.

Secondly, I proceeded to Holiness and Virtue, the promoting of which is
another great Gospel-design; and showed how many ways this is hindered in the
Church of Rome.

I observed, That great value the Church of Rome sets upon an external
Righteousness, is very apt to corrupt men's notions of what is good, to persuade
them that such external Observances are much more pleasing to God, and
therefore certainly much better in themselves, than true Gospel-Obedience, than
Moral and Evangelical Virtues: for that which will merit of God the pardon of
the greatest Immoralities, and a great Reward, that which supplies the want of
true Virtue, which compensates for sin, and makes men great Saints, must needs
be more pleasing to God, than Vertueit self. This he cites as a great
Mis-representation, and so it is, as he puts it; for he makes me say, that they
teach all this: Page 78.
whereas all that I say is, that these are natural inferences which men draw
from that great value the Church of Rome puts upon an external Righteousness,
and that such Conceits as these are very apt to make men careless of a holy
life.

Thus he makes me say, The Roman Church teaches, that men need take no care of
venial sins, Page 79.
and that they may keep clear of mortal sins, without any great attainment in
Virtue. But I never said, the Roman Church taught this. I say, The Doctrine of
venial sins, which cannot deserve eternal punishments, how many soever they
are, is apt to give men very slight thoughts of very great evils: that wdile
this distinction lasts, men have an excuse at hand for a great many sins, which
they need take no care of. What! because the Church teaches, that they need not
avoid venial sins? By no means! But because they shall not be damned for them,
which is encouragement enough to most men to be careless about them: If they
keep clear of mortal sins, they are safe, that is, as to eternal damnation; and
that men may do without any great seize in Virtue: which is certainly
true, whoever teaches it, according to the Roman distinction between venial and
mortal sins.

I showed farther, that the Church of Rome makes void most of the Gospel
Motives to a holy life. The second was the Holiness, and Purity, and inflexible
Justice of the divine Nature, which enforces the necessity of Holiness, because
a holy God cannot be reconciled to wicked men, nor forgive our sins, unless we
repent and reform. But the force of this Argument is lost in the Church of Rome
by the Judicial Absolution of the Priest. For they see daily the Priest does
absolve them without forsaking their sins, and God must confirm the Sentence of
his Ministers; and therefore they are absolved, and need not fear that God will
not absolve them: Which must either destroy all sense of God's essential
Holiness and Purity, and persuade them, that God can be reconciled to Sinners,
while they continue in their sins; or else they must believe that God has
given power to his Priests to absolve those whom he could not have absolved
himself. This he thus repeats: They teach (for this must always come in to make
me a Mis-representer) that when a Priest absolves men that forsake not their
sins, Page 78.
God must confirm the Sentence of his Minister, and therefore they are
absolved, and need not fear; whence they believe that God can be reconciled to
sinners, whilst they remain in their sins; and therefore they must believe that
God has given power to his Priests to absolve those whom he could not absolve
himself. How unlike this is to what I said, I need not tell any man; but he has
not only misrepresented my words and sense, but has made nonsense of it too,
which is a little too much at once: for if they believe that God can be
reconciled to sinners, while they continue in their sins, they need not believe
that God had given power to the Priest to absolve those whom he could not
absolve himself, that is, unreformed sinners; for if God can be reconciled to
such men, who continue in their sins, he may absolve them too, as well as the
Priest.

But I must not part with this point thus. I said, that de facto men saw that
they are every day, or as often as they please to go to confession, absolved by
the Priest without forsaking their sins; is not this true? That they are taught
that God confirms the Sentence of his Ministers, and when they are forgiven by
the Priest, they are forgiven by God: That the Priest is a Judge and absolves
as a Judge, by a true judicial, not a mere declarative power: Is not this true?
And is not this reason enough for them to believe that when they are absolved
by the Priest, without forsaking their sins, they are absolved by God? And does
not this destroy that Argument from the holiness and justice of God, that he
will not forgive our sins, unless we forsake them? But he says, They teach,
that to receive absolution without a real forsaking of our sins, in lieu of
forgiveness of them, adds a heinous Sacrilege. But how do they teach this, by
words or actions? Their actions teach quite otherwise, for they absolve men
over and over, who do not forsake their sins, though they know that they do
not; and if such Absolutions do not avail to the forgiveness of sins, what
greater security is there in the Popish judicial, than in the Protestant
declarative Absolution? Nay, why do they cheat people out of their Souls, and
lull them into security by such void Absolutions? Nor do their words teach any
necessity of men's forsaking sin, to make their Absolution valid: Contrition is
the most that is required to Absolution. Now suppose Contrition signify a
sorrow for sin, and a resolution to forsake it, yet Contrition is not forsaking
sin, is not holiness of life; and if Absolution upon Contrition puts men into a
state of salvation, then men may be saved by the Sacrament of Penance, without
an actual forsaking of sin; for if they sin again, it is only repeating the
same Remedy, the Sacrament of Penance, with the Absolution of the Priest, will
restore them to the favor of God, and a state of salvation again. Which shows
that the Church of Rome does not teach what he pretends; I wish she did, or
that he would teach it for her, that the Absolution of the Priest will avail no
man who does not actually forsake his sins, and reform his life, and then we
should see what value men would have for their Judicial Absolution.

A third Gospel-Motive to Holiness, is the Death and Sacrifice of Christ,
because his Blood is the Blood of the Covenant, and the efficacy of his
Sacrifice, extends no farther than the Gospel Covenant; that is, no man can be
saved by the Blood of Christ, but those who obey the Gospel. This I observed
the Church of Rome seems very sensible of, that the Sacrifice of the Cross will
avail none but penitent and reformed Sinners. But then the Sacrifice of the
Mass is a Propitiatory Sacrifice for the living and the dead, to expiate those
sins, which are not expiated by the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross, and
that by the bare opus operatum, by the offering this Sacrifice of the Mass it
self, without any good motion in the person for whom it is offered. These are
some more of his Mis-representations, Page 82.
to which he adds, That when Christ was sacrificed upon the Cross, he expiated
only for the eternal punishment of sin; when sacrificed in the Mass only, for
the temporal.

What has he to say to this, only three loud Calumnies. We teach, that Christ
on the Cross gave himself a full Redemption for all the guilt and debt of
sinners, who apply to themselves that precious Blood by the means appointed by
Christ. Very tender this! But did Christ expiate the sins only of true penitent
and reformed sinners? Is that the only means of applying his precious Blood to
us? That by the Sacrifice of the Mass, as also by any good Christian Prayers
for obdurate sinners, such Graces may be obtained as shall work in them their
salvation; but that no sin is remitted to an impenitent sinner. Very artificial
and trickish still! Does the Sacrifice of the Mass expiate sins, or not? Do
other good Christian Prayers expiate sin? Why then does he join the Sacrifice
of the Mass, and other good Christian Prayers, as if they attribute no more
expiation to the Mass, than to Christian Prayers? Is the Sacrifice of the Mass
to obtain Grace for sinners, or to expiate sin? Pray what Grace is obtained by
the Sacrifice of the Mass for those who are dead? or is the Sacrifice of the
Mass available for obdurate sinners, or for those only who are in a state of
Grace? But pray, why not one word to ^he main case, that the Mass expiates
those sins, for which the Sacrifice of the Cross made no Expiation? What he
adds, That no sin is remitted to an impenitent sinner, is nothing to the
purpose; the question is, Whether no man shall be pardoned, who does not reform
his sin, and live a holy life? These are two things in the Church of Rome,
where men receive Absolution upon their Contrition, as is pretended, who never
reform their lives. But as for the Opus Operatum he tells us, It has no
reference to him, who receives the Sacraments, -- but to those who administer
the Sacraments, from whose Piety they take not their force. This I know
Cassander and some other moderate Romanists would have to be the sense, but in
contradiction to the Doctrine of their Church: I shall not enter into that
Dispute now: our present case is very plain. For the Mass is offered for the
living and the dead, for those who are absent and know nothing of it, and
therefore cannot join in the Oblation of this Sacrifice; that if it have any
virtue it must be its own, the bare Opus Operatum, without any good motion of
him, for whom it is offered.

A Fourth Gospel Motive to Holiness is the Intercession of Christ for us at the
right hand of God. Because he mediates and interceeds only for true penitent
Sinners; which obliges us, as we hope for any benefit from the Intercession of
Christ, heartily to repent of our sins, and live a new life: but the Church of
Rome has found out a great many other Advocates and Mediators, who by their
great Interest in Christ, or favor with God, may obtain that pardon, which
otherwise they could not hope for: and that this must be the meaning of their
Addresses to Saints and the Virgin Mary, I proved, because there is no other
account to be given of it; for will they say, that Christ wants Will or Power
to undertake our Cause, if we be such, as according to the terms of the Gospel
it is his Office to interceed for: I confessed, it was hard to think, that they
should imagine, that the Intercession of the Virgin Mary, or the most powerful
Saints can prevail with our Savior to do that, which according to the Laws of
his own Mediation, they know he cannot and will not do. But yet so it is, that
is, thus they do, and there is no other account to be given of it but this.
This he says is a barefaced Calumny! But what is the Calumny? that they do
pray to Saints and the Virgin? or that such vile Wretches hope to be hea^d by
them, who could not reasonably expect, that Christ would hear them upon their
own account? Let him have a care of calling this a Calumny; there are many fine
Stories, how gracious the Blessed Virgin has been to the most profligate
Villains, which I suppose are related for this purpose to make such Wretches
great Devotoes of the Virgin.

What he says, That the blessed Saints only join their Prayers to ours to
obtain mercy of Christ, is nothing to our present purpose: the Question is, Why
those who have so mercifuland compassionate an High Priest, should make such
frequent Addresses to other Advocates, if they did not hope to find them more
pitiful and compassionate, to obtain that for them of their Savior by their
Interest and Intercession, which good men know, they may have of Christ for
asking, without applying to other Advocates.

A Fifth Gospel Motive to a Holy Life is the hope of Heaven and the fear of
Hell; but then the terror of Hell is mightily abated by the Doctrine of
Purgatory, for though Purgatory be a terrible place, yet it is not eternal; --
especially considering how many easy ways there are for men to get out of
Purgatory: those who can buy Indulgencies, while they live, or Masses for their
Souls, when they die, need not lie long there, if the Priests are not out in
their reckoning.

Page 83.
Here he finds three Calumnies. The first, That Catholics exempt Sinners from
Hell, who in the Protestant Doctrine would be condemned to it. No unrepented
mortal sin is lodged in Purgatory, or escapes Hell. Now I confess, though I did
not say so, yet I think they do; and I grant it is a true consequence of my
Argument: That all impenitent Sinners shall go to Hell, we both agree; but then
we make the reformation of our lives essential to repentance, and how sorrowful
soever men are for their sins, if they live after such sorrow and do not reform
their lives, they shall go to Hell. In the Church of Rome, at most contrition
or sorrow for sin is all that is necessary to Absolution, and that keeps them
out of Hell, and such men must expiate their sins by Penance in this World, or
in Purgatory in the next, but though they do not reform their sins, if they be
cont^ite and absolved again, they are restored to a state of Grace again, and
so toties quoties. Now such Penitents as are sorry for their sins, but do not
reform them, are condemned to Hell (...) the Protestant Church, and only to
Purgatory in the Church of Rome: and therefore the First is no Calumny. The
Second is, That Indulgencies may be bought for Money, this is no Calumny as I
have already shown, or avail a Soul undisposed to receive the benefit of them,
through want of contrition, the guilt of sin not being before remitted. This I
never said, and therefore is no Calumny of mine. The third, That Masses said
for any Soul in Purgatory avail such as during life have not deserved and
merited that mercy. This I take to be nonsense according to the Doctrines of
their own Church. For certainly those Souls who have merited to get into
Purgatory, have merit enough to receive the benefit of Masses.

Another Gospel-Motive to Holiness are the Examples of Good Men, but in the
Church of Rome the extraordinary Virtues of great and meritorious Saints are
not so much for imitation as for a stock of Merits. The more Saints they have,
the less need is there for other men to be Saints, unless they have a mind to
it, because there is a greater treasure of Merits to relieve those who have
none of their own -- and if one man can merit for twenty, there is no need
there should be above one in twenty good. Here he quibbles upon the different
acceptance of Merit, as it relates to a reward, or as it expiates the
punishment of sin. In the first sense he says Merit is personal, not
communicative; but if it be communicative in the second sense, that one man may
be delivered from punishments by the Merits of another, (and if it be not,
there is an end of the gainful trade of Indulgencies) that is sufficient to my
Argument, and will satisfy most sinners, who are not concerned about degrees
of glory, if they can escape punishment.

Lastly I showed, that the Gospel-Means and Instruments of Holiness, do not
escape much better in the Church of Rome: among others I instanced in the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, which besides those supernatural conveyances of
Grace, which are annexed to it by our Savior's Institution, is a great Moral
Instrument of Holiness -- but in the Church of Rome this admirable Sacrament is
turned into a dumb show, which no body can be edified with, or into a sacrifice
for the living and the dead, which expiates sin and serves instead of a holy
life. Here he says, there are three crying Calumnies. 1. That the Sacrament
among them is nothing but a show or a sacrifice, whereas they very often
receive it; and did I say the Sacrament was never received in the Church of
Rome? 2. That they require the practice of no Virtue to the receiving the
Sacrament, whereas they require the Sacrament of Penance to prepare for the
Eucharist. But I spoke of those Virtues which were to be exercised in
receiving, which there are not such advantages for in the Church of Rome, where
the Office is not understood, and the mind diverted with a thousand
insignificant Ceremonies. 3. That our exposing the blessed Sacrament, is a dumb
show, and so we assist at holy Mass. And whether it be or no, let those judge,
who have seen the Ceremony. How much the Sacrifice of the Mass encourages
Virtue, we have already seen.

I doubt not but our Jesuit can give as good an Answer to this Vindication, as
he did to the Preservative, and I as little doubt but he will; unless Mr.
Needham's Name to the License may be my security, for he has threatened, it
shall be to him a sufficient Note and Character of a Book, not worth the
Reading, much less the Censuring, wherever he sees, that Reverend Person has
opened it the Press: and I commend him for it, for he has had very ill success
with such Books of late: but though I never grudge my pains in answering an
Adversary, who gives occasion for any useful and material Discourse, (for I
desire whatever I say, should be sifted to the very bottom, and am as ready to
own any Error, I am convinced of, as to vindicate the Truth)* yet it is very
irksom to be forced to write a great Book merely to rescue my words from the
injuries of a perverse Comment, which has been my present Task: Thus any Book
may be answered, by a man, who has wit or ignorance enough to pervert it: and
such Answers may be easily answered again by men, who have nothing else to do;
but if this trade grow too common, they must be very idle people indeed, who
will find time to read them.

And therefore to prevent such an impertinent trouble for the future, before I
take leave of my Adversary, I will venture to give him a little good Advice,
which may stand him in stead against the next time.

1. That he would be more modest and sparing in his Title Page; not to paint it
so formidable as to make it ridiculous: it is a little too much to talk of
Principles which destroy all right use of Reason, Scripture, Fathers, Councils,
undermine Divine Faith, and abuse Moral Honesty. Or Forty malicious Culumnies
and forged untruths, besides several Fanatical Principles, which destroy all
Church Discipline, and oppose Christ's Divine Authority. If such things be
proved against any Book, I assure you it is very terrible, though there be
nothing of it in the Title, but the World has been so long deceived with
Titles, that commonly the more the Title promises, the less they expect in the
Book. Some cry it is a Mountebank's Bill, othe^s, the Man raves, and if
curiosity tempts any to look any farther, the disappointment they meet with,
provokes their scorn, or indignation. The bare name of an Answer to a Book,
which is commonly known and approved, is a sufficient invitation to all men to
read it, but it is a very impolitick thing to prejudice the Readers by a
frightful Title.

2. That he would not think, he has confuted a Book by picking out some
sayings, which he thinks very inconvenient and obnoxious, but in which the main
Argu^ent of the Book is not concerned: this is the case in many passages he has
objected against the Preservative, for though there is never a one, but what is
very defensible, and what I have defended, yet there are many, that if they
could not be defended, the main Argument of the Book is never the worse: This
is as vain, as to think to kill a man by laun^hing a Sore, while all his Vitals
are sound and untoucht.

3. That he would not boast of confuting a Book, without bearing up fairly to
any one Argument in it.

I know in his Postscript, he says, that he omitted nothing in Answer to the
First part of the Preservative, that even pretended to the appearance of an
Argument; that all the rest, which he did not answer in his single sheet, was
only swelled up with words, but void of Sense and Reason. A strange Tympany
this poor Preservative was sick of, that when the wordy swelling was taken
down, that and the Answer too could be reduced to a single sheet. But the
Prefacer he says, should have pointed at some pretended proofs, which he
slighted to expose, or have praised him for not wearying his Readers with a
dull prolixity. But the Prefacer pointed him to the Book, and that was enough,
unless he would have had him transcribe the Book again, and concluded every
entire Argument, with this is not Answered by the Jesuit. For I know not any
one paragraph, that he has pretended to answer, though some single sayings he
has nibled at, and little pieces of Argument, as appears from this Vindication,
and that so dully too, that there was no need of more prolixity to tire his
Readers. Our Author little thinks, how he exposes his Reputation among our
people by such vain brags as these: They can find a great many Arguments, which
he has not meddled with, and therefore conclude the Jesuit to be very blind, or
very impudent in pretending to have answered all he could find, or (which it
may be is the truth of the case) that he was not trusted to read the
Preservative, but had some sayings picked out for him to answer, and he mistook
them for the whole.

4 ly, That when he talks big of Calumnies and Misrepresentation, he would not
only say but prove them to be so: that is, that I attribute any Doctrines to
them, which are not taught by their own Councils and Doctors, or impute such
Practices to them, as they are not guilty of: for this Cry of Misrepresenting
is grown so familiar now, and that Charge has been so often bafled of late,
that our People will not take his Word for it, nor allow every Argument he
cannot Answer, to pass for a Misrepresentation.

5 ly, I would advise him to have a care, that he do not Confute his own
Church, while he is zealous to Confute his Adversary; this often happens, and
has done so to him in this very Dispute: especially in his Talk of Moral
Infallibility, which has effectually given up the Roman pretenses to
Infallibility, as I have shown above.

6 ly, If he resolves to Write again; I desire him to take but any one Chapter
or Section in the Preservative, and try his skill on it; not to pick out a
single Saying or two, but to Answer the whole Series of Argument^, as they lie
there; and if he can make any work of it, I promise him a very grave and modest
Reply.

But if he skips about from one Page to another, and only hunts for Calumnies
and Misrepresentations as he calls them, which he first artificially makes, by
changing Words and Periods, and joining Sentences, which have no relation to
each other, and then triumphs over his own Creatures, I shall leave him to be
answered and chastized by any Footman, who pleases to undertake him, and I wish
the next may not be so much his Over-match, as the first was.

I have taken no Notice of his Postscript in Answer to the Preface to the
Protestant Footman's Defense of the Preservative. That Author is able to Answer
for himself, if he thinks fit; but I presume he looks upon that Dispute as at
an end, if Disputes must ever have an end: for when all is said, that a Cause
(...) bear, and the same Arguments and the same Answers come to be repeated
over again, it is time then for a modest man to have done, and to leave the
World to judge; unless Disputing be only an Art of Scolding, where the last
Word is thought the Victory.

THE END.
Books Printed for, and are to be Sold by W. Rogers.
Bp Wilkins his Fifteen Sermons. Octavo.

Dr. Wallis of the Necessity of Regeneration: In Two Sermons to the University
of Oxford. Quarto.

-- His Defense of the Royal Society and the Philosophical Transactions;
particularly those of July, 1670. In Answer to the Cavils of Dr. William
Holder. Quarto.

The Necessity, Dignity and Duty of Gospel Ministers, discoursed of before the
University of Cambridge. By Tho. Hodges, B.D. Quarto.

The Peaceable Christian. A Sermon. Quarto. Price, 3 d.

A Treatise of Marriage, with a Defense of the 32 d Article of the Church of
England, viz. Bishops, Priests and Deacons are not commanded by God's Law,
either to Vow the State of Single Life, or to Abstain from Marriage, etc. By
Tho Hodges, B. D. Octavo.

History of the Affairs of Europe in this present Age, but more particularly of
the Republic of Venice. By Battista Nani Cavalier, of St. Mark. Fol.

Sterry's Freedom of the Will. Folio.

Light in the Wa^ to Paradise, with other Occasionals. By Dudley the 2 d, late
Lord North. Octavo.

Molins of the Muscles, with Sir Charles Scarborough's Syllabus Musculorum.
Octavo.

A Collection of Letters of Gallantry. Twelves.

Leonard's Reports, in Four Parts. The Second Edition. Folio.

Bulstrode's Reports in Three Parts, the Second Edition Corrected; with the
Addition of Thousands of References. 1688. Fol.

The Complete Clark; containing the best Forms of all sorts of Presidents, for
Conveyances and Assurances; and other Instruments now in. Use and Practice.
Quarto.

Sir Simon Degges Parsons Counselor, with the Law of Tithes and Tithing. In
Two Books. The Fourth Edition. Octavo.

An Answer to the Bishop of Condom (now of Meaux) his Exposition of the
Catholic Faith, etc. wherein the Doctrine of the Church of Rome is Detected,
and that of the Church of England Expressed, from the Public Acts of both
Churches. To which are added Reflections on his Pastoral Letter.

THE Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome, ^ruly Represen^ed; in
Answer to a Book, entitled, A Papist Misrepresented, and Represented, etc.
Quarto. Third Edition.

An Answer to a Discourse, entitled, Papists protesting against Protestant
Popery; being a Vindication of Papists not Misrepresented by Protestants: And
containing a particular Examination of Monsieur de Meaux, late Bishop of
Condom, his Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, in the Articles
of Invocation of Saints, Worship of Images, occasioned by that Discourse.
Quarto. Second Edition.

An Answer to the Amicable Accommodation of the Differences, between the
Representer and the Answerer. Quarto.

A View of the (...) ^ontroversie, between the Representer and the Answerer;
with an (...) to the Representer's last Reply; in which are ^id open some of
the Methods, by which Protestants are Misreprensented by Papists. Quarto.

The Doctrine of the Trinity, and Transubstantiation, compared as to Script^^^
^eason, and Tradition; in a new Dialogue between a Protestant and a Papist, the
(...) Part: Wherein an Answer is given to the late Proofs of the Antiquity of
Transubstantiation, in the Books called, Consensus Veterum, and Nubes Testiu^
etc. Quarto.

The Doctrine ^f the Trinity, and Transubstantiation, compared as to Scripture,
Reason, and Tradition in a new Dialogue between a Protestant and a Papist, the
Second Part: Wherein the D^^^rine of the Trinity is showed to b^ ^greeable, to
Scripture and Reason, and Transubstantiation repugnant to both. Quarto.

An Answer to the Eighth Chapter of the Representer's Second Part, in the first
Dialogue, between him and his Lay-Friend.

Of the Authority of Councils, and the Rule of Faith. By a Person of Quality:
With an Answer to the Eight Theses, laid down for the Trial of the English
Ref^^mation; in a Bo^k that came lately from Oxford.

Sermons and Discourses, some of which never before Printed: The Third Volume.
By the Reverend Dr. Tillotson, Dean of Canterbury* 8o.

A Manual for a Christian Soldier, Written by Erasmus, and Translated into
English. Twelves.

A new and easy Method to learn to Sing by Book, whereby one (who has a good
Voice and Ear) may without other help, learn to Sing true by Notes. Designed
chiefly for, and applied to, the promoting of Psalmody; and furnished with
Variety of Psalm-Tunes in Parts, with Directions for that kind of Singing.
Octavo.

A Book of Ciphers, or Letters Reverst: being a Work very pleasant and useful,
as well for Gentlemen (...) all sorts of Artificers, Engravers, (...) Price
(...)

(...) Communion in the (...) of C^^terbury. In Octavo (...)

(...) ag^^nst Transubstantiation. In Octavo. Price 3 ^.

The State of the Church of Rome when the Reformation began, as it appears by
the Advices given to Paul III. and Julius III. by Creatures of their Own. With
a Preface leading to the matter of the Book. 4o.

A Letter to a Friend, Reflecting on some (...) in a Letter to the D. of P. in
Answer to the Arguing Part of (...) to Mr. G.

The Reflecter's Defense of his Letter to a Fri^nd, against the (...) Assaults
of Mr. I. S. in his second Catholic Letter. In (...) Dialogue 4o.

A Discourse concerning the Nature of Idolat^^: in which (...) Bishop of
Oxford's true and only Notion of Idolat^^ Considered (...) Confuted. 4o.

The Protestant Resolved: or, a Discourse, ^hewing the ^^^easonableness of his
Turning Roman Catholic for Salvation. Second (...) 8o.

The Absolute imp^^^^^ility of Transubstantiation demonstrated. 4o.

The Practical Believer: or, the Articles of the Apostles Creed. Drawn out to
form a True Christian's Heart and Practice. In two Parts. 4o.

A Sermon Preached at the Funeral of the Reverend Benj. Calamy, D.D. and late
Minister of St. Lawrence-Iury, Land, Ian. 7th, 1685/6. 4o.

A Vindication of some Protestant Principles of Church-Unity and Catholic
Communion, from the Charge of Agreement with the Church of Rome. In Answer to a
late P^^^phlet, Entitled, An Agreement (...) Church of England and the Church
of Rome, evinced from the (...) of her Sons with their Brethren the Dissenters.
2d Edition.

A (...) against Popery; being some Plain Directions to Unlearne^ (...) to
Dispute with Romish Priests. The First (...) The Fourth (...).

T^^ Second Part of the Preservativ^ against Popery: showing how contrary
Popery is to the True Ends of the Christian Religion. Fitted for the
Instruction of Unlearn^^ Protestants. The Second Editio^.

A Discourse concerning the Nature* Unity and Communi^^^^ (...) Catholic
Church: wherein (...) Controversies (...) the Church are briefly and plai^^y
(...) The First Part.

These Five last by (...) D. D. Master (...)


