The Dean of St. PAVL's SERMON Before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, On APRIL 25.
1697.

Clarke Mayor.
Martis quarto die Maij 1697. Annoque R. Rs. Wilhelmi Tertii Angliae, etc.
Nono.
THIS Court does desire Mr. Dean of St. Paul's to print his Sermon preached
before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of this City, on Sunday the 25th day of
April last.

GOODFELLOW.

The Danger of corrupting the Faith by Philosophy.

A SERMON Preached before the Right Honble the Lord Mayor, AND Court of
Aldermen, At GUILDHALL-CHAPPEL, On SUNDAY, APRIL 25. 1697.

By WILLIAM SHERLOCK, D. D. Dean of St. Paul's, Master of the Temple, and
Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

LONDON: Printed for W. Rogers, at the Sun against St. Dunstan's Church in
Fleetstreet. MDCXCVII.

COLOS. II. 8. Beware lest any man spoil you through Philosophy and vain
deceit, after the traditions of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not
after Christ.
HAD St. Paul lived in our Age, it would have required little less than the
Courage and Bravery of the Spirit of Martyrdom to have said this: And nothing
but the Authority of so great an Apostle (which though some men do not much
value, yet they dare not openly despise) can skreen those, who venture to say
it after him.

What some men call Philosophy and Reason (and there is nothing so foolish and
absurd which some men will not call so), is the only thing which those men
adore, who would either have no God, or a God and a Religion of their own
making. And what Attempts some have made to undermine all Religion, and others
to corrupt and transform the whole Frame of the Christian Religion, upon a
pretense of its contradicting Natural Reason and Philosophy, is too well known
to need a Proof. That thus it was in his days, and that thus it was likely to
be in future Ages, St. Paul was very sensible, when he gave this Caution to his
Colossians; and I Am sure it is as proper a Caution for us, as ever it was for
any Age since the writing of this Epistle; for this vain Pretense to Reason and
Philosophy never more prevailed, and never did more mischief to the world.

It is an endless and fruitless Task to go about to confute all the absurd
Hypotheses and wild inconsistent Reasonings wherewith men abuse themselves and
others: The Experience of so many Ages wherein Philosophy was in all its Glory,
and the several Sects disputed and wrangled eternally, without ending any one
Controversy, gives no great Encouragement, to hope for much this way; at least
it can never be expected that ordinary Christians should be better instructed
and confirmed in the Faith by Philosophical Disputes.

The Christian Religion has from the very beginning been corrupted by a mixture
of Philosophy: Thus it was in the Apostles days, and thus it has been more or
less in all Ages of the Church to this day; and the direction the Apostle gives
for the security of the Christian Faith, is, Not to dispute such matters, but
to distinguish between Philosophical Disputes, and Matters of Revelation; and
to reject all the Pretenses of Philosophy, when it does or seems to contradict
the Faith of Christ, or would make any corrupt Additions to it.

Beware lest any man spoil you through Philosophy and vain deceit; (...), is to
make a Prey, or to carry away as a Prey; that is, to seduce them from the
Christian Faith, or from the Purity and Simplicity of it: Through Philosophy
and vain deceit, that is, through the vain deceit of Philosophy, which cheats
men with a flattering but empty appearance; may unsettle weak Minds, but cannot
lay a sure and solid foundation of Faith; may cheat men out of their Faith, but
when that is done, can give them nothing certain in the room of it: For it is
but after the traditions of men, and after the rudiments of this world: Some of
these Doctrines may possibly plead Prescription, as having been so long
received that no man knows their Original; or if they have the Authority of
some Great Name, yet it is but a Human Authority, and they are but the
traditions of men; and of men who at best had no better information than from
the visible appearances of Nature, and their own imperfect Observations, and
corrupt or defective Reasonings, after the rudiments of this world: And is this
an Authority to oppose against the Faith of Christ, which both wants that
Divine Confirmation which he gave to his Doctrines, and contradicts them? For
they are not after Christ, neither taught by Christ, nor consonant to what he
taught.

These Words might afford great Variety of Discourse; but I shall confine my
self to what is most Useful, and reduce that into as narrow a compass as I can,
by showing,

I. What great need there is of this Caution, To beware lest any man spoil us
through Philosophy and vain deceit.

II. What great reason we have to reject all these vain Pretenses to
Philosophy, when they are opposed to the Authority of a Divine Revelation.

I. As for the first of these, Whoever considers what an Enemy these vain
Pretenses to Philosophy have always been to Religion, will see need enough for
this Caution.

True Reason, and the true Knowledge of Nature, which is true Philosophy, would
certainly direct us to the Acknowledgment and Worship of that Supreme Being who
made the World: And yet we know, that there never was an Atheist without some
Pretense to Philosophy, and generally such loud noisy Pretenses too, as make
ignorant people think them very notable Philosophers, and that tempts some vain
empty persons to affect Atheism, that they may be thought Philosophers.

That this is vain deceit, all men must own, who believe there is a God: And if
it be possible to pretend Philosophy for Atheism it self, it is no great wonder
if it be made to patronize Infidelity and Heresy: But this plainly shows of
what dangerous Consequence it is to admit Philosophical Disputes into Religion,
which if at any time they may do any service to Religion, much oftener greatly
corrupt it, and shake the very Foundations of it; of which more anon.

At present I shall only show you how the Matter of Fact stands; That most of
the Disputes in Religion are nothing else but the Disputes of Philosophy, and
therefore according to the Apostolical Command, to be wholly flung out of
Religion, and not suffered to affect our Faith one way or other. To be a
Philosopher and a Christian, to Dispute and to Believe, are two very different
things; and yet it is very evident, that most of the Arguments against
Revelation in general, and most of the Disputes about the particular Doctrines
of Christianity, are no better than this vain deceit of Philosophy; that were
the matters of Faith, and the Disputes of Philosophy truly distinguished, this
alone would be sufficient to settle the Faith of Christians, and restore Peace
and Unity, at least in the great Fundamentals of Religion, to the Christian
World.

1. As to begin with Revelation in general. The Books of Moses are the most
Ancient, and that considered, the best attested History in the World; the whole
Nation of the Jews, whose History he writes, pay the greatest veneration to
him; and if we believe the Matters of Fact which he relates, he was certainly
an Inspired Man, who could neither deceive, nor be deceived. And it is
impossible to have greater Evidence for the Truth and Authenticalness of any
Writings, at such a distance of time, than we have for the Writings of the New
Testament; and indeed the Infidels of our Age have very little to say purely
against the Credibility of the History; and then one would think, that all
their other Objections should come too late, unless they will justify Pharaoh
in disbelieving Moses, and the Scribes and Pharisees in disbelieving our
Savior, after all the Miracles they did: For if they will disbelieve Moses and
Christ, though they have nothing material to object against the Truth of these
Histories; nothing, which they would allow to be good Objections against any
other History; they must by the same reason have disbelieved them, though they
had seen them do all those great Works which are reported of them in such
Credible Histories. But whatever the Authority of these Books are, they think
they may securely reject them, if they contain any thing which contradicts
their Reason and Philosophy, and they find a great many such things to quarrel
with: They think Moses's History of the Creation very unphilosophical; That the
Story of Eve and the Serpent is an incredible Fiction; That the Universal
Deluge is absolutely impossible, and irreconcilable with the Principles of
Philosophy; and it does not become Philosophers to have recourse to Miracles:
That what we call Miracles are not the effects of a Divine Power, but may be
resolved into Natural Causes; That Inspiration and Prophesy is nothing but
Natural Enthusiasm, and all the Pretenses to Revelation a Cheat and Imposture;
That Nature teaches us all that we need to know; That there is no other certain
knowledge but this; That we are not bound to believe any thing which our own
Reason cannot grasp and comprehend, and therefore Revelation is perfectly
useless; and God himself cannot oblige us to believe any thing which does not
agree with the Reason of our own Minds, and the Philosophy of Nature. Those who
understand the Mystery of Modern Infidelity, know that these, and such like,
are the wise Reasons for which they reject and ridicule all Revealed Religion,
and endeavor to rob and spoil men of one of the greatest Blessings in the
World, A Divine Revelation. So that Infidelity is resolved into these vain
Pretenses to Philosophy, that Men will understand how to make, destroy, and
govern the World better than God.

2. As these men oppose Reason and Philosophy to Revelation, so others either
deny the fundamental Articles of Christianity for the sake of some
Philosophical Difficulties, or corrupt the Doctrines of Christianity by a
mixture of Philosophy. The Gospel of our Savior is the plainest Revelation of
the Will of God that ever was made to the World; all its Doctrines are easily
understood, without Art and Subtilty; and yet there is not a more nice,
intricate, perplexed thing in the World, than what some men have made the
Christian Faith: All the Subtle Disputes of Philosophy are brought into the
Church; and Plato and Aristotle are become as great Apostles, as St. Peter, or
St. Paul: As to give some few Instances of it; for time will not permit me to
discourse it at large.

What are the Arian, Socinian, Pelagian Controversies, but mere Philosophical
Disputes, with which these Heretics corrupted the Catholic Faith?

There is nothing more plain and express in Scripture than the Faith of Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, or the Doctrine of the Trinity in Unity; and that great
Art and Subtilty which has been used, and to so little purpose, to pervert
those Texts of Scripture, wherein this Doctrine is contained, is an evident
proof, That this is the plain, natural obvious sense of those Texts, since it
requires so much Art and Criticism to put any other sense on them; and that
will not do neither, till men are resolved rather to make any thing of
Scripture, than to find a real Trinity there. If then this Faith be so plainly
contained in Scripture, what makes all this dispute about it? What makes those,
who profess to believe the Scripture, so obstinate against this Faith? Truly
that which makes some men Infidels, makes others Heretics, that is, a vain
pretense to Philosophy.

The first Philosophical Dispute is about the Divine Unity: We all own with the
Scripture, that there is but One God; but we say further, as the Scripture
teaches us, That there are Three, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, each of which is
true and perfect God. This they say is a Contradiction; and if it be so, there
is an end of this Faith, for both parts of a Contradiction cannot be true: But
to be Three and One upon different accounts, and in different senses, is no
Contradiction; for thus Three may be One, and One Three; and this is all the
Scripture teaches, or that we profess to believe, whatever the Mystery of this
Distinction and Unity be: But this will not satisfy these Philosophical Wits,
unless they can comprehend how Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are really and
distinctly Three, and essentially One, the manner of which the Scripture gives
no account of, and therefore this is no Dispute in Faith, but only in
Philosophy.

Another Objection concerns the Divine Generation, how God can beget a Son of
his own Substance; which the Arians thought inferred a division of the Divine
Substance.

And a Third Objection concerns an Eternal Generation; how it is possible that
the Father should beget an Eternal Son; that the Son should be begotten without
any beginning of Being; and that the Father should not be at least some few
moments before the Son, and consequently the Son not Eternal. Now we all grant
that we can give no Philosophical account of this, no more than we can of the
simple Divine Essence, or of Eternity it self; but we may believe that God has
an Eternal Son, as we do that there is an Eternal God, without knowing how any
thing is Eternal: These are Disputes in Philosophy, and such as none but vain
men will dispute about, as being acknowledged above our Comprehension, and
therefore no reasonable Objection against our Faith.

This as for the Doctrine of the Incarnation, nothing can be plainer in
Scripture, than that the Son of God was made man; That the Word was made flesh,
and dwelt among us; That God was manifest in the flesh: And all the disputes
about this Article are purely Philosophical: Some men reject it, because they
cannot understand how God and Man can be united in one Person: Others confound
the Divine and Human Nature, as Eutyches did; or divide the Persons, as
Nestorius did; both which indeed destroy the Article of the Incarnation; for
the Word is not made Flesh, unless the same Person, who is God, is Man too, and
continues perfect God and perfect Man after this Union: But all these disputes
concern the Philosophy of the Union of the Divine and Human Nature in Christ;
and if we would separate between Faith and Philosophy, such disputes might soon
be ended.

Thus most of the difficulties in the Pelagian and Quinquarticular Controversy,
are ultimately resolved into mere Philosophical disputes about Fate and
Prescience, Liberty and Necessity, and God's concourse with Creatures, or the
Powers of Nature and Grace: And would time permit, it were easy to show this in
most of the Controversies of Religion, That it is not what God has revealed,
and what he requires us to believe, but such Nice Philosophical Questions as
men raise about these matters, which occasion all these disputes.

It has often been proposed as a means of Union to silence all disputes, To
confine our selves to Scripture-Words and Expressions, without determining the
signification of them: But this would make only an Agreement in Words, not a
Consent in Opinions; nor could it secure the Peace of the Church, while all men
knew, that under the same form of Words, they had very different and contrary
Meanings, which would still make them as much Heretics to each other, as if
their Words did as expressly contradict each other, as their Faith. But would
men reduce all their disputes to Scripture, and make that the only Rule of
their Faith, without intermixing any Philosophical disputes with it, this would
be an infallible means of Union; for it is only this vain pretense to
Philosophy, which raises all these disputes, and then tempts men to pervert the
Scriptures to justify their Philosophy.

In all these cases we are concerned to enquire what the true sense of the
Article is; for this the Scripture teaches, and so far our Faith is concerned;
and these are not only justifiable, but necessary disputes, if the true Faith
be necessary: And such were the disputes of the Catholic Fathers with the
Sabellian, Arian, and Photinian Heretics; Whether Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
were only Three Names, or Three Appearances and Manifestations of the same One
single Person, or any other Three, but Three True, Proper, Coeternal, and
Coequal Persons: Or whether He, who is in Scripture called the Son of God, be a
Creature, though the most Excellent Creature; or a Son, and God by Nature,
truly begotten of his Father's Substance: Or whether Christ be God Incarnate,
or a mere Man: And their ancient Creeds pretended to no more, than to teach
what the Catholic Faith was, not to expound the Philosophy of the Trinity and
Incarnation. And thus far we must explain the Faith, as to know, and to let
others know, what it is we believe; and if to assert the ancient Catholic
Faith against old and new Heresies, should be called New Explications, we
cannot help it; for we must explain what the Scripture teaches about these
Articles, and how the Catholic Church always understood them: But that which
we are to beware of, is, Not to mix Philosophy with our Faith, nor to admit of
any mere Philosophical Objections against the Faith, nor to attempt any
Explications of these Mysteries, beyond what the Scriptures, and the Faith and
Practice of the Catholic Church will justify.

Indeed the Importunity of Heretics did very often engage the Catholic
Fathers in Philosophical disputes; but this they did, not to explain the
Christian Mysteries by Philosophy, but only to show, that as incomprehensible
as these Mysteries are, the Philosophy of Heretics, and their Objections
against these Articles, were very absurd: And such disputes as these may
sometimes be absolutely necessary, and of great use to shame these vain
Pretenses to Philosophy, while we do not put the Trial of our Faith upon this
Issue.

Secondly, Let us now consider what great reason we have to reject all the vain
Pretenses to Reason and Philosophy, when opposed to a Divine Revelation. For
that is all the Apostle intends in this Caution; not to discourage the use of
Reason, or the study of Philosophy, which are great Improvements, and a
delightful Entertainment of Human Minds, and with a wise and prudent Conduct
may be very serviceable to Religion too; but we must not set up any Conclusions
in Philosophy against the Christian Faith, nor corrupt the Faith with a mixture
of Philosophy, nor reject any revealed Truths, for want of Natural Ideas to
conceive them by.

To shorten this Discourse as much as I can; I shall at present only show you
what reason we have to believe those Doctrines which are thought the most
mysterious and inconceivable, notwithstanding any Objections from Natural
Reason and Philosophy against them. And the account of this must be resolved
into the Nature, Use, and Authority of Revelation; that Revelation, as to such
matters as are knowable only by Revelation, must serve instead of Sense,
Natural Ideas, and Natural Reason; that is, That we must believe things which
we do not see, things which we have no Natural Notion or Conception of, things
which are not evident to Natural Reason; for without this, there is little use
of Faith, no Authority of pure Revelation.

It is true, the general Corruption of Mankind made it very necessary for God
to revive the Laws of Nature, and to reinforce the observation of them by his
own Authority and Command; but the proper work of Revelation is to discover
such things to us as Nature cannot teach, of which we have no Natural Notion,
nor any Natural Evidence; At least, thus it may be, if God knows more than
Natural Reason teaches, or can comprehend; and thinks it fit to reveal such
Supernatural Truths to us, when he sees it useful for Mankind.

Now if God ever does reveal such things to us, if we believe upon God's
Authority (which is the strict Notion of a Divine Faith), we must believe
without any Natural Evidence, merely because God has revealed it; and then we
must believe such things as are not evident to Sense and Reason; and then it
can be no Objection against Revelation, nor against the belief of any such
supernatural Truths, that we have no Natural Notion, nor Natural evidence of
them, that they are what we cannot conceive and comprehend.

To believe no farther than natural Reason can conceive and comprehend, is to
reject the Divine Authority of Revelation, and to destroy the distinction
between Reason and Faith. He who will believe no farther than natural Reason
approves; believes his Reason, not the Revelation; and is in truth a Natural
Philosopher, not a Believer: He believes the Scriptures, as he would believe
Plato and Tully; not as inspired Writings, but as agreeable to Reason and the
result of wise and deep Thoughts; and this puts an end to all the disputes
about Faith and Revelation at once: For what use is there of Faith? What matter
whether the Scriptures be divinely Inspired or not, when we are no farther
concerned with them than with other Human Writings, to believe what they teach
agreeable to our own Reason? Let these Men then either reject Faith and
Scripture, or confess, That Revelation, as to all Supernatural Truths, must
serve us instead of Sense and Reason. I would gladly know of them, Whether they
would not believe such supernatural Truths, as are not evident to Reason, were
they sure that God had Revealed them? I guess they will not be so hardy as to
say, That they would not believe God himself, should he Reveal such things as
their Reason cannot comprehend; and if they would believe God in such matters,
Why will they not believe a Revelation, which they themselves acknowledge to be
Divine, in such matters? For is there any difference between believing God, and
believing a Divine Revelation? If God does know, and can reveal such Mysteries,
and is to be believed when he does reveal them, and such Doctrines are
contained in an undoubted Revelation; then the unconceivableness of them can be
no argument against the Truth of the Revelation, or that sense of the words,
which contains such Mysteries.

Let us then consider the natural consequence of this, which is of great moment
in this dispute, viz. That we must allow of no Objections against Revealed
Mysteries, which we will not allow to be good Objections against Sense and
Reason; which is a necessary and unavoidable consequence if Revelation, with
respect to supernatural Truths, stand in the place of Sense and Reason.

Now no man questions the truth of what he sees and feels, or what he can prove
to be true by plain and undeniable Reason, merely because there are
unconceivable difficulties in it; as there are in every thing, even the most
certain and familiar things in Nature: And if Revealed Truths are not more
unconceivable than many natural objects of Sense and Reason, Why should their
being unconceivable be a greater Objection against believing a Revelation, than
it is against believing our Sense and Reason in matters equally unconceivable?
When God has Revealed to us, That he has an Eternal and Only Begotten Son,
though we cannot comprehend the Mystery of the Eternal Generation, Why should
we not as firmly believe it, as we do, that Man Begets a Son in his own
likeness, the Philosophy of which we as little understand? Nor can we any more
conceive the Union of the Soul and Body, than we do the Incarnation of the Son
of God, or the Union of the Divine and Human Nature in one Person? And if we
own the Authority of Revelation, Why should we not as well believe what
Revelation teaches, how unconceivable soever it be, as we do what Sense and
Reason teaches, though it be alike unconceivable?

All men are sensible, that it is very absurd and foolish to deny the Being of
any thing which they have certain evidence of, because they cannot comprehend
the Nature and Reasons of it: The Man who rose up and walked before the
Philosopher, who was disputing subtly against the possibility of Motion, put
a scorn upon all his Arguments, by showing him that he could Move: And
therefore we see, that all men believe their Senses and Reason against all the
difficulties in Nature, and will never be persuaded, by the subtillest
Disputant, That that is not, which they certainly see and know to be. Now for
the same reason, if men will allow the Authority of Revelation, they must
believe what is Revealed, how unconceivable and incomprehensible soever its
nature be; for when we know that a thing is, (and this may be known by
Revelation as well as by Sense, as those men must confess, who acknowledge a
Divine Revelation) no difficulties in conceiving it, must persuade us to deny
that it is.

This is very plain in it self, though few men consider it, That to disbelieve
what is Revealed, for the sake of any difficulties in understanding or
conceiving it, is to reject the certainty of Revelation; For what other account
can be given of that difference men make between the Evidence of Sense and
Reason, and of Revelation, but that they allow Sense and Reason to be good and
certain proofs of the being of such things as are evident to Sense and Reason,
how mysterious soever their Natures are; but that mere Revelation is no certain
proof of the being of any thing which is not evident also to Sense and Reason,
how plainly soever it be Revealed; that is, that Revelation alone can prove
nothing; for if Revelation it self could prove the certainty of what is
Revealed, the difficulties in Nature and Philosophy could no more disprove a
Revelation, than confute our Senses. Now let any man judge, whether this be not
unequal usage, to expect more from Revelation, than they do from Sense and
Reason, and not to believe Revelation upon the same terms that they believe
their Senses.

Should men resolve to believe nothing which they see, till they could give a
Philosophical account of the Reasons, and Causes, and Natures, of all they see,
as they refuse to believe a Revelation any farther than they can conceive and
comprehend the thing Revealed, they must of necessity be as great Scepticks, as
they are Infidels. For as for contradictions, it is an easy matter to make or
find seeming contradictions in what we do not understand; for when we know not
the Philosophical Natures of things, nor how they act, and yet will be
reasoning and guessing at them, all our false guesses may be full of
contradictions and impossibilities, because we know not the true Mystery of
Nature. It is this vain humor of Criticizing upon Nature which makes so many
Atheists. They go upon the same Principle with Infidels and Heretics, To
believe nothing which natural Reason cannot conceive and comprehend; now they
cannot comprehend the Notion and Idea of a God, which they say, is made up of
Contradictions and impossibilities, and therefore they reject the Being of a
God: They cannot conceive a Creating Power, which can give Being to that which
had no Being before, which they think a plain Contradiction to make Something
of Nothing; and therefore they reject the Creation of the World, and either
assert the Eternity of the World, or at least the Eternity of Matter: They can
conceive no Substance but Matter and Body, and therefore reject the Notion of a
Spirit, as Nonsense and Contradiction: They will allow nothing to be wisely
made, which they understand not the reason and uses of, and therefore they
fancy a great many botches and blunders in Nature, which cannot be the designs
and contrivance of Wisdom, but the effects of Chance; and then the consequence
is plain, That the World was made by Chance, not by a Wise Author.

Now, I confess, if this way of Reasoning be allowed, it will be impossible to
defend either Sense, or Reason, or Revelation, against the Cavils of Atheists
and Infidels; for there are unconceivable and incomprehensible Secrets and
Mysteries in them all; and if to conceive and comprehend the Natures of things
must be made the measure and standard of true and false, we must deny our
Senses and Reason, as well as our Faith; and if we do and must believe our
Sense and Reason beyond our Comprehension, Why must we believe nothing that is
Revealed, any farther than we can conceive and comprehend the Nature and
Reasons of it?

The Sum is this: Humane Knowledge, whatever the means of knowing be, whether
Sense, or Reason, or Revelation, does not reach to the Philosophical Causes and
Natures of things, but only to their Being, and Natural Virtues and Powers; and
as a Wise man, who knows the measure of his Understanding, expects no more from
Sense and Reason, than to know what things there are in the World, and what
they are, as far as they fall under the notice of Sense and Natural Reason; so
we must expect no more from Revelation, than the knowledge of such things as
Sense and Natural Reason cannot discover. But we must no more expect the
Philosophy of Supernatural Truths from Revelation, than we do the Mysteries of
Nature from Sense and Reason.

Now since Human Knowledge is not a knowledge of the Mysterious Natures of
things, but only to know what things there are, and what they are; there can be
no cantradiction between Sense, and Reason, and Revelation; unless one denies
what the other affirms, not that one teaches more than the other teaches, or
that one cannot comprehend what the other teaches. Reason teaches more than
Sense teaches, or can comprehend; and Revelation teaches more than either Sense
or Natural Reason teaches, or can comprehend; but this is no contradiction, but
only a subordination between these different kinds and degrees of Knowledge;
but as for Unconceivableness and Incomprehensibility, that is no argument
against any thing; for Sense and Natural Reason can no more comprehend their
own Objects, than they do what is revealed: And it is manifest perverseness to
make that an objection against Revelation, which we will not allow to be an
objection against Sense and Reason.

This is sufficient as to the reason of the thing; but as far as it is possible
to remove men's Prejudices also against believing Mysteries, I shall briefly
answer two very popular Objections.

1. It is thought very unnatural, that when God has made us reasonable
Creatures, and therefore made Natural Reason to us the measure of Truth and
Falsehood, he should require us to believe without Reason; as we must do, if he
reveals such things to us as we know not, and cannot possibly know the reasons
of. If we must believe with our Understanding, how can we believe things which
we cannot understand?

This were a reasonable Objection, were it true; for we cannot believe what we
have no knowledge, nor understanding of; for Faith is Knowledge, though not
Natural Knowledge.

But do we not understand what it is we believe? Do we not know what we mean,
when we say, We believe in Father, Son, and Holy Ghost? Nay, do not our
Adversaries understand what we mean by it? How then come they to charge us with
believing Contradictions and Impossibilities? For if they know not what we
believe, they cannot know whether we believe Contradictions or not. And if we
do understand what it is we believe, then we do not believe without
understanding, which is absolutely impossible, if we know what it is we believe.

And we know also why we believe: Our Faith is founded in Sense and Reason, and
resolved into the Authority of God, which is the highest and most infallible
Reason. The Miracles which Christ and his Apostles wrought, were evident to
Sense, and owned by Reason to be the effects of a Divine Power; and the Answer
the Blind man gave to the Pharisees, when Christ had opened his Eyes, speaks
the true sense of Nature: H^rein is a mavelous thing, that ye know not from
whence he is, and yet he has opened mine eyes. Now we know that God hears
not sinners; but if any man be a worshipper of God, and does his will, him he
hears. Since the world began was it not heard that any man opened the eyes of
one that was born blind: If this man were not of God, he could do nothing, 9.
John 30, 31, 32, 33. And all Mankind own, that the most absolute Faith is due
to God, and to those who speak from God; and this, as I take it, is to believe
with Reason.

But still we believe such things, whose Natures we do not understand, and
cannot account for by Natural Reason, and this is to believe without Reason. We
believe, that God the Father has an Eternal Son, and an Eternal Spirit; and
that Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are but One Eternal God; but this is what
Natural Reason cannot comprehend, nor give us any notion or conception of, how
God can have an Eternal Son, and an Eternal Spirit, really distinct from
himself, and yet with himself One Eternal and Infinite God: Reason can give no
account of the Eternal Generation of the Son, nor of the Eternal Procession of
the Holy Spirit; and is not this to believe without Reason, which a reasonable
Creature ought not to do, and which we ought not to think, that God who made us
reasonable Creatures, expects from us?

And this I grant would be a material Objection, were Reason the Judge of the
Nature and Philosophy of things; and did Reason require us to believe nothing
but what we understand and comprehend. But then we must no more believe Sense
and Reason, than Revelation; for we do not comprehend the Nature of any one
thing in the World, how evident soever it is to Sense and Reason, that there
are such things. Nature is as great a Mystery as Revelation; and it is no
greater affront to our Understandings, no more against reason for God to reveal
such things to us as our Reason cannot comprehend, than it is to make a whole
World, which Reason cannot comprehend.

When we make it an Objection against any thing, That it is without Reason, or,
as we apprehend, against Reason, and contrary to Reason; we must first consider
whether it be the proper Object of Reason; otherwise it is no Objection; as it
is no objection against Sounds, that we cannot see them; nor against Colors,
that we cannot hear them; because Sounds are not the Objects of Sight, nor
Colors of Hearing.

Now no man pretends, that the pure Natures and Essences of things, or their
Essential Reasons, Properties, Unions, Operations, are the Objects of Humane
Reason; for no man living knows any thing about them.

And yet this is all the Incomprehensibility men have to complain of in the
Doctrine of the Trinity, and the Incarnation; That they cannot comprehend, how
God can beget an Eternal Son; nor how Three Divine Persons should be so united,
as to be essentially One God; nor how the Divine and Humane Nature can be
united into One Person, God-man: All which concern the Essence, and Essential
Properties, Operations, Unions, Relations of the Deity, which a modest man
might allow to be incomprehensible, if God be infinite, though he could
comprehend the Natures, Essences, and Essential Reasons and Properties of
Created Beings; but when all Created Nature is such a Mystery to us, that we
know not the pure Nature and Essence of any one thing in the World, is it an
affront to our Reason, that we cannot comprehend the Divine Nature?

Such Matters as these are neither without Reason, nor against Reason, nor
contrary to Reason; because Reason has nothing to do with them, and can take no
cognizance of them: They belong not to Reason, but to that Infinite Mind, which
comprehends it Self, and the Ideas of all possible Beings. A perfect
comprehensive Knowledge of Nature belongs only to the Maker of all things; for
it is not only to know what things are, but how to make them; which would be a
vain Curiosity, and useless Knowledge to those, who have not a Making and
Creating Power. This is to know things a priori, with an Intuitive Ideal
Knowledge, which is infinitely more superior to Reason, than Reason is to
Sense: And it is the affection of this Intuitive making Knowledge, which makes
some men Atheists, and others Heretics.

2dly. Another great Objection against such a Revelation as contains matters
which Natural Reason cannot comprehend, is, To what purpose such a Revelation
serves? What Merit there can be in believing such Doctrines? And of what good
use such a Faith can be to us?

Now I confess I cannot think it meritorious merely to believe things which are
incomprehensible; or that God any more intended to puzzle our Faith with
revealed Mysteries, than to puzzle our Reason in making a Mysterious World.
Whether we receive our information from Sense, or Natural Reason, or
Revelation, it is certain we must believe Mysteries, if we believe any thing;
for all things have something mysterious and incomprehensible in their natures;
what natural Reason cannot account for, and what God never intended we should
understand: for God never intended to teach us how to make the World, nor how
every Creature was made; and therefore we cannot and are not concerned to know
the internal frame and constitution of Nature.

But though neither Natural nor Revealed Knowledge extends to the Reasons and
Causes of Nature, and of essential Properties and Operations; yet both natural
and revealed Knowledge is of as much use to us, as if we did perfectly
understand all the secret and incomprehensible Mysteries of the nature of God,
or of the natures of Creatures. Both natural and revealed Knowledge are alike
upon this account, That they only acquaint us what things are, and what ends
they serve; and then we know what use to make of them, without understanding
the secret Mysteries of Nature.

Is this World, or any thing in it, the less useful to us, because we cannot
conceive how God created all things of nothing? Or because we do not understand
the nature of Matter, nor how the several parts of Matter came by their
different Virtues and Qualities? Is Corn, or Fruit, or Herbs, the less
nourishing or refreshing, because we know not how they grow? Does it require
any Philosophy to know how to eat, and drink, and sleep? Will not our Food
nourish us, unless we understand how it is concocted, and turned into Chyle,
and Blood, and Spirits? Nay, is it of no use to know that God is an Eternal,
Omnipotent, Omniscient, Omnipresent Being, unless we can conceive how any Being
can be Eternal without a Cause, and without a Beginning? Or can comprehend how
he can do and know all things; and be present in all places at once, without
Extension, and without Parts? We may make all the use that can be made of this
world, and of every thing in it, without understanding the essential Reasons
and Causes, or internal Nature of any thing; and we must do so, if we will make
any use of it; and we know God to all the ends and purposes for which Creatures
ought to know God, though his Nature be incomprehensible.

And thus it is in matters of pure Revelation, such as the Doctrine of the
Trinity, and the Incarnation; how unaccountable soever the Mystery of a Trinity
in Unity, the Eternal Generation, and the Incarnation of the Son of God be, yet
it is the most useful Knowledge in the world: Though we know not how the
Eternal Father begat an Eternal Son of his own Substance, nor how this Eternal
Son in time became Man; yet it is the most desirable knowledge in the world to
sinners; to know, That God has an Eternal Son; and that he so loved the world,
as to give his only begotten Son for the redemption of mankind, that whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life; and that this
Eternal Son of God became Man, lived a poor, necessitous, laborious Life, and
died an accursed Death for the Salvation of Sinners; and to know, That the Holy
Spirit, which proceeds from Father and Son, dwells in the Christian Church, and
quickens and animates the whole Body of Christ. If this be true (as we must
suppose in this Argument), all Mankind must confess, that this is a very useful
Knowledge; and never the less useful, because a Trinity in Unity, and the
Eternal Generation, and the Incarnation of the Son of God, are great and
inconceivable Mysteries. Could we give a Rational and Philosophical Account of
the Eternal Generation, and of the Incarnation, we should know more than we now
do; but Faith makes it as useful to all the purposes of Religion, as the most
perfect intuitive Knowledge could do.

This is a sufficient Answer to that Objection against the Usefulness of such
Mysteries as have something incomprehensible and unconceivable in their
Natures: Which is an equal Objection against all created Nature, which is but
one great Mystery; and yet the World is a very useful World, and we know in
some good degree what use to make of it: And the Knowledge of those Gospel
Mysteries which are the Subject of our present dispute, are manifestly of
infinite use to us, if the certain knowledge of the Pardon of Sin, and eternal
Life, by the Obedience, and Sufferings, and Death, and Intercession of the Son
of God Incarnate, be of any use; and therefore it became the Wisdom and
Goodness of God to reveal these Mysteries of Salvation to us.

Especially if we add to this, That the lapsed state of Human Nature makes
supernatural Knowledge necessary. Natural Knowledge we grant was sufficient for
a state of Nature, though no man would have had reason to complain, had God in
a state of Innocence by a more familiar intercourse with Man, or by the
frequent Conversation of Angels, improved his Knowledge beyond the mere
seize of his Natural Faculties; and it is not improbable, but this might
have been; I am sure there is an impatient thirst after knowledge in human
Nature, and such a great curiosity for secret and hidden Mysteries, that it
looks very unnatural for Men to complain, that God Reveals more to them than
Nature teaches.

But yet I say, Natural Knowledge must be allowed sufficient to all the ends of
Human Life, while man continued Innocent; for that is the Original state of
human Nature, as all men must grant, who believe that Man was made by God.

But when man sinned, he forfeited the Favor of God, and a natural
Immortality; and whether he should be restored or not, and by what means he
should be restored, depended wholly on the Sovereign Will and Pleasure of God:
And therefore the Light of Nature, though it could direct an Innocent Man how
to Please and Worship God, and to preserve himself Immortal, it could not teach
Sinners how to make atonement for Sin, nor give them any certain hopes that God
would forgive Sins, and bestow immortal Life on them; which makes it necessary,
that the Religion of a sinner be a Revealed Religion. And if God in infinite
Goodness is not only pleased to restore sinners to Grace and Favor, but to
advance them to a supernatural state of Perfection and Happiness both of Soul
and Body in the next World; this must be done by supernatural Means, and
therefore requires a supernatural Knowledge; for the Light of Nature can
neither raise us above Nature, nor discover supernatural Truths to us; and this
makes it necessary to know and believe such things, as we have no natural
Notion or Idea of, Such things, as neither eye has seen, nor ear heard,
neither has it entered into the heart of man to conceive. If Nature cannot save
us, it cannot discover to us the way of Salvation neither; and if we must be
saved by a supernatural Grace and Power, it must be supernaturally Revealed;
and what is Supernatural, is the Object of Faith, not of natural Knowledge.

This seems to me to give a plain account, Why God thinks fit to Reveal such
Mysteries to us as Nature cannot teach, and as we have no natural Notion of,
Because our lapsed state has made such supernatural Revelations necessary to
the recovery of Mankind; and when we are fallen below the relief of Nature, and
of natural Knowledge, we ought to be very thankful to our Good God for
supernatural Knowledge, and supernatural Means of Salvation.

To God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, Three Persons, One
Eternal God, be Honor, Glory and Power, now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

