IMPRIMATUR,

May, 30. 1673. Sam. Parker.

A DISCOURSE Concerning the KNOWLEDGE OF JESUS CHRIST, AND Our Union and
Communion with him, etc.

By William Sherlock, Rector of St George Buttolph lane, London.

LONDON,

Printed by I. M. for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishops-Head in St Paul's
Churchyard.

MDCLXXIV.

THE PREFACE.
Christian Reader,
I Am conscious to my self of so honest a design in writing this Discourse,
that I am very very well armed against those various censures, which are the
usual reward of such Attempts; for there is no such Sanctuary against the
rudest clamours, and the most unjust reproaches, as a good Conscience. I was
heartily grieved to see so many well-disposed Persons abused with words and
phrases, which either signify nothing, or have a very ambiguous and doubtful,
or a very bad sense; when I have observed that great zeal, which some men have
for the Worship of God, I have often thought, what great Instruments they might
be of Gods glory, were their zeal directed and governed with Knowledge and
Judgment; and when I have observed, how innocently and virtuously some of those
men live, who have espoused such Principles, as naturally tend to make them
bad, I have thought, what excellent Persons they might prove, did they rightly
understand so excellent a Religion, as is published to the World in the Gospel
of Christ; such thoughts as these at first engaged me in this Work, to rectify
those mistakes, which will either make men bad, or hinder and retard their
progress in true goodness, which is so pious and charitable a design, as may at
least plead my excuse, though it should appear to be a mistaken zeal.

In the management of this Discourse I have carefully avoided all personal
reflections, have not meddled with the lives and actions of men, which I am so
charitable as to hope, may be more orthodox than their judgments: I have
represented their opinions in their own words, and am not conscious to my self,
that I have put any other sense upon their words, than they intended, and I
cannot see, what reason any man has to take it ill; that I repeat that, which
he himself thought fit to publish: where they pretend to argue gravely, I have
examined their Arguments with all possible gravity and solemnity; where they
plainly toy and trifle, I have so far complied with their humor, as to smile
sometimes, though as modestly as any man can desire: I have taken care, not
only to unteach men, what was amiss, but to explain and consirm the true
notions of Religion, lest any man should suspect, that under a pretense of
rectifying mistakes I designed to expose all Religion: what men will account
severe, I cannot tell, because the gentlest Arguments will appear severe to any
man, who is pinch't by them; but I have given no hard words, and have sometimes
called things by softer names, than they deserve, on purpose to avoid the
imputation of severity, which is now the common artifice to teach men to
despise and reproach, what they cannot answer: and if after all this I cannot
escape without some hard names and hard censures, I must be contented with my
portion; and indeed no man ought to expect better usage, who considers, that
Mr. Baxter himself, who has deserved so well for his pious labors, could not
escape, when he touched upon their Darling Notions.

And now, Christian Reader, I shall beg no more of thee, than to read this
Discourse with an honest and unprejudiced mind, and as I did not compose it
without imploring the guidance and direction of God, so I recommend it to thee
with my hearty prayers, that it may prove as useful, as my intentions were
honest and charitable.

Farewell.

THE CONTENTS.
THE Introduction concerning the various significations of the Name Christ in
Scripture, that it originally is the name of an Office, but is used also to
signify the Person invested with this Office, and the Gospel of Christ, and
the Church of Christ. Page 1. Of what use the consideration of Christ's Person
is in the Christian Religion. 14 As first the greatness of his Person is a
plain demonstration of Gods love to Mankind, in that he gave his own Son for
us. 15 2. It gives great Reverence and Authority to his Gospel. 17 3. It gives
great Authority to his Example. 18 4. This assures us of the infinite value of
his Sacrifice, and of the power of his Intercession. 19 5. The Person of Christ
is of no other consideration in the Christian Religion, than as it has an
influence upon the great Ends of his Undertaking. 21 Of the knowledge of
Christ, and the various ways whereby God has manifested himself to the World.
25 Dr. Owen's Notion of an acquaintance with Christ's Person considered. 38 How
the Nature and Attributes of God may be learned from an acquaintance with the
Person of Christ. 42. And how we learn the knowledge of our selves with respect
to sin. 49. And to Righteousness. 53. And our wisdom to walk with God. 55 A new
Scheme of Religion deduced from this acquaintance with Christ's Person. 57 How
unsafe it is to found Religion on a pretended acquaintance with Christ's Person,
which at most amounts to no more than uncertain conjectures or ambiguous and
doubtful Reasonings. 76 This way will serve other men, as well as themselves,
and another Scheme of Religion from an acquaintance with Christ. 80 Of
expounding Scripture by the sound of words. 102 And by the Analogy of Faith.
118 What is meant by our Union to Christ. 142 Those Metaphors, which describe
the Union betwixt Christ and Christians, do primarily refer to the Christian
Church. 142 The Union of particular Christians to Christ is by means of their
Union to the Christian Church. 143 In what sense Christ calls himself a Vine.
145 The Union betwixt Christ and the Christian Church is not natural, but
political. 156 In what sense Christ is called a Shepherd, Head, and Husband.
157. The reason of these Metaphors. 159 This political Union is either only
external and visible, or true and real, and what this external Union is. 168
Wherein the real Union consists, and concerning the subjection of our Souls and
Spirits to Christ. 171 We are united to Christ by a participation of his
Nature. 172. And by a mutual and reciprocal Love. 174 In what sense the
Christian Church is called Gods Temple. 175 This Union to Christ represented in
the Sacraments of the New Testament. 181 Fellowship and Communion with God and
Christ in the Scripture Phrase signify this political Union. 186 The Lords
Supper the only Act, whereby our fellowship with God in this World is
expressed. 192 Of our Union to the Person of Christ 196 What is meant by the
Person of Christ. 200 The Personal Excellencies of Christ considered. 206 What
is meant by the Fullness of Christ. 216 In what sense Christ is called our Life.
228 Concerning the Personal Righteousness of Christ. 234 What is meant by the
Lord our Righteousness. 235 What is meant by the Righteousness of Faith. 245
What Abraham's Faith was whereby he was justified. 247. Phil. 3. 8, 9.
considered. 260 What St. Paul's Righteousness was while a Pharisee. 261 In what
sense the Apostle opposes the righteousness of the Law to the righteousness of
Faith. 264. And his own righteousness to the Righteousness of God. 274
Concerning the Conjugal Relation betwixt Christ and Believers, and whether this
can entitle us to his Personal Excellencies, Righteousness, etc. 281 Concerning
the Legal Union and Christ's being the Saints Surety. 287 Whether Christ
fulfilled all Righteousness for us as our Mediator. 296 What influence the
obedience of Christ's life, and the Sacrifice of his death have upon our
acceptance with God. 320 That some men place our Union to Christ before
holiness of life, as appears from the whole progress of the Soul (as they
represent it) to a closure with Christ. 337 That according to these Principles
there is no certain way to get into Christ. 353. Nor any certain evidence of
our being in Christ. 364 The Evidence of Sanctification considered. 366
Concerning the Love of Christ to Believers. 392 Concerning the Saints Love to
Christ. 408
Errata.
Page 17. lin. 22. for which was imitated by, read which was an imitation of,
p. 52. l. 5. for truckle r. truck, p. 62. l. 28. r. sense, p. 65. l. 24. for
thou r. then, p. 76. l. 24, 25. and p. 77. l. 1. for guest r. ghest, l. 21. r.
Counsel, p. 87. l. 5. r. Counsels, p. 89. in the Margent, for p. 19. r. 29. p.
95. l. 29. r. workings, p. 97. l. 9. for the r. that, p. 114. l. 8. for Lydo r.
Lyaeo, p. 118. l. 5. r. nonsense, p. 126 l. 27. r. ghess, p. 139. l. 8. r. in
the government of our lives, l. 15 r. sense, p. 189. l. 10. for and that the r.
and that this is the, p. 225. l. 11. dele the, p. 337. l. 16. r. did not
continue there, p. 383. l. 11. for zeal; for God r. zeal for God.

THE INTRODUCTION.
CHAP. I.
ALL error has some appearance of truth; it being impossible to believe a
plain and undisguised falsehood: but yet most men are so easy and credulous, so
impatient of severe inquiries, or by assed by so many corrupt passions and
interests, that they are too often imposed on by very slight appearances: And
commonly the first and fundamental mistake is in a confusion of names, in a
doubtful and ambiguous use of words, especially in matters of Religion, which
depend upon Revelation, and must be judged by the public and authentic
Records of inspired men: for it happens too often in this Case, that men
consider nothing but the sound of words, and from thence form such uncouth
Idaeas of Religion, as are fitted to the meanness of their understandings, or
gratify their natural Genius and disposition, or are calculated to serve an
interest: And thus the Gospel of our Savior is defaced and obscured by
affected Mysteries, and Paradoxes, and senseless propositions; and Christ
himself, who was the brightness of his Fathers glory, and the express image of
his Person, who in the most plain and perspicuous manner declared the will of
God to us, is represented with a thicker Vail upon his Face than Moses, and the
glory of the second Covenant is much more obscured with a mist of words, than
the first was with Types and Figures.

This will appear to any man, who shall observe, what strange interpretations
are commonly made of those Texts of Scripture, especially in St. Paul's
Epistles, wherein Christ is mentioned, what absurd propositions are built on
them, what pernicious consequences drawn from them, to defeat the great ends of
Christ's appearing in the flesh.

I always took it for granted, that Christ and his Religion were very well
agreed, but, if we believe some men, there is as irreconcilable a difference
between the Religion of Christ's Person, and of his Gospel, as between the Law
and Grace: For the Gospel of Christ is as severe a despensation as the Law,
which dooms all men to Eternal misery, who live not very innocent and virtuous
Lives; but the Person of Christ is all Grace, a mere refuge and Sanctuary for
the wicked and ungodly.

Surely here must be a mistake somewhere; for I am still of the mind, that the
Person of Christ is not at odds with his Gospel; and that the Person of Christ
will save none whom his Gospel condemns; or if Christ would save those, whom
his Gospel condemns, viz. impenitent and incorrigible Sinners, I cannot imagine
how men should know this without a particular Revelation, and I hope, they do
not mean this by the private testimony of the Spirit to work assurance in them;
And yet we can think of no other way, since the Gospel is so silent in this
matter: But it is easy to observe, where the mistake lies: for some men,
wherever they meet with the word Christ in Scripture, always understand by it
the Person of Christ, and thus Faith in Christ, and hope in Christ, and the
like Phrases, are expounded of a siducial relyance and recumbency on the Person
of Christ for Salvation in contra-distinction to obedience to his Laws, which
sets up a Religion of the Person of Christ in opposition to the Religion of his
Gospel. And therefore the best way of rectifying this mistake, which sets the
Person and the Gospel of Christ at such odds, is to examine the various
significations of this name Christ in Scripture, which shall serve as an
Introduction to what follows.

And first Christ is originally the name of an Office, which the Jews call the
Messiah or one anointed by God: for under the Law, their Prophets, Priests, and
Kings, were invested in their several Offices by the Ceremony of anointing them
with Oil, which was typical of that divine Unction the Holy Jesus received at
his Baptism, when the Spirit of God descended on him like a Dove. All those
legal Unctions were accomplished in Jesus of Nazareth, whom God anointed with
the Holy Ghost, and with power, Acts 10. Verse, 38. which was his Consecration
to the Mediatory Function, and vertually contained all those Offices of
Prophet, Priest, and King, which are not properly distinct Offices in Christ,
but the several parts, and different administrations of his Mediatory Kingdom.

His Preaching the Gospel (which we commonly call his Prophetical Office) was
the exercise of his Regal Power and Authority, in publishing his Laws, and the
conditions of Eternal Life. Hence the Gospel is so often called the Kingdom of
Heaven, and our Savior tells Pilate, that he was born to be a King, and the
principal exercise of his Kingly Power in this World consists in bearing
witness to the truth, John 18. 37. that is, it was an Act of his Regal Power to
Conquer error and ignorance, to destroy the Kingdom of darkness by the
brightness of his appearing, and to erect his Throne in the hearts and
Consciences of men, by the power and evidence of truth; which is a true
spiritual Kingdom.

And he was a Kingly Priest, a Priest after the order of Melchizedec, who was
King of Salem, (the new Jerusalem which comes down from Heaven) and Priest of
the most high God. Hebr. 7. Verse 1. when he offered himself a Sacrifice for
sin, he acted like a King. No man took his life from him, but he had power to
lay it down, and he had power to take it again, in the 10th Chapter of St.
John's Gospel, and 18. Verse. Herein he differed from other Kings, that he laid
the Foundation of his Kingdom in his own blood, purchased and redeemed his
Subjects by the Sacrifice of himself.

And that, to which we commonly appropriate the name of Regal Power, that
authority he is invested with, to Govern his Church, to send his Spirit, to
forgive sins, to dispense his Grace, and supernatural assistances, to answer
Prayers, to raise the dead, and judge the World, and bestow immortal life on
all his sincere Disciples, all this is the reward of his death and sufferings,
and is therefore called his intercession, because like the intercession of the
high Priest under the Law, it is founded on his expiation and Sacrifice. With
his own blood he entered once into the holy place, having obtained eternal
redemption for us. Hebrews 9. Verse 12. so that intercession signifies the
Administration of his Mediatory Kingdom: the Power of a Regal Priest to expiate
and forgive sins.

This is a true account of the nature of Christ's Kingdom, and the method
whereby it is erected. He first conquers the minds of men by the power of his
Word and Spirit; and reduces them into subjection to God; and then he pardons
their sins, and raises them into an immortal life by the expiation of his
Sacrifice, and that Power and Authority, which is founded on it.

And this is the interpretation of the name Christ, which signifies a Mediatory
King, immediately appointed by God to that Office, and consecrated to it by a
Divine and Supernatural Unction. And thus the name Christ signifies in those
places of Scripture, where Jesus is said to be the Christ, i. e. that Messiah,
whom God promised to send; Which are so many and so obvious, that I need not
name them.

Secondly, Though Christ is originally the name of an Office, yet it is used in
Scripture to signify the Person, who is invested with this Office: for the use
of names being for distinction, and the Office of a Mediator, which is the
first signification of the name Christ, being appropriate to Him, it might well
serve for a proper name, when once it was known, who was the Christ. And
therefore though before his designation to this Office was publicly owned, he
was only called Jesus, the name given him by the Angel, before he was born;
yet, when by his resurrection from the dead, He was declared with power to be
the Son and the Christ of God, Christ became as much his proper name, as Jesus
was before. In the Gospels, which contain the History of his Life and Death, He
is always called Jesus, because all this time it was disputed, whether he were
the Christ or not; but in the Epistles, which are directed to the Christian
Churches, which were founded on this Faith, that Jesus is the Christ, he is as
familiarly called Christ as Jesus, and oftentimes by both, Jesus Christ. For
there can be no mistake in the Person, by what name soever he be called,
whether it belong to his Office, or Nature, or circumstances of his Life and
Fortune, if there be but One, to whom that name belongs.

Thirdly, Christ signifies the Gospel, and Religion of Christ, as Moses
signifies the Writings, and Laws of Moses, and the Prophets, the Writings or
Sermons of the Prophets; in the 16. Chapter of St. Lukes Gospel, 29. Verse, They
have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them; and in the 31. Verse, If they
hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though one
rise from the dead. And there is nothing more usual in common speech, than to
call any Laws, or Religion, or Philosophy, by the name of the first Authors:
Thus in the 6. Chapter to the Galathians 15. Verse. In Christ Jesus neither
Circumcision avails anything, nor uncircumcision, but a new Creature: that
is, in the Gospel, and Religion of Christ, nothing is of any value to recommend
us to the favor of God, but a new Nature, a holy and virtuous life: The Law
preferred Circumcision before Uncircumcision, but the Gospel of Christ makes no
such distinction; but instead of those external signs requires the inward
purity of heart. Thus in the second Chapter of the Ep. to Coll. 8. Verse;
Beware lest men spoil you through Philosophy, and vain deceit, after the
traditions of men, after the Rudiments of the World, and not after Christ.
Where after Christ is opposed to the traditions of men, and the Rudiments of
the World, and therefore must signify not the Person, but the Religion or
Gospel of Christ, i. e. have a care, lest you be corrupted with the foolish
opinions and superstitions of men, which are inconsistent with the Christian
Philosophy, a plain contradiction to the Doctrine and Religion of Christ. And
in the 6. Verse, As you have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk
in him. i. e. obey the Doctrine of Christ, as you have been taught it by us,
for so in the next Verse he calls it, Being established in the Faith, as you
have been taught. The like we may see in the 4. Chapter of the Epistle to the
Ephesians, 20, 21. Verses, But you have not so learned Christ, if so be, you
have heard him, and been taught by him, as the truth is in Jesus. Now what can
learning Christ signify? but learning the Gospel of Christ. And how could the
Ephesians, who never saw Christ in the flesh, be said to hear him, in any other
sense, than as they heard his Gospel preached to them, ver. 8. and to be
instructed in him, as the truth is in Jesus (for so (...) signifies, not, as
our Translators render it, being taught by him, but instructed in him) must be
expounded of his Religion, in its genuine and primitive simplicity, so as
Christ taught it his Disciples, without the mixture of such corrupt and impure
Doctrines, as the Gnostick Heretics had taught under the name of Christianity.
These I take to be very convincing allegations of the use of the name Christ,
for his Doctrine and Religion.

Fourthly, It is acknowledged by all, that Christ sometimes signifies the
Church of Christ, which is his body, the fullness of him, that fills all in
all: And thus we must understand those Phrases of being in Christ, engrafted
into Christ, and united to Christ, which signify no more than to be a
Christian, One, who belongs to that Society, whereof Christ is the Head and
Governor: thus it is used in the 12. Chapter of the Ep. to the Romans, 5.
Verse. We being many are One Body in Christ, i. e. we are all but one Christian
Society, which is the One Body of Christ. Thus Brethren in Christ, i. e.
Christian Brethren, 1 Colossians. 2. Verse. And, if any man be in Christ, he is
a new Creature: 2. Ep. to the Corinthians 5. Chapter 17. v. i. e. every sincere
Christian is a new Creature, or, whoever professes the Faith of Christ, and
lives in Society with the Christian Church, has obliged himself to live a new
life: but of this more in its proper place.

Thus variously is the name Christ used in the Writings of the Apostles, which
has occasioned very great mistakes in some men's Divinity, who are very zealous
to advance Christ's Person to the prejudice and reproach of his Religion. Who,
instead of those substantial duties of the love of God, and men, and an
universal holiness of life, have introduced a fanciful application of Christ to
our selves, and Union to him, set off with all those choice Phrases of closing
with Christ, and embracing Christ, and getting into Christ, and getting an
interest in Christ, and trusting, and relying, and rolling our Souls on Christ:
And instead of obedience to the Gospel, and the Laws of Christ, have advanced a
kind of Amorous and Enthusiastic devotion, which consists in a passionate love
to the Person of Christ, in admiring his Personal excellencies, and
perfections, fullness, beauty, loveliness, riches, etc. The Foundation of all
which Riddles, and Mysteries, is, that these men make the Person of Christ
almost the sole object of the Christian Religion, and whatever is spoken of
Christ with respect to his Offices, his Laws, and his Religion, they understand
of his Person, and personal excellencies. And therefore the design of this
discourse is to reconcile the Person of Christ with his Religion, that men may
not abuse themselves with a pretended devotion to our Savior, while they
contemn his Laws, and purposely defeat the great end of his coming into the
World. And to that end I shall discourse on these following Arguments.

First, Of what use the consideration of Christ's person is in the Christian
Religion; Secondly, What the Knowledge of Christ is; Thirdly, Wherein our Union
to Christ, and Communion with him consists; Fourthly, Christ's love to us, and
our love to Christ.

CHAP. II. Of what use the consideration of Christ's Person is in the Christian
Religion.
THE first thing to be stated is, of what use the consideration of Christ's
Person is in the Christian Religion: For those men, who talk so much of the
Person, and Personal excellencies of Christ frequently without any sense, and
generally without any just ground from Reason or Scripture, are very clamorous,
and alarm the World with strange jealousies and fears; as if there were a party
of men started up, who design to make Christ useless, and to reduce Religion to
its first Natural State, which knew no Priest, nor Sacrifice, nor Mediator. A
design, which, I profess, I am wholly a stranger to, as I believe all those
are, who are so much charged with it; The Foundation of my hope is that, which
is the Foundation of the Christian Religion, the Sacrifice and Intercession of
our Lord Jesus Christ. But I doubt not, it will appear in the Sequel, what the
ground of these calumnies are, viz. that we are charged with making Christ
useless, only because we dare not make his Laws and Religion so: And to prevent
such scandals for the future, I shall lay the Foundation of all in this
inquiry; of what use the consideration of Christ's Person is in the Christian
Religion.

By the Person of Christ I mean, what all men ought to mean, who talk of
Christ's Person, viz. Christ himself, as every man's Person is himself: and the
only proper consideration here is the greatness of his Person, who is the (...)
or God man, the Son of God, in whom his Soul was well pleased, who left the
glories of an Eternal Throne to undertake the work of man's redemption; and this
suggests many useful considerations, which have a great influence upon Religion.

As first, This is a plain demonstration of Gods love to Mankind, that he sent
so great and so dear a Person, as his only begotten Son, into the World to save
Sinners. All Religion is founded on a belief of Gods Goodness, He that comes
to God must believe, that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them, that
diligently seek him. Hebr. 11. 6. that is, must believe his Being and his
Providence, that he loves, and takes care of good men; for no man will serve
God, who does not hope to be the better by it. And therefore every Religion had
its proper demonstrations of Gods Goodness: Natural Religion was founded on
those natural evidences of the Divine bounty and goodness in making and
governing the World; the Mosaic Religion on those miraculous deliverances, God
wrought for Israel, and that particular providence, which watched over them:
the Christian Religion, on the Incarnation, Death, and Resurrection of the Son
of God; a work of such stupendous love, that it is the wonder of Angels, and
the astonishment, as well as praise of men. No man can doubt of Gods good will
to Sinners, who sees the Son of God clothed with our flesh, and dying as a
Sacrifice for our sins; this gives relief to our guilty fears, and does
encourage us to retrieve our past follies by new obedience, that we have so
great an assurance of God's goodness; for he had nothing greater to bestow on
us, than his Son; And he that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for
us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things? 8 Romans 32.

Secondly, This gives great reverence and authority to the Gospel, that it was
preached by so great a Person, as the Son of God. Laws always partake of the
fate and condition of the Lawgiver; the greater opinion we have of his Wisdom,
and Reverence for his Person, the more sacred regard have we for his Laws; and
therefore Numa pretended, that he received his Laws from the Goddess Aegeria,
to procure a greater veneration for them; which was imitated by Lycurgus, and
other Lawgivers: thus God, who at sundry times, and in diverse manners, spoke
in time past to the Fathers by the Prophets, has in these last days spoken to
us by his Son, whom he appointed Heir of all things, by whom also he made the
Worlds. 1 Hebr. 1. 2. And his greatness and Authority gives an inviolable
sanction and just reverence to his Laws. Therefore we ought to give the more
earnest heed to the things which we have heard, lest at any time we should let
them slip; for if the word spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every*
transgression and disobedience received a just recompense of reward, how shall
we escape, if we neglect so great Salvation, which at first began to be spoken
by the Lord, 2. Hebr. 1. 2, 3. To the same purpose is that Parable in Luke 20.
9. etc.

Thirdly, The greatness of his Person gives great authority to his example. He
came to be our Prophet and our guide, to teach us by his Precepts and his life;
now we love to imitate great Persons, and none so great as he, who was the
brightness of his Fathers Glory, and the express image of his Person. His
example secures the honor and reputation of virtue, and gives us an evident
demonstration, wherein the perfection of our nature consists; for he lived up
to the perfection of humane nature, and the only way to be perfect is to live,
as he lived. Nay the greatness of his Person makes all the expressions of his
love and goodness the more wonderful. That the Son of God should become man,
that when he was rich, for our sakes he should become poor, that the great Lord
of the Creation should become a Minister and Servant, that the Lord of life and
glory should suffer and die: These are such expressions of love and goodness,
as we can never fully imitate, because we can never be so great, as he was, but
yet they powerfully convince us, how reasonable it is for us to stoop to the
meanest offices of kindness, since we can never stoop so low, as the Son of God
did, when he came down from Heaven, and took up his Lodging in the grave.

Fourthly, This assures us of the infinite value of his Sacrifice, and the
power of his intercession: He was a Priest of a higher order than that of
Aaron, and his Sacrifice of a greater value than the blood of Bulls and Goats:
God cannot but be pleased, when his own Son undertakes to be a ransom, and to
make atonement for Sinners, which is so great a vindication of Gods Dominion
and Sovereignty, of the authority of his Laws, and the Wisdom and Justice of
his Providence, that he may securely pardon humble and penitent Sinners without
reproaching any of his Attributes. And we can reasonably desire no greater
security for the performance of this Gospel Covenant, than that it was sealed
with the blood of the Son of God, which is such a confirmation of God's
Covenant and Promise, as the World never had before; Christ is the surety of a
better Testament, Hebr. 7. 22. (...), one who undertakes for the performance of
it, and the security he gives us depends on the virtue of his Priesthood and
Sacrifice, and the power of his Intercession; for so in Verse 21. the Apostle
tells us, that God had confirmed the Priesthood of Christ by Oath, The Lord
has sworn and will not repent, Thou art a Priest for ever after the Order of
Melchisedec: And whereas other Priests died, and left their Priesthood to their
Successors, He continues for ever, and therefore has an unchangeable
Priesthood, and is able to save them to the uttermost, that come unto God by
him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them. Verse 23, 24, 25. And
who can desire a more powerful Mediator than the Son of God, to whom God has
given such signal demonstrations of his favor and acceptance by a voice from
Heaven, and by the glory of his Miracles, and his Resurrection from the Dead?

And that the virtue of Christ's Sacrifice and Intercession depends very much on
the greatness of his Person is plain from the Epistle to the Hebrews; the
design of which is to show, how much the Priesthood and Sacrifice of Christ
excels that of the Law, and the Foundation of all is laid in the first Chapter,
where the Apostle discourses of his greatness and excellency, that he was the
brightness of his Fathers glory, and the express Image of his Person; the Heir
of all things by whom he made the Worlds, exalted above all Angels, who has an
everlasting Throne and Scepter, and shall continue, when all other things
moulder and vanish away.

But Fifthly, The Person of Christ is of no other consideration in the
Christian Religion, than as it has an influence upon the great ends of his
undertaking, i. e. we must expect no more from Christ upon account of his
Personal excellencies and perfections, than what he has promised in his
Gospel: He has told us there, whatever he intends to do for us, and has
charged us to expect no more from him. Math. 7. 21. Not every one, that says
unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does
the will of my Father, which is in Heaven. That is, you must not expect, that I
will be better to you than my word, and receive you into the Kingdom of Heaven
upon easier terms, than I have promised, I shall be moved with none of your
flattering speeches, but how good and kind soever you may fancy me, unless you
obey those Laws I publish in my Fathers name, I declare before hand, that I
will disown you, when I come to judgment.

For indeed should he absolve and justify those men, whom the Gospel condemns,
that is, wilful and incorrigible Sinners, this were to disanul that Covenant
which he had sealed with his blood: Christ is the object of our Faith and Hope,
only as he is our Savior, and he is our Savior in no other sense, than as he
is our Mediator, and he mediates for us as our Priest, that is in virtue of
that Covenant, which he has sealed with his blood, and therefore we have no
reason to expect any thing from the Person of Christ, which is not contained in
his Covenant, much less which contradicts it, for that would be in effect to
renounce his Mediation, and to trust to the goodness of his nature: And let any
man judge, whether this be not to set up a new Religion, which has no Covenant,
and no Promise; for whatever we can expect from Christ by virtue of a Promise,
is contained in the Gospel, and if we expect any thing else from him upon his
Personal account, it is without a promise: which at best reduces us to the same
state, in which the World was, before God had made an express revelation of his
will, when all their hopes were founded on that natural persuasion they had of
the divine Goodness, that Faith, which is the Foundation of Natural Religion,
that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him. Hebr.
11. 6. thus these men trust in the Person of Christ without any Promise, nay
(which makes the case much worse) in contradiction to the terms of that
Covenant, which he sealed with his blood: they quit his Promise and his
Covenant, to rely and roll upon his Person.

This is so very absurd at first sight, that I know no man will be so
senseless, as to own it in so many words, nor do I charge any man with it; but
I say, this is the natural interpretation of trusting in the Person of Christ,
in his blood, and merits, and satisfaction, fullness, and alsufficiency, and of
relying and rolling the Soul on Christ for Salvation, and the like Phrases of a
late date, in which some men place the whole mystery of the Gospel; if they
understand any thing more by them, than expecting to be saved according to the
terms of the Gospel Covenant, that is, by believing and obeying the Gospel of
Christ; And certainly they must mean something more than this, or else they
raise a great noise and clamor in the World, and confound men's minds with
obscure and unscriptural phrases to no purpose: as will appear more in what
follows.

CHAP. III. Of the Knowledge of Christ.
SECT. I.
THE happiness of Mankind consists in the Knowledge and Love of God, who is the
greatest and the best Being, and therefore our good God, who is never wanting
to his own glory, and the happiness of his Creatures, has taken care in all
Ages by one means or other to make known himself and his will to the World.

In the first Creation of all things he left such visible impresses of his own
Divine Wisdom and Power on the works of Nature, and planted in the mind of man
such a natural knowledge of himself, that it was as easy to discover the first
Author of all things, as it is now for a well disposed eye to see the Sun, when
it shines; And while man preserved his innocence, God himself did not disdain
to converse with him, and to give him very present and sensible demonstrations
of his Power and Providence.

In after Ages as Mankind grew more corrupt, and declined to Idolatry, God
afforded good men the frequent apparitions of Angels, who were the great
Ministers of his Providence; and to instruct the more degenerate part of
Mankind, he raised up some great examples and Preachers of Righteousness, such
as Enoch, and Noah, and Abraham; and gave such plain and undeniable proofs of
his acceptance of these men, as might reasonably encourage others to imitate
their examples. He translated Enoch immediately to Heaven, and preserved Noah
and his Family in the Ark, when he destroyed the rest of the World by a deluge
of Waters, which was a signal warning to that corrupt Generation, while the Ark
was preparing and a great example to Posterity; he sent Lot out of the ruins of
Sodom, and made Abraham the Father of a great Nation, which was a convincing
argument, how dear these good men were to God, and what others might expect
from him, who would worship and fear him, as they did.

But when the World would not be reformed by these single Examples, God chose
the Posterity of Abraham to be a public and constant demonstration of his
Power and Providence, and care of good men. For when God chose the Posterity of
Abraham to be his peculiar people, he did not design to exclude the rest of the
World from his care and providence, and all possible means of Salvation, as the
Apostle argues in Romans 3. 29. Is he the God of the Jews only? Is he not also of
the Gentiles? Yes of the Gentiles also: which argument, if it have any force in
it, must prove Gods respect to the Gentiles before the preaching of the Gospel,
as well as since, because it is founded on that natural relation God owns to
all Mankind, as their merciful Creator and Governor, which gives the Gentiles
as well as Jews an intrest in his care and providence. This plainly evinces,
that all those particular favors, which God bestowed on Israel, were not owing
to any partial fondness and respect to that people, but the design of all was
to encourage the whole World to worship the God of Israel, who gave so many
demonstrations of his power and providence. For this reason God brought Israel
out of Egypt, with great signs and wonders and a mighty hand, (when he could
have done it with less noise and observation) that he might the more gloriously
triumph over the numerous Gods of Egypt, and all their enchantments and
divinations, and that he might be honored on Pharaoh and all his Host. For
this reason he maintained them in the Wilderness at the constant expense of
miracles, fought all their Battles for them, and many times by weak and
contemptible means overthrew great and puissant Armies, drove out the
Inhabitants of Canaan, and gave them possession of that good land. I say one
great and principal design of all this was to convince the World of the Majesty
and Power of the God of Israel, that they might renounce their foolish
Idolatries and Country Gods, and consent in the worship of that One God, who
alone does wondrous things; this account the Psalmist gives of it; that God
wrought such visible and miraculous deliverances for Israel, to make his glory
and his power known among the Heathen; The Lord has made known his Salvation,
his righteousness has he openly showed in the sight of the Heathen. Psalm 98.
2. That the Heathen might fear the name of the Lord, and all the Kings of the
Earth his glory, i. e. that all Nations might worship God, and all Kings submit
their Crowns and Scepters to him. Psalm. 102. 15. that by this means they might
be instructed in that important truth, That the Lord is great and greatly to be
praised, that he is to be feared above all Gods; for all the Gods of the
Nations are Idols, but he made the Heavens. Psalm. 96. 4, 5.

And as God set up the people of Israel as a visible demonstration to all the
World of his power and providence, so he committed his Laws and Oracles to
them, from whence the rest of the World, when they pleased, might fetch the
best rules of life, and the most certain notices of the divine will.

In such ways God instructed the World in former Ages, by the light of Nature,
and the examples of good men, and the Sermons of the Prophets, and the public
example of a whole Nation, which God chose for that very purpose.

But when long and sad experience had proved all these ways ineffectual to
reform the World, at last God sent his own Son into the World, to make a full
and perfect Declaration of his will, to give the best rules of life, and to
encourage our obedience by the most express promises of a blessed Immortality.
This was one great design of Christ's appearing in the World, to reveal and
declare God to us. John 1. 18. No man has seen God at any time, the only
begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him: and in
Math. 11. 27. All things are delivered unto me of my Father, no man knows the
Son, but the Father, neither knows any man the Father, but the Son, and he,
to whomsoever the Son will reveal him. That is, God has now committed unto
Christ all the secret purposes of his Counsel concerning the Salvation of
Mankind, which were concealed from Ages. None of the Prophets, which lived
before, did so fully understand it, nor have we any other certain way of
knowing this* but by the Revelation Christ has made to us.

Thus in John 14. 6, 7. Jesus says unto him, I am the way, the truth, and the
life, no man comes unto the Father but by me; if you had known me, you should
have known my Father also, and henceforth you have known him, and have seen
him. That is, I alone declare the true way to life and happiness, and no man
can thoroughly understand the will of God but by learning of me, and therefore
whoever knows me, i. e. whoever is acquainted with the Doctrine and Religion I
preach, knows my Father also, that is, is thoroughly instructed in God's mind
and will, as he proves in the following Verses. So that to know God, is to
understand the will of God concerning the Salvation of Mankind, and to know
Christ, is to understand that Declaration he has made of Gods will to the
World, i. e. the Gospel, which he Preached, which is therefore called, the
light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. 2 Cor.
4. 6. That is, that glorious manifestation God has made of himself to the
World by Christ: for the face of Christ, signifies all that, whereby he made
himself known, as a man is known by his face, that is, his Laws, and Religion,
and Miracles, whereby it appeared, that he was the Son of God, the great
Prophet and Savior of the World; by all this the glory of God was manifested;
in which the Apostle alludes to that shining glory, which appeared on the face
of Moses, when he came down from the Mount; which was but typical of that
bright and glorious manifestation, God would make of himself by Christ. God was
seen in Christ, he that has seen me has seen my Father, that is in plain
words, the will of God was fully declared to the World by Christ: upon which
account too (as well as with respect to his divine Nature) he is called the
brightness of his Fathers glory, and the express image of his Person. Hebr. 1.
1. those discoveries Christ has made of God, being a bright and glorious
reflection of the Nature and Attributes of God, of his Eternal Wisdom, and
truth, and holiness, as true a representation of the divine nature and will, as
any Picture is of the person it represents. It is plain, that in this sense
Christ is called the image of God. 2 Cor. 4. 4. Lest the light of the glorious
Gospel of Christ, which is the image of God, should shine unto them. Where
Christ's being the Image of God comes in very abruptly, unless we understand it
in this sense, that he is the Image of God with respect to the glorious
Revelations of the Gospel, which contain a true and faithful account of God's
Nature and Will.

The result of all is this, that God is the last and highest object of
Religious and saving Knowledge, i. e. that the only Knowledge necessary to the
purposes of Religion, is such a knowledge of God's Nature and Will, as is
sufficient to direct our actions, and encourage our obedience: and whereas God
was formerly known by the light of nature, and the works of Creation and
Providence, and those partial and occasional revelations of his will, which he
made to the World; now the only true medium of knowing God is the Knowledge of
Christ, who came into the World to declare God to us.

He knows God best, who is best acquainted with those Revelations Christ has
made of God's will: i. e. who understands the Gospel in its full extent and
latitude. This is the meaning of that expression in John 17. 3. This is life
Eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom
thou have sent, i. e. the only way to Eternal Life is to know the nature and
will of God, and the only certain way of attaining to the knowledge of God is by
knowing Christ, whom God sent into the World to publish the Everlasting Gospel,
who has made more perfect revelations of Gods will, than ever the World had
before, and who alone has brought life and immortality to light; so that to
know Christ is not merely to know his Person, which we can have no other
knowledge of, than what he has been pleased to reveal to us, but to be
acquainted with the whole Doctrine of the Gospel in its native simplicity, as
he published it to the World, which I observed before. The Apostle calls this
learning Christ, and being instructed in him, as the truth is in Jesus. For See
Chapter 1. concerning the significa. of the name Christ.
when we speak of the Knowledge of Christ, we must consider him as our Prophet,
and so to know Christ signifies to know his Gospel; and to preach Christ is to
preach his Gospel, to expound all those rules of life and Articles of Faith,
which are contained in it; whether they are concerning the nature of God, or a
future State, or his own Nature and Office, and Mediation. Thus Philip preached
Christ to the Samaritanes, Acts 8. 5. which in Verse 12. is called preaching
the things concerning the Kingdom of God, and the name of Jesus Christ. That is
the whole Doctrine of the Gospel.

This should make all considering men ashamed of those unreasonable and
groundless clamours, that Christ is not preached, unless he be named in every
sentence, whether the argument require it or not; as if preaching Christ were
to be understood in a literal sense of preaching nothing, but the name of
Christ: those preach Christ most, who are careful to confirm men in the belief
of the Gospel, and of that great promise of immortal life, who expound his
Laws, and the true nature and design of his Mediation; for every part of the
Gospel is part of the Knowledge of Christ, and his Laws as principal a part as
any, because the design of the whole Gospel is to make us obedient to these
Eternal Rules of Righteousness, whereby we are transformed into the nature and
Image of God, and qualified for the happiness of Heaven.

There is indeed a larger notion of the Knowledge of God and Christ, which
includes the virtue and efficacy of this knowledge: for the design of all
Religious knowledge being the Government of our lives and actions, how true
soever our speculations are, the Scripture brands all those as ignorant of God,
who do not love, and reverence, and obey him: and though we be acquainted with
the whole Doctrine of the Gospel, unless we heartily believe it, and obey all
those Revelations Christ has made, we know him not: John 1. 2, 3. Hereby we
know, that we know him, if we keep his Commandments. And Verse 4. He that
says, I know him and keeps not his Commandments is a liar, and the truth is
not in him. And 1 John 3. 6. Whosoever abides in him sins not, whosoever
sins has not seen him, neither known him. Not but that bad men may have as
true a speculative knowledge of the nature and design of the Gospel, as good
men have, but the meaning is, that this is a knowledge, which serves no end,
which wants life and sense, and makes men no better, than if they were
perfectly ignorant; and therefore is of no other account with God, than
ignorance, unless it be to aggravate their sins, and their condemnation.

SECT. II. Of acquaintance with the Person of Christ.
AFter this plain account wherein the Knowledge of Christ consists, the sum of
which is, that to know Christ is to understand his Gospel, which contains all
those revelations he made of God's will, it will be necessary to examine
another notion of the Knowledge of Christ very distinct from this, which
contains a greater secret, than at first one would imagine, and that is an
acquaintance with the Person of Christ, which if we will believe some men, is
the only fountain of saving knowledge.

I shall not envy the Author the glory of this discovery, and therefore shall
honestly confess, where I had it, viz. in a Book Entitled, Communion with God
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost each Person distinctly. Written by John Owen,
D. D. And that I may not do this Author wrong, I must tell you, what he means
by acquaintance with Christ's Person, an account of which we have in digression
2. page 87. of the excellency of Christ Jesus. Where he tells us, that Christ
is not only the Wisdom of God, but made wisdom to us, not only by teaching us
wisdom (that is by the Doctrines he preached, and those revelations he has
made of God's will) as he is the great Prophet of the Church, but also because
by the knowing of him, we become acquainted with the wisdom of God, which is
our wisdom. To which purpose he applies that Text, which speaks of the
Doctrines and Revelations of Christ, to his Person. Coll. 2. 3. For in him
dwell all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge. So that our acquaintance with
Christ's Person, in this man's Divinity, signifies such a knowledge of what
Christ is, has done, and suffered for us, from whence we may learn those
greater, deeper, and more saving Mysteries of the Gospel, which Christ has not
expressly revealed to us: for so he adds soon after, that these properties of
God (his pardoning mercy, etc.) Christ has revealed in his Doctrine, in that
revelation he has made of God and his will, but the life of this knowledge
lies in an acquaintance with his Person, wherein the express image and beams of
this glory of his Father does shine forth: that is, that these things are
clearly, eminently, and savingly, only to be discovered in Jesus Christ; as he
explains himself. So that it seems, the Gospel of Christ makes a very imperfect
and obscure discovery of the nature, and Attributes, and will of God, and the
methods of our recovery; we may thoroughly understand whatever is revealed in
the Gospel, and yet not have a clear and saving knowledge of these things,
unless we gain a more intimate acquaintance with the Person of Christ. This
indeed advances the Person of Christ very much, but is no great commendation of
his Gospel, and prophetic office: It sets up a new rule of Faith above the
Gospel, viz. an acquaintance with Christ's Person, in whom dwell all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge.

But that you may better understand the whole mystery of this Acquaintance with
the Person of Christ: I shall first show you what additions these men make to
the Gospel of Christ from an acquaintance with his Person; and secondly, show
you what an unsafe way of arguing this is, and how prejudicial to the Christian
Religion. First, to show you what additions these men make to the Gospel of
Christ from an acquaintance with his Person. And I confess, I am very much
beholden to this Author for acknowledging whence they fetch all their
Orthodoxy, and Gospel Mysteries; for I had almost pored my eyes out with
seeking for them in the Gospel, and could never find them; but I learn now,
that indeed they are not to be found there, unless we be first acquainted with
the Person of Christ. This is an argument well worth considering, and if this
discourse should prove long (as I fear it will) I doubt not, but the usefulness
of it will be a sufficient reward both to the Writer and Reader. And since I
owe this discovery to Dr. John Owen, I shall confine my self to his method, who
in the place abovementioned tells us, that the sum of all true wisdom and
Digr. 2* Of the Excellency of Christ Jesus. p. 89
knowledge may be reduced to these three heads.

First, The knowledge of God, his nature and properties. Secondly, The
knowledge of our selves with reference to the will of God concerning us.
Thirdly, Skill to walk in Communion with God. In these three is summed up all
true wisdom and knowledge, and not any of them is to any purpose to be
obtained, or is manifested; but only in and by the Lord Christ.
Where By is fallaciously added to include the Revelations Christ has made,
whereas his first undertaking was to show how impossible it is to understand
these things savingly and clearly, notwithstanding all those Revelations God
has made of himself and his will by Moses, and the Prophets, and by Christ
himself, without an acquaintance with his Person.

But to let that pass, I shall begin with the knowledge of God, his nature and
properties; and I shall not particularly examine every thing, he says, but
principally take notice of those peculiar discoveries of the nature of God,
which the World was ignorant of before, and of which Revelation is wholly
silent, but are now clearly and savingly learnt from an Acquaintance with
Christ's Person.

The light of nature and the works of Creation and Providence, and those
manifold Revelations God has made of himself to the World, especially that
last and most perfect Revelation by Jesus Christ our Lord; assure us, that God
is infinite in all perfections; that he is so powerful, that he can do whatever
he pleases; so wise, that he knows how to order every thing for the best; so
good, that he desires and designs the happiness of all his Creatures according
to the capacity of their natures; so holy, that he has a natural love for all
good men, and will not fail to reward them; but hates all sin and wickedness,
and will as certainly punish all obstinate and incorrigible Sinners; but yet
that he is very patient and long-suffering toward the worst of men, and uses
various methods of kindness and severity to reclaim them, and is as ready to
pardon them, when they return to their duty, as a kind Father is to receive an
humble and penitent Prodigal: These properties of God are plainly revealed in
the Scripture without any further acquaintance with the Person of Christ; And
had Christ never appeared in the World, yet we had reason to believe, that God
is thus wise, and good, and holy, and merciful, because not only the works of
Nature and Providence, but the word of God, assure us, that he is so: the
Appearance of Christ did not first discover the nature of God to us, but only
gave us a greater expression of God's goodness, than ever we had before:
confirms us in the belief of what we had learnt before from nature, and
Revelation, just as his Resurrection, which is an ocular demonstration of
another life, confirms us in the belief of that blessed Immortality, he had
promised; and yet we could not have learnt this neither from the Person of
Christ, had he not told us, for what ends he came into the World, as will
appear more anon.

And is not this a confident man to tell us, that the love of God to Sinners,
(...)
and his pardoning mercy could never have entered into the heart of man but by
Christ; when the experience of the whole World confutes him; for whatever
becomes of his new Theories, both Jews and Heathens (who understood nothing at
all of what Christ was to do in order to our recovery) did believe God to be
gracious and merciful to Sinners, and had reason to do so, because God himself
had assured the Jews, that he was a gracious and merciful God, pardoning
iniquitiy, transgressions and sins. And those natural notions the Heathens had
of God, and all those discoveries God had made of himself in the works of
Creation and Providence, did assure them, that God is very good, and it is not
possible to understand what goodness is without pardoning Grace.

But yet the truth is, considering what these men mean by the love and
pardoning Grace, and Justice, and Patience, and Long-suffering of God, I must
acknowledge, that these properties could never have been discovered but by a
too familiar acquaintance with Christ's Person; for Nature and Revelation say
nothing of them;

As for Instance, he tells us, that in Christ (that is in his death and
sufferings Digr. 2. p. 93.
for our sins) God has manifested the naturalness of this Righteousness (i. e.
vindictive justice in punishing sin) unto him, in that it was impossible, that
it should be diverted from Sinners without the interposing of a propitiation.
That is, that God is so just and righteous, that he cannot pardon sin without
satisfaction to his justice: now this indeed is such a notion of justice, as is
perfectly new, which neither Scripture nor nature acquaints us with: for all
mankind have accounted it an Act of goodness (without the least suspicion of
injustice in it) to remit injuries and offenses, without exacting any
punishment: And that he is so far from being just, that he is cruel and savage,
who will remit no offense, till he has satisfied his revenge. That part of
justice, which consists in punishing offenders, was always looked on as an
Instrument of Government, and therefore the exacting or remitting punishment
was referred to the wisdom of Governors, who might spare, or punish, as they
saw reason for it, without being unjust in either, and therefore, had not one
who pretends to so great and personal an Acquaintance with Christ said so, I
should rather have thought, that God's requiring such a Sacrifice, as the death
of Christ, for the expiation of our sins was not, because he could not do
otherwise, but because his Infinite Wisdom judged this the best and most
effectual way of dispencing his Grace:

But though this be a very terrible discovery of the naturalness of Gods
righteousness or vindictive justice, yet he makes some amends for it in that
comfortable discovery of his patience and long-suffering toward Sinners; for
Ibid. p. 95.
now in Christ the very nature of God is discovered to be love and kindness: a
happy change this from all justice to all love! but how comes this to pass? why
the account of that is very plain: because the justice of God has glutted its
self with revenge on sin in the death of Christ, and so hence forward we may be
sure he will be very kind, as a revengful man is when his passion is over; for
so he speaks very honorably of God, whatever discoveries were made of the
Patience and lenity of God unto us, yet if it were not withal revealed, that
the other properties of God, as his Justice and Revenge for sin, had their
actings also assigned them to the full, there could be little consolation
gathered from the former. That is, he would not believe God himself, though he
should make never so many promises of being good and gracious to Sinners,
unless he were sure, that he had first satisfied his revenge, which indeed is
such a Character of the Love and Patience of God, as we could never have
understood, but from an intimate acquaintance with the Person of Christ. The
sum of which is, that God is all love and Patience, when he has taken his fill
of revenge, as others use to say, that the Devil is very good, when he is
pleased.

But however sinners have great reason to rejoice in it, when they consider the
nature and end of God's Patience and forbearance toward them, viz. That it is
Gods taking a course in his infinite wisdom and goodness, that we should not be
destroyed notwithstanding Ib. p. 97.
our sins. That as before the least sin could not escape without a just
punishment, justice being so natural to God, that he cannot forgive without
punishing; so the justice of God being now satisfied by the death of Christ,
the greatest sins can do us no hurt; but we shall escape with a Notwithstanding
our sins. This it seems we learn from an acquaintance with the Person of
Christ, though his Gospel instructs us otherwise, that without holiness no man
shall see God.

As for the Wisdom of God (which is another property he instanceth in) no
doubt, but the Gospel of Christ makes great and glorious discoveries of it, but
then this is not very consistent with those other discoveries of the nature of
God: for if justice be so natural to God, that nothing could satisfy him but
the death of his own Son, the redemption of the World by Christ may discover
his justice, or his goodness, but not his Wisdom; for Wisdom consists in the
choice of the best and fittest means to attain an end, when there are more
ways, than one of doing it.

But it requires no great Wisdom to choose, when there is but one possible way:
and whatever Wisdom there is in Gods redeeming the World by his own Son, the
knowledge of it is wholly owing to the Revelations of the Gospel, not to such a
fanciful acquaintance with Christ as these men talk of:

Thus you see what excellent discoveries of the Nature of God are owing to an
acquaintance with the Person of Christ; And the second thing we learn from
hence is the knowledge of our selves, and that in respect of Sin, and in
respect of Righteousness:

As for sin, the Gospel assures us, that God is an irreconcilable Enemy to all
wickedness, it being so contrary to his own most holy Nature, that if he have
any love for himself, and any esteem and value for his own perfections, and
works, he must hate sin, which is so unlike himself, and which destroys the
beauty and perfection of his Workmanship. For this end he sent his Son into the
World to destroy the works of the Devil, and to reduce Mankind to their
obedience, to their great Creator, to restore them to the uprightness and
integrity of their natures, and thereby to a state of friendship with God: This
was the end of his holy Laws and precious Promises, and exemplary Life, and
meritorious Death, and glorious Resurrection, and powerful Intercession for us,
to deliver us from the Power and Dominion of Sin, to make us first holy, as God
is, and then to receive us into that Blessed place, where God dwells.

But now acquaintance with the Person of Christ makes just such a discovery of
sin, as it did of the naturalness of God's Justice to him; i. e. that the
desert and demerit of sin is such, that it is impossible to make any atonement
or satisfaction to the justice and wrath of God, but only by the Death of
Christ, otherwise Christ had died in vain: that is, that God could not forgive
it without full satisfaction, which nothing but the Death of Christ could make.

Thus we learn our disability to answer P. 110.
the mind and will of God in all or any of the obedience he requires: that is,
that it is impossible for us to do any thing that is good, but we must be acted
like Machines by an external force, by the irresistible power of the Grace and
Spirit of God; this I am sure is a new discovery; we learn no such thing from
the Gospel, and I do not see, how he proves it from an acquaintance with Christ.

But still there is a more glorious discovery than this behind, and that is,
the glorious end whereunto sin is appointed and ordained (I suppose he means by
God) is discovered in Christ, viz. for the demonstration of Gods vindictive P.
112.
justice in measuring out to it a meet recompense of reward, and for the praise
of God's glorious grace in the pardon and forgiveness of it. That is, it could
not be known, how just and severe God is, but by punishing sin, nor how good
and gracious God is, but by pardoning it, and therefore lest his justice and
mercy should never be known to the World, he appoints and ordains sin to this
end, that is Decrees, that men shall sin, that he may make some of them the
Vessels of his wrath, and the examples of his fierce vengeance and displeasure,
and others the Vessels of his mercy to the praise and glory of his free Grace
in Christ: this indeed is such a discovery, as nature and revelation could not
make. For nature would teach us, that so infinitely a glorious Being, as God
is, needs not sin and misery to recommend his glory and perfections, and that
so holy a God, who so perfectly hates every thing, that is wicked; would not
truckle and barter with Sin and the Devil for his glory. And that so good a God
had much rather be glorious in the happiness, and perfection, and obedience of
his Creatures, than in their sin and misery: and Revelation tells us the same
thing, that as much as sin is for the glory of his vindictive justice, yet God
takes no pleasure in punishing, delights not in the Death of a Sinner, but
rather that he should return and live: that is, he had rather there were no
occasion for punishing, than be made glorious by such acts of vengeance: and
therefore though God be so holy as to punish incorrigible Sinners, and so
merciful, as to forgive all true Penitents through our Lord Jesus Christ, yet
he did not ordain, and appoint, and decree sin to this end: for vindictive
justice and pardoning mercy are but secondary Attributes of the Divine Nature,
and therefore God cannot primarily design the glorifying of them; for that
cannot be without primarily designing the sin and misery of his Creatures,
which would be inconsistent with the goodness and holiness of his Nature. Thus
Nature and Revelation teaches, though these men pretend to have learned
otherwise from an acquaintance with Christ.

Thus much for the knowledge of our selves with respect to sin, which is hid
only in the Lord Jesus. But then we learn what our righteousness is, wherewith
we must appear before God from an acquaintance with Christ. We have already
learnt, how unable we are to make atonement for our sins, without which they
can never be forgiven, and how unable we are to do any thing that is good: and
yet nothing can deliver us from the justice and wrath of God, but a full
satisfaction for our sins, and nothing can give us a title to a reward, but a
perfect and unsinning righteousness; what shall we do in this Case? how shall
we escape Hell, or get to Heaven, when we can neither expiate for our past
sins, nor do any good for the time to come? why here we are relieved again by
an acquaintance with Christ: his Death expiates former iniquities, and removes
the whole guilt of sin: but this is not enough, that we are not guilty; we must
also be actually righteous; not only all sin is to be answered for, but all
righteousness is to be fulfilled. Now this righteousness we find only in
Christ, We are reconciled to God by his Death, P. 117.
and saved by his life, that actual obedience he yielded to the whole law of
God, is that righteousness, whereby we are saved: we are innocent by virtue of
his Sacrifice and expiation, and righteous with his righteousness.

Now this is a mighty comfortable discovery, how we may be righteous without
doing any thing that is good, or righteous. And I confess we could never have
known this but by an acquaintance with his Person; for his Gospel makes a
different representation of it; tells us expressly, that he is righteous, who
does righteousness, that without holiness no man shall see God: that the only
way to obtain the pardon of our sins is to repent of them, and forsake them;
and the only thing that gives a right to the promises of future glory, is to
obey the Laws, and imitate the example of our Savior, and to be transformed
into the nature and likeness of God: and though our obedience be not in every
thing exact and perfect, if it be sincere, we shall be accepted for the sake of
Christ, and by virtue of that Covenant of Grace, which he has sealed with his
blood, which admits of an Evangelical, instead of a strict legal perfection:
such different discoveries does an acquaintance with the Gospel, and with the
Person of Christ, make.

The third part of our Wisdom is to Digr. 2. p. 119.
walk with God, and to that is required Agreement, acquaintance, a way,
strength, boldness, and aiming at the same end: and all these with the Wisdom
of them are hid in the Lord Jesus. The sum of which in short is this, that
Christ having expiated our sins, and fulfilled all righteousness for us, though
we have no personal righteousness of our own, but are as contrary to God, as
darkness is to light, and death to life, and an universal pollution and
defilement to an universal and glorious holiness, and hatred to love; yet the
righteousness of Christ is a sufficient, nay the only foundation of our
agreement, and upon that, of our walking with God: though St. John tells us, If
we say we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness we lie, and do not the
truth, but if we walk in the light, as God is in the light, then have we
fellowship one with another, and (then) the blood of Jesus Christ his Son
cleanses us from all sins. John 1. Chapter 1. v. 6, 7. And our only acquaintance
with God and knowledge of him is hid in Christ, which his word and works could
not discover, as you heard above. And he is the only way, wherein we must walk
with God, and we receive all our strength from him; and he makes us bold and
confident too, having removed the guilt of sin, that now we may look Justice in
the face, and whet our Knife at the Counter door, all our Debts being
discharged by Christ, as these bold acquaintance and familiars of Christ use to
speak. And in Christ we design the same end that God does, which is the
advancement of his own glory: that is, I suppose, by trusting to the expiation
and righteousness of Christ for Salvation, without doing any thing our selves,
we take care that God shall not be robbed of the glory of his free Grace by a
competition of any merits and deserts of our own:

These are those great Gospel Mysteries and Soul-saving truths, which are
learnt from an acquaintance with Christ's Person, which his Gospel is so silent
in, or speaks so darkly and imperfectly of, that it was impossible to
understand them, without being first acquainted with his Person. And that you
may the better understand the whole design and contrivance of it, I shall put
every thing into its just and natural order;

God then from the beginning designed to glorify his justice, and his mercy,
and because there had been no occasion either to punish or pardon, unless man
had sinned, he appointed and ordained sin for the glory of his vindictive
justice and pardoning Grace: and accordingly (since nothing can withstand the
Decrees and appointments of God) it pleases God that Man should sin; but when
he has sinned he is extremely displeased with it, and now his Justice must be
satisfied; for it is impossible for God to forgive the the least sin without a
complete and perfect satisfaction; this falls hard upon those miserable
wretches, whose ill fortune it was, without any faults of theirs, to be left
out of the Roll of Election, and who have no way to satisfy the Divine
Justice, but by their Eternal Torments; by this it appears, how rigorously just
God is, that he will never pardon the least sin, when he can serve his own
glory by the misery and confusion of Sinners:

But this is but one part of the glory of God, to be just in punishing sin, the
other is to show mercy in sparing and rewarding the Sinner; now here was the
great difficulty, how God should be just, and merciful too, when Justice
requires a full satisfaction, and mercy excludes all desert. For the demerit of
sin being infinite, no Creature can expiate sin, but by enduring infinite, that
is endless Torments; and those who must be always miserable, can never be the
subjects of God's mercy.

To unite these two extremes, and reconcile such contradictions, was a work of
infinite Wisdom, as well as goodness; And it was effected thus. God sends his
only begotten Son our Lord Jesus Christ into the World to fulfill all
righteousness in his life, and to make a full satisfaction for sin by his
Death. For his blood being of infinite value (as being the blood of the Son of
God) could expiate an infinite guilt, and so make a complete satisfaction to
Justice; which is more glorified by the Death of Christ, than by the Eternal
miseries of all the Sinners in the World, because it discovers the naturalness
of Justice to God (which is the Position to be maintained) that he could not
pardon without full satisfaction, that is, that he is so just, that he has not
one dram of goodness in him, till his rage and vengeance be satisfied; which is
I confess a glorious kind of Justice:

But now the Justice and vengeance of God having their actings assigned them to
the full, being glutted and satiated with the blood of Christ; God may pardon
as many and great sins, as he pleases, without fear of the least imputation of
injustice: and now a glorious and more comfortable Scene of mercy begins to
appear; now God embraces Sinners, as a kind Father, and accounts them perfectly
innocent in virtue of that satisfaction Christ has made for their sins; but
this is not enough, the law of God must be fulfilled, as well as his justice
satisfied, we must be righteous, as well as innocent, otherwise we may escape
punishment, but can expect no reward (though I confess, I should have thought,
that Christ had satisfied for sins of omission, together with sins of
Commission: and as by his satisfaction for our doing, what we ought not to do,
we are reputed by God as having never done any thing amiss, so by his
satisfaction for our neglecting what we ought to have done, we might by the
same reason be reputed by God perfectly righteous, to have done all, that we
ought, to have kept the whole Law, but it seems this was not sufficient) and
therefore as the satisfaction of Christ is imputed to us for the forgiveness of
sins, so the righteousness of Christ is imputed to us to make us perfectly
righteous; and this makes the Grace of God perfectly free without any suspicion
of merit or desert in us.

And now God and Sinners may agree very well and walk comfortably together, for
though they have guilt enough, and he Justice enough to destroy a World, yet
there is no danger, since Christ has satisfied Justice; and though he be
infinitely holy and pure, perfect light, and Sinners abominably filthy, yet
there is no fear he should loath and abhor them, when they are Clothed with
the white and spotless Robes of Christ's righteousness; and they are so well
acquainted now with the design of God to advance the glory of his free Grace in
their Salvation, that they are very secure, that neither their past sins, nor
present habitual impurities can do them any hurt: but they shall be saved with
a notwithstanding their sins.

These are those fundamental Doctrines, with which these men have blessed the
World from a pretended acquaintance with Christ's Person, which are so unlike
the holy Religion of our Savior, that for distinction sake, it ought to be
called the Religion of Christ's Person, in opposition to the Religion of his
Gospel.

And since we have discovered the Principles of this new Religion of Christ's
Person, I cannot forbear inquiring briefly into the practical inferences from
it, that we may at once view the grand Mystery of this Religion both in its
principles and practice.

Now the practice of this Religion consists in accepting of Christ, and coming
to him, and applying his merits and satisfaction, and righteousness to our
selves, for pardon and justification; and in those duties which are consequent
upon such an Union and closure with Christ. For Christ having satisfied for our
sins, and fulfilled the righteousness of the law for us, it is a plain and
necessary consequence, that we have nothing to do, but to get an interest in
the satisfaction and righteousness of Christ, that they may be imputed to us;
for he is very ignorant of Christ, who hopes that any thing else will avail him
to Salvation.

Now that we may thus come to Christ and close with him, it is absolutely
necessary, that we be sensible of our lost and undone condition out of Christ.
How impossible it is for us to atone the wrath of God, or to have any
righteousness of our own, which can bear the severe scrutiny of his justice;
and in a sense of this we must work our imagination and fancy into great
terrors and agonies, and a dismal fear of the unsupportable wrath of God, and
his natural and inexorable justice: this is the spirit of bondage, which we
must lie under, before we can attain to the Spirit of Adoption: for we shall
never value and prize Christ, and go to him for Salvation, till we are
convinced of our necessity of him, and driven to him by the threatenings and
terrors of the Law; and the promise of ease and rest, is made only to the
weary and heavy laden; and these only shall be satisfied, who hunger and thirst
after the imputed righteousness of Christ.

And now being thus stung with sin, it is time for us to look up to Christ, as
the Israelites did on the brazen Serpent, that we may be healed; now we must
begin to see his fullness and perfection and suitableness to the wants and
necessities of our Souls, that he is our atonement and expiation, our wisdom
and righteousness, all that we can desire or need.

And if it should so happen, that the sense of our sins and unworthiness makes
us afraid to come to Christ, and apply him to our Souls, we must then have
recourse to our acquaintance with the Person of Christ, to answer all our
doubts, and quiet our Consciences. As for instance, Do thou object I am a
great Sinner, and will Christ save me? the Answer is easy, whom did Christ
come to save? whom does God justify but the ungodly? did he take our flesh
upon him, and not our sins? balance all things together, your sins and Christ's
merits together, and the greatness of your sins should not so much discourage
you from coming to Christ, as the greatness of his merits should encourage you
to come to him. For where sin abounded, Grace did much more abound. Compare
your distress and Christ's compassion together, your wants and Christ's fullness
together, your unworthiness and Christ's freeness together, your desires and
Christ's invitations together, your own weakness and Christ's strength
together, Satan's objections and Christ's answers together; and now if Christ
do not prevail above all thy fears, thou art not worthy to be acquainted with
him.

Nay further, if thou objectest, what Shepards sound Believer p. 80.
have I to do with Christ? why should he have to do with me; who have such an
unholy, vile, hard, blind, and most wicked heart? (the objection you see is
full and home to the purpose, but mark the answer) O! for the Lord's sake
dishonor not the Grace of Christ, it is true, thou can not come to Christ,
till thou art laden, humble, and separated from thy sins -- yet remember for
ever, that no more sorrow for sin, no more separation from sin, is necessary to
thy closing with Christ, than so much, as makes thee willing, or rather not
unwilling, that the Lord should take it away; and know, if thou seek for a
greater measure of humiliation, antecedent to thy closing with Christ, than
this, thou showest the more pride therein, who wilt rather go into thy self to
make thy self holy and humble, that thou may be worthy of Christ, than go out
of thy self unto the Lord Jesus to take away thy sin; In a word, who think,
Christ cannot love thee, until thou make thy self fair, and when thou
think thy self so (which is pride) will thou think otherwise of Christ.

And now the reason of all this is very plain from our acquaintance with
Christ; for he is our Physician, and therefore we must not think of healing our
selves, but must go to him with all our Diseases and Sores about us, that he
alone may have the honor of healing us. He is a Fountain set open for sin and
for uncleanness, and therefore we must go to him with all our filthiness to be
cleansed and washed, for if we be first clean, there is no need of a Fountain.
He is all fullness, and therefore it is not fit we should carry any thing to
him, as if he needed any thing from us. He is our Righteousness, and therefore
if we have any, we must leave all our righteousness behind us, when we go to
him. He is all beauty and loveliness, and therefore we must not carry any
beauty to him, but receive it all from him; So that all we have to do in this
great work, is to go to Christ weary, and sick, and filthy, and naked, stripped
of every thing, but our sins and impurities, to receive ease and health, and
fullness, and beauty from him. Christ is the gift of God, and therefore we must
only receive him by the hand of Faith, and apply him to our Souls, and then
what a blessed change and Metamorphosis is there presently made in us! for
though we continue as we were, yet we have all in Christ. We are now united to
him, and made his Members and Spouse, and so have an interest in all his merits
and fullness. Watson's Christ's Loveliness. page 462.
Christ says to a believer with my body, yea with my blood I endowe thee, and
a Believer says to Christ, with my Soul I thee worship (as if Christ and a
Believer were married by the Liturgy.) And now a Sinner may with the greatest
confidence look Justice in the face, as being out of its reach. A Soul in
Christ is actually united to him, and One with him, and being so, no sentence
of condemnation can fall on him, but the same must light upon Christ himself,
(and who would desire to be more secure than Christ is) as a Woman in marriage,
though she owe never so many debts, yet the arrest does not light upon her, but
upon her Husband: O blessed privilege! and who would be afraid of running into
debt with God, when he has such a Husband to discharge all. And then how vile
and impure soever men are, here is their comfort Watson's Christ's Loveliness.
p. 467.
when they are married to Christ, this is their glorious privilege, Christ's
beauty and loveliness shall be put upon them; his lilly whiteness shall be put
upon the Saints. And to Crown all, when they are once thus engrafted into
Christ, and made his Spouse, and Members of his body, they are secure to
Eternity. For nothing Watson's Christian Character, p. 60.
that ever was a Member, can be lost to Eternity; for is Christ divided? can he
lose a Member of his body? then his body is not perfect. No, no, fear not O ye
Saints, neither sin, nor Satan, can dissolve your Union with Christ (but what
if sin should make them no Saints, would not that endanger the dissolveing of
this Union?) For as the same Author sweetly reasons, if any branch be plucked
away from Christ, it is either because Christ is not able to keep it, or
because he is willing to lose it (and why not, because it will not stay?) he
The Spiritual Vine. p. 167.
is able surely to keep it, for he is strengthened with the Godhead, and he is
not willing to lose it; for why then should he shed his blood for it. And as
another great acquaintance of Christ's speaks, Weakness (that is no strength, no
Grace, Shepards sincere Convert. p. 77.
no nor so much as sense of poverty) do not debar us from God's mercy, and the
reason is very precious and convincing; for the Husband is bound to bear with
the Wife as the weaker Vessel, and shall we think God will exempt himself from
his own Rules, and not bear with his weak Spouse. Christ has taken upon him to
purge his Spouse, and make her fit for himself; so that if she be not purged,
and cleansed, and made fair and lovely, whose fault can it be but his own, and
surely that can be no just reason for a divorce. Thus you see, what it is to
come to Christ, and accept of him, and close with him; the result of which is
(so far as I can understand it) to be content to be saved by Christ without
being either humble or holy, fair or beautiful, any otherwise, than as he is
pleased to make us so, by his satisfaction for our sins, and the imputation of
his righteousness to us.

Let us now consider what duties are consequent upon such a union and closure
of the Soul with Christ, and they are consequential, conjugal affections. As
first a mighty love for her Savior, and head, and Husband: the Soul must be
enamoured with the beauty, and loveliness, and preciousness of Christ, must
form pleasant and charming ideas of him, and feel great ravishments and
transports of passion for him: You must be sick of love to Christ, O ye Saints!
and let him lie as a bundle of Myrrh always between your Breasts; Christ is
Watson's Christ's Loveliness. p. 462.
maxim diligibilis (as the Schoolmen speak) he is the very abstract and
Quintessence of beauty, he is a whole Paradise of delight, he is the flower of
Sharon enriched with orient Colors, and perfumed with the sweetest savor, O
wear this flower not in your bosoms, but in your hearts, and be always smelling
to it, and show your love to this lovely Savior. You must delight in his
embraces, and thirst after a more intimate acquaintance with him, you must
never be satisfied one moment without him, but must follow him from one
Ordinance to another, and never be satisfied unless you meet with Christ, and
enjoy Communion with him in Ordinances: this is the Foundation of the Saints
love to Ordinances, that there they meet with the beloved of their Souls, and
enjoy the sweet caresses and endearments of his love; there they hear of his
beauty, and loveliness, and riches, and fullness, and alsufficiency, and though
Evangelical truths will not down with a natural heart, such an one had rather
hear some quaint point of some virtue or vice stood upon, than any thing in
Christ, yet when the Grace of God has altered him, than of all truths the
truths of Christ savor best, those truths that come out of the mouth of
Christ, and out of the Ministry concerning Christ, they are most sweet of all.
Such sanctified Souls and Ears loath all dull, insipid, moral discourses, which
are perpetually inculcating their duty on them, and troubling them with a great
many rules and directions for a good life; which he is pleased to call the
quaint Points of Virtue and Vice; for this is not to enjoy Christ in
Ordinances, they go away from such entertainment without having met with the
beloved of their Soul, without hearing any news from him, or having the least
glympse of his beauty and perfections; which is a plain contradiction to the
nature and design of Ordinances, which are only for our enjoyment of Communion
with Jesus Christ. That is, to unload our Consciences, and disburden our sins
on him in our Confessions, and to beg of him the imputation of his
righteousness to make us lovely, and to put our Souls into some raptures, and
amorous passions to him, and to hear some good news from him by his Ministers,
how much he loves us, and longs after us, how pitiful he is to us, ready to
overlook all our miscarriages, and cover all our deformities with his own
beauty and loveliness, and to take us to the enjoyment of himself, that where
he is, we also may be, perpetually to behold his glory, and solace our selves
in his love:

Secondly, another consequential conjugal Act is obedience to our spiritual
Husband, a duty which few Wives care for, and the truth is, though the Gospel
of Christ be very plain and express in exacting this from them, and inculcates
it so much, that it savours too strong of a legal spirit and dispensation, yet
it is very hard to find a proper place for it in this new Religion, or to
deduce it from an acquaintance with Christ's Person.

For this is not necessary at all to our coming to Christ, and closing with
him, nay it is a great hindrance to it, for we must bring nothing to Christ
with us, the marriage is consummated without it, and then we have less need of
it than before; for then we are adorned with the beauty of Christ, are holy
with his holiness, we are delivered from the guilt of sin by his expiation, he
must look to it to see the debt discharged, which he has now taken upon
himself, and we are righteous with his righteousness, which gives us an actual
right to glory, and we need no righteousness of our own to save us, which were
to suppose a defect in the righteousness of Christ; so that, how obedience
should come in, is hard to say. It is concluded on all hands by those, who are
most intimately acquainted with the Person of Christ, that it is but a
consequential duty, that which ought to follow our Espousals with Christ, and
Justification by him, as a fruit and effect of it; but yet the reason of it is
not evident. Some tell us, that it is due upon account of gratitude and
thankfulness to our Savior, which I cannot so well understand, unless our
righteousness and obedience be due to Christ in thankfulness to him for saving
us without obedience and righteousness, which is just as broad as long, and we
get nothing by the bargain. Especially considering that this is hardly
reconcilable with that essential condition of accepting Christ, wherein these
spiritual Espousals consist. Viz That the Soul consents to take Christ I. O.
Communion. p. 63.
on his own terms, to save him in his own way, and says. Lord, I would have
had thee and salvation in my way, that it might have been partly of mine
endeavors, and as it were by the works of the Law (that is, by obeying the
Laws of the Gospel) but I am now willing to receive thee, and to be saved in
thy way, merely by Grace: that is, without doing any thing, without obeying
thee; the most contented Spouse certainly that ever was in the world, to submit
to such hard conditions, as to be saved for nothing; but what a pretty
complement does the Soul make to Christ after all this, when she adds, And
though I would have walked according to my own mind, yet now I wholly give up
my self to be ruled by thy Spirit. But the mystery of this will appear in what
follows: for others make obedience necessary upon account of our participation
of Christ's fullness, for this is one part of his fullness, a power and ability to
do the will of God, and this proves that it will be so, but makes it no
otherwise necessary to us, than as we are necessarily passive in it, and this
is all the Soul means in giving it self up to be ruled by the spirit of Christ,
to be passively, not actively good, to submit (as needs it must) to the
irresistible working of the Divine Spirit, and to obey, when it can rebel no
longer.

Thus, Reader, I have given thee an entire Scheme of a new Religion, resulting
from an acquaintance with Christ's Person, in all its fundamental Principles,
and practices; here is every jot and tittle of reason, it is founded on, or
pretends to, and the most obvious and easy connection of one part with another,
whereby thou may easily judge of the whole fabric and contrivance; and I
think there needs no more to expose it to the scorn of every considering man,
who cannot but discover, how inconsistent the Religion of Christ's Person, and
of his Gospel are: this is that knowledge of Christ these men glory in, as
containing greater Mysteries and more Soulsaving truths, than are revealed in
the Gospel.

SECT. III. How unsafe it is to found Religion upon a pretended acquaintance
with Christ's Person.
HAving thus showed you what that Religion is, which these men pretend to learn
from an acquaintance with Christ's Person, it is time now to consider this way
of Reasoning, and show you what an unsafe foundation it is to build any
Religion on.

And first, this is at best to build Religion upon uncertain conjectures, or
ambiguous and doubtful reasons; for suppose men were wary and cautious in
drawing conclusions from the Person of Christ, (which few of these men are) yet
what assurance can they have, that their inferences are true: Had we seen
Christ in the flesh, and been witnesses of the many miracles he wrought, of his
Death upon the Cross, and his resurrection from the dead, had he not acquainted
us with the end and design of all this, we might have guest, and guest, till we
had been weary, but it is great odds we had never guest right, or at best could
never have been secure we had.

We may understand necessary causes from necessary effects, and necessary
effects from necessary causes; if we see a fire we know it burns something, and
if we see smoke, we may safely conclude, there is some fire; but where the
connection of the effect with the cause is not necessary, but arbitrary, does
not depend upon the nature of things, but the institution and appointment of
free Agents, we can understand no more of the design, than the principal Agent
is pleased to tell us. This is the case here: Christ's coming into the World,
and all that he did and suffered for us, is the pure effect of God's free
Grace, and the design of his unsearchable Wisdom and Council, and therefore
none can understand the reason and contrivance of this, but he who lay in the
bosom of his Father, and those who learn from him: so that whoever would
understand the Religion of our Savior must learn it from his Doctrine, not
from his Person; because there is not a natural and necessary connection between
the Person of Christ, and what he did and suffered, and the Salvation of
Mankind: the Incarnation, and Life, and Death, and Resurrection of Christ were
available to those ends, for which God designed them, but the virtue and
efficacy of them does depend upon Gods institution and appointment, and
therefore can be known only by Revelation.

When we are acquainted by Christ, for what end he came into the World, and
suffered, and died, and rose again, we may discover the Wisdom and goodness of
God in it, in sending us such a Savior, and qualifying him in so excellent a
manner for the work of our Redemption; but we cannot safely draw any one
conclusion from the Person of Christ, which his Gospel has not expressly
taught, because we can know no more of the design of it, than what is there
revealed.

And is it not intolerable presumption for men to mould and shape Religion
according to their fancies and humors, and to stuff it with an infinite number
of Orthodox propositions, none of which are to be found in express terms in
Scripture, but are only pretended to be deduced from thence by such imaginary
consequences, from some little hints and appearances of things? Especially, is
not this unpardonable in those men, who cry down reason for such a profane and
carnal thing, as must not presume to intermeddle in holy matters, and yet lay
the foundation of their Religion, and erect such glorious and magnificent
Fabrics, on nothing else but some little shows and appearances of Reason? But
the plain truth is this, when men argue from the nature of God, and his Works
and Providence, from the nature of Mankind, and those eternal notions of good
and evil, and the essential differences of things, that is, when men argue from
plain and undeniable Principles, which have an immutable and unchangeable
nature, and so can bear the stress and weight of a just consequence, this is
carnal Reason; but when men argue from fancies and imaginations, which have no
stable nature, from some pretty Allusions, and Similitudes, and Allegories,
which have no certain shape, nor form, but what every man's fancy gives them,
this is sanctified and spiritual reason, but why I cannot imagine, unless that
it so much resembles Ghosts and shadows, which have nothing solid and
substantial in them.

Secondly, How dangerous this way of reasoning from an acquaintance with
Christ's Person is, appears in this, that it will serve any man's turn, who has
any quickness and vigor of fancy. It is an easy matter at this rate to set up
the trade of making new Hypotheses of Religion. I have already given you one
draught and Scheme of Religion from a pretended acquaintance with Christ's
Person, and it were easy to present you with many more, with as fair colors
and pretenses, and as exact and regular proportions, and fanciful consequences,
and artificial connexions; I need not tell you, what use all our Allegorical
Divines would make of this, who have the peculiar knack and gift of adapting
every similitude and resemblance, to what purposes they please: We know how the
Valentinians of old perverted all the passages of our Saviors Life and Death
by such fanciful applications to confirm the doctrine of their Aeones, and the
portentous production of their Gods, and to patronize all their vilest
practices; and if we allow of this way, I know not, why one man's fancy should
not be admitted as well as another. But to show how easily this acquaintance
with Christ's Person may be made to serve different purposes, I shall oppose
another Scheme of Religion, which is much more plainly deducible from an
acquaintance with Christ's Person, to what these men advance for the great
Mystery of the Gospel, and the only spiritual Wisdom; And thus I argue.

Since we see the Eternal Son of God leave his Fathers Throne, and condescend
to come into the World in the nature and likeness of a man, we may certainly
conclude, that it was upon a design of love and goodness; for had he intended
to destroy the World, he would have Clothed himself with thunder and
lightning, he would have appeared like himself with an awful and astonishing
Majesty, and with all the terrible solemnities of vengeance and judgment,
incircled with Legions of Angels, and with Clouds of smoke and fire: but we now
see nothing dreadful in his looks, nor in his Conversation, he was made a Man,
as we are, which argues a good will and kindness to humane Nature, he had all
the sweetness of innocence, and an obliging goodness, that we have no reason to
suspect any ill design under so charming and inviting an appearance, his
miracles were great and glorious, but not frightful and astonishing, they
surprised with wonder, not with terror and fear: his Almighty Power was
displayed and manifested in methods of love and kindness, in healing the sick,
and dispossessing Devils, in feeding the hungry, and raising the dead, not in
over-turning Kingdoms and Empires, or bringing fire from Heaven to consume his
Enemies. From all this we may safely conclude, that he came upon an Embassy of
Peace, to assure the World of Gods good will toward them, and to reconcile the
differences between God and Men.

And when we consider further, that this Heavenly Ambassador and Mediator is no
less than the Eternal Son of God, by whom the Worlds were made, we may
reasonably conclude, that he came upon no less design, than of universal
goodness, for he can have no temptation to partiality, as being equally
concerned in the happiness of all men, and we cannot imagine, why he should lay
a narrower design of love in the redemption, than in the Creation of Mankind;
that when in the first Creation he designed all men for happiness, in this new
and second Creation, he should design, and intend the happiness only of some
few, which is to make him less good in redeeming, than in creating Mankind,
though Creation cost him no more than the exercise of his power, but redemption
the expense of his blood: no sure, his goodness did not become less infinite
and boundless, when he became man; the design of his appearing was to restore
Mankind to that honor, and happiness, and immortality, they had lost; and to
repair the sullied glory of the first Creation by making all things new again.

Thus when we consider the innocence and holiness of his life, that he was a
great example of an unaffected piety toward God, and all the virtues of an
innocent and useful Conversation with men, we may reasonably conclude, that his
great design was to reform the debaucht manners of the World, to reduce Mankind
to the obedience of God, to teach man how to live as well as talk, and to
restore the practice of piety, and justice, of meekness, and humility, and an
universal good will, which had been banished out of the World by the
Hypocritical pretenses of a more refined sanctity in washing hands and Dishes,
in tithing Mint and Cumming, and such like pieces of legal and Ceremonial
Righteousness; But now our Savior by his example as well as laws, taught us
another Lesson, that as we lost our happiness at first by sin, so the way to
regain the favor of God, and an immortal life, is by the practice of a sincere
and universal righteousness. He came to be our example and guide to Heaven as
well as our Mediator and Advocate, and therefore we must imitate his life, if
we would enjoy the benefits of his Death and Intercession; for so holy a Person
can never be the Patron of Vice, nor an Advocate for impenitent and
incorrigible Sinners.

When we remember, that Christ died as a Sacrifice and propitiation for sin,
this gives us a great demonstration of Gods good will to us, how ready he is to
pass by all our former sins, in that he has appointed an atonement for us, and
given no less person, than his own Son, for our ransom, which is the greatest
assurance God could give us of his readiness to accept of true Penitents, and
therefore the most powerful motive and encouragement to return to our duty.

And besides this, the death of Christ assures us, what the desert of sin is,
and what will be the portion of all impenitent Sinners: for in that he required
the death of his own Son to be an atonement for sin, he has plainly declared,
that all Sinners deserve to die, and that none shall escape this just
Condemnation, but those, who are washed and purifyed in the blood of Christ: He
will not pardon sin without a Sacrifice, nor accept of any other atonement, but
the death of his Son, and accept of that for none, but those, who believe and
obey the Gospel; and if God did not think fit to save true Penitents without a
ransom, where shall the Sinner and ungodly appear. So that though we do not
pretend to understand the strict Philosophy of that atonement made by Christ,
yet we may easily learn all that is useful and necessary for us to know; that
Christ's Death and Sacrifice for sin Seals the Covenant of Grace and pardon to
all penitent and reformed Sinners, and seals the irrevocable decree of
Reprobation against all others; for that Covenant, which is sealed with the
blood of so great and stupendous a Sacrifice, must needs be irrevocable and
Eternal.

In the Resurrection of Christ from the dead, and his Ascension into Heaven, we
have an ocular demonstration of the rewards of holiness and obedience, that for
the innocence and purity of his life, and the humility and obedience of his
Death, he is now exalted to the right hand of God, and clothed with Majesty
and Glory. That Power and Authority, he is now invested with, secures us of the
prevalency of his intercession, of his constant care and providence over his
Church, of the influences of his Grace, and the supply of all our spiritual
wants, and of that glory and happiness, to which he will advance us at the last
day.

All this we learn from an acquaintance with Christ's Person (as these men call
it) and it were easy now to draw the whole plot and design of Christianity, to
search into the deep Councils of God, and to discover those principles and
motives, he was acted by, and the infinite Wisdom of the contrivance, and the
true methods of a Sinners recovery by Christ, and what that homage and worship
is, which we owe our Savior.

As to make some short Essay of it. Those natural notions, which we have of
God, acquaint us, that he is infinitely good, and the History of the Creation
assures us, that God made the World to be an image and representation of his
own glory and perfections, but especially Man, who was made after the image of
God, and endowed with that Wisdom and Knowledge, and all those Principles of
Piety and Virtue, which would have made him a living and active image of the
Divine perfections. This was the glory and the happiness of his nature to know
God, and to be like him, to praise and adore his great Benefactor, and to be
inseperably united to him by those natural ties of love and obedience. For
nothing else can be the happiness of a reasonable Creature, but Conformity to
the Divine Nature, which is the pattern and measure of all rational perfections
and happiness. And therefore when Mankind apostatized from God, they miserably
defeated the end of their Creation, and intercepted those natural
Communications of the divine goodness, by making themselves unworthy and
incapable of them: and now we may easily imagine, how much a good God was
grieved, and offended with this, not as a haughty and Imperious Prince would be
with the miscarriages and rebellion of his Subjects, but as a kind Father is
displeased and grieved for the disobedience of his Children, for their
refractory and unmanageable temper; not so much as an affront and contempt of
his own Authority, but as it is a necessary cause of the ruin and misery of
his Children, whose happiness he so passionately desires and designs.

This made the divine goodness so restlesly zealous and concerned for the
recovery of Mankind; various ways he attempted in former Ages, but

Of the Knowledge of Christ, p. 19.
with little success, as I observed before: but at last God sent his own Son
our Lord Jesus Christ into the World to be the great Shepherd and Bishop of
Souls, to seek and to save that which was lost.

And that we may be able in some measure to comprehend the infinite Wisdom and
goodness of this contrivance, and how well the means is fitted to the end, we
must consider that the whole Mystery of the recovery of mankind consists only
in repairing the Divine Image, which was defaced by sin; that is in making all
men truly good and virtuous. Sin is our apostasy from God, and does as
naturally make us miserable, as it makes us unlike the most happy Being. But
holiness restores us to our Primitive State, to the perfect constitution of our
Natures, and makes us good, and therefore happy, as God is.

And this was the great difficulty to persuade men to be good, to work upon the
different tempers, and inclinations, and passions, of mankind, and to reduce
them to the forsaken and untrodden paths of virtue: and though the laws and
precepts, the great promises and threatenings of the Gospel confirmed by so many
stupendous miracles, and by the resurrection of Christ from the Dead, have in
themselves a mighty power to reform the World, yet the consideration of
Christ's Person, of what he did, and suffered for us gives a peculiar force and
energy to them.

Sin and guilt makes men fearful, and it makes them disingenuous, they are apt
to distrust goodness or to abuse it: will either believe God implacable, which
makes them desperate, because there is no hope of pardon; or believe him to be
fond and indulgent, which makes them saucy and presumptuous; and to prevent
both these extremes of superstition, which are such professed Enemies to a
sincere and unaffected Religion, God sent his own Son into the World, and by
the greatness of his Person, and the manner and circumstances of his
appearance, did confute them both.

If guilt make us afraid of God as an angry and severe judge, behold here the
distance taken in the Incarnation of the Son of God, who condescended to come
down to us clothed with our nature, as a mild and a gentle Prince, by all the
methods of love and sweetness to reduce us to our Allegiance and subjection to
God; in him we see the good will of God to Sinners, here is a demonstration of
condescending goodness, which stooped as low as earth, and did not disdain the
nature and appearance of a man, nor the Conversation of Sinners, nor the shame
of the Cross, nor the pale terrors and agonies of Death and the Grave.

And to remove all possible suspicion concerning Gods love to Sinners, the Son
of God dies as a Sacrifice for our sins, to make atonement for us, and with his
blood Seals the Covenant of Grace and Pardon, and all the promises of Eternal
life. And still to give us the greater security of the performance of all this,
our dying and suffering Lord is raised again from the dead, and advanced to the
right hand of power and Majesty to intercede for us.

Thus God deals with us after the manner of men, and to encourage us to return
to our duty, has given us all the security of our acceptance, that guilt it
self (though infinitely jealous and suspicious) could desire: for what could we
wish for more, than that God should send so great and so beloved a Person to us
on an Embassy of Peace, than that the Son of God should be our propitiation and
Advocate, our Lord and Judge, he who took our nature and our infirmities on
him, who knows our weakness and our temptations, who died to expiate our sins,
and is entered into the Holy of Holies to intercede for us in the virtue of his
blood, and in the power of his glory, and the triumphs of his Conquests, and
with a tender and compassionate sense of our infirmities.

But then on the other hand to cure our presumption, that we may not think God
to be so easy, as to be reconciled to Sinners, and to their vices together;
the death of Christ upon the Cross assures us, what the merit is, and what the
portion of sin shall be; that all Sinners deserve to die, and shall certainly
have their deserts without a sincere repentance and reformation of their lives;
for to expiate sin by death can signify no less than this, that death is the
proper recompense of sin, and therefore that those sins which are not expiated
by the Sacrifice of Christ (as none are, till we repent and reform) shall
certainly be expiated by the Death of the Sinner. Especially considering how
holy our Priest and Sacrifice was, we cannot reasonably conceive, that he died,
or that he intercedes for incorrigible Sinners. The Sacrifice of his Death
extends no farther, than the example of his life, he was made manifest to
destroy sin, and in him was no sin.

Now though I dare not be so bold as to say, what infinite Wisdom can do, yet
it is not imaginable, how God could have contrived a more effectual way to
reform the World, which contains so many powerful obligations, such forceable
endearments, such ravishing charms; which makes such a pleasant and inviting
representation of God to the World, which so confirms our Faith, and encourages
our hopes, and enflames our love, and awakens our fears, and excites our
emulation, which does even affect our senses with the arguments of Religion,
and storm the lower and more brutish faculties of our Souls, and captivate
them to the love and obedience of Christ.

From hence it is easy to understand, what is the true method of a Sinners
recovery by Christ, and what returns of love and gratitude we owe our Lord and
Savior. When we are so affected with all the powerful arguments to a new life,
which are contained in his Incarnation, and life, and doctrine, and example,
and miracles, and death, and resurrection, and Ascension into Heaven, and his
Intercession for us, as to be sensible of the shame and folly of sin, and to be
reconciled to the love and practice of true piety and holiness, then we partake
in the merits of his Sacrifice, and find the benefit of his Intercession, and
have a title to all the blessings, and promises of his Gospel: this was the
design of Christ's coming into the World not to distract our guilty minds with
the terrors of the Law, and the inexorable justice of God, not to bring us
under a Legal dispensation of fear and bondage, but to encourage us to forsake
our sins, and reform our lives, by all the endearments of love and goodness,
and the lively hopes of a blessed Immortality, mixed with an awful regard and
Reverence for God, who is a holy and righteous Judge, and an irreconcilable
Enemy to all sin. This is such a method of converting Sinners, as is proper to
the Person of Christ, and the manner of his appearance, which was not designed
to cause tempests and Earthquakes in our minds, like the Thunder and Lightning
from Mount Sinai, but to work a reformation in the World by more silent and
gentle methods, and in more humane ways. If our Faith in Christ have reformed
our lives, and rectified the temper and disposition of our minds, and made us
sincere Lovers of God and goodness.

Though we are not acquainted with these artificial methods of repentance, have
not felt the workings of the Law, nor the amazing terrors of Gods wrath, nor
the raging despair of damned Spirits, and then all on a sudden (as if we had
never heard of any such thing before) have had Christ offered to us to be our
Savior, and heard the woings and beseechings of Christ to accept of him, and
upon this have made a formal contract and espousal with Christ, and such like
working of a heated fancy, and religious distraction, though our conversion be
not managed with so much art and method, and by so many steps and gradations,
we are never the worse Christians for want of it. For indeed this must needs be
the effect of ignorance, not of an acquaintance with Christ, which suggests so
many encouraging considerations to return to God, as to a merciful and
compassionate Father, and not to tremble at his presence, as a severe and
inexorable judge.

And hence we learn, that the truest expression of love to our Savior, is not
some fond and amorous passions, but obedience to his Laws, and the greatest
honor we can do him, is to imitate his example, and to express the power of
his death and resurrection in the exemplary holiness of our lives; for this
best answers the end of his coming into the World, is the fruit of his
intercession for us, and the greatest glory and ornament of his spiritual
Kingdom.

Thus I have given you a brief Scheme and Hypothesis of Religion from an
acquaintance with Christ's Person; and if they will own this a safe way, to
build Religion on an acquaintance with Christ's Person, they must own, what I
have now discoursed, which is much more agreeable to the Person of Christ, and
the design of his appearing, and more easily and naturally deduced from it,
than their own wild and fantastical conceits. If they do not like this, I must
advise them to quit this way, as the which will serve others as well as
themselves, and let us all fetch our Religion from the plain Doctrines and
Precepts of the Gospel of Christ, not from any pretended Personal Acquaintance
with him.

SECT. IV. How men pervert the Scripture to make it comply with their fancies.
THere is a very obvious objection against this whole discourse, the answering
of which will further discover the ill consequences of frameing such fanciful
Idaeas of Religion from an acquaintance with Christ's Person; And that is this,
that though these men deduce their Religion from an acquaintance with Christ,
yet there are no men, that so abound in Scripture proofs to confirm what they
say, and therefore they do not lay the Foundation of their Religion on such
uncertain conjectures; and the truth is, if you consult these men's Writings,
you shall find their Books stuffed with Scripture, or if you talk with them,
their whole discourse is little else, but Scripture phrase: but that Reverend
Doctor confessed the plain truth, that their Religion is wholly owing to an
acquaintance with the Person of Christ, and could never have been clearly and
savingly learned from his Gospel, had they not first grown acquainted with his
Person. And then it is no wonder, if they can accommodate Scripture expressions
to their own dreams and fancies. For when men's fancies are so posfest with
Schemes and Idaeas of Religion, whatever they look on appears of the same shape
and color, wherewith their minds are already tinctured, like a man sick of the
Jaundies, or that looks through a painted Glass, who sees every thing of the
same color, that his eye or Glass gives it: all the Metaphors, and
Similitudes, and Allegories of Scripture are easily applied to their purpose;
and if any word sound like the tinkling of their own sancies, It is no less
than a demonstration, that that is the meaning of the Spirit of God, and every
little shadow and appearance does mightily confirm them in their pre-conceived
opinions. As Inenaeus observes of the Valentinians, that they used one Artifice
or other to adapt all the speeches of our Savior, and all the Allegories of
Scripture male composito phantasmati, to the ill contrived sigment of their own
brain: and thus the minds of men are abused with words and phrases, and the
Scripture is pressed to serve every newfangled conceit in Religion.

The wildest and most extravagant opinions that were ever yet vented under the
name of Religion, have pretended the authority of Scripture for their
Patronage; though any unprejudiced man would wonder, how the reading such
places of Scripture should suggest such notions to them: but this is no wonder,
when we consider that men first contrive their Religion (as these acquaintances
of Christ do) and possess their Fancies thoroughly with their private opinions,
and then read the Scripture with no other design, than to find something there
to stamp Divinity on their own conceits. For it is easy to pervert the
plainest sense, and by the help of a strong imagination to make any thing of
any thing; such men dote upon words and phrases, metaphors, and allusions, as
best fitted for their purpose, they found their Religion on obscure Texts, or
Mystical interpretations of plain Texts, and by the help of some arbitrary
distinctions, and limitations, glosses, and paraphrases, by curtailing of
Texts, or transplacing words and comma's, or separating a single sentence from
the body of the discourse, make the Scripture speak their sense as plainly, as
the Bells ring, what every boy will have them. Which is to deal with the
Scripture (as Irenaeus observes) as if a man should take a Picture of the King
which consisted of an artificial composition of precious stones, and transplace
all these stones into another form, as suppose of an Ape, and then should
persuade silly people, that that was the Kings Picture: At this rate we may
find the Alcoran in the Bible, as well as make so many Books so different, and
contrary to each other, from the various compasition of twenty four Letters.
This is plain and evident at the first proposal to any intelligent Reader, but
to put it out of all doubt, I shall give you some Instances of it, and show you
how these familiar acquaintances of Christ (and who may better make bold with
him than they) take the liberty to pervert his Gospel to serve their opinion.

There are two ways of expounding Scripture in great vogue among them. First,
by the sound and clink of words and phrases, which is all some men understand
by keeping a form of sound words. Secondly, when this will not do, they reason
about the sense of Scripture from their own pre-conceived notions, and
opinions, and prove that this must be the meaning of Scripture, because
otherwise it is not reconcilable to their dreams, which is called expounding
Scripture by the Analogy of Faith:

First, they expound Scripture by the sound of words and phrases, that is, if
they can find any words in Scripture, which chime to the tune of their private
conceits, without ever considering the use of the words in those places where
they are found, they clap their own sense on them, and then they serve for very
solid and substantial proofs. I shall give you several instances of this way.

Thus when men are possessed with the fancy of an acquaintance with Christ's
Person, then to know Christ can signify nothing else, but to know his Person,
and all his personal excellencies and beauties, fullness and preciousness, etc.
and when Christ is said to be made Wisdom to us, this is a plain proof, that we
must learn all our spiritual Wisdom from an acquaintance with his Person.
Though some duller men can understand no more by it, than the Wisdom of those
Revelations Christ has made of Gods will to the World.

Thus when men have first learned from an acquaintance with Christ to place all
their hopes of Salvation in a Personal Union with Christ, from whom they
receive the free Communications of Pardon and Grace, Righteousness and
Salvation, what more plain proof can any man who is resolved to believe this,
desire of it, than first Ep. John 5. 12. He that has the Son has life, and he
that has not the Son, has not life. For what can having the Son signify, but
having an Interest in him, being made one with him; though some will be so
perverse as to understand it, of believing and obeying his Gospel; but the
phrase of Having the Son confutes that dull and moral interpretation,
especially when we remember, that it is called being In Christ and abiding in
him, which must signify a very near Union between Christ's Person and us, such
as there is between two things, which are within one another, which makes all
Christ ours, and us Christ's.

Now it is self evident, that before we can thus be united to Christ, we must
go to him, and therefore Faith, which is the Instrument of this Union, is very
luckily called coming to Christ: from whence it is very evident, that to
believe in Christ is to go to him for Salvation, which Metaphors of coming and
going are a very intelligible explication of believing. But when the Soul is
come to Christ, is this enough? no surely, the Soul then must receive Christ,
as Saint John tells us, to as many as received him, to them gave he power to
become the Sons of God. John 1. 12. That Faith, which serves us for legs to go
to Christ, must be a hand to receive him, and to apply all his merits and
fullness and righteousness to our Souls; and now when we have received him, we
must embrace him in our arms too, as good old Simeon did, when he found him in
the Temple, which is a little nearer Union; as plainly appears from the example
of the Patriarchs, who saw the promises afar of, and embraced them. Hebr. 11.
13. and now we have Christ, we must trust, and lean upon him, as we are often
commanded, to trust in God, which signifies that Act of Faith, whereby finding
and feeling our own weakness, as unable to support our selves, we do lean and
rest on Christ, and if leaning be not enough, we may make a little more bold,
and roll on him, as appears from Psalne 37. 5. roll thy ways on the Lord, as
the Original Gal signifies, which is that Act of Faith, whereby we being laden
with sin, and seeking ease, we at last discharge our Load, and cast it on
Christ. And this is plain from the phrase of believing In Christ, and On Him. 1
Peter 2. 6. for what can that signify, but leaning and rolling on Him, laying
and building our selves on him, as on a Foundation. And now we have thus
brought our Souls to Christ, we must commit them to his trust to take charge of
them, and save them, and if they perish, it will be his fault, and he must give
account of it. Thus Saint Paul did 2 Timothy 1. 12. I know whom I have believed,
and I am persuaded, that he is able to keep that, which I have committed to him
against that day. And now we must hide our selves in Christ from the fierce
wrath and displeasure of God, as the Dove hides in the Rocks, Cant. 2. 14. O my
Watson's Christ's Loveliness.
Dove in the Clefts of the Rocks. Christ's wounds are the clefts of the rocks,
where this believing Soul, Christ's Dove, hides it self. And besides this, a
Rock is a Screne to shade off the heat, so Christ is called Isai. 32. 2. a
shadow from the heat; he shades a poor Sinner from the scorchings of Gods
wrath. And then, We must fetch comfort too from Christ, as honey came out of
the Rock, Deuteronomy. 32. 13. he made him suck honey out of the Rock, and oil out of
the stinty Rock, the honey of the Promise, and the oil of gladness comes out of
this blessed Rock*

But this is not enough yet; for we must be clothed with the Righteousness
Idem.
of Christ, as appears from that expression that we must put-on Christ* Romans
13. 14. Gal. 3. 27. which can signify nothing else, but putting on Jesus
Christ, that is his righteousness, as men put on a Garment to cover their
nakedness, and to adorn them. And therefore Christ is resembled to a beautiful
Robe. Isai. 61. 10. He has covered me with the Robe Watson Ibidem.
of Righteousness: His righteousness is a lovely Robe, no Robe of Gold or
Ermin, wherewith Kings are invested, is so honorable as this. In this Robe we
shine as Angels in Gods Eye; The High Priests glorious Vestments, Exodus 28. 2.
The Mytre, the Robe, the Ephod of gold, and the Breast plate of precious
stones, did all but serve to set out the beautiful Robes of Christ's
righteousness, wherewith a Believer is adorned: thus if we would get the
blessing, we must go to God, as Jacob did in the Robes of our Elder Brother,
though I confess, this resemblance does not very well please me; for though
Jacob was a good man, yet this looks like a cunning trick, to rob his elder
Brother of the blessing, and to cheat his blind Father, and men must not think
that God is thus to be imposed upon. But however that be, this is plain, that
when we are thus united to Christ, and made one with him, then all Christ is
ours, as the Apostle tells us, All is yours, and you are Christ's, and Christ is
Gods: The merit of his Death is ours to free us from the guilt and punishment
of our sins, and his Active obedience to the will of God, his Righteousness is
ours for our justification, as is plain, in that he is called the Lord our
Righteousness, and is said to be made unto us of God Righteousness. And as I.
O. well observes, we are reconciled to God by the Death of his Son, and saved
by his life, that is by the Righteousness of his life, which is made ours. Romans
5. 10. And now what better proof can you desire for all this, if you will be
contented with express words. Though I am very much of the Doctors mind, that
we could never have discovered these mysteries clearly and savingly, had it not
been for an acquaintance with Christ's Person. No man would ever have dreamed of
such interpretations of Scripture, who had not been prepossest with the
mysterious notion of a fanciful Union to Christ, and application of Christ to
us: for here is no other proof of this, but words and phrases, separated from
the body of the Text, and the design of the discourse, and like straglers picked
up, and listed into the service of their Hypothesis.

For indeed the whole mystery of this, and a great deal more stuff of this
nature, consists in wresting metaphorical, and allusive expressions to a proper
sense. When the Scripture describes the profession of Christianity, a sincere
belief and obedience to the Gospel, by having Christ, and being in Christ, and
coming to him, and receiving him, these men expound these phrases to a proper
and natural sense, to signify, I know not what unintelligible Union, and
spiritual progress and closure of the Soul with him; An Union of Persons,
instead of an agreement in faith and manners. As will appear more hereafter.

Thus when they talk of our spiritual impotency, and inability to do any good
thing (for after all the noise they make about our coming to Christ, they mean
being carried thither with an Omnipotent and irresistible power) they prove it
wonderfully from our (...)
being dead in trespasses and sins, and therefore as a dead man can contribute
nothing to his own Resurrection, no more can we toward our Conversion: which
is true of natural Death, but will be hard to prove of a moral Death, which
consists in the prevalency of vicious habits contracted by long custom (which
was the case of the Heathens, whom the Apostle there speaks of) which do so
enslave the will, that it is very difficult, though not impossible, for such
persons to return to the love and practice of virtue: another argument of the
like nature is, that we are said to be created to good works, and to become new
Creatures, and therefore can contribute no more to it, than we did to our first
Creation: and that we are born again, which signifies, that we are wholly
passive in it: which were true indeed, if our being created to good works did
signify the manner and method of our Conversion, and not the nature of the new
Creature, which is the true meaning of it; that as in the first Creation we
were created after the image of God, so we are renewed after his 1
image in the second; which is therefore expressly called in other places the
renewing and renovation of our minds.

When this way fails, they take another course with metaphors, and similitudes
to make them serve their purpose, and that is, by considering all the
properties and qualifications of those things Christ is compared to, and
applying all, that will serve their turn, to Christ, without any regard to the
end, for which they are used.

Thus the Kingdom of Heaven, that is the Gospel, is compared to a pearl of
great price. Matthew 13. 46. This Pearl in some men's Divinity signifies Christ,
and the excellency of Christ appears plainly in this comparison. For Watsons
Christ's Loveliness.
other Pearls add no real worth to them, that wear them, but Christ this
Illustrious Pearl does, he makes us worthy with his worthiness. Excellently
turned to serve their purpose; though all that the Parable means is, that we
should be as ready to part with all for the belief and profession of the
Gospel, as other men are, to sell all they have to purchase a pearl of great
value.

Thus Christ was prefigured by Mannah, Idem. Christ's Loveliness.
and this Mannah was of a circular figure, and this Circle was a figure of
Christ's perfection; this was meat cooked and dressed in Heaven, God himself
prepared it, and then served it in, thus Jesus Christ was prepared and set
apart of his Father to the blessed work of Mediatorship. And Mannah suited it
self to every ones Palate, thus Jesus Christ suits himself to every Christians
condition; he is full of quickening, strengthening, comforting virtue. That is,
he is what every man fancies him to be, relishes according to the gusto of
their own palates: what precious discoveries are here of Christ! and what
irrefragable proofs for them! Thus to proceed, Christ was resembled to a Rock,
1 Cor. 10. 3. Watson. ibidem.
That Rock was Christ. And then he is a Rock for defense, and a Rock for
offense, and a Rock for Comfort to screne us from the wrath of God, and to
contain the honey of the promises. Christ is resembled by the brazen Serpent:
now Watson's true brazen Serpent.
brass being an inferior metal signifies the meanness of his humanity, and it
being a firm solid metal, it signifies the power of his Godhead, and though it
shines, it does not dazzle the eyes, and so signifies the glory of the Godhead
veiled with the Manhood: thus the brazen Serpent was made like a Serpent, but
was no real Serpent, so Christ was made in the likeness of sinful flesh, but
was no Sinner. The Serpent was lift up, so Christ was lift up in the
acclamations of Angels, in the preaching of the Gospel, and upon the Cross,
which the Pole was a Type of, and in our hearts by contemplating, admiring,
loving him. And the Serpent was lift up to be looked upon by the stung
Israelites, which looking employed a secret hope, they had of Cure, so if we do
but look on Christ fiducially, we shall be cured of our sins. Never was there
so happy a man in expounding Types; never was any brazen Serpent half so subtle.

Thus as the same Author tells us, Christ is compared to a Vine, and that upon
several accounts. The Vine of its self is weak, and must be supported and born
up, so the Humane Nature of Christ Watson's Spiritual Vine.
(which it seems is represented by the Vine) was of it self weak, and was fain
to be supported, and underpropt by the Divine Nature. The Vine grows in the
Garden, not in the Forest, thus Christ grows in the Garden of the Church, he is
not known among the Heathen: but I should have thought it more grand to have
said, that Christ this Spiritual Vine does not find, but make a Garden, where
ever he grows, since the Church owes its Being to him, not he to the Church;
thus the Vine communicates to the branches, and Christ shoots up his sap of
grace into Believers, who are the branches of this Vine: And the Vine has
rare, delicious, fruit growing on it, and thus the promises are the Clusters of
Grapes growing upon Christ the true Vine. And whereas other Vines bear but one
sort of fruit, this spiritual Vine bears many, the fruit of justification, the
fruit of sanctification, and the fruit of consolation. And the blood of Christ
is the Wine of this Spiritual Vine, which chears the heart of man, as other
Wine does, as he excellently proves from an old Latin Catch, Curam metumque
juvat dulci lydo solvere, that is let us drink away care, etc. and now what
fine work might a profane wit make with Scripture at this rate of expounding
metaphors.

But still they have a fetch beyond all this, which consists in jumbling
metaphors, and Allegories, and Types, and Figures, altogether, and proving one
thing from another in a most wonderful manner.

As suppose a man would prove, that Christ is infinitely beautiful and lovely,
this is a most easy thing to do, if you take the right method: for first, he
is Watsons Christ's Loveliness.
Lovely in his Titles, he is the desire of all Nations, the Prince of Peace,
the holy one of Israel, Elect and precious, these are most lovely Titles, which
argue him to be very beautiful.

And then he is lovely in his Types too: he was typified by Persons most
lovely: by Moses, and David, and Solomon, who were all lovely for one thing or
other, either upon account of Natural beauty, or education, or office, or those
great things done by them. But then he was typified by lovely things; As by the
Pillar of Cloud and Fire, which was most lovely to behold; by the Mannah, which
was very lovely too, because it was of a circular figure, and extraordinary
meat, and suited to every ones Palate; and by the mercy seat, and brazen
Serpent, and Noah's Ark. Who can forbear being smitten with so lovely a Person?
Lovely as a Pillar of Cloud and fire, lovely as Noah's Ark, lovely as any
Serpent, yea as a brazen Serpent? But besides all these, Christ is resembled to
a Rose, the Rose of Sharon, the Queen of flowers, and how lovely is this Rose.
To a Vine, the noblest of Plants, and oh what lovely Clusters grow upon this
Vine! To a Corner stone, and oh how lovely and precious is this Stone! to a
Rock, and a River in a dry ground, and a rich treasure, and a beautiful Robe,
and all these are lovely, (and so should any thing have been, that had come in
his way at that time) and who can doubt after all this, but that Christ is the
chiefest of ten thousands, yea that he is altogether lovely.

Thus if I had a mind to imitate these men, and prove that Christ is very
powerful, as well as lovely, most of the same types and resemblances, would
serve the turn. For he was prefigured by Moses, who did wonders in Egypt; He
was typified by David; who killed Goliath; by Solomon; who was the most powerful
Prince in his days; by the Pillar of Cloud and Fire, out of which God thundered
upon the Host of Pharaoh; By the brazen Serpent, which had power to Cure the
stung Israelites; by Noah's Ark, which was certainly very strong, that it could
resist all the force and power of the general deluge; He is resembled to a
Corner stone, which supports the whole building, to a Rock which is for
offense, and defense, to a rich treasure, and riches all men know, are the
Nerves and Sinews of Power, and he is most beautiful, and beauty is stronger
than all the rest, and Conquers more than Sword or Fire.

Thus Christ is very rich; for he is rich in Wisdom, and rich in beauty, and
rich in strength, and power, rich in his Godhead, and rich in his Manhood; and
then do but add Husband to all this, and he is a rich and a powerful, and a
beautiful Husband: thus Christ is Lovely, because he is rich and powerful, and
he is powerful, because he is rich and lovely, and Rich, because he is powerful
and lovely: and how is it possible these men should want proofs for any thing.
And is there any need now to prove, that all this is the work of fancy and
imagination, that it is nothing but phrase, and Religious tattle, the fruit of
precarious Hypotheses, and of a pretended acquaintance with Christ's Person; for
at this Rate it were easy to make any thing of any thing, to find out some
pretty words, and phrases, and allusions, types, or Metaphors, to countenance
all the feats of Enthusiasm, and the more godly Romances of Popish Legends. He
who would be an honest Reader of Books, who has no mind to turn every thing
into Burlesque, ought carefully to distinguish between proper, and allusive, or
metaphorical expressions, to consider the use of words and phrases, and the
great variety of Dialects, and the peculiar Moods of speaking in every
language, and in every age, and to urge Metaphors no further than their first
intention, without which we may deal by all Authors, as these men deal by the
Scripture, make them speak nonsense, or (as they use to call them) venerable
Mysteries, and overthrow and contradict their own design: And this is their
first way of expounding, otherwise called adulterating and debauching
Scripture, by the sound of words.

Secondly, When this will not do, then they argue and reason about the sense of
Scripture from their own preconceived notions and opinions of Religion, pretend
to prove their own Scheme and fancies of Religion from the Scripture, but in
truth prove the sense of the Scripture by its agreement with their own
opinions; which is such a trick, as the Papists have got, to prove the
Authority of the Church from the Scripture, and the Scripture from the Church.
I might give Instances of this in abundance, but I shall mention only some few,
lest I tire my self, and my Reader.

Thus after all their talk of being justified by the imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, there are a great many places of Scripture, which expressly tell
us, that we are justified by Faith, have Remission of sins by Faith, have peace
with God by Faith, are sanctified by Faith, are the Sons of God by Faith, have
Eternal Life, and are saved by Faith: now how do you think shall all these
Scriptures be reconciled to their notion of being justified by the imputation
of Christ's Righteousness: for Faith certainly is not the Righteousness of
Christ in their notion of it: why this is plain at first sight to these
acquaintances of Christ. For when Faith is said to justify, and save, etc. we
must not understand this absolutely, that is, we must not understand this of
Faith, considered as Faith, but we must understand it relatively, that Faith
justifies, as it brings us to Christ, and makes us one with him, by whom we are
justified: Faith apprehends the Righteousness of Christ, and the Righteousness
of Christ justifies: now this distinction is plainly owing to their
preconceived opinions, without which no man could ever have stumbled on it: that
when the Scripture says, that Faith justifies, the meaning should be, that it
justifies and saves instrumentally and relatively (words which the Scriptures
are unacquainted with) that is, not as it is Faith, but as it apprehends the
Righteousness of Christ; which in plain words signifies, that Faith does not
justify; though the Scripture so often says it does.

But now the Reason of this Interpretation is very plain; for should Faith
justify, as our own Act, (that is, as Faith) it would be as bad as good works,
and as perfectly irreconcilable with the free Grace of God: For had
justification been promised to any thing wrought in us, or done by us, it had
been of desert, not of Grace, of wages, not of mercy: if God had promised
justification upon any work of ours, had said, we must bring so much
humiliation, so much repentance, so much breaking of Spirit, so much Grace, so
many Prayers, Alms-deeds, (or so much Faith, as our own Act) and then we should
be justified, it would not have been of Grace, not of free mercy: though modest
men, who are not so apt to dream of meriting by every thing they do, would have
thought, that free Grace and Faith might have been easily reconciled, though
Faith had justified, as our own Act, since the reward and recompense does so
infinitely exceed the work that there can be no suspicion of merit, and where
there is no merit, the Reward is of Grace, and not of debt, whatever the
condition of the promise be.

But this is past all doubt, when it is confirmed by a metaphor or two, of
which there is great variety, some more apt than others: as for Instance: the
virtue is not in Faith but in Christ, as appears in this, a Ring, which has
Watson Mystery the Lora Supper, p. 64.
a precious stone in it, which will staunch blood, we say the Ring stauncheth
blood, but the virtue does not barely lie in the Ring, but in the stone in the
Ring: so Faith is the Ring, Christ the precious stone, all that Faith does, is
to bring home Christ's merits to the Soul, and so it justifies: so that if you
can but find out an improper and absurd form of speech in use among the vulgar,
or if you can but invent one, as this Gentleman does, for I never met with this
before; it is a sufficient reason to expound Scripture, as improperly as
unlearned men talk, or think; or if you can but fancy Faith a Ring, and Christ
a precious Stone, it is enough to answer all those places of Scripture, which
speak of that legal and meritorious way of justification by Faith: And thus
Faith justifies, as it is a receptive Grace: it is the receiving the Gold, that
enriches, so Faith receiving of Christ's merits, and filling the Soul with all
the fullness of God, must needs be an enriching Grace: In the body there are
Idem. p. 65.
Veins, that suck the nourishment that comes into the Stomach, and turns it
into blood and Spirits; Faith is such a sucking Vein, that draws virtue from
Christ, and therefore is called a precious Faith: Is not this very plain now to
him, who understands the nature of our Union to Christ, which is like that of
the Members of a natural body, and that we are saved by Christ, just as the
body is nourished by the Stomach.

And now to make all clear, we may give a Philosophical account, why God chose
Faith to be the Instrument of our Justification; because it is a humble Ibidem.
Grace, and gives the glory of all to free Grace. If repentance should fetch
justification from Christ, a man would be ready to say, this was for my tears
(strange deserving Creatures these, who can dream of meriting Heaven with a few
tears) but Faith is humble, it is an empty hand, and what merit can there be in
that? does a poor man's reaching out his hand, merit an Alms? (yes just as much
as a few tears merit Heaven) Faith is only a golden Bucket, that draws Water
out of the well of life; But why may not those, who are so apt to be conceited
of merit, grow as proud, that they have a golden Bucket, as if the whole Well
were their own.

Thus you see, how these men deal with the Scripture, and poor humble Faith,
make what they please of them, to fit them to their purpose; that Faith is
sometimes feet to go to Christ, sometimes a hand to receive him, a mouth to
feed on him, an eye to look fiducially on him, a Ring to hold this precious
Stone, a Vein to suck justification out of the Spiritual Stomach (which by the
way is a very new conceit, for though Christ is called the head, I never before
read, that he was the Stomach) a Bucket to draw water out of this Well, Christ,
though in this they are very civil to Faith, in making it a Golden Bucket;
whereas at other times they tell us, that Faith may be a sore and blear-eyed
Leah, a shaking and Palsy hand, weak and bending Legs, and have all the
infirmities that may be, and be never the worse neither as to the purpose of
justification; so that Faith had need be a very humble Grace, else it would
take such language very ill from them.

Thus to give you but one instance more; when these men are pressed with those
Scriptures, that urge the necessity of good works, and a holy life: that
without holiness no man shall see God; that the wrath of God is revealed from
Heaven against all unrighteousness, and ungodliness of men. That our
acceptance with God depends upon a holy and virtuous life: that God is no
respector of Persons, but in every Nation, he that fears God, and works
Righteousness is accepted with him. That except our Righteousness exceed the
Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees (those Immoral Hypocrites who placed
all their Righteousness in observing the Ceremonies of the Law without the
purity of their hearts and lives) we shall in no wise enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven. That he who breaks one of the least of these Commandments, and teaches
men so; shall be called least in the Kingdom of Heaven (that is shall have no
Inheritance there) and he that does, and teaches them, shall be called great
in the Kingdom of Heaven, that is shall be greatly rewarded, with many more of
the like nature, which assert the absolute necessity of a holy life, and
keeping the Commandments of God, to entitle us to his love and favor, and the
rewards of the next life; which perfectly overthrow their fundamental notion of
justification by the righteousness of Christ; the merits of whose death they
say free us from the guilt of sin, and that punishment, which is due to it,
make us as perfectly Innocent, as if we had never offended, and the
righteousness of his life imputed to us, makes us righteous, so as to deserve a
reward: gives us an actual title to glory: Now any one, who is not mightily
acquainted with the Person of Christ, would think it a very hard task to
reconcile this Doctrine of Justification by the imputation of Christ's
Righteousness without any thing of our own, with the necessity of a holy life,
which the Scripture does so expressly assert. But these men defy you, if you
charge them with destroying the necessity of a holy life: And I wish with all
my heart, that whatever the consequence of their Doctrines is, it may have no
bad influence upon their lives.

For they tell us, that this Universal Obedience and good works (a very
suspicious word, which methinks these men should be afraid to name) are
indispensably Dr. Owen's Communion with Christ, Chapter 8.
necessary from the Sovereign appointment and will of God, this is the will of
God, even our Sanctification; It is the will of the Father, and it is the will
of the Son, I have ordained you, that you bring forth fruit. John 15. 16. and
the appointment of the Holy Ghost. And then Holiness is one eminent and special
end of the peculiar dispensation of Father, Son, and Spirit, in the business of
exalting the glory of God in our Salvation; It is the end of the Fathers
electing love, he has chosen us, that we should be holy, Ephesians. 1. 4. the end of
the Sons redeeming love, who gave himself for us to redeem us from all
iniquity, and to purify to himself a peculiar people zealous of good works.
Titus 2. 14. and of the Spirits sanctifying love, as any one would easily guess.

It is necessary to the glory of God, to the glory of the Father, to the glory
of the Son, and to the glory of the Holy Ghost, whose Temple we are: and are
not these men now mightily injured in being charged with denying the necessity
of a Holy Life, who make it necessary upon so many accounts? Is it not great
pity, they should be so abused? But the truth is, all this is not one syllable
to the purpose; for the question was about its necessity to Salvation, and if
we be justified and saved without it, all this cannot prove any necessary
obligation on us to the practice of it: God has appointed and commanded
obedience, but where is the sanction of this Law, will he damn those, who do
not obey, for their disobedience, and will he save and reward those who do obey
for their obedience, not a word of this; for this destroys our justification by
the Righteousness of Christ only: And if after all these commands, God has
left it indifferent, whether we obey or not, I hope such commands cannot make
obedience necessary.

The Father has elected us to be holy, and the Son redeemed us to be holy: but
will the Father elect and the Son redeem none but those who are holy, and
reject and reprobate all others? does this Election and Redemption suppose
Holiness in us, or is it without any regard to it? For if we be elected and
redeemed without any regard to our own being holy, our Election and Redemption
is secure, whether we be holy or not, and so this cannot make holiness
necessary on our parts, though it may be necessary on Gods part to make us
holy, but that is not our care.

Obedience and a holy life is for the glory of the Father, the Son, and holy
Spirit: how so? when the necessity of Holiness is so destructive to free Grace,
which is the only glory God designs to advance by Christ. If this will not do
yet Holiness is necessary to our honor, for it makes us like to God. Profane
men that they are! as if the perfect Righteousness of Christ, his beautiful
Robes, were not much more for our honor, and did not make us more like to God
than the rags and patches of our own Righteousness: however if men prefer their
lusts and interests before their honor, the necessity of holiness ceases.

But it is for Peace. What Peace I pray you? Peace of Conscience? Why then must
we at last fetch our Peace and security from our own duties and graces? Is not
this to renounce Christ? Miserable men that we are! must we then I. O.
Excellency of Jesus Christ. Digr. 2. p. 113.
set about correcting our lives, amending our ways, performing duties required,
and so follow after righteousness according to the Prescript of the law? Why
this is the course, wherein many men continue long with much perplexity,
sometimes hoping, oftener fearing, sometimes ready to give quite over, sometimes
vowing to continue (their Consciences being no ways satisfied, nor
righteousness in any measure obtained) all their days; After they have tired
themselves perhaps in the largeness of their ways, they come at length with
fear and trembling and disappointment to the conclusion of the Apostle, by the
works of the Law no man is justified, and with David cry, that if God marks
what is done amiss, there is no standing before him. And is this the way, in
which we must seek for Peace? is this the way to enjoy Communion with God by
our own righteousness? why does not all our Wisdom of Ibidem p. 119.
walking with God consist in our Acquaintance with Christ? God is light and in
him is no darkness at all, we are darkness, and in us no light at all. He is
life, a living God, we are dead, dead Sinners, dead in trespasses and sins. He
is holiness, and glorious in it, we wholly defiled, an abominable thing. He is
love, we full of hatred, hating and being hated. Surely this is no foundation
of agreement, or upon that of walking (that is of Communion) together: nothing
can be more remote than this frame from such a condition. The foundation then
of this peace (that is of agreement and Communion with God) is laid in Christ,
hid in Christ, he, says the Apostle, is our peace, he has made peace for us;
he is the new and living way into the holy of holies. I am the way (says
Christ) and no man comes to the Father, but by me; he is the Medium of all
Communication between God and us, in him we meet, in him we walk. So that if
this Gentleman's memory had not failed him, he would never have told us in the
8. Chap. that holiness is necessary to our Peace and Communion with God: when a
little before he had disclaimed this, as wholly useless to that purpose.

But however holiness is very useful to all the purposes of life: that it may
be, and not necessary to Salvation: It serves for the Conviction of the Enemies
of God. How so? When it is not essentially necessary to his Friends; And it is
for the Conversion of others. Why so? When men may be converted without it: It
keeps the judgments of God from other men, as Ten good men would have preserved
Sodom. But why cannot the righteousness of Christ do this more effectually,
than the holiness of men? But, It is necessary in respect of the state and
condition of justified Persons: for they are accepted, and received into
Friendship with an holy God, a God of purer eyes, than to behold iniquity, etc.
and therefore they must cleanse and purify themselves. What need of this? When
they are Clothed with the Robes of Christ's Righteousness which is the only
foundation of our Communion with God, as you heard before.

But however holiness is necessary with respect to sanctification. We have in
us a new Creature, 2 Cor. 5. 17. this new Creature is fed, cherisht, nourisht,
kept alive, by the fruits of holiness; to what end has God given us new
hearts, and new Natures? is it, that we should kill* them, stifle the Creature,
that is found in us, in the Womb? that we should give him to the old man to be
devoured? The phrase of this is admirable, and the reasoning unanswerable: for
if men be new Creatures, they will certainly live new lives, and this makes
holiness absolutely necessary by the same Reason, that every thing necessarily
is, what it is, when it is; but still we enquire after a necessary obligation
to the practice of holiness, and that we cannot discover yet.

Well! But Holiness is necessary as the means to the end. This indeed is
something to the purpose, but let us hear how: Though it be neither the cause,
matter, nor condition of our justification (mark the Hypothesis) yet it is the
way appointed of God for us to walk in for the obtaining Salvation, and
therefore he that has hope of Eternal Life, purifies himself, as he is pure,
and none shall ever come to the end, who walks not in the way, for without
holiness it is impossible to see God. This I confess is all pertinent, and home
to the purpose, but yet there are two little faults in it; that it contradicts
it self, and overthrows their darling opinions, which I can very well pardon,
if he can: What? the necessary way to Eternal Life, and yet neither the cause,
matter, nor condition: at least you might allow the way to Eternal life to be
the causa sine qua non, without which we shall never get thither; and that in
spite of all your distinctions will entitle it to the nature of a condition.
But not to dispute about words, I am content it should only be a necessary way
to Eternal Life: but what becomes of Christ then? who is the only way, the
truth and the life: is not the righteousness of Christ able to save us without
an additional righteousness of our own? does the Active and Passive
Righteousness of Christ both free us from guilt and punishment, and give us an
actual right and title to glory? and yet can we not be saved without walking in
the ways of holiness? what becomes of free Grace then? is not this to eke out
the righteousness of Christ with our own? to make Christ our justifier, and our
works our Savior?

Thus you see, how men wrest and pervert the Scripture to make it speak their
sense, and justify their darling opinions and fancies, though not always with
the same success; for some truths are so plain and stubborn, that they will not
bend* but must be broke into the most palpable absurdities and contradictions,
before they can be fitted to their opinions, and then they agree like new
Cloth in an old Garment, which makes the rent the wider.

It were easy to produce many more instances of this nature, but this is
enough to show you how dangerous it is to pre-possess our fancies with some
arbitrary notions in Religion, which naturally force men to pervert the
Scriptures to make them speak the Orthodox language. To this we owe all those
nice and subtle distinctions, which constitute the body of Systematical
Divinity, which commonly have no other design, than to evade the force of
Scripture, or to bribe it to speak on their side. The Authority of Scripture is
sacred and inviolable, and it is dangerous to call that into question, whatever
acquaintance men have with the Person of Christ; but as Mr. Chillingworth
observes of the Church of Rome, that to establish her Tyranny over men's
Consciences, she need not either abolish or corrupt the holy Scripture (which
in regard of the numerous multitude of Copies dispersed through all places,
translated into almost all languages, guarded with all solicitous care and
industry, had been an impossible attempt) but the more expedite way, and
therefore the more likely to be successful, was to gain the opinion and esteem
of the public and authorized Interpreter of them, and the Authority of adding
to them, what Doctrines she pleased under the title of traditions or
definitions. Thus though their fancies and the Scripture agree no better, than
the Church of Rome and the Scripture do, yet they may be both retained, so
their opinions may but expound the Scriptures, and add such limitations,
distinctions, glosses, etc. as are necessary to make them Orthodox.

The sum of all is, that to know Christ is not to be thus acquainted with his
Person, but to understand his Gospel in its full latitude and extent; It is not
the Person, but the Gospel of Christ, which is the way, the truth, and the
life, which directs us in the true way to life and happiness. Which instructs
us in our duty, and furnishes us with all the motives and arguments to a good
life, and gives us the greatest assurance of our reward. This Acquaintance with
Christ's Person, which these men pretend to, is only a work of fancy, and
teaches men the Arts of Hypocrisy, it undermines the fundamental design of the
Gospel, makes men incurably ignorant, and yet conceited of their own knowledge,
impertinent and endless talkers, and insolent Censurers of all Mankind: every
Boy, who is acquainted with these notions, learns to despise the ignorance of
his teachers, as if they knew nothing of Christ, and of the Mystery of the
Gospel; and now the Laws of Christ will not down with them, this is moral and
legal Preaching; nothing appears wholesome and savoury to their palates, but
some Romantic descriptions of the beauty, loveliness, fullness, and
preciousness of Christ. But I hope hereafter they will see reason to believe,
that we are not such Strangers to Christ, as they imagine, but have a greater
Reverence for him, than to be so rude and unmannerly, than to make so bold with
his Person, and with his Laws; and are too honest to abuse the people with such
dreams and fruitless speculations.

The wildness and distraction of these men makes me so much the more admire the
Wisdom and the Honesty of our Church, who in her public Catechism has been
careful to prevent these cheats and delusions of fancy: feeds her Children with
wholesome and substantial food, has taught them a Religion without Art or
Subtilty, has instructed them in the nature of their Baptismal Vow, and those
obligations it lays on them to a virtuous life: has taught them the Apostles
Creed, which contains those great and essential Articles of Religion, which are
the necessary Principles of Action, has given them a plain and easy
explication of the Ten Commandments, which are the rules of a good life, has
taught them to pray to God, and what the true design of our Saviors
Institutions is, without filling their heads with notions and Artificial
Theories of Religion, which serve only to make them giddy with a vain conceit
of knowledge, to talk ill, and to live worse.

And now it is time to dismiss these acquaintances of Christ, and if nothing
will make them wiser, to leave them to their own dreams and dotage; only
advising them, that however they may indulge themselves in these choice
speculations, they would have a care of pretending any acquaintance with
Christ's Person for the neglect or contempt of his Laws, lest they fare as ill,
as another of his acquaintance did, Luke 19. 21. who argued from the severity
of his temper and disposition to apologize for his own sloth and idleness. for
I feared Thee, because thou art an austere man, who take up that thou layedst
not down, and reapest that, thou did not sow. But it seems, as great an
acquaintance as he was, he drew a very false conclusion, when he hid his Talent
in a Napkin, as his Lord convinct him to his cost: and it will be the same
case, though we argue from other Principles, not from the severity, but from
the fondness and Indulgence of our Savior, from the merits of his Death, or
the Imputation of his Righteousness: The safest way is to do what he bids us,
lest he be too hard for us at Reasoning, and making Hypothesis.

But yet there is one thing more, which I must take notice of: that as when the
Scripture speaks of the knowledge of Christ, it includes not only the
speculative part of knowledge, which consists in true notions, and opinions,
but the virtue and efficacy of this knowledge in the government of lives, in
transforming us into the likeness of our Lord and Savior, and and making us
obedient to his Laws; without which all our knowledge is but like a curious
piece of painting, an accurate Image and Picture, without life or sense: so
these men talk also of an experimental knowledge of Christ; the meaning of
which is, that this acquaintance with the Person of Christ warms and heats
their fancies, and moves their passions; sometimes they find great breakings of
heart, they melt and dissolve into tears for their sins, when they remember,
what their Lord suffered for them, they see him hang upon the Cross, and have
all his agonies, and dying groans in their Ears; and then they Curse their sins
that nailed him there, and tremble at the thoughts of the Naturalness of Gods
vindictive justice to him: and feel all the horrors and agonies of damned
Spirits: at other times they are mightily ravished with his love, and charmed
and captivated with his beauty: fancy they have him in their arms in the
closest embraces; they hear Christ call them by name, and say to them, as he
did to that Woman in the Gospel, thy sins are forgiven thee. They are refresht
and ravished with his Comforts, and the sweet Caresses of his love: they see
Christ adorning them with the beautiful Robes of his Righteousness, owning them
for his dearest Spouse, and expressing all Conjugal affections to them; now
they taste and relish the sweetness of Christ, which other men only talk of, and
have an experimental sense of his fullness to supply their wants, of his Love in
chearing their Souls, of his beauty in adorning them, they are all life and
spirit, which is a plain argument, that now Christ has taken up his abode with
them.

This will fall under consideration in what follows; at present I shall only
say this; that all this may be no more, than the working of a warm and
Enthusiastic fancy, and no man ought to think himself ever the more
experimentally acquainted with Christ, unless he find the power of it in
governing his life: It is very desirable to have always such a quick and
vigorous sense of the love of our dying Lord, as may constrain us to live to
him, who dyed for us; but without this we are still ignorant of him, however we
may be transported with these frantic raptures and exstasies of love and joy.

CHAP. IV. Of our Union to Christ, and Communion with him.
SECT. I.
NExt to the knowledge of Christ there is not a greater Mystery, than our Union
to him, and Communion with him; on which, as these men represent it, are built
all those wild and fanciful conclusions, which so directly oppose both the
Doctrines and practice of Christianity. And therefore it is of great
concernment to state this matter, and to examine, what is meant in Scripture by
our Union to Christ, and Communion with him; for the Scripture does mention
such a relation between Christ and Christians, as may be expressed by an Union,
and those phrases of being in Christ, and abiding in him, can signify no less.

And first, I observe, that those metaphors, I.
which describe the Relation and Union betwixt Christ and Christians, do
primarily refer to the Christian Church, not to every individual Christian.
Thus Christ is called a Head, but he is the head of his Church, which is his
body, as a Husband is the head of the Wife, Ephesians. 5. 23, 24. No particular
Christian is the body of Christ, but only a member in this body. Christ is
called a Husband, but then the whole Church or Society of Christians, not every
particular Christian, is his Spouse, as St. Paul tells the Church of Corinth, 2
Cor. 11. 2. For I am jealous over you with a godly jealousy; for I have
espoused you to one Husband, that I may present you as a chaste Virgin to
Christ. Christ is a Shepherd, and the Christian Church is his Flock, John 10.
For the relation between Shepherd and Sheep does primarily concern the whole
Flock: Christ is the Rock, upon which his Church is built, the chief Corner
Stone, and the Christian Church a Holy Temple: so that all these Metaphors in
their first and most proper use refer to the whole Society of Christians, and
are designed to represent the Union between Christ and his Church.

Secondly, I observe further, that II.
the Union of particular Christians to Christ is by means of their Union to the
Christian Church: the Church is the body of Christ, and every Christian by
being united to this body becomes a member of Christ, as the Apostle tells the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 12. 27. Now you are the body of Christ, and members in
particular. The Church is the Temple of God built upon the foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ being the chief Corner stone, and every
Christian is a lively stone in this spiritual building: The Church is Christ's
Flock, and every Christian, who is of this fold, is one of Christ's Sheep. The
Church is Christ's Spouse, and every Christian is a member of that Society,
which Christ ownes for his Spouse: but every Christian is not Christ's Spouse;
He is a great Enemy to Polygamy, and has but one Spouse, as he has but one
body, and one Church; which quite spoils the prettiness and fantastical Wit of
a late Exhortation to young Women to choose Christ for their Husband, because he
is rich, and beautiful, Thomas Vincent.
and kind, and has all the properties of an excellent Husband; which would
have sounded much better in a Popish Nunnery, than among such pretenders to
reformation: for this is the great Art, whereby those cunning Priests wheedle
silly Girls into a profession of perpetual Virginity, by persuading them that
in so doing, they are married to Christ: And to give every one their due, the
Papists are the most generous sort of Suitors for Christ, for they persuade
them to forsake all other Husbands for Christ, which is more honorable and
meritorious.

Thus to proceed, Christ is called the Vine, and Christians the branches in
that Vine, John 15. which must be expounded to the same sense with what goes
before, where Christ speaking of himself says, I am the true Vine. The meaning
is, that Church, which is founded on the belief of my Gospel, is the true Vine:
I, signifies Christ together with his Church, which is his body: upon which
account the Church is elsewhere called Christ, as I observed above. And my
reasons for this exposition are these:

First, Because the Jewish Church is frequently in the Old Testament compared
to a Vine, Isaiah 5. Ier. 2. 21. Hosea 10. 1. Now a Vine being the metaphor,
whereby the Church uses to be described, we cannot reasonably understand it
otherwise here; I am the true Vine, that is the Church, which is founded on the
belief of my Gospel, is the only true Church, which God now owns; He having
rejected the Jewish Synagogue, as proving a degenerate Vine. Especially when we
consider, that Christ himself applies the Parable of the Vineyard to the State
of the Gospel, Math. 21. 33. etc. and the Christian Church is called an Olive
Tree, and the members of it expressly called branches, Romans 11. 17, 18. which
metaphor has the very same nature and signification with the Vine and branches.

Secondly, Because God is called the Husbandman, who takes care to dress this
Vine, which cannot be understood of Christ, but of the Church, which is
therefore called God's Husbandry.

Thirdly, Christ speaks of such branches in him, as bear no fruit; now there
can be no such branches in the Person of Christ; for our very Union to his
Person (as those men acknowledge, who talk of such an Union of Persons between
Christ and believers) will make us fruitful: and therefore being in him can
signify no more, than being members of his visible Church, which is made up of
Hypocrites, as well as sincere Christians.

But fourthly, To confirm all this, and to prevent objections, it is evident
from this very Chapter, that when Christ speaks in the first Person, I and In
me, he cannot mean this of his own Person, but of his Church, Doctrine, and
Religion, according as the circumstances of the place require, thus in the 5.
Ver. I am the true Vine, ye are the branches, he that abides in me, and I in
him, the same brings forth much fruit, for without me ye can do nothing. I
would willingly learn what sense can be made of this, if we understand it of
the Person of Christ: for it is not very intelligible, how we can be or abide
in the Person of Christ, and it is more unintelligible still, how we can be in
the Person of Christ, and the Person of Christ at the same time be in Us; which
is a new piece of Philosophy called Penetration of dimensions; and that our
fruitfulness should depend upon such an Union to the Person of Christ, is as
hard to my understanding, as all the rest.

But if by He that abides in me, we understand the Christian Church, he who
makes a public and visible profession of Faith in me, and continues in Society
with those, who do so; and by I in him, the Christian Doctrine, both the sense,
and Reason of it is very evident: the sense is this; That Church, which owns my
Doctrine and Religion, is the true Vine, and all you, who make a public
profession of Faith in me (of a belief of my Gospel) and live in Communion with
one another, are the branches in this Vine; and whoever of you continue
steadfast in this profession and Communion, and do not only make a visible
profession of Faith in me, but suffer my Doctrine and Precepts to dwell and
abide in you, to govern your will and affections, and to direct your
Conversation in the World, all such of you will be very fruitful in good works,
for without such a sincere and hearty belief of my Gospel, it is impossible,
you should do any thing, that is good.

So that to abide in Christ is to make a public and visible profession of
Faith in Christ, to be the members of his visible Church; but because many are
so, who do not much credit their profession, (being branches in him that bear
not fruit) hence to distinguish all true Christians from such Hypocritical
Professors, he adds, and I in you, that is my words abide in you. Ver. 7. if my
Doctrines and Precepts take fast hold of your wills and affections, they will
make you fruitful in good works.

Thus you see, that the Union of particular Christians to Christ consists in
their Union to the Christian Church: And hence it is, that the Ancient Fathers
interpret all those Metaphors, which decypher the Union between Christ and
Christians, to signify the entire love and Unity of Christians among
themselves. Thus St. Chrysostom. expounds Ephesians. 2. 19, 20, 21. where the Apostle
speaks of that spiritual building, which is erected on the foundation of the
Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ being the chief Corner Stone, to signify
the Unity of the Church in all Ages; that both the Jewish and Christian Church
are united in Christ, as the several parts of the building are kept together by
the Corner Stone; and St. Ambrose to the same purpose tells us, duos populos in
se suscepit salvator, and secit unum in Domino, sicut and lapis angularis duos
parietes continet in unitate domus sirmatos. i. e. That Christ united two
people in himself (the Jew and Gentile) and made them one in the Lord, as the
Corner Stone unites two Walls in a building, and makes it but one House. Which
is the plain design of the place to prove, that Christ has taken away the
enmity and distance, which was between the Jew and Gentile, and has reconciled
them both to God in one body by the Cross, Ver. 16.

Thus St. Chrysostom. observes on 1 Cor. 3. 9. that the Apostle to dissuade them
from Schisms and Factions tells them, (...), etc. That they were Gods building,
and if they were Gods building, they must not be torn asunder, for then they
are no longer a building; and if they were Gods Husbandry, they must not be
divided from each other, but they must be one enclosure, hedged and walled in
by Unity and agreement. And adds, let us therefore be built on Christ, and
cleave to him as to a foundation, and as a branch to the Vine; that there may
be no distance between Christ and us to interrupt this Union, for if there be,
we immediately perish; for the branch draws nourishment and fatness from the
Vine by its Union to it, and the building stands firm by the strong adhesion of
its parts. Which plainly signifies, that our Union to Christ consists in our
Union to the Christian Church, and when we divide and separate from the Church,
we are broken off from Christ, as a branch is from the Vine; we are then like a
building, whose stones fall asunder, and destroy the whole fabric.

Thus the same Father argues on John 14. 21. to persuade Christians to Peace
and Unity: (...); etc. for he (Christ) unites us to each other by many examples
and patterns of the closest Union; He is the Head, and we the body, and the
whole body by the Union of its several parts must be firmly united to the head;
He is the foundation, we the building, He the Vine, We the branches; He the
Husband, We his Spouse; He the Shepherd, We his Sheep; He the way, we those who
are to walk in that way; We are a Spiritual Temple, and He it is, who dwells in
us; He is the first born, we his Brethren; He the Heir, we fellow Heirs with
him; He the life, we those who live by him; He the Resurrection, we those who
rise with him; He the light, and we are all enlightened by him; (...). All these
metaphors describe the nearest and closest Union of Christians to each other,
and of all to Christ, which will not admit of the least distance and
separation: so that according to the sense of this Holy man, particular
Christians are united to Christ by means of their Union to the Christian
Church, otherwise I cannot understand how our Union to Christ can be an
argument to Unity and Concord among ourselves, if we are immediately united to
the Person of Christ, without being first united to his Church. Which I wish
those men would seriously consider, who boast so much of their Union to Christ,
and yet rend his Church into a thousand little factions, tear the members of
his body from each other, and yet pretend to be united to the head, make new
enclosures in the Husbandry, and Vineyard of God, and when Christ has broken
down the middle Wall of Partition, and made Jews and Gentiles but one Church,
do now erect more Partition Walls in the Christian, than ever were in the
Jewish Temple.

But we need not depend on Authority for the confirmation of this notion, that
the Union of particular Christians with Christ, consists in their Union with
the Christian Church; for those Sacraments our Savior has Instituted, as
Symbols of our Union with him, are a plain demonstration of it: Our first
undertaking of Christianity is represented in our Baptism, wherein we make a
public profession of our Faith in Christ; and it is sufficiently known, that
Baptism is the Sacrament of our admission into the Christian Church; and if any
one should deny this we have the Authority of St. Paul for the proof of it. 1
Cor. 12, 13. For by one Spirit we are all baptized into one body; In which the
Apostle seems to allude to Baptism, which confers the same holy Spirit on us
all, and thereby makes us all members of that one body of Christ, which is his
Church; but more expressly in Ephesians. 4. 4, 5. There is one Body, and one Spirit,
as you are called in one hope of your Calling, one Lord, one Faith, one
Baptism; that is, the Christian Baptism is but one, and is a Sacrament of
Union, making us all the members of that one body of Christ; this is called
being Baptized into Christ, i. e. admitted into the Christian Church by a
public profession of our Faith in Christ.

Thus the Lords Supper is a Sacrament of Union, and signifies that near
Conjunction between Christ and the Christian Church, and the mutual fellowship
of one Christian with another: hence the Apostle calls the Cup of Blessing the
Communion of the blood of Christ, and the Bread the Communion of the body of
Christ; for we being many are one bread and one body (one body represented by
this one bread) for we are all partakers of that one bread. 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17.

For the Intention of our Lord and Savior in what he did and suffered for us
was, not merely to reform and save some single Persons but, to erect a Church
and to combine all his Disciples into a public Society, to unite them by holy
Mysteries, and to engage them to a mutual discharge of all Christian offices,
whereby the whole body may edify it self in love; and therefore our Savior
does not own any relation to particular men, as such, but as they are members
of his body, for he is the Savior of the body, and Redeemed his Church with
his own blood.

Hence St. John tells us in his first Ep. Chapter 1. Ver. 3. That which we have
seen and heard (the whole Doctrine and History of the Gospel) declare we unto
you, that you also may have fellowship with us, and truly our fellowship is
with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. First, that ye may have
fellowship with us, become members of the Church of Christ, by which means you
have fellowship and Communion with God and Christ.

And therefore those public censures, whereby rotten or dead members are cut
of from the body of Christ, consist in casting such persons out of the Society
of Christian people, in debarring them from the Communion of Prayers and
Sacraments, and all Religious offices, which is a plain demonstration, that our
Union to Christ is not an Union to his Person (of which more hereafter) but
consists in a sincere and spiritual Communion with the Christian Church;
otherwise this external Communion with the Church could be no visible
signification of our Union to Christ, nor could our excision from the visible
Church signify our separation from him.

But thirdly, It will be requisite now III.
to explain more particularly the nature of this Union between Christ and the
Christian Church, which is not a natural, but a Political Union, that is such
an Union, as is between a Prince and his Subjects: Christ is a spiritual King,
and all Christians are his Subjects, and our Union to Christ consists in our
belief of his Revelations, obedience to his Laws, and subjection to his
Authority: Hence our Savior tells the Jews, if you continue in my words, then
are ye my Disciples indeed, John 8. 31. which is the same thing with being in
him: and by keeping his Commandments we abide in his love, John 15. 10. and 14.
21. and to have his word abide in us is a description of the closest and
firmest Union to him John 15. 7. As obedience to our Prince is the strongest
bond of a Political Union, which is dissolved and broken by disobedience and
Rebellion. Thus our Savior calls himself a Shepherd and Christians his Sheep.
John 10. to signify that Authority he has over his Church, which bears some
Analogy to the government of a Shepherd, which is ofttimes used as a name of
power and Authority; as God is styled the Shepherd of Israel, Psalm 80. 1. and
Kings are frequently called Shepherds both by profane and sacred Writers.
Though this name is most commonly given to Prophets, who feed and instruct the
Church, which includes power and Authority; and so does very properly belong to
our Savior, who erected this spiritual Kingdom on the Foundation of his
Doctrine and Laws, and by the exercise of his prophetical office: for which
Reason he is called the Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls.

Thus he is called a Head and the Church his Body, a Husband and the Church his
Spouse, which two metaphors signify the same thing, and are both of them names
of power and Authority; as appears from Ephesians. 5. 23. etc. For Husbands are said
to be the head of their Wives, as Christ is the head of the Church, and are
commanded to love their Wives, as their own bodies, as Christ loves his Church:
so that a Husband, as a Husband represents the head, and the Wife the body; and
what the meaning of all this is, the Apostle plainly tells us: that Christ is
called the Head and Husband, because he has the Rule and Government of us, and
therefore exhorts Wives to be subject to their Husbands as the Church is
subject unto Christ the Spiritual Head, v. 24. For because the Head in the
natural body has the command and government of all the members; hence Head is
a common name for Princes and Governors, Deutr. 28. 13. The Lord shall make
thee the Head and not the Tail, and thou shall be above only, and thou shall
not be beneath, that is, thou shall rule and govern; Psalm. 18. 43. Thou have
made me the Head of the Heathen, and a people whom I have not known shall serve
me. And therefore the Apostles always expound this metaphor of Christ's being a
Head by power and Authority. Ephesians. 1. 20, 21, 22. Has set him at his own right
hand in Heavenly places, far above all Principalities and Powers -- and has
put all things under his feet, and gave him to be Head over all things to the
Church, which is his body. Col. 1. 18. And he is the Head of the body, the
Church, who is the beginning, the first born from the dead, that in all things,
he might have the pre-eminence: (...); that is that he might not only excel
other things, but that he might rule and govern them; for so (...) signifies
him, who has the first place of Authority; because government is naturally
entailed on the greatest excellency and perfection. Thus Christ is the Head of
all Principalities and powers, that is their Lord and Governor. Col. 2. 10.
This is the true explication of this relation betwixt Christ and his Church. He
is the Head and Husband, because he is invested with Authority to govern; and
the Church is his body and Spouse, because it must be obedient to his Laws, and
subject to his Government: as we know it is very familiar to call a Society of
men, who live under the same Laws and Civil Government, a body Politic, which
signifies their subjection to the same Authority, as a body has but one Head;
and that regard they must have to the preservation of the whole, and their
mutual care of each other, as members of the same body.

Now the true Reason why this spiritual Kingdom of Christ is described by the
Authority of a Shepherd over his Sheep, and of a Head and Husband over his body
and Spouse, is to signify the mildness and gentleness of his government, and
that great and near concern he has for the welfare of his Church: that he
governs his Church with the care and tenderness of a Shepherd: that he defends
and ransoms his Church with his own blood, as a good Shepherd lays down his
life in defense of his Sheep. John 10. That he loves his Church with the
natural kindness of a Head or Husband; that his Government is only for the good
of his Church, not for his own private advantage; as a kind Husband exercises
no other Authority over his Wife, but what is for her good, as well as his own;
or as the Head has no other concern, but that all his members be preserved in
their natural State and vigor, and perform their proper and natural offices;
and therefore we may be secure, that his yoke is easy, and his burden light;
that he will be gentle in his Discipline, and favorable in his censures;
especially when we consider how dearly he has purchased this relation to his
Church, that he gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it
with the washing of water by the word. Ephesians. 5. 25, 26. Upon which account we
may well be called the Members of his Body, of his Flesh, and of his Bones,
verse. 30. the Church being, as it were, taken out of his crucified Body, as the
Woman was taken out of the Man; as Christ is said to have reconciled the
Gentiles (that is, taken them into his Church) in the body of his flesh through
death, Col. 1. 21, 22. because the Covenant of Grace, which is the Foundation
of the Christian Church, and receives Gentiles as well as Jews, was sealed with
the blood of Christ; so that the Church is taken out of the crucified body of
Christ, which in the mystical sense answers to the Woman's being taken out of
the Man, which seems to be the Apostles meaning in that place. For the same
reason Christ ownes himself our Friend, Ioh. 15. 14. Ye are my friends, if you
do what soever I command you: which does not signify such an equality betwixt
Christ and us, as there is betwixt friends, nor encourage any rudeness and
unbecoming familiarity in our addresses to him; but acquaints us with the
nature of his government, that he will rule his Church with the same care and
tenderness, which one friend expresses to another.

So that all this is a description of the state of the Gospel, in which our
Lord and Master is our Shepherd, our Head and Husband, our Friend and Savior,
who has redeemed and purchased us with his own blood, who laid the Foundation
of his spiritual Kingdom in the most surprising and astonishing goodness, and
exercises his authority in all the methods of love and compassion. Upon which
account God also has now laid aside in a great measure that severe name of a
King, and calls himself our Father, to assure us of his fatherly care and
government, and to signify that liberty of Sons we now enjoy under the Gospel
in opposition to the bondage and servitude of the Law of Moses.

But then we must observe farther, that though Christ be our Lord and
Governor, he does not govern us immediately by himself, for He is ascended up
into Heaven, where he powerfully intercedes for his Church, and by a vigilant
Providence superintends all the affairs of it, but has left the visible and
external conduct and government of his Church to Bishops and Pastors, who
preside in his name, and by his authority: in the first Ages of Christianity,
Christ conferred such extraordinary gifts on men, as qualified them for so
great an office, Ephesians. 4. 8. etc. But though these miraculous gifts ceased, when
the Gospel was fully published and sufficiently confirmed, yet the offices
still continue for the instruction and government of the Church, though managed
in more ordinary and humane ways. Christ now governs his Church by men, who are
invested with his authority: which is a plain demonstration of what I
discoursed above, that the Union of particular Christians to Christ, is by
their Union with the Christian Church; which consists in their regular
subjection to their spiritual Guides and Rulers, and in concord and unity among
themselves. For if our Union to Christ consists in our subjection to him as our
Lord and Master, our Head and Husband; and this authority is not immediately
exercised by Christ himself, but by the Bishops and Pastors of the Church; it
necessarily follows, that we cannot be united to Christ, that is, cannot own
his authority and government, till we unite our selves to the public Societies
of Christians, and submit to the public Instructions, Authority, and
Discipline of the Church, as no man can be said to submit himself to his
Prince, who denies subjection to those subordinate Magistrates, who act by his
Princes Commission: for the Union of Bodies Politic (such as the Christian
Church is) consists in Order and Government, when all the Members keep their
proper places, and are knit to each other by a faithful discharge of their
several offices and trusts: Schismatics are in the Church, just as Rebels are
in the Kingdom, not as part of it, but as open and professed Enemies: but the
Apostle tells us wherein the Unity of the Church consists in Ephesians. 4. 16. Christ
is the Head, from whom the whole body fitly joined together and compacted by
that, which every joint supplieth, according to the effectual working in the
measure of every part, makes increase of the body to the edifying of it self
in love. That is, the supreme power is invested in Christ as Head, to whom the
Church is obedient and subject, but to make this Union firm and lasting, there
must be a regular subordination of the several Members, and a mutual discharge
of all Christian offices, which is the most effectual way to advance their
spiritual growth in all Christian graces, and especially to increase that love
and friendship, which is the very life and soul of the Church: This indeed
supposes a visible Society of Christians, professing the Faith of Christ, and
living in communion with each other; for if there be no such visible Society
(as it may happen in times of persecution, or some great degeneracy of the
Church) it must of necessity alter the case: our Union to Christ then consists
in an acknowledgment of his Authority and Subjection to his Laws, which makes
us Members of the Universal Church, though there be no particular Church to
communicate with: but when there is a visible Church, we are under the
necessary obligations of a visible Communion, because herein our subjection to
the Authority of Christ, and consequently our Union to him, consists.

And this by the way gives a plain account of the only cause, that can justify
our separation from any Society of Christians: for our Union with the Christian
Church being the Medium of our Union to Christ, while the Church, we live in,
acknowledges the Authority, and submits to the Laws of Christ, we are bound to
live in Communion with it, because this unites us to Christ. When nothing is
made the condition of our Communion, which is expressly forbid by the Laws of
our supreme Lord, we acknowledge his Authority in our subjection to our
spiritual Guides; and we disowne his Authority in disowning and affronting
theirs; as our Savior tells his Apostles, He that hears you, hears me, and
he that despises you, despises me, and he that despises me, despises him
that sent me, Luke 10. 16. But when any Church prevaricates in the Laws of
Christ, corrupts his Religion, and undermines the fundamental design of it,
which is to make men good and virtuous, when we cannot obey our spiritual
Rulers without disobeying the express Laws of Christ, the reason of our
Communion with such a Church ceases, because it does not answer (nay
contradicts) the end of Christian Society, which is to have fell^wship with the
Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. For in this case we cannot own their
authority, but we must renounce the authority of our Head and Husband: now as
it is in an Army, should any Captain revolt from his Prince, the Soldiers
under his Command are not bound to turn Rebels, because their Leader is so; or
should a whole Troop or Regiment conspire in the Treason, no particular
Soldier is obliged to continue in the Company, or submit to the Government of
Rebels, no more than he is obliged to be a Rebel; the same reason holds good as
to Christian Societies; if any particular Church apostatize from the Faith of
Christ, we are then under the same necessity of deserting their Communion, as
we are of obeying the Laws, and submitting to the Authority of our Lord and
Master; but nothing less than this can justify a separation; while the Church
is subject to Christ, we must be subject to the Church; while the fundamental
Laws of his spiritual Kingdom are observed, and his Institutions reverenced,
and the great ends of his Religion advanced, to separate from such a Church is
to separate from the Body of Christ; for our Union to Christ consists in a
subjection to his Authority, and it is plain, that we disowne his Authority,
when we reject those, who act by his Authority.

Now this Political Union betwixt Christ and his Church may be either only
external and visible, and so hypocrital Professors may be said to be united to
Christ, or true and real, which imports the truth and sincerity of our
obedience and subjection to our Lord and Master: For since Christianity is
become the Religion of Nations, and is entailed on us by our Ancestors as part
of our inheritance, is received into the Laws and Constitutions of Kingdoms,
and made a great Instrument of Civil Government, it is too often seen, that
many men undertake this Profession only as the Mode and Fashion of their
Country, to avoid singularity, and to serve a worldly interest; And thus the
Christian Church is filled with Hypocrites and visible Professors, who are
great Strangers to the life and spirit of the Holy Jesus; while some under the
name of Christians practice all the villainies of the Heathen World, and live in
a public defiance to the Laws of that Religion they pretend to own; others
make a fair show of external conformity to the Laws and Constitutions of this
spiritual Kingdom, and conceal their impurities under some glorious and pompous
form of Religion, and pass for very good Christians, when they are no better
than disguised Hypocrites; and this makes it necessary to distinguish between a
mere external and real Union, between those, who do no more than make a visible
profession of Christianity, and those who are true and sincere Christians.

Earthly Princes can exact only an external conformity to their Laws, because
they can take no cognizance of the secret workings of men's minds, and the end
of their Government is attained in the preservation of public peace and order;
But the spiritual Kingdom of our Lord is of another nature, which requires not
only an external and visible subjection to Christ our Head and Husband, and a
visible Union to the Christian Church, but the homage and obedience of the
Soul, the government of our thoughts and passions, the renovation of our minds
and spirits, We must be born again of Water and of the Spirit, if we would
enter into the Kingdom of God, Ioh. 3. 5. That is, before we can be the
Disciples of Christ, the Subjects of his spiritual Kingdom, which is in
Scripture called the Kingdom of God, and the Kingdom of Heaven; we must be born
of water, must make a public profession of our Faith in Christ, and obedience
to Him in our Baptism: but this is not sufficient, unless we be born of the
Spirit too, that is, unless our minds and spirits become subject to Christ,
unless our Faith in Christ, and subjection to Him, be sincere and hearty, do
govern all the motions and desires of our Souls, and make us really such, as we
pretend to be; which is called Being born of the Spirit, because all Christian
Graces and Virtues are in Scripture attributed to the Spirit of God as the
Author of them. Hence the Apostle tells us, that In Christ Jesus nothing
avails but a new Creature, that is, that none are true Subjects of Christ,
such as shall be rewarded by Him, but those whose minds and spirits are
transformed into the love of virtue and goodness.

Now as a visible Profession of Christianity is the Foundation of this
external-political Union betwixt Christ and his Church; so this new Nature is
the Foundation of a real and spiritual Union, and this the Scripture represents
to us under several notions. First, by the subjection of our minds and spirits
to Christ, as our spiritual King, when we put our Souls as well as Bodies under
his Government and Conduct: hence Christ is said to dwell in our hearts by
faith, Ephesians. 3. 17. that is, to have the sole Command and Empire of our wills
and affections, to govern our hearts, as a man does the house, in which he
dwells. And thus all those Metaphors, which signify our subjection to Christ,
must be expounded of the subjection of our Souls and Spirits to Him, as well as
the outward conformity of our actions; because Christ is a spiritual King, who
rules and governs hearts, as earthly Princes govern the bodies of their
Subjects: our subjection to him ought to begin in the Soul, in a sincere
acknowledgment of his Power and Authority, in a steadfast belief of his
Doctrines and Revelations, and in a cheerful and willing obedience to his Laws;
such a subjection as a Wife ought to yield to her Husband, and Members to their
Head, the effect of a free choice, not a feigned or forced compliance.

Secondly, By a participation of the same nature, which is the necessary effect
of the subjection of our minds to him: for the Gospel of our Savior is the
truest image of his mind, he transcribed his own nature into his Laws, and
therefore a sincere obedience to his Laws is a conformity to his Nature. Hence
is that exhortation, That the same mind be in us, which was in Christ Jesus,
Phil. 2. 5. and to be his Disciples is to learn of him, who was meek and lowly
in mind, Matthew. 11. 29. Hence also our Union to Christ is described by having
the Spirit of Christ. Romans 8. 9. If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he
is none of his; that is, unless he have the same temper and disposition of mind
which Christ had, which is called having the Spirit of Christ by an ordinary
figure of the cause for the effect, for all those virtues and graces, wherein
our conformity to Christ consists, are called the fruits of the Spirit, the
fruit of the Spirit is in all goodness, righteousness, and truth, Ephesians. 5. 9.
and therefore what the Apostle in that place calls, having the Spirit of
Christ, in the next verse he expresses by if Christ be in you: i. e. if you be
possessed with the same love of virtue and goodness, which appeared so eminently
in him; which is much to the same sense with that expression, of Christ's being
formed in you. Gal. 4. 19. My little Children of whom I travel in birth again,
till Christ be formed in you: that is, till you be thoroughly instructed in the
Doctrine and Religion of Christ, and are thereby molded into his likeness and
image. Hence in the 1 Cor. 6. 17. the Apostle tells us, He that is joined to
the Lord is one Spirit: that is, herein consists our Union to Christ, that we
have the same temper of mind which he had: for there can be no Union betwixt
Souls and Spirits without this, that they are acted by the same Principles, and
love, and choose the same things: bodies are united by an external adhesion of
parts, but Souls by an harmony and consent of wills. This makes two one Spirit,
when there is a perfect likeness of disposition, when they agree in the same
designs as much, as if the same Soul animated them both: when we love God and
men, as our Savior did, when we are meek and humble, and patient and
contented, as he was, we are as closely united to him, as if he dwelt in us,
and we in him: as if we had but one Spirit in us both.

But Thirdly, there is a closer Union still, which results from this, which
consists in a mutual and reciprocal love. When we are transformed into the
image of Christ, he loves us, as being like to him, and we love him too, as
partaking of his nature. He loves us as the price of his blood, as his own
workmanship created to good works, and we love him as our Redeemer and Savior.
Now love is the great Cement of Union, which unites interests, and thereby does
more firmly unite hearts: hence when our Savior had told his Disciples, At
that day ye shall know, that I am in my Father, and you in me, and I in you,
Joh. 14. 20. he explains the meaning of it in v. 21. He that has my
Commandments, and keeps them, he it is that loves me, and he that loves me,
shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him and manifest my self unto him.
That is, God and Christ, and Christians are all united by a mutual and
reciprocal love, founded on a likeness of dispositions and actions, on
obedience to those Laws, which are but a Copy of the Original Holiness of God,
and of the life of Christ. To the same purpose Christ prays for his Disciples,
Ioh. 17. 21. that they may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee,
that they also may be one in us. Which refers to their agreement in doctrine
and love. Thus according to the Scripture phrase love makes us one with God and
Christ, and with each other.

Fourthly, This Union is expressed in Scripture by resembling the Christian
Church to Gods Temple, wherein he dwells, as formerly he did in the Temple at
Jerusalem: while that typical and ceremonial Worship was in force, God was
pleased to dwell in a Temple made with hands, there he placed the Symbols of
his Presence, from thence he gave forth his Oracles, there he received their
Sacrifices and Oblations, and returned an answer to their prayers. But since
Christ has introduced a more manly and spiritual Worship, God dwells no longer
in a Temple of wood and stones, by such visible signs of his presence, as
formerly he did, but has chosen the society of devout minds and pure souls for
the place of his residence and abode. Thus in the 1 Cor. 3. 16. Know you not,
that ye are the Temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you: and
Chap. 6. verse. 19. Know you not, that your body is the Temple of the Holy
Ghost, which is in you, which ye have of God: and 2 Cor. 6. 16. Ye are the
Temple of the living God, as God has said, I will dwell in them, and walk in
(or among) them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people. To the
same purpose we find in Rev. 21. 3. that after the description of the Holy
City, the New Jerusalem coming down from God out of Heaven, which signifies the
state of the Christian Church, there was heard a great voice out of Heaven,
saying, Behold the Tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them,
and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be with them, and be their
God. Now all this must be expounded in allusion to the Temple at Jerusalem:
that as the Temple was the place of Gods peculiar presence with that people,
signifying that he was always ready at hand to assist them in their distress,
to supply their wants, to defend them from their enemies, to hear all the pious
prayers they put up to him: that is, that he would be their God, and they
should be his people; as the Apostle expounds it; thus it is now with the
Christian Church, they are the only society of men, whom God has a peculiar
regard for, with whom he is always present, whom he protects and defends by a
vigilant and more particular providence, whom he has chosen for his peculiar
people to dwell among them.

And as in the Temple God placed the Mercy-seat and the Cherubims as Emblems of
his Majesty and Presence, for which reason he is so often said to dwell betwixt
the Cherubims: so he has now bestowed his holy Spirit on the Christian Church,
which is a surer pledge of his dwelling among them, than those Types and
Shadows were, as the Apostle speaks, Know ye not, that ye are the Temple of
God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you, or among you: that is, this is
a sufficient evidence, that ye are the Temple of God, in that God has given
his Spirit to dwell with you: which primarily refers to those extraordinary
gifts of the Spirit, which God in that Age bestowed on the Christian Church:
this was the true Shecinah or divine glory resting on them: for which reason he
is called the Spirit of Glory, 1 Pet. 4. 14 The Spirit of Glory and of God
rests on you: that is, that Spirit of God, which is the visible manifestation
of his glory in the Christian Church, of which that visible glory, which
sometimes filled the Jewish Tabernacle, was an Emblem. Hence S. Paul tells us,
that the glory of the new Covevant, which is the ministration of the Spirit
(which was confirmed by such miraculous and plentiful effusions of the holy
Spirit) did far exceed the glory of the first Covenant, written and engraven in
stones, though that was so glorious, that the Children of Israel could not
steadfastly behold the face of Moses, because of the glory of his countenance, 2
Cor. 3. 7, 8. for this was a glorious manifestation of a divine Presence with
the Church, that God did indeed dwell with them, and walk among them: and
though these extraordinary gifts are now ceased, yet the virtue and glory of
them still remains, they are a lasting demonstration of Gods peculiar presence
with his Church in all Ages, as they are of the truth of the Christian
Religion: for the Christian Church in all Ages since Christ and his Apostles is
but one, and therefore still inherits the glory as well as the Religion of
former Ages. In allusion to this the Christian Church is called Gods Building,
1 Cor. 3. 9. and Ephesians. 2. 20, 21, 22. and are built upon the foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone, in
whom all the building fitly framed together, grows into an holy Temple in the
Lord, in whom ye are also built together for an habitation of God through the
Spirit: (...), that is, a Spiritual Temple in opposition to the material Temple
at Jerusalem, which S. Peter calls (...), a spiritual House or Temple, 1 Pet.
2. 5. all which refers to this notion, that the Christian Church is Gods Temple
wherein he dwells.

Now though all this do most properly belong to the Christian Church, as a
spiritual Society; that they are the Temple of the living God: yet it is
accommodated in Scripture to particular Christians: and Philo also alludes to
it, (...) that the mind of a wise and good man is in truth and reality the
Palace and Temple of God: every devout Soul is Gods Temple wherein he dwells:
an enlightened mind, which is stored with all the treasures of divine wisdom and
knowledge, is his Debir or Oracle: a pure heart is his Altar, and devout
prayers are spiritual incense and sweet perfumes: the body it self is a
consecrated place, and is also called the Temple of God, which must therefore
be preserved pure and undefiled, 1 Cor. 6. 19. nay our bodies are Sacrifices
too, which we must offer up to God by devoting them to his service, Romans 12. 1.
for the Scripture loves to allude to the Temple, and Aliar, and Sacrifices of
the Law, which in a moral sense may very well be accommodated to the Christian
Worship and Service, as in their Typical signification they prefigured Christ,
whose Body was the true Temple, where the Divine Glory dwelt, who was both
Priest and Sacrifice, and by his death put an end to that Typical Dispensation;
only we may observe, that when the Scripture mentions Gods or Christ's dwelling
with particular Christians, it uses a more familiar style, and seems rather to
allude to a private house, than a public Temple: Thus in Ioh 14. 23. If any
man love me, he will keep my words, and my Father will love him, and we will
come unto him, and make our abode with him: and Rev. 3. 20. Behold I stand at
the door and knock, if any man hear my voice and open the door, I will come in
to him, and sup with him, and he with me.

This is all I can find in Scripture concerning the Union betwixt Christ and
Christians, and that this is the true account of it (besides what has been
already urged) will evidently appear from those Institutions of our Savior,
which are the Instruments and Symbols of our Union to him, which we commonly
call Sacraments, Baptism and the Lords Supper: which represent and signify
both our external and real Union with him.

First our external Union: Thus Baptism is a public profession of the
Christian Religion, that we believe the Gospel of Christ, own his Authority,
and submit to his Government: We are baptized in the Name of Christ, that is,
we publicly own him for our Instructor and Governor, to believe whatever he
has taught, and to do whatever he has commanded. And the Lords Supper is a
foederal Rite which answers to the Feasts on Sacrifices under the Law, whereby
we renew our Covenant with our Lord, and vow obedience and subjection to him:
hence these Institutions were by the Ancients called Sacraments, in allusion to
that Oath which Soldiers took to be true and faithful to their Prince, when
they were listed into his Army, which was called Sacramentum Militiae or the
Military Oath; of this nature are Baptism and the Lords Supper, a Vow and
Covenant to be subject to Christ as our Head and Husband, wherein our external
and visible Union consists.

Secondly, They signify also our real Union to Christ, thus Baptism signifies
our profession of becoming new men, our profession of conformity to Christ in
his Death and Resurrection, We are buried with Christ by Baptism into death,
that like as Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father, even
so we also should walk in newness of life, Romans 6. 4. that is Baptism, or our
immersion under water, according to the ancient Rite of administering it, is a
figure of our burial with Christ, and of our conformity to his death, and so
signifies our dying to sin, and walking in newness of life: for the death of
Christ must be considered, not barely as a natural death, a separation of soul
and body, but as a Sacrifice for sin to destroy the power and dominion of it,
and so our dying to sin (that is, ceasing from the practice of it) is the
truest conformity to the death of Christ; and we must consider his
Resurrection, not only as his returning to life again, but as his living to
God, his advancement into his spiritual Kingdom, the design of which is to
promote the interest of Religion, and a divine life, and so our walking in
newness of life (a virtuous and religious life) is our conformity to his
Resurrection, makes us the true Subjects of his spiritual Kingdom; which the
Apostle tells us, gives us an abundant assurance of a glorious resurrection,
that we shall in a proper sense rise with him; because this new life, wherein
our spiritual Conformity to the resurrection of Christ consists, is an immortal
principle of life, which can no more die, than Christ can die again, now he is
risen from the dead. Thus Baptism is called putting on Christ, Gal. 3. 27. He
that is baptized into Christ has put on Christ: that is, has engaged himself
to be conformed to his image and likeness, to adorn his mind with all those
virtues and Graces, which appeared in our Saviors life:

Thus the Lords Supper is a spiritual feeding on Christ, eating his flesh and
drinking his blood, which signifies the most intimate Union with him, that we
are flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone: Ephesians. 5. 30. That as we are
redeemed by his Death and sufferings, are the purchase of his blood, and so as
it were taken out of his Crucified body, as the Woman was taken out of the Man;
so by this spiritual feeding on Christ we are transformed into the same nature
with him as much as if we were of his flesh and bones. This is a Sacrament,
wherein we celebrate the love of our dying Lord, and express our most
passionate love and devotion to him; The memory of what he has done and
suffered for us, excites a just hatred of our sins, sincere purposes and
resolutions of a new life, to live to him, who died for us; a great hope in
God, who has provided such a Sacrifice and Atonement, such a Mediator and
Advocate for us; and a steadfast expectation of a future reward. This is eating
the flesh and drinking the blood of Christ, when these visible figures of his
Death and Sufferings affect our minds with such a strong and passionate sense
of his love to us, and excite in us such a firm hope in God, as transforms us
into a divine Nature: and this is our real Union to Christ, as you heard above.

Now I take it for granted, that there can be no better way to understand the
nature of our Union to Christ, than to consider the nature of those Sacraments,
which were designed as the Instruments and signs of our Union to him; and if we
will take that account, the Scripture gives of them, all the Union they
signify, is only a public and visible profession of our Faith in Christ, and
subjection to him, as our Lord and Savior, and a sincere conformity of our
hearts and lives to the nature and life of Christ.

Fourthly, I observe further, that IV.
fellowship and Communion with God, according to the Scripture notion,
signifies what we call a Political Union, that is, that to be in fellowship
with God and Christ signifies to be of that Society, which puts us into a
peculiar relation to God; that God is our Father, and we his Children, that
Christ is our head and Husband, our Lord and Master, we his Disciples and
followers, his Spouse, and his body: thus in John 1. 1. 3. That which we have
seen and heard, declare we unto you, that you also may have fellowship with us,
and truly our fellowship is with the Father and with his Son Jesus Christ:
where I observe, that our fellowship with the Father and Son is first founded
on our fellowship with the Christian Church, that is on our profession of the
Faith of Christ, obedience to his Laws, subjection to his Government and
Discipline, which he now visibly exercises by the Bishops and Pastors of the
Church; this unites us into one Society, and body politic: and now by virtue
of our fellowship with the Christian Church, we have fellowship with Christ,
who is the supreme Head and Governor of his Church, which is a plain argument,
that all the Apostle means by fellowship with God and Christ is such a
Political Union, as is between a Prince and his Subjects, between Superiors
and Inferiors in the same Society. Now (as you heard before) if this
profession be only external and visible, without the conformity of our hearts
and lives to the laws of Christ, it gives us only an external fellowship, or
relation to God and Christ; that is, such men only appear to be in fellowship
with Christ, maintaining a visible fellowship with his Church, when in truth
they are perfect strangers to him, such as Christ will not own for his
Disciples, as the Apostle adds in Ver. 6. 7. If we say, we have fellowship with
him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth, but if we walk in the
light, as God is in the light, then have we fellowship one with another, etc.
That is, we abuse our selves, if we hope, that God will own himself our
Father, and bestow the inheritance of Children on us, while we live in sin; but
when we join the practice of real righteousness with the visible profession of
Christianity, then God will own us for his Children, and Christ for the true
members of his body. So that this fellowship with God and Christ is such a
state and condition, as we are put into by a visible profession and sincere
practice of Christianity, and that in short is, that we are united to God as
his Sons and Children, and are united to Christ, as his Disciples, and members
of his body, which intitles us to the Inheritance of Children and all the
blessings of the Gospel.

Thus in the 1 Cor. 1. 9. God is faithful, by whom ye are called into the
fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord: where the fellowship of Christ can
signify no more than the fellowship of the Christian Church, whereof Christ is
Lord and Head, and therefore the Apostle immediately adds in the next Verse,
Now I beseech you Brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ (for the
honor and reputation of Christ and his Religion) that you all speak the same
thing, that there be no divisions nor Schisms among you, but that you be
perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment. Where he
argues from the nature of their Faith in Christ, to the obligations of Peace
and Unity, which plainly evinces that this fellowship with Christ is that
relation we stand in to him, as Members of the Christian Church, whereof he is
Head.

And that the true notion of (...), which we render sometimes by Fellowship,
sometimes by Communion, is as plain as we can wish, in 2 Cor. 6. 14. where the
Apostle disswades them from having any fellowship with Heathen Idolaters, from
eating of their Sacrifices, etc. Be ye not unequally yoked with unbelievers,
that is, have no society with those men, whose Religion is so contrary to
yours, that you will be as uneasy to each other, as two Heifers in the same
yoke, which draw different ways: For what fellowship has righteousness with
unrighteousness? (...), what is there common between them, which they both
alike partake of, as a foundation of union and concord? What communion has
light with darkness? (...), which signifies the same thing, what is there
common to them both? What concord has Christ with Belial? (...), what consent
and harmony of mind to unite them into one fellowship? What part has he that
believes with an unbeliever? (...), which seems to refer to those portions of
Sacrifices, which were distributed among them, as a Symbol of their Union to
each other, and to the same God. How can a Believer and Unbeliever, a Christian
and an Idolater have right to a part of the same Sacrifice? What agreement has
the Temple of God with Idols? (...), what is there to unite them together in
the same place; to reconcile the Temple of God with the Worship of Idols? All
these expressions decypher to us the nature and foundation of fellowship; the
nature of it consists in the union of things, which in rational Beings consists
in mutual relations and common interests, and the foundation of it is a
likeness of nature, and consent and harmony of wills; and therefore the Apostle
explains our fellowship with God by our being the Temple of God, and that God
dwells in us, and walks in us, Verse. 16. 18.

Now because the Lords Supper is the only Act which the Scripture mentions,
whereby our fellowship with God and Christ in this World is expressed, hence it
is called the (...), or the Communion and fellowship; 1 Cor. 10. 16. The Cup of
blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the blood of Christ? The
Bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the body of Christ? And why he
calls it the Communion, appears from the following verses. First, because it
signifies the Communion and fellowship of Christians with each other, that they
are all Members of the Body of Christ, that they are all the Children of the
same Father, as being entertained by him at the same Table, verse. 17.

And Secondly, It is a Communion also, as it signifies our fellowship with God.
Verse. 18. Behold Israel after the flesh, are not they which eat of the
Sacrifice partakers of the Altar? The meaning of which is, that the Sacrifice
which was offered upon the Altar, was reckoned as Gods meat, as the Temple was
his house, and therefore those that eat of the Sacrifice, were entertained at
Gods Table, which was a signification of their fellowship with him, that he was
their God, and they his people. Thus the Lords Supper is a Feast upon a
Sacrifice, even that great and stupendous Sacrifice of the Body of Christ,
which was offered upon the Cross; and therefore to eat the consecrated Bread,
and drink the Wine, which are the figures of his Body and Blood, is to eat of
that Sacrifice, that spiritual food God has provided for us. Thus God
entertains us at his Table, as his own Children, who are of his household and
family, as the Members of Christ, who have a right to all the blessings of the
new Covenant, which was sealed with his blood. This is the true Interpretation
of all Feasts upon Sacrifice (such as the Lords Supper in an eminent manner is)
that it is to eat of Gods food, and to be entertained at his Table, which is
such an argument of our fellowship with God, as eating and drinking together is
among men, always allowing for that infinite distance which is between God and
us.

This is the only Act of Religion, which in Scripture signifies Communion and
Fellowship, because it is the most proper signification of our fellowship with
God, and with each other; but prayer and meditation, and such like Acts of
Devotion, are no where called Communion with God, though a prevailing custom
has in our days almost wholly appropriated that name to them; fellowship with
God does not consist in transient Acts, but is a state of life, that relation
we stand in to God and Christ, and there is no Act of Religion, which does
properly signify this fellowship with God but only eating at his Table: for
you will not say, that a poor man enjoys communion and fellowship with his
Prince, when he puts up a Petition to him to beg his charity, or praises him
for his clemency and bounty: to pray to God is an Act of Homage, which we owe
him, as he is our Maker and Father, it is a duty which results from our
relation to, and fellowship with God, but it is not in its own nature an act of
fellowship and communion: which expression I purposely avoid, not only because
it is improper, and has thrust out the true notion of our fellowship with God,
and not only the notion but the practice of it too (for certainly did men
understand, what our fellowship with God is, they would not so much neglect the
Lords Supper, which is the only Act whereby our Communion is expressed) but also
because men have abused it to great irreverence and familiarity with God in
their addresses to him, while they fancy, that they are now acting the part of
Gods Fellows, and therefore may talk to him with such freedom, as they use in
common conversation.

I have discoursed these things at large, because they are too commonly
mistaken: our Union to Christ has been represented as a Riddle and Mystery,
which no body can understand, the perfect knowledge of which must be reserved
for the next World, or the coming of Elias; and the mistakes about it have had
a bad influence upon all Religion, not only to confound the notions, but to
debauch the practice of it. The sum of what I have already said is this; that
those Phrases and Metaphors, which represent our Union to Christ, signify our
visible Society with the Christian Church, and our sincere practice of the
Christian Religion: when we join in Communion with the Church of Christ, and
live in a regular subjection to our spiritual Governors, and a mutual
discharge of all Christian offices, when we profess to believe the Gospel, and
to obey the Laws of our common Savior, then we are visibly united to Christ,
as Subjects to their Prince, and Members to their Head; and when this
profession is sincere and hearty, when we really are what we pretend to be,
then our Union to Christ is real and spiritual too. A visible and real Union to
Christ differ as a visible Professor and sincere Christian, the one is a
Christian only in show, the other is what he pretends to be: and this Union to
Christ entitles us to his peculiar care and providence, to the influences of
his Grace, to the power of his Intercession, transforms us into his nature and
likeness, and makes us the Temple of God, wherein he delights to dwell. All
this may be understood on this side Heaven, and without sending for Elias to
unriddle it; and this is all the Scripture tells us of our Union to Christ.

SECT. II. Of our Union to the Person of Christ.
I Know not whence it comes to pass, that men love to make plain things
obscure, and like nothing in Religion but Riddles and Mysteries: God indeed was
pleased to institute a great many Ceremonies (and many of them of very obscure
signification) in the Jewish Worship, to awe their childish minds into a
greater veneration of his Divine Majesty. But in these last days God has sent
his own Son into the World to make a plain, and easy, and perfect Revelation
of his Will, to publish such a Religion, as may approve it self to our reason,
and captivate our affections by its natural charms and beauties; and there
cannot be a greater injury to the Christian Religion than to render it obscure
and unintelligible: and yet too many there are, who despise every thing, which
they understand, and think nothing a sufficient trial of their Faith, but what
contradicts the sense and reason of mankind. I might give you too many
instances of this, but our present Argument may serve instead of many. There is
nothing more easy to be understood than our Union and Communion with Christ,
and it had certainly continued so, had not some men undertook to explain it,
who have now made it more than mystical, that is, an unintelligible Union;
though indeed that is the least fault, that it cannot be understood; for as
they have ordered the matter, it is made to serve a great many evil purposes,
and to overthrow the main Designs of Christianity. And to make this appear, I
shall as briefly and plainly, as the matter will bear, represent to you those
other opinions concerning our Union to Christ, which are now in great vogue in
the World, and do very unjustly challenge to themselves the name of
Gospel-Mysteries.

As first when we inquire what this Union betwixt Christ and Believers Dr.
Jacomb. on Romans 8. page 42.
is, they answer in general, that it is a mystical Union through the Spirit and
Faith. This Mystical is a hard word, and therefore to explain it, they tell us,
that this mystical Union is an Union of Persons, where yet Persons and Natures
Page 45.
are distinct. As there is an Union of three Persons in one Nature in the
Trinity, and of two Natures in one Person in Christ, which is the Hypostatical
Union, so the mystical Union is an Union of Persons, where both Persons and
Natures are distinct: and it is an Union of Persons, but no Personal Union. The
Person of Christ is united to the person of the Believer, and the person of the
Believer is united to the Person of Christ (as it must needs be where the
Person of Christ is united to the person of the Believer) which Union is made
by Faith, which receives the Person of Christ, and therefore must unite to the
Person of Christ (I doubt that consequence is not good, for men are not united
to every thing they receive, but yet what follows may help it out) as it is in
the Marriage-Union, which joins person to person. This is not very clear yet,
and therefore as a fuller explication of it, the same Author describes it thus,
This mystical Union Page 48.
is that supernatural, spiritual, intimous Oneness and Conjunction, which is
betwixt the Person of Christ and the person of Believers, through the bonds of
the Spirit and Faith, upon which there follows mutual and reciprocal Communion
with each other. This Oneness and Conjunction are hard words still, and
therefore to explain them, you must observe, that Christ and Saints are united,
how? why in respect of that Oneness and Conjunction that is between them. This
now is as plain as one could wish, they are one by their Oneness. Union is
Union, and Christ is Christ, and Believers are Believers, and Oneness is
Oneness, and thus Christ and Believers are united by their Oneness.

But what are the bonds of this Union? (though it had been convenient first to
have understood the Union better) why they are the Spirit and Faith, the Spirit
unites Christ to us, and Faith unites us to Christ: and who can deny this to be
a very mystical Union? But besides this mystical Union, there Page 49.
is a Legal or Law-Union betwixt Christ and Believers, as he is their surety
and a moral Union, the foundation of which is Love (of which more in its proper
place) and thus the Person of Christ and the person of Believers are united
mystically, legally, morally. The design of all these distinctions is to prove
the Union of Persons betwixt Christ and Believers, and because I find this
Author has bewildred himself, I will endeavor to help him out; for it is a
very plain case: if Christ and believers are united, their Persons must be
united too; for the Person of Christ is Christ himself, and the Persons of
believers are the believers themselves, and I cannot understand, how they can
be united without their Persons, that is without themselves: but then they are
united by mutual relations, as the Persons of a Prince and his Subjects, of a
Husband and his Wife are united, or by mutual affections, or common Interest,
not by a natural adhesion of Persons; but because I find it does not satisfy
these men, that Christ and believers are united, unless their Persons be united
too, it makes me suspect that there is a greater Mystery in this Union of
Persons, than every one apprehends; and therefore,

Secondly, Let us inquire, what they mean by the Person of Christ, to which
believers must be united. And here they have outdone all the metaphysical
subtilties of Suarez, and have found out a Person for Christ distinct from his
Godhead and Manhood: for there can be no other sense made of what Dr. Commun.
with Christ page 51.
Owen tells us, That by the Graces of his Person, he does not mean the glorious
excellencies of his Deity considered in it self, abstracting from the office,
which for us as God and Man he undertook, nor the outward appearance of his
humane nature neither, when he converst here on Earth, nor yet as now exalted
in glory; But the graces of the Person of Christ, as he is vested with the
office of Mediation; His spiritual eminency, comeliness, beauty, as appointed
and anointed by the Father unto that great work of bringing home all his Elect
into his bosom. Now unless the Person of Christ as Mediator, be distinct from
his Person, as God Man, all this is idle talk; for what Personal Graces are
there in Christ as Mediator, which do not belong to him either as God, or Man?
there are some things indeed which our Savior did and suffered, which he was
not obliged to either as, God, or Man, but as Mediator, but surely he will not
call the peculiar duties and actions of an office, Personal Graces. His
Personal Graces fitted him for the discharge of his Mediatory office, but
whatever Personal Graces are in Christ, belong to his Person still, are seated
either in his Divine or Humane Nature, and he has no Personal Graces as
Mediator, which he has not either as God or Man. And the Doctor himself, when
he accommodates the Description, the Spouse gives of her Beloved, to Christ,
tells us, That he is Ibid. p. 52.
white in the glory of his Deity, and ruddy in the preciousness of his
humanity, because white is the complexion of glory, and ruddy is very
applicable to his humanity, because man was called Adam from the red Earth,
whereof he was made; which are excellent proofs, but however white and ruddy
belong to his divine and humane nature, and that without any regard to his
Mediatory office, for he had been white in the glory of his Deity, and ruddy
with the red Earth of his humanity, whether he had been considered as Mediator,
or not. And in his first digression concerning the Page 64.
excellency of Christ Jesus, to invite us to Communion with him in a Conjugal
relation, he tells us, that Christ is exceeding excellent and desirable in his
Deity, and the glory thereof, He is desirable and worthy our acceptance, as
considered in his Humanity, in his freedom from sin, and fullness of Grace, etc.
Now though this look very like a contradiction to what he said before, that by
the graces of his Person, he meant neither the excellencies of his divine, nor
humane nature, yet he has a salvo, which will deliver him both from
contradiction, and from sense; that he does not consider these excellencies of
his Deity or Humanity, as abstracted from his office of Mediator: though he
might, if he pleased, for he considers those excellencies, which are not
peculiar to the office of Mediation, but which would have belonged to him, as
God and Man whether he had been Mediator, or not: but what becomes of his
distinction of the Graces of Christ's Person as Mediator, from the Graces of his
Person as God and Man: when there are no Personal Graces in Christ, but what
belong to his Deity or Humanity: and then you can find no other Person to be
the subject of these Personal excellencies, unless his office of Mediation must
go for a distinct Person, which is a new kind of heresy. But whatever becomes
of the sense of the distinction, there is a very deep fetch in it, the
observing of which will discover the whole Mystery of the Person of Christ, and
our Union to him: for these men consider, that Christ saves us, as he is our
Mediator, and not merely considered as God or Man, and they imagine, that we
receive Grace and Salvation from Christ's Person, just as we do water out of a
Conduit, or a gift and largess from a Prince; that it flows to us from our
Union to his Person; And therefore they dress up the Person of the Mediator
with all those personal graces and excellencies, which may make him a fit
Savior, that those, who are thus united to his Person, (of which more in the
next Section) need not fear missing of Salvation: Hence they ransack all the
boundless perfections of the Deity, and whatever they can find or fancy, which
speaks any comfort to Sinners, this is presently a Personal Grace of the
Mediator: they consider all the glorious effects of his Mediation, and whatever
great things are spoken of his Gospel or Religion, or Intercession for us,
these serve as Personal Graces too; that all our hopes may be built, not on the
Gospel Covenant, but on the Person of Christ: so that the dispute now lies
between the Person of Christ, and his Gospel; which must be the foundation of
our hope, which is the way to life and happiness.

To make this appear, I shall consider that account, which Dr. Owen gives us,
of the Personal graces and excellencies Communion with Jesus Christ, page 53.
of Christ, which in general consist in three things. First, His fitness to
save from the grace of Union, and the proper and necessary effects thereof:
Secondly, His fullness to save from the Grace of Communion, or the free
consequences of the Grace of Union: and Thirdly, His excellency to endear from
his complete sutableness to all the wants of the Souls of men.

First, That he is fit to be a Savior from the Grace of Union, and if you
would understand what this strange Grace of Union is, it is the uniting the
nature of God and Man in one Person, which makes him fit to be a Savior to the
uttermost: He lays his hands upon God by partaking of his nature. Zachar. 13.
7. and he lays his hands on us by partaking of our nature; Hebr. 2. 14. 16. and
so becomes a days-man or Umpire between both: now though this be a great truth,
that the Union of the Divine and Humane Nature in Christ did excellently
qualify him for the Office of a Mediator, yet this is the unhappiest man in
expressing and proving it, that I have met with: for what an untoward
representation is this of Christ's Mediation, that he came to make peace by
laying his hands on God and men, as if he came to part a Fray or Scuffle: and
he might as well have named Genesis 1. 1. or Matthew. 1. 1. or any other place of
Scripture for the proof it, as those he mentions: but to let that pass, in his
Chap. 3. he discourses this more at large, and thither I shall follow him.
Where he tells us, how glorious Christ is in his Deity, and how desirable in
his Humanity, and what are the glorious effects of the Union of the Divine and
Humane Nature.

As for the first, how excellent and desirable Christ is in his Deity. From the
Deity of Christ he observes, the endless, bottomless, boundless grace and
compassion that is in him. It is not the grace of a Creature, no not of the
humane Nature it self, that can serve our turn; if it could be conceived as
separate from the Deity, surely so many thirsty guilty Souls, as every day
drink deep and large draughts of grace and mercy from him, would (if I may so
speak) sink him to the very bottom, nay it could afford no supply at all, but
only in a moral way (and that is a very pitiful way indeed) But when the
Conduit of his Humanity is inseparably united to the infinite inexhaustible
Fountain of the Deity, who can look into the depths thereof: If now there be
grace enough for sinners in an alsufficient God, it is in Christ -- On this
ground it is, That if all the World should (if I may so say) set themselves to
drink free grace, and mercy, and pardon, drawing waters continually from the
Wells of Salvation; if they should set themselves to draw from one single
promise, an Angel standing by, and crying, Drink, O my Friends, yea drink
abundantly, take as much grace and pardon, as shall be abundantly sufficient
for the World of sin, which is in every one of you, they would not be able to
sink the grace of the promise (of the Person of Christ you mean) one hairs
breadth -- The infiniteness of Grace with respect to its Spring or Fountain
(the Deity of Christ) will answer all objections -- What is our finite guilt
before it (a World of sin is something, though it hear no proportion indeed to
infinite Grace) show me the Sinner that can spread his iniquity to the
dimensions (if I may so say) (no man ever had more need, nor made better use of
so says) of this grace: here is mercy enough for the greatest, the oldest, the
stubbornest transgressor, etc. enough in all reason this, what a comfort is it
to sinners to have such a God for their Savior, whose Grace is boundless and
bottomless, and exceeds the largest dimensions of their sins, though there be a
World of sin in them? But what now if the Divine Nature it self have not such
an endless, boundless, bottomless grace and compassion, as the Dr. now talks
of? For at other times, when it serves his turn better, we can hear nothing
from him but the naturalness of Gods vindictive Justice. Though God be rich in
mercy, he never told us yet, that his mercy was so boundless and bottomless: he
has given a great many demonstrations of the severity of his anger against
sinners, who could not be much worse, than the greatest, the oldest, and
stubbornest transgressors. But supposing the Divine Nature were such a
bottomless Fountain of Grace, how comes this to be a Personal Grace of the
Mediator; For a Mediator, as Mediator, ought not to be considered as the
Fountain, but as the Minister of Grace: God the Father certainly ought to come
in for a share at least in being the Fountain of Grace, though the Dr. is
pleased to take no notice of him. But how excellent is the Grace of Christ's
Person above the Grace of the Gospel? For that is a bounded and limited thing,
it is a strait gate, and narrow way that leads unto life, there is no such
boundless mercy, as all the sins in the World cannot equal its dimensions, as
will save the greatest, the oldest, and the stubbornest transgressors.

Thus the Love of Christ is an eternal Love, because his Divine Nature is
eternal; and it is an unchangeable Love, because his Divine Nature is
unchangeable; and his love is fruitful, for it being the love of God, it must
be effectual and fruitful in producing all the things which he wills unto his
Beloved: he loves Life, Grace, Holiness into us, he loves us into Covenant,
loves us into Heaven. This is an excellent Love indeed, which does all for us,
and leaves nothing for us to do: we owe this discovery see you to an
Acquaintance with Christ's Person (or rather with his Divine Nature) for the
Gospel is very silent in this matter. All that the Gospel tells us, is, that
Christ loved sinners so as to dye for them, and that he loves good men, who
believe and obey his Gospel so as to save them, and that he continues to love
them, while they continue to be good; but hates them, when they return to their
old vices: and therefore I see, there is great reason for sinners to fetch
their comforts, not from the Gospel, but from the Person of Christ, which as
far excels the Gospel, as the Gospel excels the Law.

But methinks this is a very odd way of arguing from the Divine Nature; for if
the love of Christ as God, be so infinite, eternal, unchangeable, fruitful, I
would willingly understand, how sin, and death, and misery came into the World:
For if this Love be so eternal and unchangeable, etc. because the Divine Nature
is so, then it was always so: for God always was what he is, and that which is
eternal, could never be other than it is now; and why could not this eternal,
and unchangeable, and fruitful love as well preserve us from falling into sin,
and misery, and death, as Love, Life, and Holiness into us; for it is a little
odd, first to love us into sin and death, that then he may love us into Life
and Holiness; which indeed could not be, if this Love of God were always so
unchangeable and fruitful, as this Author persuades us, it is now: for if this
Love had always loved Life and Holiness into us, I cannot conceive, how it
should happen, that we should sin and dye.

Not that I deny, that the Love of God is eternal, unchangeable, fruitful, that
is, that God was always good, and always continues good, and manifests his
love and goodness in such ways as are suitable to his Nature, which is the
fruitfulness of it: but then the unchangeableness of Gods love does not consist
in being always determined to the same object, but in that he always loves for
the same reason, that is, that he always loves true virtue and goodness,
wherever he sees it, and never ceases to love any person, till he ceases to
be good, and then the immutability of his Love is the reason, why he loves no
longer; for should he love a wicked man, the reason and nature of his Love
would change: And the fruitfulness of God's Love with respect to the Methods of
his Grace and Providence does not consist in producing what he loves by an
omnipotent and irresistible power (for then sin and death could never have
entered into the World) but he governs, and does good to his Creatures in such
ways, as are most suitable to their natures. He governs reasonable Creatures by
Principles of Reason, as he does the material World by the necessary Laws of
Matter, and bruit Creatures by the Instincts and Propensities of Nature.

From hence he proceeds to show, how desirable Christ is in his Humanity, by
reason of his freedom from all sin, both Original and Actual, and his fullness
of Grace; that all Grace was in him for the kinds thereof, and all degrees of
Grace, for its perfection. This indeed does represent him as a very excellent
Person, a spotless Sacrifice, and a great Example to the World, but these
personal perfections cannot pass out of his Person to become ours.

But then Thirdly, you must consider, That all these perfections of the Divine
and Humane Nature are united in one Person, and this made him fit to suffer,
and able to bear whaetever was due unto us, which no Creature could do; for if
the weight of our sins had been laid upon a mere innocent Creature, how would
they have overwhelmed him, and buried him for ever out of the presence of God?
No doubt the Sacrifice of Christ, who was God-Man, was of greater value, than
the Sacrifice of any mere Creature could be, but I know not what this is to his
purpose, and do as little admire his Philosophy.

But his being God and Man, made him an endless, bottomless Fountain of Grace
to all that believe: This he was as God, as we were told before, and his Grace
was never the more bottomless for becoming Man. The design, you see, of all
this is to make the Person of Christ the Fountain of all Grace, from whence we
must drink pardon and mercy as long as we need any, and such mercy too, as his
Gospel is unacquainted with; he has a fullness of all Grace in himself, and
from thence we must receive the communications of it.

And this brings me to the second sort of the Personal Graces and Excellencies
of Christ, his fullness to save from the Grace of Communion, or the free
consequences of the Grace of Union. As for this Grace of Communion (as he is
pleased to call it, though it sounds a little harsh to be a Personal Grace, and
yet communicated) whereby Christ communicates his fullness to Believers, I shall
reserve it for its proper place, and shall at present only consider, what this
Personal fullness in Christ is, which he calls, all the furniture he received
Communion p. 54.
from the Father, by the Unction of the Spirit, for the work of our Salvation:
and near of kin to this is his third Personal Grace, his Excellency to endear
from his complete suitableness to all the wants of the souls of men. There is
no man whatever (this sounds like universal Redemption) that has any want in
reference to the things of God, but Christ will be unto him, that which he
wants; is he dead? Christ is life; is he weak? Christ is the power of God,
and the wisdom of God; has he the sense of guilt upon him? Christ is complete
Righteousness, the Lord our Righteousness: many poor Creatures are sensible of
their wants, but know not where their remedy lies. Indeed whether it be life,
or light, power, or joy, all is wrapped up in him. Now it must be acknowledged,
that the Scripture does attribute a Fullness to Christ, and he is called Life
and Righteousness, the Power and Wisdom of God: So that there is no dispute
between us, whether Christ have all fullness in him, whether he be our Life and
Righteousness, the Wisdom and Power of God; but the dispute is, in what sense
the Scripture attributes all this to Christ. They say, that these are the
Personal Graces of Christ, as Mediator, which are inherent in him; and must be
derived from his Person; we say, they signify the Perfection and Excellency of
his Religion, as being the most complete and perfect declaration of the will of
God, and the most powerful Method of the Divine Wisdom for the reforming the
World; as it prescribes the only Righteousness, which is acceptable to God, and
directs us in the only way to Life and Immortality.

Now to bring this controversy to an issue, there cannot be a more effectual
way, than to examine those places of Scripture, which speak of this matter, and
to learn their sense of it: for if men be allowed to take Scripture phrases,
and put what sense they please on them, we may quickly have as many different
Religions, as there are different fancies among men.

To begin then with the fullness of Christ; and the first place, in which we
meet with it, is in John 1. 16. And of his fullness we all received, and Grace
for Grace. Now what is meant by this fullness, we may learn from Verse 14. The
word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, (and we beh^ld his glory, the glory as
of the only begotten of the Father) full of Grace and Truth. So that this
fullness, which was in Christ, is a fullness of Grace and truth; and if we
consult Ver. 17. we shall find that this Grace and Truth is opposed to the law
of Moses: The Law was given by Moses, but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ.
So that Grace and Truth signify the Gospel, which is a Covenant of Grace, and
is expressly called the Grace of God, Titus 2. 11. and contains the most clear
and perspicuous revelation of the Divine will in opposition to the Types and
Shadows of the Law; is Truth in opposition to Types and Figures: This is the
fullness we receive from Christ, a perfect revelation of the Divine Will
concerning the Salvation of Mankind, which contains so many excellent promises,
that it may well be called Grace; and prescribes such a plain and simple
Religion, so agreeable to the natural notions of good and evil, that it may
well be called Truth.

This fullness dwelt only in Christ, and from him alone we receive it; for none
of the Prophets, who were before him, did so perfectly understand the will of
God, as he did: No man has seen God at any time, but the only begotten Son,
who is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him. v. 18. That is no man
ever before had so perfect a knowledge of the will of God, (which is here
called seeing God, because sight gives us the clearest evidence, and the most
perfect and particular knowledge) but the Son of God, who perfectly understood
all his most secret Counsels, has perfectly declared the will of his Father to
us. And hence that fullness, which we receive from Christ, is explained by Grace
for Grace: And of his fullness we have received, (...) viz. Grace for Grace:
(...), where the repetition of the word (...) with a preposition, signifies
only that abundance of Grace which is now manifested by the Gospel of Christ.
There is indeed some difference about the sense of the preposition (...); some
of the ancient Fathers expound it by Vice, as St. Austin, pro Legis gratia,
quae praeteriit, gratiam Evangelii accepimus permanentem, and pro umbris and
imaginibus veteris Instrumenti, gratia and veritas, per Christum facta est,
That instead of the Grace of the law, which is now past, we receive the Grace
of the Gospel, which is constant and permanent, and instead of the shadows and
figures of the Old Testament, we have Grace and Truth by Jesus Christ; and thus
Nonnas in his Paraphrase renders it, (...), -- though this seems to be a forced
sense; for the Law is no where called Grace, but Grace is expressly opposed to
the Law in the next Verse, but however this you see, they agree in, that by the
fullness of Grace and truth, they understand the Gospel, that perfect
Declaration, which Christ has made of Gods will to the World.

Now though every man in his wits must confess, that this fullness was first in
the Person of Christ, (as these men love to speak) before he could communicate
it to us, that is, that he first perfectly understood the will of God himself,
before he could declare it to others, yet it is not this Personal fullness we
are to attend to, but the fullness and perfection of his Gospel, from whence we
must fetch the knowledge of the Divine Will; for whatever fullness be in him,
the Revelations of the Gospel only communicate this fullness to us.

To the same purpose the Apostle discourses in the 2. Col. 9. 10. For in him
dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily, and ye are complete (...)
filled) in him, who is the Head of all principalities and powers. For the
understanding of which we must consider, what is meant by that Phrase, That in
him dwelt all the fullness of the Godhead ((...) of the Deity) bodily; which
must be acknowledged to be an allusive and Metaphorical expression; for God,
who is a Spirit, cannot in a proper sense dwell bodily in any thing. And
therefore we must observe, that the design of the Apostle in this Chapter is to
persuade the Colosians to adhere to the Gospel of Christ; not to be seduced
either by Jews, or Gnostics, (who talked very much in their canting phrase of
the pleromata) to corrupt the Religion of Christ with Jewish Ceremonies, or
Pagan Superstitions, Ver. 16, 17, 18, 19. and the principal argument he urges
to this purpose, is the perfection of the Gospel Revelation, that in Christ
(that is the Gospel of Christ) are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and
Knowledge, Ver. 3. (...) That is, not in whom are hid (as our translation
renders it contrary to the sense of the place) but in whom are all the hidden
treasures ((...)) of Wisdom and Knowledge: that is, who has now revealed to us
all those treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, which in former Ages were hidden
from the World, upon this he exhorts them to be firm and steadfast in the belief
of the Gospel of Christ, and obedience to it, Ver. 6, 7. To beware lest any man
spoil them through Philosophy and vain deceit, after the traditions of men,
after the Rudiments of the World, and not after Christ. That is, lest their
minds be corrupted through Philosophical Speculations, or Traditionary
superstitions, (in worshipping Demons and Angels, etc.) which are inconsistent
with the Gospel of Christ, and owe their original only to the folly and
superstition of Mankind. And then he adds, for in him (that is, in Christ)
dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily: so that this must refer to that
complete and perfect Revelation of the Gospel, which needs not be supplied by
the Philosophy or Traditions of men. And to understand the Reason of this
Phrase, and the force of the Apostles argument, we must consider, that this is
an allusion to Gods dwelling in the Temple at Jerusalem by Types and figures,
which were the Symbols of his presence: for the Tabernacle or Temple was Gods
House wherein he dwelt, and the mercy seat, and Cherubims, etc. were the
Emblems of Gods presence there, and this Symbolical presence of God in the
Temple was very agreeable to that Symbolical and Ceremonial worship, which he
then instituted and commanded: He dwelt among them by Types and figures, and
fore instituted a Typical and figurative Religion; and this was an imperfect
and obscure Declaration of himself to the World: But now God has sent his Son
to Tabernacle among us. John 1. 14. the Deity it self now dwells in the Temple
of Christ's body, not by Types and figures, as formerly he dwelt in the Temple
at Jerusalem, but by a real and immediate presence, and Union; and therefore
those Revelations, which are made by Christ, are answerable to the Inhabitation
of the Godhead in him, contain a true and perfect Declaration of Gods will, in
opposition to the imperfect Rudiments and obscure Types and figures of the Law.
So that (...), or bodily, is opposed to figurative and Typical: and this is a
plain demonstration of the perfection of the Gospel Revelation, that the
fullness of the Deity dwelt substantially in Christ, and we need not doubt, but
that so excellent a Prophet as he was, in whom the Deity it self inhabited,
has perfectly revealed Gods will to us. All the figures of the Temple were
accomplished in Christ's Person, he was that in truth and reality, which the
Temple was a figure of, God dwelling among us, and his Religion answers the
greatness of his Person: The Godhead dwelt in him bodily, not by Types and
figures, and his Religion is (...) too, all truth and substance, The Law was
but a shadow of things to come, but the Body is of Christ, Ver. 17. his
Religion is Body, truth, and substance. So that this place is exactly parallel,
with John 1. 14. The word was made flesh and dwelt among us, (...) Tabernacled
among us: herein the figure of the Tabernacle was fulfilled, that God dwelt in
our flesh: and the Revelations he made of God's will did agree with the manner
of his appearance; were full of Grace and truth, not a Typical and figurative,
but a plain and perfect Declaration of Gods will. And as the Evangelist tells
us, That of his fullness we have all received; that we are perfectly instructed
by him in the will of God, so our Apostle adds here, and ye are complete in
him, (...), filled in him; you need no other Instructor but Christ, who has
revealed as much of Gods will, as is necessary for us to know. So that this
fullness of the Godhead dwelling bodily in Christ, does ultimately resolve it
self into the perfection of the Gospel-Revelation; for since the fullness of the
Deity did inhabit in Christ's Person, we need not question, but he was able to
acquaint us with the whole mind and will of God, and that he would do so. The
force of which Reason our Savior himself takes notice of John 3. 34, 35. For
he whom God has sent speaks the words of God, that is, declares his whole
will to us, for God gives not the Spirit by measure to him: It is not with
him, as it was with meaner Prophets, who had only some particular Revelations
of the Divine will; but the fullness of the Godhead dwells in him bodily. The
Father loves the Son, and has given all things into his hands.

Thus the fullness of Christ, you see, signifies the excellency and perfection
of the Gospel; and in other places this fullness signifies the Church of Christ.
Ephesians. 1. 22, 23. And has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be head
over all things to the Church, which is his body, the fullness of him, that
fills all in all: Where the Church is called the fullness of Christ, which
makes him (as it were) complete and perfect; for he cannot be a perfect Head
without a Body; hence the Church is called Christ. 1 Cor. 12. 12. For as the
body is one and has many members, and all the members of that one body, being
many are one body, so also is Christ: that is the Christian Church, as it
immediately follows; for by one spirit are we all baptized into one body,
whether we be Jews, or Gentiles, whether we be bond, or free; and Beza tells
us, that this is the the reason of that phrase, which so frequently occurs in
the New Testament, of being in Christ, that is being members of the Christian
Church.

Now the Church is called the Fullness of Christ with respect to its extent and
universality, that it is not confined to any particular Nation, as the Jewish
Church was, but takes in Jews and Gentiles, Bond and Free: for this I take to
be the meaning of Col. 1. 19. For it pleased the Father, that in him should all
fullness dwell, which words are commonly expounded to the same sense with Col.
2. 9. For in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily; but if we
consult the Context, we shall see reason for a different sense, and Beza
observes, that some Expositors by his fullness in this place understand the
Church: for Verse. 18. the Apostle tells us, that He is the head of the body,
the Church, who is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead, that in all
things he might have the pre-eminence: for it pleased the Father, that in him
should all fullness dwell: where fullness must be expounded of the Church, that
it pleased God to unite his Church into Christ; for the Apostle assigns this as
the reason of Christ's being the Head of the Church. And if you would know, why
the Church is called Fullness, and all fullness said to dwell in Christ: the
reason follows in 20, 21. And having made peace through the blood of his Cross
to reconcile all things by him, I say, whether they be things in Earth, or
things in Heaven. And you, who were sometime alienated, and enemies in your
minds by wicked works, yet now has he reconciled. This is that fullness that
dwells in Christ, that he is made the Head of the Universal Church both in
Heaven and Earth, that Jews and Gentiles are now united in one Body; that
whereas in former Ages, the Church of God seemed to be confined to the Jewish
Nation, now it pleased the Father, that Christ should be the Universal Shepherd
and Bishop of Souls, by him to reconcile all things to himself: and this too is
the meaning of that Phrase, The fullness of him, who fills all in all:
therefore the Church is called his Fullness, because he fills all in all: that
is, does not confine his care and providence, and the influences of his Grace
to any one Nation or People, but extends it to the whole World.

Thus the fullness of Christ signifies in Ephesians. 4. 13. Till we all come in the
Unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God to a perfect man, to
the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ: (...), which is the
explication of (...), to a perfect man. That is, to that perfection of faith
and knowledge, which becomes the Christian Church. For (...) signifying the
age, and growth, and stature of a man, the fullness of Christ cannot so properly
be understood of any thing as of the Christian Church.

This is all that I can find in Scripture concerning the fullness of Christ,
which either signifies the perfection of his Gospel, or the Universality of his
Church: which is a plain demonstration of those men's skill in expounding
Scripture, who make this fullness a Personal Grace in Christ, and apply it to
every thing they can find, or fancy, in him: All the furniture that he received
from the Father by the Unction of the Spirit, for the work of our Salvation:
The fullness of his Divine and Humane Nature, the fullness of Love in Christ, the
fullness of habitual Grace, fullness of Satisfaction, fullness of Merit, fullness
of Power and Virtue, a fullness of Justification, and a fullness of
Sanctification: which fullness, I am sure, has confounded men's notions of
Religion, and made them look upon Christ only as a Fountain, from whence they
must drink grace, and mercy, and pardon, justification, and eternal life.

Let us now consider in what sense Christ is called our life: and he is so
called with respect to his Doctrine, his Sacrifice, and that Power he is
invested with to raise us from the dead. He is called Life with respect to his
Doctrine, because he preached the Word of Life, and has brought Life and
Immortality to light by the Gospel: hence in Ioh. 1. 4. the Evangelist tells
us, In him was life, and the life was the light of men: That is, he preached
the Word of Life, which enlightened the dark minds of men: for it is not
imaginable how Life should be light in any other sense, than as this Word of
Life, which Christ preached, enlightened their minds, and dispelled all the
Mists of Error and Ignorance: hence Christ tells his Disciples, I am the way,
the truth, and the life, no man comes to the Father but by me, Ioh. 14. 6.
that is, I declare the true and only way to life and happiness, and no man can
thoroughly understand the will of God, nor consequently be a true Worshipper of
him, without learning of me: thus he calls himself the Bread of life: Ioh. 6.
with respect to the Doctrine he preached, Verse. 33. and with respect to that
Sacrifice he offered for the life of the World, Verse. 51. I am the living
Bread, which came down from Heaven, if any man eat of this bread, he shall live
for ever, and the bread that I will give, is my flesh, which I will give for
the life of the World.

Thus Christ is called our Life, because he has power and authority to bestow
immortal life upon all his sincere Followers, Ioh. 11. 26, 27. I am the
Resurrection and the Life, he that believes in me, though he were dead, yet
shall he live, and he that lives and believes in me shall never dye: That is,
he has power to raise the dead, and will actually raise all those who believe
in him, and reward them with eternal life. To the same purpose our Savior
speaks in Ioh. 5. 25, 26. The hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall
hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live; for as the
Father has life in himself, so has he given to the Son to have life in
himself: That is, he first raises those who are dead in sin, to a new spiritual
life by the power of his Doctrine, and then has Authority to raise them to an
immortal life. This is the meaning too of that expression in Col. 3. 3, 4. You
are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God, when Christ who is our life
shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory: That is, you profess
your selves to be dead to this World in conformity to the death of Christ; and
though that immortal life, which you expect to enjoy with Christ, who is now
risen again from the dead, be at present concealed from your view, yet when
Christ, who is the Author of eternal life, and has power to raise us from the
dead, shall appear the second time to judge the World, then shall ye appear
with him in glory.

So that when Christ is called our Life, the meaning is, that he has published
the Word of Life to us, which contains the most express promises of a blessed
Immortality, and the most plain and easy directions how to attain it: and that
by his death he has expiated our sins, and confirmed all these promises to us;
and being risen from the dead himself, has now power to raise us. We must not
dream of fetching life from the Person of Christ, as we draw water out of a
Fountain; but if we would live for ever with Christ, we must steadfastly believe
and obey his Gospel, which is a Principle of a Divine life in us, and then we
may joyfully expect, that when our Lord and Savior comes again to judge the
World, he will raise us from the dead, and reward our Faith, and Patience, and
Obedience with Immortal Life.

Thus to proceed, Christ is the Power of God, and the Wisdom of God, which
these men call Personal Graces too. But I have already showed you at large,
that Christ is the Wisdom of God, with respect to those Revelations he made of
Gods will. The Gospel of Christ is the Wisdom and Power of God: 1 Cor. 1. 24.
Christ the Power of God and the Wisdom of God: that is, the Doctrine of a
crucified Christ, as will appear from the verses before: The Jews require a
sign, and the Greeks seek after wisdom, but we preach Christ crucified, to the
Jews a stumbling block, and to the Greeks foolishness; but to them who are
called both Jews and Greeks Christ the Power of God, and the Wisdom of God. The
Jews were all for Signs and Miracles, the Greeks were for curious Philosophical
Speculations, which might gratify their inquisitive minds, and therefore
neither of them could relish that plain simple Doctrine of a crucified Christ,
but whatever these men thought of it, the Apostle tells us, that this Doctrine
of a crucified Savior is the Power of God and Wisdom of God. That is the most
powerful Method which was ever used by God for the reforming the World, and the
contrivance and effect of excellent Wisdom; and thus the Gospel of Christ is
called the Power of God to Salvation to them that believe: Romans 1. 16. and by
this foolishness of Preaching, that is, by preaching this foolish Doctrine (as
it was accounted by the Wisemen of the World) of a crucified Christ, it
pleased God to save them that believe. Christ indeed being now exalted to the
right hand of the Majesty on High, may in a proper sense be called the Power of
God, because all power is given to him both in Heaven and Earth, and he has
the supreme government of all the affairs of this spiritual Kingdom; and this
is a Personal Power inherent in him, which all good men shall find the blessed
effects of: but then the exercise of this Power is confined to the Rules of the
Gospel, he has power to save those who believe and obey him, and he has power
to destroy his enemies, to accomplish all the promises, and to execute all the
threatenings of his Gospel: So that this Personal Power in Christ can give us no
greater encouragement than the Gospel does; It cannot save any man whom the
Gospel condemns, we have no reason to trust to his Personal Power, unless we
first obey his Gospel: for how omnipotent soever he be, his Gospel is the
measure of his Actings, if that condemns us, his omnipotent Power will not save
us. But the chief Personal Grace, which these men most vehemently contend for,
is still behind, viz. the Righteousness of Christ: Now no Christian will deny,
that Christ was very righteous, a great Example of universal Holiness and
Purity; and it must be confessed, that his Righteousness was not an imaginary
imputed Righteousness, but Inherent and Personal; but what comfort is this to
us, that Christ was Righteous, if we continue wilful and incorrigible Sinners?
Yes, says the Doctor, Have thou Communion with Jesus Christ. p. 55.
the sense of guilt upon thee? Christ is complete Righteousness, the Lord our
Righteousness: This makes Christ suitable to the wants of a Sinner indeed, that
he has a righteousness for him, which God infinitely prefers before any
homespun Righteousness of his own. This is a very comfortable notion for bad
men, and such as I would not part with for all the World, did I resolve to live
wickedly, and yet intend to get to Heaven: But it is good to be sure in a
matter of such importance, and therefore let us consider, in what sense Christ
is called our Righteousness, and what the Scripture intends by these Phrases of
the Righteousness of God, or the Righteousness of Faith, or the Righteousness
of God by Faith.

To begin then with that famous place in the Old Testament, Ierem. 23. 6. where
Christ is expressly called the Lord our Righteousness: In his days Judah shall
be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely, and this is his name, whereby he shall
be called, The Lord our Righteousness: a very express place to prove, that
Christ is our Righteousness: that is, as these men expound it, that the only
righteousness, wherewith we must appear before God, is the righteousness of
Christ imputed to us: but is there no other possible sense to be made of this
Phrase? Righteousness in Scripture is a word of a very large use, and sometimes
signifies no more, than Mercy, kindness, and beneficence, and so the Lord our
righteousness is the Lord, who does good to us, who is our Savior and
deliverer: which is very agreeable to the Reason of this name, that in his days
Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely: And righteousness
signifies that part of Justice, which consists in relieving the injured and
oppressed: thus David speaks in Psalm 4. 1. Hear me, when I call, O God of my
righteousness: i. e. Thou O God, who maintainest my right and my cause. Psalm
9. 4. Thus in Isaiah 54. 17. No weapon, that is formed against Thee, shall
prosper; and every tongue that shall rise up against thee in judgment, thou
shall condemn; this is the heritage of the Servants of the Lord, and their
righteousness is of me, says the Lord. Which is a parallel expression to the
Lord our righteousness, and signifies no more than that God will avenge their
cause, and deliver them from all their Enemies. The like we have in Isaiah 45.
24. Surely shall one say, in the Lord have I Righteousness and strength; even
to him shall men come, and all that are incensed against him, shall be ashamed;
in the Lord shall all the Seed of Israel be justified, and shall glory: that
is, the Lord is that just and righteous judge; who will justify good men, i. e.
deliver them from the violence and injuries of their Enemies: He is their
righteousness and strength, their righteous, strong, and powerful deliverer:
which agrees with that promise in Verse 14. In Righteousness thou shall be
established, thou shall be far from oppression, thou shall not fear, and from
terror, for it shall not come near thee. And to name but one place more:
Isaiah 61. 10, 11. I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my Soul shall be joyful
in my God, for he has clothed me with the garments of Salvation, he has
covered me with the Robe of Righteousness, as a Bridegroom decketh himself with
Ornaments, and as a Bride adorneth her self with Jewels: for as the Earth
brings forth her bud, as the Garden causes the things that are sown in it to
spring forth; so the Lord will cause Righteousness and Praise to spring forth
before all Nations. This sounds very like an Imputed Righteousness; for what
can be meant by the Robe of Righteousness, but that pure and spotless Robe of
Christ's Righteousness, which covers all our sins and deformities, and makes us
appear as beautiful and lovely in the eyes of God, as a Bride does, who adorns
her self with Jewels? This is the effect of our espousal with Christ, that we
are covered, and adorned with his Righteousness: but if we will attend to the
circumstances of the place, and not to the bare sound of words, we need seek no
farther for the confutation of this fancy: for the Garment of Salvation, and
the Robe of Righteousness, signify those great deliverances God promised to
Israel in the former Verses, which should make them as glorious in the eyes of
men, as a splendid garment would: that Righteousness and praise, which God
would cause to spring forth before all Nations: even as the Earth brings
forth her bud, and as the Garden causes those things which are sown in it to
spring forth: That is, that God would work such great deliverances for them by
such improbable means, and in such plenty and abundance, as if they sprang out
of the Earth, which should make it appear to all Nations, That they are the
Seed whom the Lord has blessed: Verse. 9. And what has this to do with the
Imputation of Christ's Personal Righteousness to us?

But it is time now to proceed to the New Testament; for indeed we cannot
reasonably expect, that so great a Gospel Mystery, as this of the Imputation of
Christ's Righteousness is, should be so clearly discovered in the Old Testament,
where the Gospel was wrapped up in Types and Figures. Now it is very observable,
that in all the Histories of the Gospel, which give us an account of our
Saviors Sermons and Parables, whereby he instructed the people in all
necessary Truths, he makes no mention at all of the Imputation of his
Righteousness to them, but exacts from them a Righteousness of their own, if
they would find mercy with God: now it is very strange (if the Imputation of
Christ's Righteousness for our Justification be the great Gospel Mystery, and
the only way to find favor with God) that our Savior in all his Sermons
should not once mention this; that he should not once warn his Hearers (as the
Gospel Preachers of our days do) to beware of trusting to their own
Righteousness, or of expecting Salvation by their own Works; but that instead
of this, he should so severely enjoin them the practice of an Universal
Righteousness as the only thing that pleases God; and so severely threaten
those who continue in any sin, who break the least of his Commandments, that
they shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but shall be banished from the
presence of God into outer darkness. This, I confess, to me (who am apt in the
first place to admire our Saviors Sermons, who was the first Author of our
Religion, before the Writings of the Apostles themselves, though inspired men)
is a very great prejudice against such notions, as are set up for the
Fundamentals of Christianity, without the belief of which we cannot be saved,
when there is not the least footsteps of them to be seen in the Gospel of our
Savior: for did not our Savior instruct his Hearers in all things necessary
to Salvation? Or have the Evangelists given us an imperfect account of our
Saviors Doctrine, and omitted so essential a part of it, as the Imputation of
his Righteousness? Choose which side you please, and the consequence is very
bad: if the first, then Christ was not faithful in the discharge of his
Prophetical Office, did not instruct his Hearers in all things necessary to
Salvation; if the latter, you overthrow the Credit of the Gospel, and by both
destroy the Foundation of our Faith.

There were some things indeed, which the Apostles themselves, by reason of
their Jewish prejudices, could not understand, while Christ was with them; and
therefore he reserved the more perfect Revelation of those Truths till the
descent of the Holy Ghost: as he tells his Disciples in Ioh. 16. 12, 13. Such
was that Doctrine of the Nature of his spiritual Kingdom, which should commence
with sufferings and death, whereas they expected a Temporal Messiah, as the
rest of the Jews did; and the receiving the Gentiles into his Church, which S.
Peter himself did not understand, till he was instructed by a Vision, in Act.
10. which is so frequently in the Epistles called that Mystery which was hid
from Ages: but now the knowledge of these things was not absolutely necessary
to eternal life, and therefore the perfect revelation of them might be deferred
till the most convenient season: It was necessary indeed, that the Apostles
should understand the full extent of their Commission to preach the Gospel to
all Nations, Gentiles as well as Jews; but it was not necessary to know this,
till they were sent to preach: but we cannot imagine, that our Savior would
neglect to acquaint them with the necessary terms and conditions of Salvation:
for his Sermons were to be the Rule of theirs; and had the Apostles taught any
thing as necessary to Salvation, which our Savior had not taught, especially
any thing that did so plainly contradict the Doctrine of our Savior, as this
imputed Righteousness does, it would very much have weakened their credit with
me; for this had been to preach another Gospel than our Savior did, and we
have S. Paul's command to reject such Preachers, though they were Apostles, or
an Angel from Heaven, Gal 1. 8, 9. I do not speak this to evacuate the
Authority of the Apostles, or of their Writings; for they do not make any thing
necessary to Salvation, but what Christ did, nor contradict any thing, which
Christ has taught: But to awaken those men, who take little notice of the
Gospel of our Savior, while they fetch all their Mysterious Divinity out of
some obscure passages of S. Paul's Epistles; Though S. Peter long since told us,
That there were many things in them hard to be understood, which they that are
unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do also the other Scripture, to their own
destruction, 2 Pet. 3. 16. and yet if they can meet with any obscure Phrases,
which will serve their turn, without considering how their sense agrees with
the Gospel of our Savior, they make it the Foundation of their Faith, and a
standing Rule to expound the Doctrine of our Savior, and to measure the
Orthodoxy of all Opinions: whereas on the contrary, this ought to be a
sufficient reason to reject such Interpretations, that the Gospel of our
Savior is perfectly silent in a matter pretended to be of such absolute
necessity to Salvation.

Having premised this, it is time now to consider those Texts of Scripture,
whereon they found this notion of the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness: And
it is worth observing, that in all the New Testament there is no such
expression as the Righteousness of Christ, or the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness: we there only find the Righteousness of God, and the
Righteousness of Faith, and the Righteousness of God, which is by the Faith of
Jesus Christ; which is very strange, did the whole Mystery of the Gospel
consist in the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, that neither Christ nor his
Apostles should once tell us so in express words. But to consider particular
places: I shall begin with that Phrase of the Righteousness of God, which
sometimes signifies his Justice, Veracity, or Goodness, Romans 3. 5. but most
commonly in the New Testament it signifies that Righteousness which God
approves and commands, and which he will accept for the Justification of a
Sinner; which is contained in the Terms of the Gospel: Romans 1. 17. For therein
is the Righteousness of God revealed from Faith to Faith: Thus it is called the
Righteousness of God, Matthew. 6. 33. Seek ye first the Kingdom of God and his
Righteousness, which is the same with the Righteousness of his Kingdom: now the
Kingdom of God signifies the state of the Gospel, and the Righteousness of God,
or of his Kingdom, that Righteousness which the Gospel prescribes, which is
contained in the Sermons and Parables of Christ, and consists in a sincere and
universal obedience to the Commands of God.

That we may the better understand this, we must observe farther, that this
Righteousness of God (that which he commands and rewards) is the Righteousness
of Faith, or Righteousness by the Faith of Christ: Now Faith, and Faith in
Christ is often used objectively, for the Gospel of Christ, which is the object
of our Faith, or contains those matters which are to be believed; and so the
Righteousness of Faith, or by the Faith of Christ is that Righteousness which
the Gospel commands. Thus in Acts 24. 24. Felix sent for Paul, and heard him
concerning the Faith of Christ: that is, concerning Righteousness, Temperance,
and the judgment to come: Ver. 25. which are the principal matters of the
Gospel: thus obedience to the Faith is obedience to the Gospel, Romans 1. 5. In
this sense Faith and Works are opposed to each other in St. Paul's Epistles, as
has been abundantly proved by others: the great dispute in the Epistle to the
Romans is, whether we must be justified by the Law of Moses, or by the Faith of
Christ: that is, whether the observation of all the external Rites and
Ceremonies of the Law, and an external conformity of our Actions, to the moral
Precepts of it will justify a man before God; or that sincere and universal
obedience, which the Gospel of Christ requires, which transforms our minds into
the likeness of God, and makes us new Creatures: And that this Righteousness of
Faith, and this alone, can recommend us to God, the Apostle proves from the
example of Abraham, in the 4. Chapter; who was accounted Righteous for the sake
of his sincere and steadfast belief of Gods promises: Abraham believed God, and
it was counted to him for Righteousness, Ver. 3. and this, while he was
uncricumcised, which is a convincing argument against the Jews, that
Circumcision, and the observance of the Law of Moses is not necessary to
justification, because Abraham, who was the Father of the faithful, and is set
forth for the Pattern of our justification, was justified without it.

But that we may understand, what this justification by Faith is, and how the
Apostle argues from Abraham's being justified by Faith to prove, that we must
now be justified by the Faith of Christ, it is necessary to enquire, what that
Faith was, whereby Abraham was justified, and what agreement there is between
the Faith of Abraham, and Faith in Christ.

For Abraham's Faith was not a Faith in Christ, but Abraham believed God, and it
was counted to him for Righteousness: Christ indeed was the Material object of
Abraham's Faith, that is, he believed that promise, which God made of sending
Christ into the World, upon which account our Savior tells the Jews, your
Father Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it, and was glad: John 8* 5,
6. But no man could believe in Christ, till he came, that is could not believe
any thing upon his Authority; which is the true notion of believing in him, as
you shall hear more presently.

There is not a plainer argument, how apt men are to pervert the Scriptures to
reconcile them to their own prejudices and preconceived opinions, than to
observe what work they make with Abraham's Faith, as if that Faith, which was
imputed to him for Righteousness, were a fiducial reliance and recumbency on
Christ for Salvation, upon which the Righteousness of Christ apprehended by
Faith was imputed to him: for suppose this imputation of Christ's Righteousness
were revealed in the most plain and express words in the New Testament, yet it
is hard to conceive, how Abraham should learn this great Mystery from that
general and obscure promise, In thy seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be
blessed, which is all, that was ever revealed to Abraham concerning Christ:
This is such a train of thoughts from in thy seed shall all the Nations of the
Earth be blessed, to the imputation of Christ's Righteousness, as Mr. Hobs
himself could never have hit on: for is there no possible way for God to bless
the World, but by the imputation of Christ's Righteousness? or is there such a
natural and necessary connection between this blessing, and the imputation of
Christ's Righteousness, that we cannot understand the one without the other.

Pray let us consider, how many things Abraham must distinctly know (according
to these men's own principles) before he could come to the knowledge of the
imputation of Christ's Righteousness; and he would be a wonderful man indeed,
who could learn all this from that general promise, without some more
particular revelation: As first, he must be well assured, that the Blessings
here meant are spiritual blessings, pardon of sin, and eternal life, and that
Christ should be a spiritual King and Savior, and though this be the least
difficulty of all, yet the promise is not so clear and express in this matter,
but that men might mistake it, and so we know, the whole Jewish Nation for many
Ages did, who had more particular promises concerning Christ, than this was,
and yet expected only a Temporal Prince, who should sit on the Throne of David,
and subdue their Enemies under their feet; and this was the great prejudice,
which the Jews had against Christ and his Religion, that he so much deceived
their expectations by his mean appearance.

And secondly Abraham must know too, that Christ was to die for the sins of the
World, without which (according to the Doctor) it is impossible God should
forgive sin, considering the naturalness of his vindictive Justice to him; and
this was more than the Apostles of Christ themselves understood till after his
Resurrection, though Christ had expressly told them of it: And Thirdly, He must
understand also the perfect Holiness and Innocence of Christ's life, and that he
fulfilled all righteousness, not for himself, but for us: Nay Fourthly, He must
understand that great Mystery of the Incarnation of the Son of God; for without
this it is impossible to understand the virtue and efficacy of his expiation,
and Sacrifice, and Righteousness, since the sufferings of a mere man could
never expiate sin, nor his Righteousness serve any more than himself: And
Fifthly, He must understand also that intimate oneness and Conjunction, which
is betwixt Christ and his Church, by virtue of which Union believers may
challenge a right to all, that Christ did and suffered, which is such a riddle,
as these men explain it, as is not understood to this day: And Sixthly, He must
understand too the nature of Faith, of rolling the Soul on Christ for
Salvation, and renouncing all Righteousness of his own, and then possibly he
might without any more ado understand this great Mystery of the imputation of
Christ's Righteousness, and he that can believe, that Abraham could learn all
this from that general promise, In thy seed shall all the Nations of the Earth
be blessed, may believe, what he will, and I suppose no man will trouble
himself to confute him.

Now if you would know, what the Faith of Abraham, and of all good men in
ancient times was, the Apostle to the Hebrews gives us a full account of it, in
Hebr. 11. That he discourses there of a justifying Faith, that is, such a Faith
as renders men approved of God, and which he will count for Righteousness,
appears from the whole tenor of this Chapter. In the 2. Verse he tells us,
That by this the Elders obtained a good report, i. e. the Fathers of the Old
Testament were approved and rewarded by God for the sake of this Faith: as he
shows particularly that Abel obtained witness, that he was Righteous, v. 4.
that Enoch had the testimony, that he pleased God, v. 5. that Noah became the
Heir of Righteousness which is by Faith, v. 7. etc. Now this justifying Faith
is the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen:
(...) a firm and confident expectation of th^se things, we hope for, and (...)
an argument of the being of those things, which we do not see; that is, Faith
is such a firm and steadfast persuasion of the truth of those things, which are
not evident to sense, as makes us confidently hope for them: The object of
Faith must be unseen things, as the Being, or providence of God, or a future
state, something past or to come; the Creation of the World, or the final
dissolution of it, or the accomplishment of any promises, and predictions; the
nature of Faith consists in such a firm assent to these unseen things, as
produces some answerable effects in our lives; This is the general notion of
Faith, by which the Elders obtained a good report, and the different sorts of
Faith result from the different objects and motives of it: the Apostle takes
notice of two kinds of Faith in this Chapter, and Faith in Christ makes a
third, which are all the kinds of Faith, the Scripture is acquainted with.

The first we may call a natural Faith, i. e. a belief of the Principles of
natural Religion, which is founded upon natural demonstrations, or moral
arguments; as that God is, and that he is a Rewarder of them, that diligently
seek him, which was the Faith of Abel and Enoch, whereby they pleased God: for
there being no mention made of the Faith of Abel and Enoch, in the old
Testament, the Apostle proves, that they were true believers, because they had
this Testimony, that they pleased God; now it is impossible to be sincerely
Religious, or to do any acceptable service to God without the belief of his
Being, and Providence, and care of good men: These are the first Principles of
all Religion, and God required no more of those good men, who had no other
particular Revelations of his will.

Secondly, There is a Faith in God, or a belief of those particular
Revelations, which God made to the Fathers of the Old Testament: of this the
Apostle gives us many examples in this Chapter: Thus Noah believed God, when he
forewarned him of the Universal deluge, and in obedience to him, provided an
Ark for the safety of himself, and his Family, and this was imputed to him for
Righteousness: He became the Heir of the Righteousness, which is by Faith: Thus
Abraham in obedience to the Divine Revelation left his own Country and Fathers
House, and went into a strange Land: thus Sarah by believing the promise of
God, received strength to conceive Seed, and was delivered of a Child, when she
was past age; because she judged him faithful, who had promised. Thus Abraham
in obedience to God offered his Son Isaac, which was as Heroical an Act of
Faith, as was ever done by Man: for besides that great and passionate kindness
he had for his only Son, which made this a very difficult trial; this command
of offering his Son seemed to thwart that former promise, In Isaac shall thy
Seed be called, i. e. that from Isaac should proceed that numerous Offspring,
which God had promised to Abraham, which was not very likely, when this very
Isaac must be offered in Sacrifice, and die without leaving any Child to
succeed him; but yet Abraham was so well assured both of the faithfulness and
power of God, that whatever impossibilities humane reason suggested, he would
neither disobey Gods command, nor distrust his promise, but did believe in hope
against hope: the like examples we have of the Faith of Isaac, and Jacob, and
Joseph, and Moses, etc. who firmly believed all those particular Revelations
God made to them, and confidently expected the performance of all his promises,
how unlikely soever they appeared to be: This is that Faith, whereby Abraham,
and all the good men in those days were justified, viz. Such a firm belief of
the Being and Providence of God, and all those particular Revelations God made
to them, as made them careful in all things to please God, and to obey him.

From hence we learn thirdly, What Faith in Christ is, which is now imputed to
us for Righteousness, as Abraham's Faith was to him; for to make our Faith in
Christ answer to the Faith of Abraham, and all good men in former Ages,
(without which the Apostles argument from Abraham's being justified by Faith to
our justification by Faith is of no force) our Faith in Christ must signify
such a steadfast belief of all those Revelations, which Christ has made to the
World, as governs our lives and Actions: Abraham was justified by believing
those Revelations, which God made to him, and we are justified by believing
those Revelations, which Christ has made of Gods will to us; for if by the
Righteousness of Faith, you understand the Righteousness of Christ apprehended
by Faith and imputed to us, you utterly destroy the Apostles argument for our
justification by Faith: for Abraham, and all the good men of old were not
justified by such a Faith as this; they never heard of the Righteousness of
Christ imputed to us: Noah was made Heir of Righteousness, that is, was
accounted a Righteous Person, because he believed that the World should be
drowned, and prepared an Ark at Gods command for himself and his Family:
Abraham's Faith was imputed to him for Righteousness, because he left his own
Country, and followed God into a strange land, and believed, that God would
give him a Son, and make him the Father of many Nations, when he and his Wife
were so old, that according to the course of nature, they could not expect any
Child: and when Sarah by Faith had conceived, and brought forth this Son of the
Promise, he offers this Son at Gods command without distrusting the performance
of the Promise: Now what has all this to do with an Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness? how does it follow, that because Abraham was justified by such
noble and generous Acts of Faith, therefore we shall be justified by the
imputation of Christ's Righteousness, by rolling our Souls on Christ for
Salvation: These two Faiths are of as different kinds, as can well be imagined,
and therefore we cannot reason from one to the other, and St. Paul certainly
understood himself better, than to argue at this weak rate.

And therefore to bring this discourse to an Head, the difference between the
Faith of Abraham and the Faith of Christians is this, that Abraham believed
God, and it was counted to him for Righteousness, and we believe in Christ, and
this is counted unto us for Righteousness; Abraham believed those Revelations
God made to him, either immediately by himself, or by the Ministry of Angels,
we believe all those Revelations God has made to us by his own Son: for God,
who at sundry times and in diverse manners spoke in time past to the Fathers by
the Prophets, has in these last days spoken unto us by his Son: Hebr. 1. 1. So
that the first notion of Faith in Christ is a firm belief of his Divine
Authority, which necessarily draws after it a belief of the whole Doctrine of
the Gospel: thus in John 20. 31. The Christian Faith is described by believing
that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God: and 1 John 5. 5. Who is he that
overcomes the World, but he that believes, that Jesus is the Son of God: That
is, that he came from God with full power and Authority to declare his will,
and confirm and ratify the new Covenant. So that the difference between the
Faith of Abraham and Faith in Christ is, that Abraham's Faith was founded on the
immediate inspirations of God, or the Revelations of Angels, but a Faith in
Christ is founded on the Authority of Christ, which is the first object of the
Christian Faith; and the reason and foundation of all other Acts of Faith:
Abraham had only some particular Revelations, as the object of his Faith, but
now Christ has made a perfect Revelation of the whole will of God, which is
the object of our Faith; and thus the Christian Faith excells all other kinds
of Faith, as much as the Revelations of the Gospel excel all other Revelations
made to Abraham and other good men: but still the end of all Faith is the same
to govern our lives, and make us obedient in all things to God, as Abraham was,
without which no Faith can justify.

And the same difference there is between the Righteousness of Faith in a
general notion, as it is applied to Noah, and Abraham, and those worthies of
old, and the Righteousness of God by the Faith of Jesus Christ: Romans 3. 22. and
that Righteousness which is through the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness
which is of God by Faith: Phil. 3. 9. The first signifies that Righteousness
which is owing to an hearty belief of the Being and Providence of God, and
those particular Revelations, which they received from God; the latter is the
effect of a sincere belief and obedience to the Gospel, which is the most
perfect Revelation, which God ever made of his will to mankind. This is so
plain and easy an account of the rise and use of these phrases, and of the
force of the Apostles reasoning from the Faith of Abraham to the Faith of
Christ (which is unintelligible in any other way) that could men be reconciled
to plain sense, it would need no other confirmation but the natural evidence of
naked and simple truth. But not to be wanting to a good cause, let us now
examine those Texts of Scripture, which are abused by these men to set up the
Personal Righteousness of Christ as the only formal cause of our justification,
as that alone which can make us righteous before God.

I shall begin and end with that famous place. Phil. 3. 8, 9. (for the
explication of this will give us occasion to consider all the material passages
of Scripture, which are applied to this purpose) yea doubtless, and I account
all things loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord,
for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and I do account them but
dung, that I may win Christ, and be found in him, not having my own
righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is through the Faith of
Christ, the Righteousness, which is of God by Faith: by my own righteousness
these men understand inherent righteousness, whatever good St. Paul had done,
either while he was a Jew, or after his Conversion to Christianity: this he
rejects, and therefore the righteousness, which is through the Faith of Christ,
must needs be an imputed Righteousness, the Personal Righteousness of Christ
apprehended by Faith, and imputed to us. This is fairly offered, but what proof
have they for it? That, I confess, I cannot learn, only it is taken for
granted, that my Righteousness signifies inherent Righteousness, and the
Righteousness of Faith imputed Righteousness, and it is a sufficient answer to
this to say, they need not signify so. My own Righteousness can signify no
more than that, in which he placed his Righteousness, whatever it was; and what
necessity is there to understand this of Inherent Holiness; an external
Righteousness serves most men's turn very well, and this is the righteousness by
which the Pharisees (and amongst the rest St. Paul, while he was a Pharisee)
expected to be justified; for what his Righteousness was he tells us in Ver. 6,
7. Circumcised the eight day; of the stock of Israel, of the Tribe of Benjamin,
an Hebrew of the Hebrews, as touching the Law a Pharisee (who were mighty
strict and punctual in observing all external Ceremonies) and he expressed his
zeal for the law of Moses, by persecuting the Christian Church, and touching
the Righteousness, which is in the Law, he was blameless: which last phrase,
touching the Righteousness of the law blameless, signifies only an external
blamelessness of Conversation, as Mr. Calvin himself acknowledges: for this was
the Pharisees notion even of the moral law, that the obligation of it did reach
no farther than the outward man, and Trypho the Jew in Justin Martyr quarrels
with the Gospel of our Savior for this very reason, that it requires the
government of our thoughts and passions, which, he says, is impossible for a
man to do: and thus we must understand this blamelessness here, unless we will
say, that St. Paul, while he was a Pharisee, did perfectly observe the moral
law, was blameless before God as well as before men, which I suppose those who
talk so much of the impossibility of keeping Gods laws, will be loath to own.
So that my own Righteousness, which is of the law is so far from signifying an
inherent Righteousness, an inward and vital principle of holiness, that it
signifies only an external Righteousness, which consisted in some external
Rites, as Circumcision and Sacrifices, etc. or external privileges, as being
of the Seed of Abraham, and stock of Israel, or an external Civility and
blamelessness of Conversation, and this Righteousness he had reason to reject,
because God will reject it.

This was all the Righteousness he had, while he was a Pharisee, and this he
accounts dung and loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ our
Lord; i. e. for the sake of the Gospel (which is the knowledge of Christ, as
you heard above) which contains a more excellent and perfect Righteousness,
than the Law did: and that he might win Christ, i. e. that he might attain to
an Evangelical Righteousness, such as Christ was the Preacher, and example of:
and that he might be found in him, not having his own Righteousness, which is
of the law: that at the last day he might appear to be a sound and sincere
Christian, whose righteousness does not consist only in some external
observances, or an external Conformity to Gods Law, but that, which is through
the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness, which is of God by Faith: i. e. that
inward and vital principle of holiness, that new nature, which the Gospel of
Christ requires of us, and which this Christian Faith will work in us; which is
a Righteousness of Gods own choosing, which he commands, and which he will
reward.

To confirm all this we must observe a double Antithesis in the words, the
Righteousness of the law is opposed to the Righteousness, which is by the Faith
of Christ, and my own Righteousness opposed to the Righteousness of God; now
the surest way to understand the meaning of this is to consider, how these
phrases are used in Scripture.

The Righteousness of the law (as you have already heard) is an external
Righteousness, which consists in washings, and purifications, and Sacrifices,
or an external Conformity to the moral Law: the Righteousness, which is by the
Faith of Christ, is an Internal Righteousness, which consists in the renovation
of our minds and Spirits, in the government of our thoughts and passions, which
is therefore called being born again, and becoming new Creatures, and rising
again with Christ, and putting off the old man, and being renewed in the spirit
of our minds, and putting on the new man, which after God is created in
Righteousness and true Holiness. The meaning of all which phrases is that that
Righteousness which God requires of us under the Gospel must be an inward
principle of love and obedience, which changes our natures and transforms us
into the image of God, as much as if we were born again, and made new Creatures.

Hence St. Paul tells us, that the reason why God sent Christ into the World in
our nature, to die as a Sacrifice for our sins, and to confirm and seal the new
Covenant with his blood was, that the righteousness of the law might be
fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit, Romans 8. 3,
4. (...) the righteousness of the law, that is (...), as St. Chrysostom
expounds it, that which the law was designed to work in them, but was found too
weak to effect it by reason of the greater power and prevalency of sin, i. e.
the inward holiness and purity of mind, which was represented and signified by
those external Ceremonies of Circumcision, washing, purifications, and
Sacrifices; this was the design of the Gospel to work in us that internal
holiness and purity, which is the perfection and accomplishment of the Typical
and Figurative Righteousness of the Law.

I know very well, that this place is expounded of the imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, that we fulfill the Righteousness of the Law, not personally, but
imputatively: but what reason can there be assigned for this, besides that they
will expound Scripture so, which no man can help: for is there any mention here
of the Righteousness of Christ? that he fulfilled all Righteousness for us, and
that his Righteousness is imputed to us, and so we fulfill the Righteousness of
the law in him? And we ought to consider, how consistent such an interpretation
is with the Apostles design, which is to show the great virtue and efficacy of
the Gospel in delivering us from the power of sin, which the law could not
effect: The law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus (that divine and
spiritual law, which Christ has given us, which governs our minds and spirits,
and is the principal of a new spiritual life) makes us free from the law of sin
and death (from the power and dominion of sin, which is called a law, and the
law in our members warring against the law of our minds. Romans 7. 21, 23.) for
what the law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, (what the law
could not do, i. e. govern our minds and passions, deliver us from the law of
sin and death, from the Power and Dominion of our lusts) this God effected by
sending Christ into the World to publish the Gospel to us, and to confirm all
those great promises and threatenings contained in it with his own blood, That
the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the
flesh, but after the Spirit: how can imputation come in here? What pretty sense
would this make of the Apostles Argument? The Law was too weak to make men
thoroughly good, to conquer their love to sin, and to reform their hearts and
lives; and therefore God sent his Son into the World; What for? To give them
better laws, and more excellent promises, and more powerful assistances to do
good? No, by no means, but to fulfill all righteousness for them, that they may
fulfill the righteousness of the law, not by doing any thing themselves, but, by
having all done for them, by having this perfect Righteousness of Christ
imputed to them: there was no reason surely to abrogate the law of Moses for
this end; it might have continued in full force still, and have been as
available to Salvation as the Gospel is, with the supplemental Righteousness of
Christ: But the weakness of the law, which the Apostle complains of, was, not
the want of an imputed Righteousness (which might have been had as well under
the Law, as under the Gospel, if God had pleased) but, a want of strength and
power to subdue the sinful appetites of men, it was weak through the flesh, by
reason of the greater prevalency of sensual lusts, which the law could not
conquer; and therefore the Gospel of our Savior must supply this defect, not
by an imputed Righteousness, but, by an addition of greater power to enable men
to do that which is good, to fulfill the external righteousness of the law by a
sincere and spiritual obedience.

Much to the same purpose the Apostle discourses in Romans 7. Ver. 4, 5, 6.
Wherefore my Brethren, you also are become dead to the law by the body of
Christ (who put an end to that imperfect dispensation by his death) that you
should be married to another, even to him who is raised from the dead, that we
should bring forth fruit unto God: for when we were in the flesh (under that
carnal and fleshly dispensation of the Law of Moses) the motions of sin, which
were by the Law (which grew more boisterous and unruly by the prohibitions of
the law, v. 8.) did work in our members to bring forth fruit unto death, i. e.
did betray us to those wicked actions, which end in Death; but now we are
delivered from the law, that being dead in which we were held, that we should
serve in newness of the Spirit, and not in the oldness of the letter. So that
the reason why the Law of Moses was abrogated, was because it could not make
men good; It nursed them up in a ritual and external Religion, taught them to
serve God in the letter, by Circumcision and Sacrifices, or an external
Conformity to the letter of the law: But the Gospel of Christ alone teaches us
to worship God with the Spirit, to offer a reasonable Sacrifice to him, to
fulfill the (...), all that internal Righteousness, of which those legal
Ceremonies were the Signs and Sacraments.

This is the plain meaning of the Apostle, which can never be reconciled with
an imputed Righteousness, which would make his argument foolish and absurd: and
therefore in other places, he tells us, what little reason we have to be so
zealous for the law of Moses, since we have the perfection of it in the Gospel:
what need is there of the Circumcision of the flesh, which the law required?
when in the Gospel we have that Circumcision made without hands, in putting off
the body of the sins of the flesh by the Circumcision of Christ; which is the
(...), the perfection of that fleshly Circumcision. What need is there of legal
washings and purifications? when they are all eminently fulfilled in the
washing of Regeneration, in the Gospel Baptism. Thus we are complete in Christ,
who has perfectly instructed us in the will of God, and instituted such a
Religion as is the perfection of all external Ceremonies; Col. 2. Ver. 10, 11,
12. We must now offer a nobler Sacrifice than the law of Moses commanded, not
the Sacrifices of dead Beasts, but of a living and active Soul. Romans 12. 1.

Hence Christ is called (...), the end of the law, i. e. the perfection and
accomplishment of the law (as (...) signifies) for righteousness to them, that
believe; Romans 10. 4. That is, the Gospel of Christ requires that righteousness
of us, which the law did only typifie and represent, that holiness and purity
of mind which is the perfection of all legal righteousness: for that Christ
should be made the end of the law for righteousness by the imputation of his
righteousness to us, has no foundation in the Text. The Apostle explains what
he means by this in the following Verses, where he gives us a description of
the righteousness of the law, and the righteousness of Faith: The righteousness
of the law is an external Conformity to the letter of the Law, The man that
does them shall live in them: i. e. shall enjoy all those temporal blessings of
the Land of Canaan, which were promised to the observance of the Law: but the
righteousness of Faith is a firm and steadfast belief of the Divine Authority of
Christ, that he is the Lord; and more particularly a belief of his Resurrection
from the dead, as the last and great confirmation, which God gave to the
Divinity of Christ's Person and Doctrine: This is that Faith that overcomes the
World, and purifies the heart, and transforms us into the likeness of God,
which is the perfection of all the ritual righteousness of the Law.

Upon this account Christ is said to be made unto us righteousness. 1 Cor. 1.
20. But of him are you in Christ, who of God is made unto us Wisdom, and
Righteousness, and Sanctification, and Redemption: i. e. he is the Author of
all this to us; He is our Wisdom, as he is our great Prophet and Teacher, who
instructs us in true Wisdom; Our Righteousness, as we are justified by Faith in
him, by a sincere belief of his Gospel, which is the only Righteousness
acceptable to God; Our Sanctification, because the law of the spirit of life in
Christ Jesus, makes us free from the law of sin and death: that Divine and
Spiritual law of Faith conquers the Power and Dominion of sin, which the law of
Moses could not do: and our Redemption, as by these means he has delivered us
from the bondage and pedagogie of the Jewish Law, from the Idolatrous Customs
of the Heathens, and the Tyranny of wicked Spirits, and from the wrath of God,
which is the just merit and desert of sin.

Thus you see how the Apostle opposes the righteousness of the law to the
righteousness of Faith, not as an Inherent and Personal to an Imputed
Righteousness, but as an External and Ritual to an Inherent, real, and
substantial Righteousness, this is the (...), the foundation of all other
mistakes in this matter, that by the righteousness of the law, and the
righteousness of works, most men understand an internal holiness, the
Conformity of our hearts and lives to all moral Precepts, and Rules of a good
life, and then conclude, that if this Righteousness will not please God,
nothing but an Imputed Righteousness can, though I should rather have
concluded, that nothing can; but the truth is, the Righteousness of the Law and
of Works in the New Testament, signifies only an external Righteousness, which
cannot please God, and that internal holiness, which they call the
righteousness of the Law, is that very Righteousness of Faith, which the Gospel
commands, and which God approves and rewards; and this Imputed Righteousness is
no where to be found, that I know of, but in their own fancies.

Let us now consider in what sense the Apostle opposes his own Righteousness to
the Righteousness of God: not having mine own Righteousness, but the
Righteousness which is of God by Faith; and there is no great difficulty in
this; for the Apostle himself tells us, that by his own righteousness, he means
the righteousness of the law, and by the Righteousness of God, the
Righteousness of Faith: And be found in him, not having mine own righteousness
which is of the law, but that which is through the Faith of Christ, the
Righteousness which is of God by Faith: and what that is, you have already
heard: thus in Romans 10. 3. For they being ignorant of Gods Righteousness, and
going about to establish their own righteousness, have not submitted to the
Righteousness of God: where their own righteousness, which the Jews so
obstinately adhered to, was the righteousness of the law, and the Righteousness
of God, which they were ignorant of, and would not submit to, was the
Righteousness of Faith: for this was the great controversy between the Jews
and Apostles (which is the subject of this Epistle) whether men were to be
justified by the law of Moses, or by the Gospel of Christ, by a legal, or
Evangelical Righteousness, as appears from Romans 9. 30. Israel, which followed
after righteousness, has not attained to the law of righteousness; wherefore?
because they sought it not by Faith, but as it were by the works of the law:
that is the Israelites, who pursued so earnestly after Righteousness, are
excluded from righteousness, or forgiveness of sins, and are under a Curse,
because they did not look for Righteousness, and Justification in the way,
which God prescribed, which is by Faith in Christ, or by Christianity, but by
the observance of the law of Moses.

Now the most obvious Reason, why this righteousness of the law is called their
own righteousness, and the Righteousness of Faith, Gods Righteousness, is,
because this legal righteousness was a way of justification, not of Gods
appointment but their own choosing; God never designed, that any man should be
justified to eternal life by observing the law of Moses, but yet they
confidently expected justification by that Law, and for that reason rejected
the Gospel of Christ: But the righteousness of Faith is a righteousness of
Gods, choosing; this he approves and accepts of for the justification of a
Sinner; by this the Elders obtained a good report, by this Enoch, and Noah, and
Abraham were justified before God: and therefore this may well be called the
Righteousness of God, because this he appointed, and this he will own, and
reward. Thus, you see, that there is no foundation in Scripture for all this
talk of a Personal Righteousness of Christ inherent in him, and imputed to us:
but the righteousness of which the Scripture speaks, is not the righteousness
of Christ's Person but of his Gospel, that is, that way of Righteousness and
Justification, which Christ has revealed in his Gospel.

I have now considered all the Personal Graces of Christ, (as these men call
them) and upon inquiry it appears, that what they appropriate to his Person,
belongs to his Gospel, and is intended to describe the perfection and
excellency of his Religion, as being the most perfect Revelation of the will of
God, the most powerful method of his wisdom for the reforming the World, the
only way to life and immortality, and which prescribes the only Righteousness,
which is acceptable to God.

There is indeed one metaphorical expression still behind, which exercises men's
wits and fancies, viz the riches of Christ, Ephesians. 3. 8. Which must needs be a
personal Grace too, or Personal Estate, or what you will call it: unto me, who
am the least of all Saints, is this Grace given, that I should preach among the
Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ. Where by the unsearchable riches of
Christ is meant the Gospel, which St. Paul preached to the Gentiles, as being
ordained by Christ to be the Apostle of the Gentiles: and he calls it
unsearchable riches, because the Grace of the Gospel is not a narrow and
stinted thing, is not confined to a particular Nation, as the law was, but is
offered to all Mankind, whether Jews or Gentiles, bond or free: the Gospel of
Christ contains those glorious discoveries of Gods goodness to all Mankind, as
may well be called the riches of his Grace, Ephesians. 1. 7. for riches signify only
an abundance.

And is it not a great violation of the Majesty of Scripture to sport and toy
with words and metaphors, as some men do with this riches of Christ: that he is
rich, because he has a rich Brooks Riches of Christ.
dowry, having all the World given to him, as his proper Inheritance; that he
keeps open House, and maintains all the Creation at his own charge, and that he
has done this above 6000 years, which would have broke him long since, had he
not been very rich; and that he does not only enrich all the Saints, but all of
the Saints, their understandings with glorious light, their Consciences with
quickness, pureness, etc. and that after all this vast expense he is never the
poorer, that he is not a penny the poorer for all, that he has laid out for
the relief of those that have their dependence on him; And that Jesus Christ is
generally rich, rich in Houses and Lands (though he had not a place whereon to
lay his head) in gold, in silver, in Cattle, in all temporals as well as
spirituals; and that he has a great Tribute and Rent due to him, that he is
the great Landlord and Owner of all, that Angels and men possess above and
below; These are fine things to persuade young Women to accept of Christ for
their Husband, since they can never expect so rich and advantageous a match any
where else: but I have something else to do, than to pursue such follies and
extravagancies, as are so palpable, that there is no need to expose them.

SECT. III. Concerning the nature of our Union to Christ, whereby we are
entitled to all his fullness, Righteousness, etc.
HAving showed you what kind of Person these men make of Christ, how they have
fitted him to all the wants and necessities of a Sinner, let us now consider,
wherein this Union they talk of, between the Person of Christ and the Persons
of Believers does consist.

Now the Union betwixt Christ and Christians is represented in Scripture by
various metaphors, which I have explained at large: but these men instead of
explaining these metaphors, turn all Religion into an Allegory: As for example,
Christ is called an Husband, and the Church his Spouse; and now all the
invitations of the Gospel are Christ's wooing and making love to his Spouse, and
what other men call believing the Gospel of Christ, whereby we devote our
selves to his service, these men call that consent and contract, which makes up
the marriage betwixt Christ and Believers: Christ takes us for his Spouse, and
we take Christ for our Husband, and that with all the solemnities of marriage
(except the Ring which is left out as an Antichristian Ceremony) Christ saying
thus, This is Dr. Owen Com.
that we will consent unto, that I will be for thee, and thou shall be for me;
and not for another. Christ gives himself to the Soul with all his
excellencies, righteousness, preciousness, graces, and eminencies, to be its
Savior, Head, and Husband, to dwell with it in this holy Relation, and the
Soul likes Christ for his excellencies, Graces, suitableness far above all
other Beloveds whatever, and accepts of Christ by the will for its Husband,
Lord and Savior, and thus the Marriage is completed, and this is the day of
Christ's Espousals, of the gladness of his heart; and now follow all mutual
conjugal affections, which on Christ's part consist in delight, valuation, pity,
or compassion, and bounty: on the Saints part in delight, valuation, Chastity,
duty; which is much like Mr. Hobs his Description of his Artificial Man the
Commonwealth: But I have already corrected this fooling with
Scripture-Metaphors, and Phrases, and my business at present is to consider,
wherein they place the nature of this Union betwixt Christ and Believers;
namely in this, that it is such an Union, as makes all Christ ours, and us
Christ's: when a man is united to Christ, he has a propriety and interest in
all his Personal Graces and Eminencies: He is lovely with Christ's loveliness,
Righteous with Christ's Righteousness, the Wisdom, and Power, and fullness of
Christ are his; whatever Christ has done, or suffered, is all his as much, as
if he had done and suffered the same things himself.

Now this Union of Persons betwixt Christ and Believers, which gives them such
a propriety in all the Personal Graces of Christ, is commonly explained by a
conjugal relation, and legal Union, that mutual Relation, which is betwixt
Husband and Wife, and that Union, which is betwixt the Surety and Debtor.

First, They explain this Union by a 1.
conjugal Relation, Christ is a Spiritual Husband, and every Believer is his
Spouse, now this marriage Union consists in a mutual resignation or making over
their Persons one to another; Christ Dr. Owen Com. p. 60.
gives himself to the Soul with all his Excellencies, Righteousness, Graces and
Eminencies to be its Savior, Head and Husband, for ever to dwell with it in
this holy Relation: now as you know, the Wife by virtue of her Marriage-Union
is entitled to her Husbands Estate, thus are Saints by their marriage to Christ
entitled to all his Personal fullness, beauty, righteousness: and as a Wife
under covert Dr. Iacomb Romans 8. p. 85.
is not liable to an arrest, or action at law, but all must fall upon her
Husband, so you being married to Christ, this Supersedes the Process of the Law
against you; if it be not fully satisfied, it must seek its reparation at the
hand of your Spiritual Husband Christ himself; as for any condemnatory charge,
it cannot fall upon you. This is the sum of all the Reason, they allege to
prove that we have a right and title to whatever Christ has done or suffered,
by virtue of our marriage to him, because a Wife has an Interest in her
Husbands Estate, and is secured from all Arrests at Law, and if these be not
weighty reasons, let any man, that can, give better.

To consider this briefly, they say, that a Wife has an Interest in her
Husbands Estate, and is secured from all Arrests at Law* and therefore, Christ
being our Husband all his Personal excellencies righteousness, etc. are ours;
and the Law cannot take hold of us, but our Husband must be responsible for our
faults: a very hard Law truly, and I think a Husband is in a very ill Case,
when he has a bad Wife: Now suppose this were the Case in some earthly
marriages, it were worth while to consider, whether this be essential to
marriage, or whether it depends upon private contracts, or public Laws and
Customs, which are arbitrary and mutable; for if this be not essential to
marriage, how can we be secure, that this is the law of our spiritual marriage,
unless our spiritual Husband had told us so: especially considering, that this
spiritual marriage betwixt Christ and his Church is of a different nature from
earthly marriages, and if they differ in any thing we cannot be sure, but that
they differ in this, unless we have some better proof of it, than this Analogy
and resemblance between earthly and spiritual marriages; nay and better proof
too, than Dr. Owen gives us of it. Cant. 1. 15. Behold thou art fair my
Companion, behold thou art fair, thou have Doves Eyes, and Cant. 3. 14* O my
Dove, that art in the clefts of the Rocks, and in the secret places of the
stairs, let me hear thy voice, let me see thy countenance, for sweet is thy
voice, and thy countenance is comely, or Cant. 4. 8. Come with me from Lebanon
my Spouse, look from the top of Amana, from the top of Shenir and Hermon, from
the Lions Dens, and the Mountain of the Leopards, or Isai. 4. 2. The branch of
the Lord is beautiful and glorious, and the fruit of the earth is excellent and
comely to them, that are escaped of Israel: which are all the proofs he can
find (for if he had any better, he did ill to conceal them) for Christ's giving
himself to the Soul with all his Excellencies, Righteousness, Preciousness,
Graces, Eminencies, etc. Now how any such consequence as this can be drawn,
either from Doves Eyes, or from the Clefts of the Rocks, or from Lebanon, or
from the top of Amana, Shenir, or Hermon, or from the Lions Dens, or Mountain
of Leopards, is past my understanding to make out. But let the Laws of Kingdoms
and Nations be as they will, there can be no Law made to alter the nature of
things; there never was any Law, that the Personal virtues and qualities and
perfections of the Husband should be settled upon his Wife for a jointure:
though the Husband be never so fair and comely, wise and virtuous, his Wife may
be ugly and deformed, a Fool or a Harlot; for Personal and Inherent perfections
cannot pass out of the Person, nor be made over to any other, as money and
lands are: and therefore whatever other privileges we may enjoy by our
marriage to Christ, his Personal excellencies cannot be ours, though his Person
were.

And we know, that in marriage, there are private contracts too, and the Wives
interest in her Husbands Estate may be limited to such conditions, as they
agree upon: and the truth is Christ has not made such an absolute settlement
of himself upon us, as these men dream he has; for the Gospel contains the
Articles of this Marriage (to speak in these men's dialect) and there we must
learn to what purposes, and upon what conditions, Christ gives himself to us,
and must challenge no more from Christ by virtue of our marriage to him, than
what the Gospel (the marriage Covenant) promises, and we find nothing there of
his Personal Righteousness to be made ours. As for what they tell us, that a
Woman under covert is not liable to an Arrest or action at the law, but all
must fall upon her Husband, it is true as to matter of Debt, but does not
extend to Crimes: if a Woman kill her Child, or rob upon the Highway, I doubt
her being under covert will not secure her from the Gallows: was it never known
that a Woman was hanged either with or without her Husband? The Keeper of
Newgate could have better informed them in this nice point of Divinity: and how
secure soever any man may fancy himself of his marriage to Christ, I would not
advise him to venture too much upon it, for if he be guilty of any gross wilful
sin, there is some danger, that the law or Gospel may condemn him, unless he
timely repent, and reform his Vices.

So that this conjugal Relation to Christ does not make him so absolutely ours,
as these men pretend, who by their loose discourses and inconsequent reasonings
seem neither to understand Divine nor Humane Laws: when the Scripture calls
Christ our Husband, and the Church his Spouse, it means no more, but that
Christ is our Head and Governor, who rules his Church with as great kindness,
tenderness and compassion, as a Husband exercises toward his Wife, and that
we are to pay the same love, duty, and obedience to Christ, that Wives owe to
their Husbands; and here we must have done with the Metaphor, unless we will
turn Religion into a Romance.

Secondly, Christ and Believers are 2.
legally united: now there are two different ways of explaining this, some
iusist most upon the notion of a Surety, others of a Mediator, which come much
to one, but yet have some peculiar absurdities belonging to each of them: as
for the notion of a Surety, which is the first way, Dr. Iacomb gives us this
account of it, that Christ, Ibid.
as the Saints (...), or Surety, struck hands with God (as the word imports)
put himself into their stead, took their Debt upon himself, and bound himself
upon their account to make satisfaction to God: now in law the Debtor and the
Surety are but one Person, the law looks upon them as one, and makes no
difference between them, and therefore both are equally liable to the Debt, and
if the one pay it, it is as much in the eye of the law, as if the other had
paid it: Thus it is with Christ and us, he is our Surety, for he took our Debt
upon himself, engaged to pay whatever we owed, for us; upon this, Christ and we
are but one Person before God, and accordingly he deals with us; for he makes
over our sins to Christ, and also Christ's Righteousness and satisfaction to us,
he now in a legal notion looking upon both but as one Person.

This is the account of Christ's being our Surety, now I have two things to say
to this. First, I wonder why this should be called the Union of Saints to
Christ? or why Christ should be called only the Saints Surety? The Apostle
tells us, that he is (...) Hebr. 7. 22. The Surety of a Testament or Covenant:
now as I take it, there is a vast difference between Christ's being the Saints
Surety, and the Surety of the Covenant, for the Covenant respects both Saints
and Sinners, and therefore is antecedent to our Union to Christ, as Saints: and
to be a Surety of the Covenant signifies no more than to confirm and ratify
this Covenant, and to undertake for the performance of it, that all the
promises of the Covenant shall be made good upon such terms and conditions, as
are annexed to them; but to be a Surety for Saints, (as the Dr. explains it) is
to strike hands with God, (as men do at making a bargain) and to put himself
into their stead to do and to suffer, what they ought to have done and
suffered, upon which God makes over our sins to Christ, and Christ's
Righteousness and satisfaction to us; Now this notion is so different from the
notion of a Surety of a Covenant, that methinks it wants some better proof,
than barely Christ's being called a Surety, or the Surety of a Covenant.

But Secondly, Suppose Christ had been called the Saints Surety, I doubt they
are as much out in the law of Suretiship, as they were before in the laws of
marriage; though the Dr. tells us, that this does so exactly fall in with the
common notion and case of Suretiship among men, that he needs not any further
insist on the illustration of it. I confess, I am of another mind, and think it
wants a great deal more illustration, than he has bestowed on it. For first
the prime end and design of Suretiship among men, is not that the Surety shall
without more ado pay the Debt, but to give security to the Creditor that the
Debt shall be paid: that is, the Surety does not make himself the immediate
Debtor; but the Debtor is Debtor still, and bound to pay the Debt, and the
Surety is liable only in case of his default. It is the strangest definition of
Suretiship, that was ever heard of, that it is an absolute taking the Debt upon
our selves, and an actual discharge of the Debtor. For I dare say, never any
man was surety upon these terms, that is, no man in his wits ever became Surety
for another, when he knew before hand, that if he did, he must pay the Debt;
but men become Sureties upon some reasonable assurance, that they shall suffer
no injury by it; and therefore when Christ died for us, he did not die as our
Surety, but as our Sacrifice substituted in our room, which is the Scripture
notion of it, and differs as much from the notion of a surety, as paying the
debt does from being bound with another, that it shall be paid.

Secondly, Suppose that Christ dyed for us as our surety, (though I think,
however the Doctor triumphs in this, the Socinians have no reason to be afraid
of such Adversaries, who have no better way to defend the Satisfaction of
Christ, than by the notion of suretiship) yet did Christ fulfill all
Righteousness for us as our surety too? Does this also so exactly answer the
case of suretiship among men, that there is no need to insist upon the
Illustration of it? The Doctor indeed was so wise, that he would not assert
this in the premises, but very craftily thrusts it into the Conclusion, that
therefore God makes over our sins to Christ, and Christ's Righteousness and
Satisfaction to us: But was there ever such a suretiship heard of among men,
that one man should discharge all the offices of Piety and Virtue, Justice and
Temperance instead of another? If such a thing had ever been, such a man ought
not to have been called a Surety, but a Proxy; but humane Laws, as many
defects as there are in them, never admitted of such Proxies, for these are
personal duties, which no other can perform for us; and you may as well say,
that a man may live and be a man by Proxy, as discharge those Duties, which are
necessarily entailed on his Person by a Proxy: Proxies are allowable only in
such cases, where the consideration of the person that does it, is not
essential to the Action, where the material Inquiry is, whether the thing be
done, not who does it; but where the consideration of the person that does it,
is essential to the Action, there is no place for a Surety or Proxy (call him
what you will) because in this case it does not satisfy the Law, that the
thing is done, unless it be done by such a person: Thus it is in all the Duties
of Piety and Religion, every individual person is bound to do them, and though
there were never so many righteous men in the world, their righteousness can
avail none but themselves; nay the Righteousness of God, which is more than the
righteousness of all the men in the world; cannot make an unrighteous man
righteous; no external Relation can make the righteousness of another our
righteousness, because it is a personal righteousness that is required of us,
and the righteousness of another can never be our personal righteousness,
unless we become one person with him: and therefore though the Doctor be so
careful to tell us, that our Union to Christ is an Union of Persons, but no
Personal Union, that we are not transformed into the Essence and Being of
Christ, so as to be Christed with Christ, yet indeed there is no other way to
make the Personal Righteousness of Christ our personal righteousness (which is
the righteousness required of us) but by a Personal Union to Christ, by being
Christed with Christ, as some speak how boldly soever, yet very agreeably to
these Principles.

But Thirdly, Let us consider what truth there is in what he asserts, That in
the Law the debtor and the surety are but one person, the Law looks upon them
but as one, and therefore both are equally liable to the debt, and if the one
pay it, it is as much in the eye of the Law, as if the other had paid it, which
he makes the Foundation of the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness and
Satisfaction to us, because he being our surety, we are but one person with
him; that is, legally, not personally one person as he warily distinguishes.

Now there needs no great skill in the Law to discover the weakness and
Sophistry of this Discourse: for no considering man can think it indifferent,
who pays the debt, the surety or the debtor, or that they are both equally
obliged to it; the debtor is the immediate debtor still, and the surety only is
obliged in case the other refuse, or be unable to pay the debt, and that is
some little difference: but then though the creditor be satisfied, whether the
debt be paid by the debtor, or his surety, and the Law will allow him no
farther Action against either of them, yet the Law does not account it
indifferent, which of them pay it; for though it permit the payment to be
exacted from the surety, in case the debtor refuse, yet it will look back
again, and allow the surety an Action against the debtor for such a refusal,
which is an Argument, that the Law does not judge them one Person, nor think it
indifferent which of them pays the debt.

Thus it is in other cases, if a man be surety for the appearance of another,
which is called giving Bail, and is sometimes admitted in Criminal Causes; the
Law does not judge them one Person; for if the Prisoner escape, the Bail or
Surety shall be punished according to the nature of the Fact, and yet the
Prisoner is not quitted by this means, but liable either to the Arrest of the
Surety, or in Criminal Causes to the Sentence of the Law, if ever he be
re-taken.

Thus in Sureties for good Behavior (which sounds as if it were nearest of kin
to the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness as our surety) though the surety be
never so innocent and virtuous a person himself, this will not serve him, for
whom he is surety; but if he prove a Villain, they shall be both punished: So
that humane Laws are strangers to this Mystery of imputing the Righteousness of
a Surety to a bad man. Suretiship does not so unite their persons, that
whatever one does, is always and to all purposes imputed to the other; and if
this will not hold good among m^n, it is a very sorry foundation for this
bargain and exchange betwixt Christ and Believers, That he should take their
sins upon himself, and impute his Righteousness to them.

Let us now try, whether the notion of a Mediator can do any better service,
than the notion of a Surety, which is the second way of explaining this legal
Union betwixt Christ and Believers, which entitles them to all that Christ has
done or suffered: and what this means, we may learn from Dr. Communion with the
Son, Chap. 6. p. 182.
Owen, who gives us this account of it: That Christ fulfilled all
Righteousness, as he was Mediator, and that whatever he did as Mediator, he did
it for them, whose Mediator he was, or in whose stead, and for whose good he
executed the office of a Mediator before God; and hence it is, that his
complete and perfect obedience to the Law, is reckoned to us. This is well
said, if it were as well proved, and because this is a matter of great
consequence, I shall first examine those reasons the Dr. alleges to prove,
That Christ fulfilled all Righteousness, as he was Mediator in their stead,
whose Mediator he was: Secondly, to avoid calumnies and objections, I shall
show you briefly what influence the Righteoeusness of Christ's life, and the
Sacrifice of his death have upon our acceptance with God.

As for the first, we have some reason to require good proof of this, since the
notion of a Mediator includes no such thing: A Mediator is one, who interposes
between two differing parties, to accommodate the difference: but it was never
heard of yet, that it was the office of a Mediator to perform the terms and
conditions himself. Moses was the Mediator of the first Covenant, Gal. 3. 9.
and his office was to receive the Law from God, and to deliver it to the
people, and to command them to observe those Rites, and Sacrifices, and
Expiations, which God had ordained; but he was not to fulfill the Righteousness
of the Law for the whole Congregation: thus Christ is now the Mediator of a
better Covenant, and his Office required, that he should preach the Gospel,
which contains the terms of peace and reconciliation between God and men, and
since God would not enter into Covenant with sinners without the intervention
of a Sacrifice, he dies too as a Sacrifice and Propitiation for the sins of the
world, and confirms and seals this new Covenant with his own blood, and being
risen again from the dead, he executes this Office of Mediator with power and
glory, that is, he intercedes for us according to the terms and conditions of
this new Covenant, to obtain the pardon of our sins, and the assistance of the
divine Grace to do the will of God; and all those other blessings which are
promised: but the Office of Mediator does not oblige him to fulfill the
Righteousness of the Covenant for us; this I am sure does not so exactly fall
in with the case and notion of Mediatorship among men.

But before we examine their proofs, it is necessary to consider, what it is
they would prove, that is, what that Righteousness is, which, they say, Christ
as our Mediator fulfilled for us: and Dr. Owen is very exact and curious in
Communion with the Son, p. 178.
stating this matter, and distinguishes between the several sorts of
Righteousness in Christ, that we may know, what belongs to us, and what is
peculiar to himself.

First he tells us of an habitual Righteousness of Christ as Mediator in his
humane Nature, which was the absolute, complete, exact conformity of the Soul
of Christ to the mind, will, or law of God, or his perfect, habitual, Inherent
Righteousness: now he tells us, that this Righteousness was the necessary
effect of the Grace of Union (that is of the Union of the Divine and Humane
nature in Christ) and that the Relation which this Righteousness of Christ has
to the Grace we receive from him, is this, that thereby he was (...), fit to do
all that he had to do for us; for without this he could not have actually
fulfilled that Righteousness which was required at his hand, nor have been a
complete and perfect Sacrifice, etc. So that this habitual, inherent
Righteousness of Christ, is not imputed to us, but was his own proper
Righteousness.

But secondly, There is the actual obedience of Christ, which was his willing,
cheerful, obediential performance, of every thing, duty, and command, that God
by virtue of any Law, whereto we were subject and obnoxious, did require, and
moreover to the peculiar Law of the Mediator: Let us then first consider the
peculiar Law of the Mediator, which he tells us respected himself merely (so
that we have nothing to do with this neither) and contains all those acts and
duties of his, which were not for our imitation, he instances in his obedience
which he showed in dying (though St. John the Divine, (and I think the greater
of the two) tells us, that we must imitate him in this also, must lay down our
lives for the Brethren, as Christ died for us. John 1. 3. 16. and S. Paul tells
us, that we must be conformed to the Death and Resurrection of Christ, Romans 6.
which sounds very like an imitation) though in the next page he excepts the
Case of dying, of his passive obedience, and tells us, that all the rest of his
obedience to the Law of mediation is not imputed to us, as though we had done
it. So that by the Law of Mediation he understands whatever Christ was bound to
do, as our Mediator, whatever was proper to his Mediatory Office, all this
(though sometimes, when he better thinks of it, he excepts dying) is not
imputed to us, as though we had done it: I hope we shall find something at last
to be imputed to us, and yet there is nothing left now. But thirdly, That which
concerns him in a private capacity, as a man subject to the Law, and now
whatever was required of us by virtue of any Law, that he did and fulfilled;
and this is that actual obedience of Christ, which he performed for us.

This methinks is very strange, that what he did as Mediator, is not imputed to
us, but what he did not as our Mediator, but as a man subject to the law, that
is imputed to us, and reckoned, as if we had done it, by reason of his being
our Mediator: and it is as strange to the full, that Christ should do, whatever
was required of us by virtue of any law, when he was neither Husband nor Wife,
nor Father, Merchant or Tradesman, Seaman or Soldier, Captain or Lieutenant,
much less a temporal Prince or Monarch; and how he should discharge the duties
of these several relations for us, which are required of us by certain Laws,
when he never was in any of these relations, and could not possibly be in all,
is an argument, which may exercise the subtilty of Schoolmen, and to them I
leave it.

Having now discovered what that Righteousness is, which Christ was to fulfill
for us, as our Mediator, viz. whatever was required of us by virtue of any law,
whether it concerned us in general as men, or had respect to the various
relations, conditions and circumstances of our lives (for each of these have
their proper duties belonging to them) setting aside that difficulty of proving
that Christ did, what he never did, let us consider how the Dr. proves, that
what Christ did, he did for us, and in our stead, and here he makes use of a
little reason, and a great deal of Scripture to as little purpose. And to
prepare the way for his reasons, I find the Dr. much puzzled (and I do not
wonder at it) to prove, that Christ acted as Mediator in those things, which
did not concern the law of his Mediation, which he did as a private Commun.
page 182.
man subject to the law: for he tells us, that of this expression, as Mediator,
there is a double sense. It may be taken strictly, as relating solely to the
law of the Mediator, and so Christ may be said to do as Mediator, only what he
did in obedience to that law, (that is, only what he did as Mediator, which is
a pretty observation) but in the sense now insisted on (that is not strictly as
Mediator, but as not Mediator) whatever Christ did as a man subject to the Law,
he did as Mediator, because he did it as part of the duty incumbent on him, who
undertook so to be: the meaning of which is, that he, who was Mediator, being
bound to do such things, though not as Mediator, but as a man subject to the
law, yet he did them as Mediator, because he was a Mediator, who did them:
which is just as good an argument, as it would be to prove, that every
Ambassador eats, and drinks, and sleeps, as an Ambassador, because though
this be no part of his Embassy, yet he is an Ambassador, who does it, which is
such an exposition of Qua, as the subtilest Schoolman of them all never yet
thought of.

But there is another objection which Page 184.
troubles the Doctors Head; for since it is the actual obedience of Christ,
which is imputed to us, he finds it difficult to distinguish the Active and
Passive obedience of Christ: for every Act almost of Christ's obedience from the
blood of his Circumcision to the blood of his Cross, was attended with
sufferings, so that his whole life in that regard might be called a death: this
is a very subtle objection, but observe the answer, that looking upon his
willingness and obedience in it, it may be distinguished from his sufferings
peculiarly so called, and termed his active obedience: this is a strange
solution of it, for now it will be as hard to find out what the passive
obedience of Christ was, for as I remember the Scripture tells us, that he was
as willing and cheerful in submitting to Death, as in any other Act of
obedience, and I am sure our Savior himself tells us, that he laid down his
life, and no man took it from him, which argues some good degree of
willingness: Page 183.
what he said in the page before is a much better answer, that doing is one
thing, and suffering another, they are in diverse Predicaments, and cannot be
coincident.

As for this last scruple, the Dr. might very well have spared it, but that a
man so well furnished with the knowledge of Predicaments, may venture upon any
thing; but the former difficulty of Christ's doing those things as Mediator,
which did not belong to the Laws of his Mediation, is a very material one, and
requires great skill in Logic to get rid of it; but however it is wisely done
to make a show of saying something to that, which cannot be answered: for he
was sensible, that what Christ did purely as Mediator could not be imputed to
us, as though we Page 181.
had done it, though the (...) or fruits of it are, because we were never
designed to be Mediators, and the Righteousness of a Mediator is as improper to
be imputed to those who are not Mediators, as it is to impute the Righteousness
of a Prince to a Beggar. The righteousness of every man consists in the
discharge of those duties and offices, which belong to his state, condition,
and relatious of life, not in doing those things, which he is not concerned to
do; and therefore that the Righteousness of Christ might be fit to be imputed
to us as our Righteousness, he was forced to consider him, not as Mediator, but
as a private person made subject to the Law, who did whatever was required of
us by virtue of any Law, though this too was impossible, for he could not at
the same time act so many different and opposite parts, as there are relations
and conditions of men in the World; and yet when he thought on it again, he
found, that it was not the Righteousness of a private person, that would avail
us, though it were never so perfect (because we have no way to come at it, to
make it ours) but only the Righteousness of a Mediator, who did whatever he
did, for us and in our stead, and so he wheels about again, and tells us, that
though what Christ did as a man subject to the Law, did not belong to the Law
of his Mediation, yet he did it as Mediator, because he was a Mediator who did
it: and thus he is caught in the Net and Labyrinth of his own making, and the
more he turns and winds himself, the faster it holds him, A Mediator, who acts
as a Mediator, in a private capacity, as a man subject to the Law. I shall
certainly believe, as they say some Country People do, that Logic is
Conjuring, if it can reconcile such palpable contradictions.

It is very ominous thus to stumble at the threshold, but though Mediator and
not a Mediator be contradictory terms, which Learned men say cannot be
reconciled, yet let us forgive him that slip, and see how he proves, that
whatever Christ did is reckoned to us, as done in our stead; and all the reason
I Communion, p. 183.
can find in his Discourse may be reduced to three Heads; first, that Christ
was under no obligation to do it himself; secondly, that there r can be no
other reason assigned, why he did it at all, but that he did it for us, and
thirdly, that this was absolutely necessary it should be so.

First, That Christ was under no obligation to obey these Laws himself, and to
make this appear, he discourses particularly both of the Law of our Creation,
and the Ceremonial Law given to the Jews.

As for the first, the Law of Creation, that comprehends those eternal Laws,
which result from the essential differences of good and evil, which all Mankind
are bound to observe by the very frame and constitution of their natures: now
he dares not deny, that Christ was bound to obey this Law for himself, but then
his obedience (he says) was voluntary; and what of that? for so the obedience
of every good man is: for by voluntary, he tells us, he does not mean, that it
was merely arbitrary, and at his choice, whether he would yield obedience to
it, or not; but on supposition of his undertaking to be a Mediator, it was
necessary it should be so; but he voluntarily and willingly submitted unto it,
and so became really subject to the commands of it, and is it not very plain
now, that Christ was not obliged to obey these Laws, because he willingly
submitted to them? But certainly he means something more by this voluntary,
than he could tell how to express, and all that I can guess is, that whereas we
are bound to obey these Laws antecedentally to our own choice, it was not so
with him, for his obligation was only consequential upon his being born, and
becoming Man, which was his own choice; and yet even then, as he tells us, as
he was Mediator, God and Man, he was not by the Institution of that Law obliged
to it, being as it were exempted, and lifted above that Law by the Hypostatical
Union. Now this is very profound reasoning; for the meaning of it is this, that
Christ had not been bound to live like a man, unless he had become man, and yet
I can grant something more; that it was impossible he should have lived like a
man, discharged all the duties of a man without being man; but when he chose to
be a man, there was no need to choose any more; for then he was bound by the
Laws of his Nature to discharge all the duties of a man for himself: But how
could he be exempted from this Law (though it be but as it were) and raised
above it by being Mediator, God and Man, when the Doctor himself acknowledges
two lines after, that upon supposition of his being Mediator, it was necessary
it should be so, that is, that he should yield obedience to the Law; now not to
be obliged by the Institution of the Law as Mediator, and that it should be
necessary for him to obey the Law as Mediator, are at so great a distance, that
it may serve for another trial of skill to reconcile them.

But Secondly, Though we suppose, that Christ as Man was bound to yield
obedience to the Laws of the Creation, yet the Doctor observes, that this is
the only Law, he could be liable to, as a Man: for an innocent man in a
Covenant of works, as he was, needed no other Law, nor did God ever give any
other Law to such persons: the Law of Creation is the only Law, that an
innocent Creature is liable to, with what Symbols of the Law God is pleased to
add: -- But now Jesus Christ yielded perfect obedience to all those Laws, which
came upon us by the occasion of sin, as the Ceremonial Law, yea those very
Institutions that signified the washing away of sin, and repentance from sin,
as the Baptism of John, which he had no need of himself, this therefore must
needs be for us. This now looks something like, though I fear, it will prove
like all the rest, that is, to no purpose: for though the Doctor takes it for
granted, yet I would willingly have had some proof of it, that an innocent man
can be bound by no other Law, than the Law of Creation; especially since he
acknowledges (which is a great favor) that God might add what Symbols he
pleased to that Law; (for, I suppose, he remembered the Tree of Life, and the
Tree of knowledge of good and evil) now I know not what these Symbols are but
positive Laws, and such the Ceremonial Laws were; and if God may require the
obedience of an innocent man to one positive Law, I see no reason, why he may
not, if he please, enjoin twenty such Laws by the same Authority. But they are
such Laws as came upon us by occasion of sin, and therefore an innocent man
cannot be obliged by them: but why not? Though they were at first commanded
upon occasion of sin, an innocent man may observe them to good and wise
purposes, as public and solemn Acts of Worship, as external and visible
expressions of devotion, as a public profession of Righteousness and a
virtuous life, to which purposes among others the Sacrifices and Ceremonies of
the Law, and the Baptism of John served: And if there were no other reason,
this were sufficient, that it becomes an innocent man to set an example of
reverence to all Divine Institutions, that every conceited Religionist, (who
may be far enough from being innocent) may not presently conceit himself above
all Forms and external Worship, as the Doctor knows, who are too apt to do.

But this is not worth contending about; for the Righteousness of the
Ceremonial Law could never justify any man, and therefore if Christ had
fulfilled this Law for us, it could have availed us nothing. Nor can I
understand, why the Doctor should suppose, that Christ fulfilled the Ceremonial
Law for all Believers, when the greatest part of them (the Gentiles) were never
under the obligation of it.

His second Argument to prove, that what Christ did as Mediator (that is, the
actual obedience of his life) he did for us and in our stead, is this, that
there can be no other reason assigned of Christ's obedience to the Law of God,
but only this, that he did it in our stead. Now this Argument would be good,
were it true, and were there not a great many things done, which we cannot
assign the reason of, and yet done for great and weighty reasons; but it
appears from what I have already discoursed, that there was sufficient reason,
why Christ should obey the Laws of God, viz. because he was as much bound to
it, as any other man is: But to wave this, let us consider how he manages this
Argument: he takes it for granted Communion, p. 182.
(as he is very apt to do things, which he cannot prove) that if Christ were
not bound to obey these Laws upon his own account, it must be either for us, or
to fit him for his death and oblation, but it was not to fit him for his death
and oblation, therefore it was for us: for he tells us, That he answered all
Types, and was every way (...), fit to be made an Offering for sin by his Union
and habitual Grace; so that if the obedience Christ performed be not reckoned
to us, and done upon our account, there is no just cause to be assigned, why he
should live here in the World so long as he did, in perfect obedience to all
the Laws of God: had he dyed before, there had been perfect innocence and
perfect holiness by his habitual Grace, and infinite virtue and worth from the
dignity of his Person, and surely he yielded not that long course of all manner
of obedience but for some great and special purposes in reference to our
Salvation: yes truly, it was for some great and special purpose in reference to
our Salvation, that Christ lived so long in the World, and consequently yielded
such a long course of all manner of obedience to God; but must this needs be
his actual fulfilling all Righteousness for us? What do you think of his
preaching the Gospel throughout all Iudaea, which required, that he should be a
man before he did it, and would take up some time in doing it? What do you
think of those many Miracles, which he wrought for the confirmation of his
Doctrine? What do you think of training up his Apostles to succeed him in his
Ministry as eye and ear witnesses of his Miracles and Doctrine? Nay what do you
think of the holy example of his life, which was no less necessary than his
Laws? These were all great and special purposes in reference to our Salvation,
though we should suppose him fit to have been a Sacrifice (as Herod designed he
should have been) as soon, as he was born: though by the way I think he could
not have answered the Types and Predictions of him, had he died so soon,
notwithstanding his perfect innocence and perfect holiness.

His third reason to prove that Christ Communion, p. 185.
performed all Righteousness for us, is from the absolute necessity of it; for
this is the term of the Covenant, do this and live; life is not to be obtained,
unless all be done that the Law requires; that is still true, if thou will
enter into life keep the Commandments, they must be kept by us, or by our
Surety: so that we being unable to yield that complete and perfect obedience,
which the Law requires, as the condition of life and happiness, it is
necessary, that Christ our Mediator and Surety should fulfill the Law for us.
Now the best that can be made of this argument is, that it proves it ought to
be so, but it does not prove that it is so; just like the Papists alleging the
necessity of an infallible judge to prove, that the Pope or Church of Rome is
infallible; but such arguments prove nothing but the arrogance and presumption
of the disputant, who will undertake to prescribe methods to God, and to prove,
that he ought to have done so, when it does not appear, that he has done so:
the sum of this argument is, that there never was, nor ever can be a Covenant
of Grace, that God still exacts the rigorous perfection of the Law from us, and
that we must not appear before him without a complete and perfect righteousness
of our own, or of another: now this is the thing in Question, whether we must
be made Righteous with the perfect Righteousness of Christ imputed to us, or
whether God will for the sake of Christ dispense with the rigor of the Law,
and accept of a sincere and Evangelical obedience, instead of a perfect and
unsinning Righteousness; so that he only confidently affirms what was in
dispute, and this goes for an argument.

Thus you see how weak their reason is, let us now examine their Scripture
evidence; and the Dr. makes a great flourish with some Scripture phrases,
Communion, p. 167.
that there is almost nothing that Christ has done, but we are said to do it
with him: we are Crucified with him, we are dead with him, and buried with him,
and quickened together with him, etc. In the acting*s of Christ, there is by
virtue of the compact between him as Mediator, and the Father, such an assured
foundation laid of the Communication of the fruit of these actings unto those
in whose stead he performed them, that they are said in the participation of
these fruits to have done the same things with him: But he is quite out in the
reason of these expressions, which is, not that we are accounted to do the same
things, which Christ did (for the things here mentioned belong to the peculiar
Office of his Mediation, which he told us before were not reckoned as done by
us) but because we do some things like them: our dying to sin is a Conformity
to the Death of Christ, and our walking in newness of life is our Conformity to
his Resurrection, and the consideration of the Death and Resurrection of
Christ, is very powerful to engage us to die to sin, and to rise into a new
life; and this is the true reason of these phrases, not that Christ did all in
our stead, and therefore we are said to do it too, but for a quite different
reason because we must do something like it, express the power and image of his
Death and Resurrection in our lives.

To this purpose also he cites that Communion, p. 184.
Text in Gal. 4. 4, 5. God sent forth his Son made of a Woman, made under the
Law, to redeem them that were under the Law, and here he stops, but I shall
take confidence to add, that we might receive the adoption of Sons: now by
being made under the Law, he tells us, is meant being disposed of in such a
condition, that he must yield subjection and obedience to the Law, well,
suppose this: and this was all to redeem us, and therefore our Redemption is by
the obedience of Christ imputed to us: fairly argued; but can his obedience to
the Law contribute no otherways to our redemption, but by being reckoned as
done by us? but the truth is, this us is not in the Text, it is not to redeem
us, but to redeem them that were under the Law, that is, the Jews, who were in
bondage under the Mosaical Law, from which Christ redeemed them by abrogating
that Law, and introducing a better Covenant, the adoption of Sons: for in this
Epistle, nay in this Chapter, the Law is called a state of Servants, and of an
Heir under Age, but the Gospel is the adoption of Sons, puts us into such a
free and manly state, as that of an Heir at Age, and therefore is called the
Spirit of adoption. Romans 8. 15. So that the meaning of this Text is this, that
God has now put an end to the dispensation of the Law, which is called
redeeming them that were under the Law, in a state of servitude and bondage,
and has established a better Covenant in the room of it, which as much excells
the Law, as the adoption of Sons does the state of Servants, and this God
brought to pass by sending his Son into the World, made of a Woman, made under
the Law: for the understanding of which words we must consider, what influence
Christ's appearing in the world had on the abrogation of the Law, and that was,
that he accomplished all the Types and Figures of the Law in his own Person,
and when all these Types were fulfilled, they grew out of date: so that his
being made under the Law most probably signifies, his being made such a Person,
as should exactly answer all the Types and Figures of the Law, and so put an
end to it, as of no further use: Thus the Temple was Gods House, wherein he
dwelt, but now the Shecinah or Divine Glory rested on Christ, and the fullness
of the Godhead dwelt in him bodily, so that now there was no longer any need of
a material Temple, as a pledge of Gods peculiar presence among them; the
Priests and Sacrifices of the Law were Types of Christ, and when that great
high Priest came, and offered that perfect Sacrifice of himself, all legal
Priests and Sacrifices were of no use: Thus by his being made under the Law,
and accomplishing all the Types and Figures of it, he put an end to all those
beggarly Rudiments, and delivered the Jews from the bondage of the Law; for
though the Gentiles too are redeemed by Christ, yet they were not redeemed from
the Law of Moses, under which they never were.

Several other places he alleges to the same purpose, but I have either
already considered them, or shall do in what follows; but what I have now
discoursed, is enough to satisfy any impartial Inquirer, how vain and
precarious this Principle is, which too many make the very Foundation of their
Faith, that Christ as Mediator fulfilled all Righteousness in their stead,
whose Mediator he was.

And now had I no other design than to expose the mistakes of other men, I
should need add no more, till I saw this answered; but I have a greater and
better design, viz. to explain and confirm the true notions of Religion in
opposition to such mistakes, and therefore having showed you, that there is no
foundation in Reason or Scripture to fancy such an Union between Christ and
Believers (whether we consider it as a Conjugal Relation, or Legal Union, as he
is our Surety or Mediator) as should entitle Believers to the Personal
Righteousness of Christ, lest any man should suspect, that the design of all
this is to lessen the Grace of God, or to disparage the Merits and
Righteousness of Christ, (which God forbid any Christian should be guilty of) I
shall secondly examine what influence the Sacrifice of Christ's death, and the
Righteousness of his life have upon our acceptance with God: and all that I can
find in Scripture about this, is, that to this we owe the Covenant of Grace:
that God being well pleased with the obedience of Christ's life, and the
Sacrifice of his death, for his sake entered into a new Covenant with Mankind,
wherein he promises pardon of sin and eternal life to those who belief and obey
the Gospel.

This is very plain with reference to the death of Christ; hence the Blood of
Christ is called the Blood of the Covenant, Heb. 10 29. and Christ is called
the great Shepherd and Bishop of Souls through the blood of the everlasting
Covenant, Heb. 13. 20. and the blood of Christ is called the blood of
Sprinkling, which speaks better things than the blood of Abel, Heb. 12. 24.
which is an allusion to Moses his sprinkling the blood of the Sacrifice,
whereby he confirmed and ratified the Covenant between God and the Children of
Israel, Heb. 9. 19, 20, 21. For when Moses had spoken every precept to all the
people according to the Law, (when he had declared the terms of this Covenant
to them) he took the blood of Calves and Goats with water, and Scarlet wool,
and hysop, and sprinkled both the book and all the people, saying, This is the
blood of the Testament, which God has ordained to you. Thus the blood of
Christ is called the Blood of Sprinkling, because by his blood God did seal and
confirm the Covenant of Grace, as the sprinkling the blood of beasts did
confirm the Mosaical Covenant. Hence we are said to be justified by the blood
of Christ, Romans 5. 9. that is, by the Gospel Covenant, which was confirmed and
ratified with his blood; and Christ is called a Propitiation through faith in
his blood, that is, by a belief of his Gospel, Romans 3. 25. Hence it is also,
that the Scripture uses these phrases promiscuously, to be justified by faith,
and to be justified by the Faith of Christ, and to be justified by Christ, and
to be justified through Faith in his Blood, and to be justified and saved by
Grace, nay by believing that Christ is the Son of God, Ioh. 20. 31. and that
God raised him from the dead, Romans 10. 3. All which signify the same thing,
that we are justified by believing and obeying the Gospel of Christ: for Faith
or Faith in Christ, signifies such a firm and steadfast belief of the Gospel, as
brings forth all the fruits of obedience; and the Grace of God is the Gospel of
Christ, expressly so called in Tit. 2. 11. as being the effect of the free grace
and goodness of God to Mankind; and Faith in the Blood of Christ is a belief of
the Gospel, which was confirmed by his death; and believing that Christ is the
Son of God, that is, that Messiah and Prophet, whom God sent into the World to
reveal his will to us, includes a general belief of the Gospel, which he
preached; and believing that God raised him from the dead does the same,
because his Resurrection from the dead was the last and great confirmation,
which God gave to the truth of his Gospel and Religion. And hence it is also,
that the Apostles attribute such things to the Blood of Christ as are the
proper and immediate effects of the Gospel Covenant, because they consider the
Blood of Christ as the Blood of the Covenant, and therefore all the blessings
of the Gospel are owing to the Blood of Christ, because the Gospel Covenant it
self was procured and confirmed by the Blood of Christ. Thus the Gentiles who
were sometime afar off, are said to be made nigh by the Blood of Christ, and
the Gentiles and Jews were reconciled unto God in one body by the Cross, Ephesians.
2. 14, 15, 16. That is, the Gentiles were received into the fellowship of Gods
Church, and the Jews and Gentiles united in one Body, or Society; now this
Union of Jews and Gentiles is owing to the Gospel, which takes away all marks
of distinction and separation, and gives them both an equal right to the
blessings of the new Covenant. The Mosaical Covenant did belong only to the
Children of Israel; but this new Covenant belongs to all Mankind, to Gentiles
as well as Jews, there is now no distinction of persons, neither Jew nor Greek,
Barbarian, Scythian, Bond nor Free, but Christ is all and in all: That is,
there is no respect of persons or Nations under the Gospel, no man is ever the
more or less acceptable to God, because he is a Jew or a Greek, but the only
thing of any value now is Faith in Christ, or a belief of the Gospel, which is
indifferently offered to all. Now this is attributed to the Blood of Christ,
and to his death upon the Cross, because thereby Christ put an end to the
Mosaical Covenant, and sealed this new Covenant of Grace with Mankind, as the
Apostle explains himself in the following Verses, 17, 18, etc. that Christ
having abolished the Law of Commandments by his death, he came and preached
peace (that is, the Gospel of Peace) to them who were afar off (to the Gentile
World) and to them who were nigh (to the Jews, who were Gods peculiar people)
that is, he abrogated the Mosaical Law, that Law of Commandments contained in
Ordinances, which was peculiar to the Jews, and separated them from the rest of
the World; and he broke down the middle Wall of Partition, which kept the
uncircumcised Gentiles, though Proselytes, at a distance from God, as confining
their worship to the outward Court of the Temple, which the Apostle seems to
refer to in that phrase, them that were afar off; and now by the Gospel he
admits the Gentiles to as near an approach to God, as the Jews; as he adds, for
through him, we both have an access by one spirit to the Father, Ver. 18.

Thus the Jews are said to be redeemed from the Curse of the Law by the
accursed Death of Christ upon the Cross, Gal. 3. 13. Because the Death of
Christ put an end to that legal dispensation, and sealed a new and better
Covenant between God and Man: and the Gentiles were redeemed from their vain
Conversation received by tradition from their Fathers, that is, from those
idolatrous and impure practices they were guilty of, not with corruptible
things, as silver and gold, but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb
without blemish and without spot. 1. Pet. 1. 18, 19. Now the Gentiles were
delivered from Idolatry by the preaching of the Gospel, which is called their
being redeemed by the blood of Christ, because we owe this unspeakable blessing
to his Death, who having abolished in his flesh (by his Death) the enmity, even
the Law of Commandments, etc. came and preached peace to you, which were afar
off, and to them that were nigh.

Now as the Death of Christ upon the Cross, and his Ascension into Heaven, and
presenting his blood to God in that true holy place, did answer to the first
sprinkling of the blood under the Law, which confirmed the Mosaical Covenant,
as the Apostle discourses in Hebr. 9. So his continual Intercession for us in
virtue of his blood once shed, and once offered to God, answers to those
frequent expiations by Sacrifice under the Law, especially to that general
Sacrifice on the great day of expiation, when the High Priest entered into the
holy of holies with the the blood of Beasts.

The reason, why the legal Sacrifices were so often repeated, was, because they
were imperfect and typical, but a shadow of good things to come, and so could
not take away sin; but Christ by one offering has perfected for ever them that
are sanctified. Hebr. 10. 14. He has made a perfect expiation for our sins by
dying once, and has sealed the promises of pardon and forgiveness to them who
are sanctified, and where remission is, there is no more offering for sin, Ver.
18 Such a Sacrifice as once for all Seals the Covenant of Pardon and
Forgiveness, makes all other Offerings and Sacrifices needless; and then the
High Priest, who entered into the Holy of Holies with the blood of the
Sacrifice, did continue there to intercede for the people, but came out of that
holy place, and could not return thither again without a new Sacrifice; but
this man after he had offered one Sacrifice, for ever sat down at the right
hand of God. Hebr. 10. 12. and because he continues for ever, he has an
unchangeable Priesthood, wherefore he is able also to save them to the
uttermost, that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make
Intercession for them. Hebr. 7. 24, 25. So that Christ by his Death expiated
our sins, and confirmed an everlasting Covenant, and being ascended up into
Heaven he there appears in the presence of God for us, and perpetually
intercedes in virtue of his blood once offered, which is of infinite more value
than the repeated Sacrifices of the Law: he procures the pardon of our sins by
his Death, and dispenses this pardon to us by his Intercession; he sealed that
Covenant of Grace by his blood, and intercedes for us in virtue of his blood,
but still according to the terms and conditions of that Covenant, and this is
all we must expect from him as our Mediator.

From what I have now discourst, it appears, how injurious those men are to the
blood of Christ (how much soever they pretend to magnify it) who attribute no
more to it than a non-imputation of sin, Dr. Owen's Communion, p. 193.
that by his Death Christ bearing and undergoing the punishment that was due to
us, paying the ransom that was due for us, delivered us from this condition,
(the wrath and Curse and whole displeasure of God) and thus by the Death of
Christ all cause of quarrel and rejection is taken away, but then this will not
complete our acceptance, the old quarrel may be laid aside, and yet no new
friendship begun, we may be not Sinners, and yet not so far righteous, as to
have a right to the Kingdom of Heaven: So that the blood of Christ only makes
us innocent, delivers us from guilt and punishment, but (if we will take the
Doctors word for it) it can give us no title to glory, this is owing to the
imputation of Christ's Righteousness to us, to the obedience of his life: but
you see, the Scripture gives a quite different account of it, we are said to be
justified and redeemed by the blood of Christ, nay we have boldness to enter
into the holiest by the blood of Jesus. Hebr. 10. 19. which is an allusion to
the High Priests entering into the Holy of Holies (which was a Type of Heaven)
with the blood of the Sacrifice; thus by the blood of Christ we have admission
into Heaven it self, though the Dr. says, that the blood of Christ makes us
Innocent, but cannot give us a right to the Kingdom of Heaven.

The Scripture takes no notice of their artificial method, that the guilt of
sin is taken away by the Death of Christ, and that we are made righteous by his
Righteousness; but the blood of Christ is said to justify us, and to give us
admission into the holiest of all, into Heaven it self, nay we are made
righteous by the Death of Christ too. 2 Cor. 5. 21. For he has made him to be
sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the Righteousness of God by
him: that is, though Christ was a very holy Person, yet he died as a Sacrifice
for our sins, the just for the unjust, that we might be reconciled to God: So
that our Righteousness as well as innocence is owing to the Death of Christ, to
that Sacrifice he offered for our sins: his blood had a great virtue and
efficacy in it to make us righteous, to purge our Consciences from dead works,
that we might serve the living God, and our Righteousness and acceptance with
God is wholly owing to that Covenant, which he purchased and sealed with his
blood.

But though the pardon of our sins, and our justification be attributed to the
blood of Christ, yet I could never persuade my self, that this wholly excludes
the perfect obedience and Righteousness of his life: for the Apostle tells us,
that we are accepted in the beloved. Ephesians. 1. 6. So that whatever rendered Christ
beloved of God, did contribute something to our acceptance; for because he was
beloved we are accepted for his sake, and I think no man will deny, that God
was very highly pleased with the perfect obedience of our Saviors life.

We know how many blessings God bestowed upon the Children of Israel for the
sake of their Fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, who were great Examples of
Faith and Obedience, which made them very dear to God; and there is no doubt,
but God was more pleased with the obedience of Christ, than with the Faith of
Abraham, and therefore we ought not to think that we receive no benefit by the
Righteousness of Christ, when Abraham's posterity was so blessed for his sake:
but then the Righteousness of Christ's life and the Sacrifice of his death do
not serve two such different ends, as these men fancy, (that the death of
Christ removes the guilt of sin, and his Righteousness is imputed to us to make
us righteous) but they both serve the same end to establish and confirm the
Gospel Covenant: God was so well pleased with what Christ did and suffered,
with the obedience of his life and death, that for his sake he entered into a
Covenant of Grace with Mankind; as Abraham's Faith was not imputed to his
posterity, as their act, but for Abraham's sake God entered into Covenant with
them, and chose them for his peculiar people. The Obedience and Righteousness
of Christ's life was one thing, which made his Sacrifice so meritorious, which
was the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish and without spot.

And this is the most that can be made of Romans 5. 18, 19. Therefore as by the
offense of one judgment came upon all men to Condemnation, even so by the
righteousness of one the free gift came upon all men to justification of life:
for as by one man's disobedience many were made Sinners, so by the obedience of
one shall many be made righteous: there is no necessity indeed of expounding
this (...) obedience, of the Righteousness of Christ's life, or his active
obedience, for it may very well signify no more than the obedience of his
Death, notwithstanding the Doctors distinction, that doing is one thing, and
suffering is another, for the Apostle tells us, that he became obedient unto
death, (...) Phil. 2. 8. and his offering himself in Sacrifice is called doing
the will of God, Hebr. 10. 9, 10. and whether this be properly said or not, I
will leave the Doctor to dispute it with the Apostle; it is plain, that in this
Chapter, there is no express mention made of any other act of Obedience and
Righteousness, whereby we are reconciled to God, but only his dying for us, in
Ver. 8. The Apostle tells us, that Christ died for us, while we were Sinners,
in Ver. 9. that we are justified by his blood, in the 10. that we are
reconciled to God by the Death of his Son, which makes it more than probable,
that by his Righteousness and obedience here, the Apostle understands his Death
and Sufferings, because this was the subject of his discourse: but yet these
expressions his Righteousness and Obedience seem to take in the whole compass
of his obedience in doing and suffering the will of God: and the meaning of the
words is this, that as God was so highly displeased with Adams Sin, that he
entailed a great many evils and miseries, and death it self upon his Posterity
for his sake, so God was so well pleased with the Righteousness and Obedience
of Christ's Life and Death, that he bestows the rewards of Righteousness on
those who according to the strictness and rigor of the Law are not Righteous,
that for Christ's sake he has made a new Covenant of Grace, which pardons our
past sins and follies, and rewards a sincere though imperfect obedience; for
(...), shall be made righteous, is the same with (...), shall be justified,
that is, treated like righteous persons: so that the Righteousness of Christ is
not the formal cause of our justification, that very Righteousness whereby we
are righteous, but the Righteousness of his Life and Death is the meritorious
cause of that Covenant, whereby we are declared righteous, and rewarded as
righteous persons; for the Apostle tells us in Ver. 17. who those are who are
thus justified by Christ, and shall Reign with him in Life, not those who are
righteous by the imputation of Christ's Righteousness to them, but those who
have received the abundance of Grace, and the gift of Righteousness, that is,
who by the Gospel of Christ, which is the Grace and the abundant Grace of God,
are made Holy and Righteous, as God is; which Righteousness is called a gift,
because it is not owing solely to humane endeavors, but is wrought in us by
supernatural means, by those powerful arguments and motives, and divine
assistances, which God in infinite love and goodness has afforded the World by
Jesus Christ.

This gives a fair account how we may be said to be made righteous by the
Righteousness of Christ, not that his actual obedience is reckoned as done by
us (which is impossible) but because we are made righteous both in a proper and
forensick sense by the Gospel Covenant, which is wholly owing to the Grace of
God, and to the merits and Righteousness of Christ: the great arguments and
motives, and powerful assistances of the Gospel form our minds to the love and
practice of Holiness, and so make us inherently righteous, and the Grace of the
Gospel accepts and rewards that sincere and Evangelical obedience, which
according to the rigor and severity of the Law could deserve no reward: so
that our Righteousness is wholly owing to the Righteousness of Christ, which
may in this sense be said to be imputed to us (though that phrase never occurs
in Scripture) because without this Covenant of Grace, which is founded on the
Righteousness of Christ, the best man living could lay no claim to
Righteousness or future glory.

So that the Righteousness of Christ is our Righteousness, when we speak of the
foundation of the Covenant, by which we are accepted, but if we speak of the
terms of the Covenant, then we must have a righteousness of our own, for the
Righteousness of Christ will not serve the turn: Christ's Righteousness and our
own are both necessary to our Salvation, the first as the foundation of the
Covenant, the other as the condition of it.

The sum of this Section is this, that there is no foundation in reason or
Scripture, to imagine any such Union betwixt Christ and Believers, as should
entitle them to all the personal Righteousness of Christ, as much as if it had
been performed by themselves; but the virtue of Christ's Obedience and
Sufferings, so far as it concerns our justification, is contained in the
Gospel Covenant: he is the Mediator of the Covenant, and his blood is the blood
of the Covenant, and we must expect no other advantage from what Christ has
done and suffered, but to be saved according to the gracious terms and
conditions of the Gospel.

SECT. IV. That these men place our Union to Christ before holiness of life.
I Have now explained to you the nature of our Union to the Person of Christ,
as these men represent it, whereby (they say) we are entitled to all his
Excellencies, Graces, Righteousness, Preciousness, etc. and made it appear,
that there is no foundation for such a notion, either in Scripture or reason;
but before I dismiss this, it will be convenient to take notice of the great
evil and mischief of this opinion, which may satisfy any considering man
(though there were no other evidence of it) how false it is; and I shall
observe two things to this purpose: First, That according to this notion men
may, nay must be united to Christ, while they continue in their sins, which
according to my understanding overthrows all Religion, and destroys the
necessary obligations to an holy life. Secondly, That according to these men's
discourses no man can certainly tell how to get into Christ, or know whether he
be in Christ or not.

As for the first, that men may, nay must be united to Christ, while they
continue in their sins, it is easy to produce abundant evidence for the proof
of it. Sound Believer. p. 321.
Mr. Shephard tells us expressly, that obedience does not make us Gods people,
or God our God, but he is first our God (which is only by the Covenant of
Grace) and hence it is, that he being ours, and we his, we of all others are
most bound to obey: as for the obligation to obedience, we will consider that
anon, at present it suffices, that we are Gods people, and that by virtue of
the Covenant of Grace, before we obey him: the same Author P. 318.
tells us, that we are not united to Christ our life by obedience, as Adam was
to God by it, but by Faith (that is by such a Faith of which Obedience is no
part, otherwise he opposes a part to the whole, and so the same thing to it
self) and therefore as all actions in living things comes from Union, so all
our acts of obedience are to come by Faith, from the Spirit on Christ's part,
and from Faith on our part, which make the Union: the meaning of which is this,
that we must first be united to Christ by this Faith (of which more anon)
before we can do any thing, that is good; before this Union the best actions we
can do, are sins, which is a plain demonstration of the truth of this charge;
because according to this principle we can do nothing but sin, before we are
united to Christ: hence these men constantly place our justification before our
sanctification, that we are first accounted holy by God before we are made
holy, now our justification follows our Union to Christ, and our fanctification
follows our justification, and therefore we must first be united to Christ, so
as to have a title to all the Promises of the Gospel, to Justification and
Eternal Life, before we are sanctified, that is, before we are made Holy: hence
we are told, that P. 212.
Holiness is a remote end of vocation, but the next end is to come to Christ:
and the same Author makes a speech for Christ to a Sinner (so gracious a
speech, that among all the invitations of Christ in the Gospel, we find nothing
like it) though thou have resisted my Spirit, refused my Grace, wearied me with
thy iniquities, yet come unto me, and this will make me amends, I require
nothing of thee else but to come; for Gods call is out of free Grace, and
therefore he calls for no more, than only to come up and possess the Lords
fullness.

But not to insist upon some particular sayings, let us consider the whole
progress of the Soul (as they represent it) to a closure with Christ, the
several steps and degrees whereby men are brought at last to an Union with the
Lord Jesus, and they are Conviction, Compunction, Humiliation, and Faith, which
is the uniting Grace; now if there be nothing of forsaking sin included in all
this, then men must be united to Christ before they forsake their sins: it were
easy to produce the concurrent judgments of many Authors, for what I shall now
say, but that would be too tedious, and therefore I shall confine my self to
Mr. Shephards Sound Believer, as Orthodox a Book as ever was writ, and which to
this day is in too many peoples hands.

Now Sound Believer, p. 68.
Conviction of sin (according to this Author) is a great sense of the evil of
sin, and the evil after sin, of its abominable and accursed nature, and those
just judgments which follow sin, that the Sinner must die, and that eternally
for sin, if it remain in this state it is now in: and no man can deny, but that
this is, as it ought to be; men must be awakened into a serious consideration
of the evil which they have done, and of the punishment which they have
deserved, before they will reform their lives; reform? nay now you are out,
this is not the end of Conviction to reform sin, (that is a legal way) but
compunction is the end of Conviction: well then, what is this Compunction? why
compunction is first a great fear of being damned, when a man is thus convinced
of sin, he sees Death, wrath, Eternity, near unto him, and hence has no hope
to escape it, as now he is, and therefore does fear; next to this succeeds a
great sorrow and mourning for sin, the Lord having smitten the Soul, or shot
the arrows of fear into the Soul, it therefore grows exceeding sad and heavy;
and that, which perfects this compunction, is a separation from sin; this is
something like, if they mean as they speak; but if you would not mistake them,
by a separation from sin, you must not understand a leaving and forsaking sin,
but such a separation from sin as is consistent with living in it: for it is
nothing else, but P. 86.
a being willing or rather not unwilling, that the Lord should take it away:
the Lord does not wound the heart to this end, that the Soul should first heal
it self, before it come to the Physician, but that it might seek out, or
feeling its need be willing and desirous of a Physician, the Lord Jesus, to
come and heal it; it is the great fault of many Christians, that either their
wounds and sorrows are so little they desire not to be healed, or if they do,
they labor to heal themselves first, before they come to the Physician for it,
they will first make themselves holy, and put on their Jewels and then believe
in Christ: P. 85.
so that all he means by a separation from sin, is to be content, that Christ
by an irresistible power should take away our sins; by this separation the Soul
is cut off P. 82.
from the will to sin, not from all (no nor from any) sin in the will, for that
must be mortified by a Spirit of Holiness, after the Soul is implanted into
Christ. Now this is downright nonsense, for he must be a very subtle man, who
can distinguish between a will to sin, and sin in the will, and all that can be
made of it is this, that this separation from sin is a willingness, or rather a
not unwillingness, that Christ should take away our sins against our wills; and
therefore he does well to tell us, that this separation from sin is no part of
our sanctification, as any man would easily have guest by his description of
it; the whole design of this compunction, of this fear, and sorrow, and
separation from sin, is not that we might forsake sin, but to work humiliation
in us, which is a third step toward an Union with Christ: Now this P. 12^
humiliation is the work of the spirit, whereby the Soul being broken off from
self conceit, and self-confidence in any good it has, or does, submits
unto, and lies under God to be disposed of, as he pleases; this self
confidence, from which the Soul must be broke off, is any hope of pleasing God
by repentance or reformation, or any thing he can do; for when men feel this
compunction of spirit for their sins, the great danger is, lest they should
seek ease by repenting of their sins, and reforming their lives; that as their
sins have provoked God to anger against them, so now if they can reform and
leave those sins, or if they repent, and be sorry for them, if now they pray,
and hear, and do as others do, they have some hopes (as well they may, if they
do all this) that this will heal their wounds, and pacify the Lord toward
them, when they see there is no peace in a sinful course, they will try if
there be any to be found in a good course; this indeed every man naturally
would have thought to have been a very good way, but it is a dangerous mistake,
for while it is thus with the Soul, he is incapable P. 125.
of Christ, for he that trusts to other things to save him, or makes himself
his own Savior, or rests in his duties without a Savior (that is according to
this Author, all those who repent and reform upon the Convictions of their
Consciences) he can never have Christ to save him: So that true humiliation is
this, when the Lord Christ has made the Soul feel, not only its inability to
help it self, but also its own unworthiness, that the Lord should help it, that
so it may lie down under God to be disposed of, as he pleases, that is to be
contented to be saved or damned, as shall best please God; and when the Soul is
brought to this pass, then it is vas Capax, a Vessel capable (though unworthy)
of Grace, and now they are made thus hollow and empty by compunction and
humiliation, they are capable of receiving and holding Christ, as a hollow P.
141.
and empty Vessel is of receiving and holding any thing, that is put into it:
this is a new notion of our Union to Christ, that it is a receiving Christ into
us, as a hollow Vessel receives any liquor, that is poured into it; however
this is a very Philosophical account of the nature of humiliation, that it is
to bring a man to such a thorough sense of his inability to please God, that he
shall never dare to be so profane as to attempt it, but must leave repentance
and reformation of life to carnal and Christless men; and then to make him so
sensible of his own unworthiness, and how just it is with God to damn him, that
he shall contentedly submit himself to God to be damned or saved, as he
pleases; and now the Soul being thus empty and hollow is fit to receive Christ
into it, and being grown careless of its Salvation, and indifferent whether it
be saved or damned (for it is impossible thus to submit to God, without being
indifferent in some measure which God shall choose) it is a fit object for
mercy: certainly it is a very hard thing to bring any man in his wits to this,
and I find by this Author, that God is very hard put to it thus to humble the
Soul; P. 128.
for he is forced to irritate and stir up original corruption, to stir the
dunghill, (a very unfit office for a holy Being) that so men finding themselves
sensibly grow worse and worse every day, may despair of growing better, and
leave off such vain attempts, and set down humble under God: nay the Lord loads
and tires, and wearies the Soul by its own endeavors, till it can stir no
more; that is, when the Soul labors with all its might to repent and reform,
the Spirit of God, which should encourage and assist all such pious endeavors,
withdraws it self, because it knows the Soul would rest therein without Christ:
P. 130.
now I confess, I know not who suffers most by this, the Sinner, who is thus
humbled and broken, or God who thus humbles him; for it must needs be as
contrary to the holy and merciful Nature of God to use such methods of
humiliation, as it is to the proud heart of man to be thus humbled: Thus you
see, that Humiliation has nothing to do with repentance and reformation of our
lives; for one great end of humiliation is to cure men of such carnal conceits,
as to think to please God by repenting and reforming our sins, and this is the
next immediate disposition toward our receiving Christ and closing with him.

For now when the Soul is thus humbled, it is time it should go to Christ,
though the truth is, such Souls are so wounded and humbled now, that they P.
152.
lie dead at Gods feet, and are as unable to believe, as they were to humble
themselves: and therefore now the Lord takes them up in his Arms, that they may
lean and rest upon the bosom of their beloved by Faith: Now the form and
essence P. 173*
of Faith, this uniting Grace, consists in this, that it is the coming of the
whole Soul out of it self to Christ: Faith does nothing for life, for that is
the Law of Works, it only receives him, who has done all for it, it comes out
of all it has or does unto Christ for life. The Soul by sin is averted from
God, and turns his back upon God, the turning and coming of the Soul (not unto
duties of Holiness, for that is obedience properly, but) unto God in Christ
again is properly and formally Faith: So to come to Christ, as to drink in of
Christ's fullness, is believing in Christ.

But then Faith is the coming of the whole Soul to Christ, and that is, when
the eye of the Soul so sees Christ, and the P. 185.
heart so embraces, and relyeth upon Christ, as that it rests in Christ, as
in its portion and all-sufficient good. This is the Faith which unites us to
Christ, and this Faith you see has nothing at all to do with obedience in
uniting us to Christ; but it perfects this Union between Christ and Believers,
while they are as ugly, and deformed, and vicious as may be; very unfit persons
methinks to become the Members of so holy an Head.

This is enough to convince any considering man, how false this notion is of
our Union to Christ, according to which wicked men who live in sin, may be
united to Christ: for the Scripture places the formal nature of our Union to
Christ in a subjection to his Authority, and Obedience to his Laws, as I have
already made it appear; and therefore an holy life must not only follow our
Union to Christ, as an effect of it, but must at least in order of Nature go
before it, because by this we are united to Christ. A visible profession of an
holy life is necessary to our admission into the Christian Church, which is the
Body of Christ; but though this makes us visible Members of Christ's Body, and
give us a right to an external Communion, yet we are not real and living
Members of Christ, till we sincerely obey him, till our minds are transformed
into his Image: our Union to Christ is more or less perfect according to our
seize in true piety and virtue. The first and lowest degree of our Union
with Christ is a belief of his Gospel, which in order of Nature must go before
obedience to it; but yet it includes a purpose and resolution of obeying it;
and in this sense we must be united to Christ, before we can be holy; because
this belief of his Gospel is the great Principle of Obedience; as our Savior
tells his Disciples, Abide in me, and I in you, as the branch cannot bring
forth fruit of it self, except it abide in the Vine, no more can ye, except you
abide in me, Ioh. 15. 4. But then our Union is not perfected without actual
obedience; this makes us the true Disciples of Christ, when we are fruitful in
good works, as he adds in Verse. 8. Herein is my Father glorified, that you
bring forth much fruit, so shall you be my Disciples. A belief of the Gospel of
Christ, and a purpose to live in obedience to it, is all that can be expected
from beginners, but this does not give us an actual title to all the promises
of the Gospel, unless we actually obey it: but when in the strength of this
Faith we conquer all the temptations of the World and the Flesh, and improve
all the opportunities of doing good, this makes us the Disciples of Christ
indeed, and Heirs of Glory: Christ receives bad men as soon as they believe his
Gospel, and resolve to be good, but their reward is suspended upon the
performance of these vows, and this is no reproach to his Holiness; but nothing
can be a greater dishonor to our Savior, nor a greater contradiction to his
Gospel, than to affirm, that wicked men, while they continue such, are actually
united to Christ, and thereby have an actual right to pardon, and
righteousness, and eternal life. St. John I am sure, understood not this
Doctrine, when he told us, That God is light, and in him is no darkness at all:
if we say we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, (live in any sin)
we lie, and do not the truth; but if we walk in the light, as God is in the
light, then have we fellowship one with another, 1 John 1. 5, 6, 7.

This Doctrine does not only take away the necessity of holiness in order to
our Union with Christ, but destroys the necessary obligations to holiness and
obedience for the future, and so thrusts holiness quite out of the Christian
Religion. Our Union to Christ is perfected while we are unholy, and when we are
united to Christ, there is less need of holiness than before; for now the
Merits and satisfaction of Christ's death is imputed to us to remove the guilt
of sin, and to deliver us from the punishment of it; and his actual obedience
is imputed to us to make us righteous, and to give us an actual right to Glory:
so that if men will obey Christ out of a principle of good nature, and
thankfulness to him, they may; but according to this notion there can be no
necessity of it, because they are delivered from the wrath of God, and have a
right to eternal life without it: And this is a plain demonstration, that these
notions are so far from being an essential part of the Christian Religion, that
they overthrow all Religion, by leaving it at every man's liberty, whether he
will worship and obey God or not: but I have Chap. 3.
discoursed this at large already in the examination of Dr. Owens reasons for
the necessity of Holiness and Obedience.

SECT. V. That according to these Principles, there is no certain way of
getting into Christ, or of knowing whether we are in Christ or not.
THus I have made good the first charge, that according to this notion of our
Union to Christ men may, nay must be united to Christ (if ever they be united)
while they continue in sin, and this is a great reproach to the Person and
Gospel of our Savior; the other thing which I charged upon this notion, is a
more immediate ^injury to men, as exposing them to perpetual doubts and
jealousies about their Salvation, viz. that according to these principles no
man can certainly tell how to get into Christ, or know whether he be in Christ
or not: And if I can make this appear, it will be a sufficient reason for every
man to reject it, who has any care of his Salvation, or any regard to the
peace and quiet of his own mind.

First then according to these Principles there is no certain way to get into
Christ: Suppose a sinner, who hears of those great Privileges, which are
consequent upon our Union to Christ, should inquire what course he should take
to be united to Christ, and to have a Right and Interest in all the
Excellencies, Preciousness, Graces, and Righteousness of the Lord Jesus; the
method prescribed in order to this is Conviction, Compunction, Humiliation, and
Faith, which is the uniting Grace; now I observe first, that a man is passive
in all this, and can contribute nothing to it himself any otherwise, than as he
is acted by an irresistible power, and it is a vain thing to give such rules
and directions as no man can follow; this only tells us by what methods God
unites us to Christ; not what we must do, but what we must suffer in order to
this Union. A Sinner may stir up in himself some natural conviction of sin,
some natural fear and sorrow, etc. and in a sense of this may set upon the work
of reformation, of leaving his sins, and performing duties, but all this they
tell us is to no purpose; for unless this conviction, and compunction, and
humiliation be wrought in us by the irresistible power of the Spirit of God
(which no man can possibly tell, whether it be or not) it is not of the right
stamp, and will avail us nothing: So that the sinner has nothing to do but to
sit still, and patiently expect till God will do all for him.

But secondly, Suppose a man have this conviction, compunction, and
humiliation, is this a sufficient reason to lay hold on Christ by the hand of
Faith? by no means; the end of conviction is compunction, and the end of
compunction is humiliation, and all this carries us no nearer to Christ, than
Sound Believer, p. 126.
quietly to lie down before God, that he may do what he will with us, P. 133.
turning the other cheek unto the Lord even smiting of us, acknowledging that
if the Lord show mercy, it will be wonderful, if not yet the Lord is Righteous,
and therefore we have no reason to quarrel against him for denying special
mercy to those to whom he does not owe a bit of bread: and now the Soul is
indeed humbled, because it submits to be disposed of as God pleases; that is to
be saved or damned: so that this conviction, compunction, and humiliation,
contribute nothing to our Union with Christ, but their whole virtue consists in
bringing us to such a temper of mind, as to be content either to have Christ,
or to go without him, as God shall please: P. 137.
humiliation makes the Soul in the sense of its own infinite vileness and
unworthiness not to quarrel at the Lord, and Devil-like grow fierce and
impatient before and against the Lord, in case he should never help it, never
pity it, never succor it. P. 138.
And now you shall see, if the Lord intend good, he will by this do thee good,
and this is all men get by humiliation, that if the Lord intend to do them
good, this is the way, in which he will do it, but though they be humbled, they
cannot be sure, whether God intend to do them good or not: and therefore we are
told, that P. 144.
we are as much bound to submit to God, whether he will save or damn us, as we
are to submit to the disposal of God, as to any common mercy: though you must
pray for mercy, it must be with submission to the good will of the Lord, saying
the Lords will is good (whether it be to save or damn) but mine is evil, though
it be to be saved, and to have Jesus Christ: nay we are much more bound to
submit our selves to God, whether he will save or damn us, than we are to
submit to him in the lesser concernments of this life: P. 145.
For if it be pride to murmur in case the Lord deny you smaller matters, the
offals of this life, do thou not see, that it is far greater pride for thee
to sink, and quarrel with him, if he denies thee greater, the things of another
life? is he bound to give thee greater, who does not owe thee the least? the
Lord gives you life, blessed be his name, but you ask for treasures of Grace
and mercy (now God has given you life, you would feign live for ever, an
unpardonable fault this!) thousands of pounds, Christ himself, and all that he
is worth, and the Lord seems to deny you, and now you sink, and grow sullen,
may not the Lord now say, was there ever such pride and insolence? as to be
unwilling to be damned for ever; though I dare say this is not the pride which
cast the Apostate Angels out of Heaven. So that though conviction, and
compunction, and humiliation, be the only way to come to Christ, yet it is such
a way, as brings us never the nearer him; when all this is done we are where we
were: before we were humbled it was at the Lords good pleasure, whether we
should have Christ or not, and so it is still.

What then is to be done further in order to our closing with Christ by Faith?
for hitherto there is no foundation for our Faith: why you must not catch at
Christ, but stay till God give Christ to you, till God take you up in his arms,
that you may lean and rest upon the bosom of your beloved through Faith; you
must stay till God give you a particular call to come to Christ, and whether
that will be ever or never, no man can tell: many a wounded Sinner P. 153.
will be scrambling after Christ from some general reports of him (such as his
Gospel makes) before the day and hour of Gods glorious and gracious call, now
for any man to receive Christ, or to come to Christ before he is called, is
presumption (I unpardonable presumption too to attempt impossibilities, for no
body can come till he is called) no man should come unless first called (and
therefore no crime to stay away) as it is in calling to an ordinary office, so
it is in our calling much more to special Grace, no man takes this honor to
himself but he, that is called of God. Hebr. 5. 4. (it is great presumption to
usurp the office of a Priest, or Prophet, or King, without a lawful designation
to such an office, and therefore it is much greater presumption to attempt to
be a good man and a good Christian without such a particular call) for what
has any man to do with Christ, to make himself a Son of God and Heir of Glory
(to take care to please God, and to make himself happy) but he, that is called
of God? Well Sinner, wait with patience till thou art called, and so thy work
is at an end for this time.

But how shall a poor humbled Sinner know when he is called, that then he may
come to Christ? why you must have a care, that you do not mistake the general
offers of the Gospel for this special call, for they are not a sufficient
foundation for our Faith in comeing to Christ, though they are made to the
weary and the heavy laden too: men cannot, men will not come at such a call,
and indeed they have no reason to do it. For Christ is not intended for all,
and therefore though he be offered to all in the Gospel, yet it would be great
presumption for every one to lay hold on him: for Christ does Sincere Convert.
p. 75.
not immediately offer himself to all men, as a Savior, whereby they may be
encouraged to serve him as a King (that is he does not promise Salvation and
Eternal Life in the Gospel with a design, that every one that will, should take
encouragement from these promises to obey and serve him) but first as a King,
commanding them to cast away their Weapons, and stoop under his Scepter,
acknowledging that if ever he save me, I will bless him, if he damn me his name
is righteous in so dealing with me: the meaning of which is, that every man is
invited in the Gospel to submit himself to the mercy of Christ, but then Christ
reserves a liberty to himself to save or damn, as he pleases; and this is all
the encouragement the Gospel gives us. These are hard terms, and such as sound
more like the arbitrary will of an haughty and imperious Lord, than the
conditions of a gracious and merciful Savior.

What then must we do now? why the only remedy is to venture and try, Ibidem.
P. 85.
God has elected but few, and Christ has shed his blood for few, and
therefore we must venture, (and a hard venture it is, where there is such great
odds against us, and yet our eternal happiness depends upon the success, too
great a stake for such a venture!) as many men among us do now, who hearing of
one good living fallen, twenty of them will go and seek for it, although they
know only one shall have it (though did they know, it were irrevocably
determined, who should have it, none of them would stir, but wait till the news
were brought them; good God what Merchant-Adventurers are poor Sinners, who
after all their seeking for Christ are in such danger of missing him!) or as
the Lepers in Samaria, if we stay here we must die, if we go out to the Camp of
the Assyrians we may live: which is the resolution of desperate men, as it
seems the Gospel condemns us all to be.

No previous disposition can give us any encouragement to come to Christ;
humiliation cannot do it, after this we must expect a call still, we are but
probationers for Christ still, and are in as great danger of missing him, as
any one of the twenty Competitors are of missing that living, which only one
can have; and which is more wonderful, assurance it self cannot do it, Sound
Believer. p. 246.
For if you come to Christ, because you have assurance (that is, if you come to
Christ, because you are sure you are already come) or because you feel such and
such graces, and Heavenly impressions of Gods Spirit in you, then you may many
a day and year keep at a distance from Christ, and live without Christ: this is
a hard saying, that though we come to Christ, we may keep at a distance from
him, nay though we come, because we are sure, we are come already: it is time
now to give over, and despair of ever being sure, when assurance it self is no
security.

Nothing then but a particular call is a good reason to come to Christ: when
the Spirit of God makes the general call (which signifies nothing) particular,
Ibidem. p. 215.
when the Soul sees, that the Lord in special means me, singles out me in
special to believe: for otherwise the Souls of the elect will not be much moved
with the call of God, so long as they think, that the Lord offers no more mercy
to me than to any reprobate (that is no more mercy than what will damn them)
and therefore the spirit of Christ makes the call particular, I have called
thee by name, Isaiah 43. 1. He calls all his Sheep by name, John 10. 5. not
by their Christian name (as he well observes, for they cannot be Christians
before they come to Christ, and that must be after this call) but as the Lord
from before all Worlds wrote down their names in the Book of Life, and loves
them in special, so in vocation (the first opening of Election) the Lord makes
this call special; and so special as if it were by name: look, says the Lord
Jesus, how I have left thousand thousands in the World, and have had greater
cause so to have left thee (this is free Grace indeed) but behold I am come
unto thee, oh come thou unto me. So that it is impossible for a Sinner to do
any thing in order to his Union to Christ; there is no foundation for our Faith
in Christ, but this particular call, and we must wait patiently for it, and be
contented too, if it never come.

And when the Soul has this particular call, suppose it should suspect this
call for a delusion, what course can it take to satisfy it self, that this is
the call of the spirit of God, and not the cheat and imposture of an
enthusiastic fancy? truly none that I know of; if this calling by name will
not satisfy it, there is no other way but to call for the Book of Election,
and see whether its name be enrolled there: the best of it is, that all that
are called must come, and therefore they need inquire no further.

But secondly, Though we know not how to get into Christ, it would be some
comfort to know that we are in him, but this is as impossible as the other: as
the only foundation of our Faith in coming to Christ (according to these men's
notions) is this special and particular call of the Spirit, so the only
infallible assurance any one can have, that he is in Christ, is the testimony
of the Spirit, that Spirit of adoption which teaches us to cry Abba Father; and
yet God does not afford this testimony of the Spirit to all, but suffers many
good Christians to walk in darkness, and hides his face from them, and conceals
the evidences of his eternal love, for no other reason but because they are
Sound Believer, p. 130.
desirous of it, and would be quiet if they should know it: this is somewhat
hard measure; but suppose you have, or think you have this testimony of the
Spirit, how can you be sure, that it is not a cheat and delusion, the imposture
of the Devil, or of your own selfflattering imaginations?

To satisfy this scruple we are directed to marks and evidences, and thus this
infallible assurance from the testimony of the Spirit, must in its last resolve
be founded upon some moral evidence; as it is with the Church of Rome, who
after a great noise and cry of infallibility are at last forced to resolve
their Faith into some motives of credibility, or to dance round in an endless
circle.

Well, but let us consider what are the marks and evidences of our being in
Christ: and now you must inquire, whether you have the Spirit of Christ, and it
is just as easy to know this, as whether you be in Christ: But are you true
Believers? is your Faith of the right stamp? is it wrought by the Almighty
Power of God? or is it such an easy, common, presumptuous, false Faith, as
that which is in the generality of men? and this is as easy to know, as either
of the former; for if there be such a false, presumptuous Faith, as takes
Christ when he does not belong to us, and rests and relies on Christ only for
pardon, life, and Salvation, and yet shall never have Christ, how shall we
know, whether our Faith be true and genuine? such as will make Christ ours? and
the answer to this brings us to that great mark of sanctification; you must
consider the effects of Faith, does it purify Dr. Iacomb Romans 8. p. 65.
your heart? does it overcome the World? does it work by love? if any man be in
Christ, he is a new Creature, are you then new Creatures? is the state of your
person changed from a Child of wrath to an Heir of Grace? (which is the thing
to be proved) or is your nature changed? do you not think, speak, act as you
did before? do ye walk in newness of life? etc. have you crucified the flesh
with its affections and lusts? do you bring forth fruit, as every branch in
Christ (which is not rejected by him) does? that is, you must prove your
justification by your sanctification, your Faith by your Works: It must be
acknowledged, that these are some of those marks and Characters, which the
Scripture gives of good Christians, by which we may as certainly know what our
state is, as the Tree is known by its Fruit; and since it is no better, I am
heartily glad it is no worse, that good works and a holy life may at least put
in for marks and evidences of a justified state: though the truth is, this is a
mere complement to holiness, and as they order the matter, a holy life can no
more be the sign of a justified state, than it can justify us.

For first, since holiness is not necessary to our Union with Christ, it can be
no necessary sign of it; we are united to Christ before we are holy, as appears
from what I have already discoursed, and therefore an unholy man may be united
to Christ, and how then can holiness be the only sure mark of our Union to
Christ? indeed they tell us, that holiness does necessarily follow our Union to
Christ, but no man knows how long it may be before it follows, and yet all this
while such a Person is united to Christ; at best this gives evidence but to one
part of the question, a holy life may be a good evidence that such a man is in
Christ, but the want of it is no certain evidence, that a man is not in Christ,
and therefore this mark may be rejected by any one, who has no mind to it.

Nay secondly, According to these men's principles, we cannot tell whether we
are holy or not, till we know whether we are in Christ or not; our Union to
Christ must be an evidence of our holiness, not our holiness an evidence of our
Union to Christ: till we are united to Christ, we can do nothing to please God,
the best actions of Christless and unregenerate men are but splendida peccata,
glittering impieties, which may appear so fair and lovely, that they may
deceive both other men and themselves for the true fruits of the Spirit, but
yet are odious and abominable to God, because the person who does them, is out
of Christ: our persons must be first accepted in Christ, and then our services:
we cannot judge of holiness by the external performance of any duty, nor by the
inward sense of our own minds, but must first know whether we are in Christ,
whether our persons be accepted in him, before we can tell whether any thing we
do be good and acceptable to God: and this is a plain demonstration, that
holiness cannot be an evidence of our Union to Christ, because we must first
know our Union to Christ, before we can know that we are holy.

And thirdly, At other times these men make the work of sanctification in this
life so imperfect, and so like an unsanctified state, that it is impossible to
distinguish a sanctified and unsanctified man; and upon this account holiness
and sanctification must needs be a very sorry evidence of our Union to Christ,
when it is so imperfect, that it cannot be known, for that which is an evidence
of another thing, ought to be very evident it self.

An unregenerate man is under the Law of Sin, under the reigning power of it,
and a regenerate man (as they describe him) is in a state as like this, as one
Egg is like another: for a regenerate man may be carnal, sold under sin, that
is a Slave and Captive to it; he may do those things which he allows not, nay
those things which he hates; that is, he may sin against the clearest
convictions of Conscience, and sense of duty; he may neglect to do those things
which he knows he ought to do, and do those things which he knows he ought not
to do; he may find a Law in his members, that when he would do good evil is
present with him; a Law in his members warring against the Law of his mind,
which brings him into Captivity to the Law of sin, that is in his members: for
so they tell us, that Saint Paul complains of all this in the Person of a
regenerate man, in Romans 7. Now an unregenerate man does the very same, and
indeed cannot do much worse; he sins against his Conscience, is brought into
Captivity to sin, and is overpowered by indwelling sin; he finds a great many
natural fears and terrors, when he is tempted to sin, which give some check to
him, and make him sin against his own will with some unwillingness and
reluctance; he approves the Law of God as just and equal, his Conscience
assents to it, but there is a strong bias upon his will, which runs counter to
all these holy commands, and makes him a Slave and Captive to his lusts; Now
not to dispute at present which of these two the Apostle means in Romans 7. I
think it is hard to assign any difference between them, the regenerate man
according to this description is full as bad as the unregenerate man, or if
there be any difference, the regenerate man is the worse of the two, because in
the regenerate man the Spirit is led into Captivity, but in the unregenerate
man only natural Conscience, which is a much weaker principle, and so is
capable of a better excuse, is led into Captivity; but which of these two it is
no man can tell, and therefore a regenerate man has great reason to fear, that
he may be unregenerate, and an unregenerate man has as much reason to hope
that he may be regenerate: and what becomes then of this evidence of
sanctification to prove our Union to Christ, when sanctification it self cannot
be distinguished from an unsanctified State: Romans 8. p. 182.
Dr. Iacomb in his Discourse of the Law of Sin, attempts to assign the
difference between the Law of sin as it is in the regenerate, and as it is in
the unregenerate; and has given us such a Description of an unregenerate
State, that I think there is scarce such an unregenerate man in the World; and
yet if we must judge what a regenerate man is by inverting the Character of the
unregenerate, he is by odds much the worse man.

As first, When the whole bent and tendency of the heart is toward sin, when
the propensities of the Soul thereto are entire and unmixt, there it is the Law
of sin, and the Law of sin, which is proper to the unregenerate: but is every
one a regenerate man then, who has some good inclinations and propensities in
him? who has some wouldings and velleities to that which is good? it is to be
hoped then as many bad men as there are, there are few unregenerate men in the
World.

Secondly, Which he tells us is the explication of the former, (as indeed I
think it needs some explicati^^) when all the several faculties of the Soul are
altogether on sins side, and wholly take its part, then it is the Law of sin,
and that which is proper to the unregenerate: where the understanding gives in
its final and positive dictate, that sin is good, represents it as eligible to
the will, upon this closes with it, embraces it, cleaves to it, the affections
(desire, joy, delight) run out upon it, where it is thus the case is
determined: Yea without controversy; but where shall we find such a man? it is
so far from being true, that there are such unregenerate men, that I believe
there never was such a man born: there are too many, who choose evil though they
know it to be evil, for the seeming advantages of profit or pleasure it brings
with it; but to choose evil as believing it to be good, and to rejoice and
delight in it as good and eligible for it self, is such an unregenerate State,
as the Devil himself never yet arrived at; for though he be a very wicked
Spirit, yet he is no Fool, or Sot, as those must be, who mistake evil for good
in such plain and palpable instances; the Heathens themselves at this rate were
all regenerate men, for their Consciences accused them for doing evil. Romans 2.
they knew good to be good, and evil to be evil, though they did not act
agreeably to this knowledge: there never was such a man as he describes, when
he tells us, Ibidem.
That sin comes to the Sinner, and says, art thou willing that I should rule?
Yes (says he) with all my heart, I like thy Commandments, and Government, I am
thine, and submit to thee to be at thy dispose, I here swear fealty and
allegiance to thee, etc. This Oath, etc. might very well have been spared, for
there is enough in all Conscience without it: and yet if this be the principal
difference between a regenerate and unregenerate man, that the unregenerate man
chooses sin as believing it to be good, and the regenerate man chooses sin,
though he knows it to be evil, it is plain, that the regenerate man is much the
worse, because his sins have the greatest aggravation that any sins are capable
of, which the sins of an unregenerate man have not, viz. that they are sins
against knowledge, and so according to our Saviors reasoning, this regenerate
man will be beaten with more stripes; I doubt not but in this description he
wrongs the unregenerate man very much, but yet he makes the regenerate man ten
times more the Child of wrath than the other.

But then Thirdly, The Law of sin has different workings in the people of God
than in others; this working of the Law of sin in the people of God, let it be
what working he will, methinks is an ill thing, and makes sanctification a very
sorry evidence, but let us hear how it is.

First, Where sin is committed industriously and designedly, there it is the
Law of sin, and which is peculiar to the Graceless: so that unless men be very
cunning at the trade of sin, and lay projects and designs of sinning, they are
not under the Law of sin, as it is peculiar to the Graceless; Grace is very
consistent with taking all fair opportunities of sinning, so we do not design
it before hand.

Secondly, When the temptation easily prevails, and there is little or no
opposition made to sin, then it is the Law of sin, as it works in the
unregenerate: this is an argument indeed that a man is a willing slave, but
when a man is conquered by a temptation, though he make some resistance, it is
an argument that sin is his Master, which rules and governs, especially if this
be often; and such a man surely is none of Christ's Freemen.

And therefore not to fail, Thirdly, When sin carries it in spite of all
opposition, then it is the Law of sin, and the power of sin: that is, against
all external discouragements, all the threatenings of the Law of God, the
Scepter of the Gospel, the love and mercy of God, or his wrath and justice, the
Death, Sufferings, Agonies, Wounds, Blood of Jesus Christ, the reproof of the
Word, Ministers, Christians; his own resolutions, vows, promises, purposes,
etc. So that it seems when sin carries it in despite of all external
oppositions only, it is the mark of an unregenerate man, but when it carries it
both against external and internal oppositions, that is a sign of a regenerate
man: for a regenerate man has the same external oppositions to preserve him
from sin, that an unregenerate man has; and besides these he has the internal
oppositions, the checks of his own Conscience, etc. which he says the
unregenerate man has not.

And fourthly, When it is sinning, and no sense of sin, no after repentance for
it, then it is the Law of sin: now what bad man is there, who does not at one
time or other repent of his sins, and complain of them, and how many are there,
that repent of their sins, and make large Confessions of them, and yet return
to them again: so that there are no men, but do at one time or other express
some sorrow for their sins (which he calls Repentance) and there are a great
many, who pretend thus to be sorry for their sins; who, it is to be feared, are
never the better men for it: and yet were there any such, who sin without any
sense of it, they would be much better than these regenerate men, who feel the
gripings of their Consciences for sin, and yet return to it.

The result is this, That there is no great matter to choose between the
regenerate and the unregenerate man, only (as they order the matter) the
regenerate man has the better name, but is the worse man: that if we come to
external evidences, the regenerate man has all the reason in the World to
fear, that he is unregenerate, and the unregenerate man has some little reason
to hope, that he is regenerate; and is not Sanctification an excellent mark now
of our Union to Christ, when a regenerate man may be full as bad or worse than
the unregenerate? Indeed it is wonderful to consider, how little a matter will
serve for an evidence of Grace (after all their talk of Sanctification) when
they come to administer comfort to distressed Consciences: Shephards Saints
Jewel, page 192.
Oh! says the Soul, I find sin prevail, and how can I be comforted! (not by
the mark of Sanctification sure!) Answ. I will subdue your iniquities, and cast
your sins into the midst of the Sea. Obj. But the Devil will be busy with me
wherever I go. Answ. God has said it, I will tread down Satan under your
feet. Obj. But I cannot go to God by prayer to fetch comfort: (Comfort? what
have thou to do with comfort? get quit of thy sins first, and then it is time
enough for comfort) Answ. Though it be so, yet believe and thou shall have thy
desire: (but I doubt the Soul that cannot pray, cannot believe neither) Obj.
But I am afraid I shall fall away from God (afraid of it? thou art fallen away
from God already, if sin prevail so much, for sin is the great Apostasy from
God) Answ. None can pluck thee out of Christ's hands, neither sin nor the Devil
(but how if they be not in Christ's hands yet, sin I doubt may keep them out,
and if God cut off barren branches from this spiritual Vine, there is some
danger that putrid and rotten branches will not escape) And God has said, I
have made an everlasting Covenant with thee, that I will not turn away from
thee to do thee good. Obj. This is good news, had I a right to the promise, but
alas! I cannot believe, and take a naked promise. Answ. Do thou desire to
believe and to have Christ? and say thus, If it were possible Christ and Heaven
should be separated, I would rather desire Christ without Heaven, than Heaven
without Christ. Obj. But this is a hard matter, and I cannot say I truly desire
Christ on such terms as I should (this saying is the best sign of Grace I have
met with yet; for it is an Argument he is an honest man, who will not
contradict the natural sense of his mind, and say he can do that, which is
impossible to be done: for it is a very odd proposal in order to comfort a poor
Soul, that he must be willing to be damned with Christ, before he must take
comfort in hopes of being saved by him) Answ. But is it the grief of thy heart,
that thou can not deny thy self? and desire thou rather than be separated
from Christ, to close with Christ upon any terms? Obj. Alas! I am so far from
being grieved as I ought, that I rather find a heart that will not grieve and
mourn for sin, etc. (certainly they are at cross purposes, their Objections and
Answers do so ill agree; what is matter for mourning for sin, man? Can thou
desire to have Christ upon any terms, though it be to be damned with him?)
Answ. Have thou any will to it? mark the place, and whosoever will, let him
take of the waters of life freely: not that every one that will have Christ,
shall have him, but art thou willing to part with thy sins? But the poor Soul
says again, I fear I shall never do this: But art thou willing that Christ
should make thee willing (against thy will) and pitch thee upon a promise, and
hold thee there: (for shame, poor Soul, refuse not this) then comfort thy self,
thou have a right to Gods promises. Thus this evidence of Sanctification is
dwindled away into a desire to be willing, nay into a desire to be made
willing; and he is a strange man, who cannot go so far.

But then fourthly I observe further, That when they have a mind to take down
the confidence of men, who are apt to presume too soon, that their condition is
good, they do so magnify the seize of Hypocrites, who shall never go to
Heaven, that it is impossible for any sanctified man to do more than an
Hypocrite may do; so that notwithstanding any evidences of Sanctification,
which he can discover in himself, for ought he or any body else can tell he may
be a Hypocrite still; which quite spoils the evidence of Sanctification,
because we cannot distinguish a sanctified man from a Hypocrite.

Thus for Example, One may plead, I Shephards sincere Convert, p. 94* etc.
have left my sins I once lived in, and am now no Drunkard, no Swearer, no
Liar: I answer, Thou may be washed from the mire (the pollution of the World)
and yet be a Swine in Gods account (which he proves from 2 Pet. 2. 20. where
the Apostle tells them, That if they have escaped the pollutions of the World
through the knowledge of Christ, and are again entangled therein, and overcome
(if they return to their old vices) then their latter end is worse than the
beginning, which is point blank contrary to what he affirms, That those who
have escaped these pollutions, and are not yet entangled again in them, may
notwithstanding that be Swine in Gods account, for so he adds, Thou may live
a blameless, innocent, honest, smooth life, and yet be a miserable Creature.
But I pray (says such a man) and that often, so thou may, and yet never be
saved: Isa. 1. 11. To what purpose is the multitude of your Sacrifices? To
great purpose sure, when they are offered by men of blameless, innocent,
honest, smooth lives, the want of which made those Sacrifices abominable to God.

But I fast sometimes; so did the Scribes und Pharisees twice a week, but it
was to devour Widows houses, which was not the fast of an honest innocent man:
but I hear the Word of God, and like the best Preachers; So did the stony
ground, who heared the Word with joy, and for a season believed; and this had
been well, and a good sign of Grace, if it had continued. I read the Scripture
often; so did the Pharisees, who were so perfect in the Bible, that Christ
needed but say, It has been said of old times, for they knew the Text without
intimation: Men of prodigious memories certainly, better than any Concordance;
but though Knaves may read the Scripture, and be never the better for it, yet
good men may read it to good purpose, and therefore I hope reading the
Scripture is no argument, that a man is a Hypocrite, because the Pharisees were.

But I am grieved and am sorrowful, and repent of my sins; so did Judas; but he
hanged himself, and that indeed is no repentance to life: But I love good men
and their company; so did the foolish Virgins; but they slept, and suffered
their lamps to go out, which I hope all that love good men do not: But God has
given me much knowledge; That thou may have, and never be saved: yes, and
twenty good things more, but if a blameless honest man have the keeping of this
knowledge, it is never the worse for him. But I keep the Lords day strictly; so
did the Jews, whom yet Christ condemned: Had he been as well acquainted with
the Scriptures as the Pharisees were, he would not have said, that the Jews
kept the Lords day; however this is one good thing, which does well in the
company of more, though it will not justify a man, when it is alone. But I
have many good desires and endeavors to get to Heaven; these thou and
thousands may have, and miss of Heaven: and yet when he was in a more gentle
humor, he told the poor doubting Soul, that desire, nay that a desire only to
desire at two or three removes, was enough.

But many do duties without life or zeal, I am zealous; so was Iehu (to destroy
the Worship of Baal, and to retain Ieroboams Calves) and so was Paul while a
Pharisee (in persecuting the Christian Church, and therefore an universal, and
religious, and well-governed zeal; for God can be no sign of Grace.) But I am
constant and persevere in godly courses; so did the young man, all these things
have I kept from my youth (only he left Christ for the sake of his riches, and
so did not persevere.) But some men are conscious to themselves of their own
hypocrisy, but I do all with a good heart for God: So thou may think of thy
self, and be deceived; (and if this be an objection, let a man have what marks
he will, the objection will still be good, and so all evidences signify
nothing; for after all it may be objected, That a man may be deceived in it,
and think he has these marks, when he has them not.) There is a way that
seems right to a man, but the end thereof is death, thou may live so as to
deceive thy self and others, and yet prove an Hypocrite: as if because some men
may think themselves good, who are in a bad way, no man could ever be sure,
that he is in the right; and thus farewell all evidences.

But after all this, it would be worth the while to know how to distinguish a
regenerate from an unregenerate man; and that he tells us may be done thus, An
unregenerate man, let him go never so far, do never so much, yet he lives in
some one sin or other; this now is very strange, What go never so far? and do
never so much? and yet live in some one sin or other? What live a blameless,
innocent, honest, smooth life, and yet live in some one sin or other? and yet
suppose he did, a regenerate man may be in captivity to the law of sin, and
pray what is the difference? but then an unregenerate man cannot be poor in
spirit, and so carried out of all duties to Christ: That is, if an unregenerate
man do good, he is conscious to himself that he does it, if he have a good
heart, he feels a good heart in himself, and in all he does, and therefore
feels not a want of all good, which is true poverty of spirit: So that
according to this discourse, the surest mark of a regenerate man is either to
have no good in himself, or if he have any, to be mistaken and think he has
none, either of which I think is a very odd sign of Grace.

But then an unregenerate man comes unto Christ, but he never gets into Christ,
never takes up his eternal rest and lodging in Jesus Christ only: I thought
coming had been believing, and that believing would have done the business, and
if so, God forbid that any man should be damned for want of that other Metaphor
of taking up his eternal rest and lodging in Christ: men in distress of
Conscience (that is, all unregenerate men under such distress) if they have
comfort from Christ they are contented, if they have Salvation from Hell by
Christ they are contented (and I think they have some reason then to be
contented) but Christ himself (that is, without comfort and without Salvation)
contents them not. Now to be contented with Christ without comfort and without
Salvation, is so far from being the mark of an unregenerate man, that I am not
yet satisfied, that it is the mark of an unreasonable man.

Now are not these men do you think great friends to sanctification, who make
all the parts of sanctification, the reformation of our lives, an innocent and
blameless Conversation, Fasting, Prayer, hearing, reading, conversing with good
men, zeal for God, perseverance in well doing, honest and sincere intentions in
all we do, no more than the marks of Hypocrites; and give no better marks of a
regenerate man than to be sensible of no good in himself, (and then he must
either have none, or be a Fool, though having none is the surest way not to be
sensible of it) and to take up his eternal rest in Christ, and to be contented
with Christ without Comfort and without Salvation.

And now I shall conclude this Section with a remarkable passage in the Sincere
Convert, whereby it will evidently P. 167.
appear, what these men think of sanctification: there we have an account what
course some men take to secure their eternal happiness: that when they find
themselves tired and weary of themselves, and hearing that only Christ can save
them, they go to Christ to remove those sins, which tired and loaded them, that
he would enable them to do better than formerly: if they get these sins subdued
and removed, and if they find power to do better, then they hope to be saved,
(here is the evidence of sanctification) whereas (as he adds) thou may be
damned, and go to the Devil at last, though thou do escape all the pollutions
of the World, and that not from thy self, and thy own own strength; but from
the knowledge of Jesus Christ, woe to you for ever if you die in this state
(with your sins mortified and subdued by Christ) and the reason is, because
this is to come to Christ to suck juice from him to maintain his own Berries (
his own stock of Graces) alas! he is but the Ivy, he is no member nor branch in
this Tree, and hence he never grows to be one with Christ. So that holiness and
obedience is no evidence of our Union to Christ, though we fetch strength from
Christ to do his will; we may only grasp about Christ all this while, as the
Ivy does about the Oak, but never be united to him, and become one with him: so
that now we must return where we began, and stick to the testimony of the
Spirit, without any external evidence, that, is to private Enthusiasms, for
sanctification can be no evidence of our Union to Christ.

Good God! Into what mazes and Labyrinths do these men lead poor distressed
Souls, they can direct them to no certain way of getting into Christ, nor how
to know whether they are in Christ or not: and now we may plainly see what
friends these men are to a holy life: they all agree that holiness is not
antecedently necessary to our Union with Christ, but they only pretend to make
it a necessary mark and evidence of our Union, and yet they will not allow it
this privilege neither to be a certain evidence of our Union to Christ; it may
prove us united to Christ, as the Ivy is to the Oak, not as a branch is united
to the Vine; and I hope this will justify any man's zeal against such opinions,
as undermine the very foundations of Christianity.

The Gospel method of Salvation is very plain and easy: those great Miracles
our Savior wrought, and his Resurrection from the Dead, are the foundation of
our Faith, a sufficient reason to believe that he came from God, and declared
his will to the World: a public profession of this Faith in our Baptism makes
us the visible members of his body, which is his Church; and a sincere
obedience to his Gospel makes a real Union between Christ and us, and entitles
us to all the promises of the Gospel: and every man may as certainly know,
whether he be thus united to Christ, as he can feel the motions of his own
mind, as he can know what he loves, and hates, and chooses, and what the course
of his life and actions are, and there is no need of any revelation, of any
private testimony of the spirit to assure men of this, no more than there is to
assure them of any thing, which is evident to their outward or inward senses.

The testimony of the Spirit concerns the general adoption of Christians for
the Sons of God, not to testify to any particular man, that he is a good
Christian, or in a state of Grace: that is, it is not a private, but a public
testimony given to the whole Christian Church: that Holy Spirit, which God
bestowed upon the Apostles and Primitive Christians, which enabled them to work
miracles, and to speak Languages which they had never learnt, and to Prophecy,
was a plain argument to all the World, that God now owned the Christians, not
the Jews, for his chosen and elect people, for his Sons and Children: for this
was the great dispute of those days, whether Jews or Christians were the Sons
of God, whether God now owned the Jewish or the Christian Religion, and the
Apostles decide this controversy by the testimony of the Spirit; for God could
not give a greater testimony to the Christian Church than the gift of the Holy
Spirit; for it was a plain argument, that he owned them for his Sons, when he
bestowed the Spirit of his Son on them: as the Apostle argues. Gal. 3. 2.
Received ye the Spirit by the works of the Law, or by the hearing of Faith?
That is, did God bestow his Spirit on you, while ye were Jews? or upon your
Conversion to Christianity? for if God bestowed his Spirit only on Christians,
this is a sufficient seal to the Christian Religion.

This is very plain and intelligible; the testimony of the Spirit assures us,
that all Christians are the Sons of God, and Heirs of his Promises, and every
man's own Conscience will tell him, whether he be a Christian, that is, whether
he heartily believe, and obey the Gospel of Christ, and herein consists our
Union to Christ, and fellowship with him: let us then leave those other dim
notions to men, who can believe, what no man can understand, who despise every
thing, that can be understood, as if it were no better than carnal reason.

CHAP. V. Concerning the Love of Christ to Believers.
SECT. 1.
I Have now finished the greatest part of my design, and shall discourse more
briefly of what remains. Next to our Union with Christ, follows our Communion
with him; for though Communion and fellowship in the Scripture notion of those
words signify no more, than what we call Union, as Chapter 4. Sect. 1. P. 186.
I have already proved, yet in these men's Divinity they are very different: our
Union to Christ is represented by our marriage to him, our Communion with him
by consequential, conjugal affections: the only thing I shall at present take
notice of for a Conclusion of all, is that mutual and reciprocal love, which is
betwixt Christ and Believers, Christ's love to Believers, and the Believers love
to Christ.

First, Christ's love to Believers: the Scripture does very justly magnify the
love of Christ, as the greatest example of goodness, that was ever known in the
World; and the greatest expression of the love of Christ was his dying for us:
he is that good Shepherd who gives his life for his Sheep. John 10. 11. and
our Savior himself tells us, greater love has no man than this, that a man
lay down his life for his friend: and therefore when the Apostle designed to
mention the greatest expression of Christ's Love, he instances in this. Ephesians. 5.
25. Husbands love your Wives, even as Christ also loved the Church, and gave
himself for it: and when the same Apostle represents the constraining power of
Christ's love to captivate our affections, and to engage us to live to him, he
argues from his love in dying for us, 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. For the love of Christ
constrains us, because we thus judge, that if one died for all, then were all
dead, and that he died for all, that they which live should not henceforth live
unto themselves, but unto him which died for them, and rose again: and the most
surprising circumstance of all, which gives a new luster to the love of Christ,
is that he died for us while we were Enemies. Romans 5. 6, 7, 8. For when we were
yet without strength in due time Christ died for the ungodly, for scarcely for
a righteous man will one die, yet peradventure for a good man some would even
dare to die, but God commends his love toward us, that while we were yet
Sinners, Christ died for us.

But though this be the greatest, it is not the only expression of Christ's
love; herein indeed was the love of Christ perfected that he died for us, but
he expresses the same good will in all the methods of his Grace and Providence:
for Christ being our Lord and Master, the most proper expression of his love to
us is in an easy and gentle Government, and a kind and watchful Providence,
not in such a fondness of passion, as is sometimes seen among equals, this Chapter
4. Sect. 1.
I told you was expressed by those metaphors of his being a Shepherd, a Husband,
a Head, a Friend: and our Savior assures us, that his yoke is easy, and his
burden light, that he is a mild and gentle Governor, meek and lowly in mind:
that he has declared to us the secrets of Gods Counsel concerning our
Salvation with the same freedom and plainness, that a man uses to his friend;
henceforth I call you not Servants, for the Servant knows not what his Lord
does, but I have called you Friends; for all things, that I have heard of my
Father, I have made known unto you: John 15. 15. He pities our weakness and
infirmities, and is ready to help and succor us; he is now ascended up into
Heaven, where he personally intercedes for us, and with his own hand dispenses
all those blessings to us, which we want and pray for in his name; he is a
gracious and merciful High Priest, who is touched with a feeling of our
infirmities, being in all things tempted like as we are, yet without sin. Hebr.
4. 15.

And now it is no wonder, if he, who died, and who intercedes for us, take
pleasure in good men, and dwell with them, as one friend dwells with another.
John 14. 21. He that has my Commandments, and keeps them, he it is that
loves me, and he that loves me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love
him, and will manifest my self unto him: and in Ver. 23. If a man love me, he
will keep my words, and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and
make our abode with him: That is, Christ will in a more peculiar manner be
present with such good men, who are careful in all things to obey him, and will
give very sensible demonstrations of his presence with them: not that he will
make any new revelations to them, for he has already revealed the whole mind
and will of God in such a plain and familiar manner, that every one may
understand it, who will but exercise the same reason in it, that he does to
understand the Laws of his Prince; but yet when a Soul is transformed into the
likeness and image of Christ, it many times feels such strong and vigorous
motions to that which is good, and such great and ravishing delights in all the
acts of Religion, as infinitely excel all the pleasures of sense, and are a
plain demonstration of a more peculiar presence of God in such a Soul; these
divine joys are by the Psalmist compared to the Feasts upon Sacrifices, Psalm
36. 8* They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy House, and
thou shall make them drink of the Rivers of the pleasures, that is, they shall
relish a^ great pleasure and satisfaction in the sense of thy goodness, and in
paying their just praises and acknowledgment to thee, as those do, who Feast
upon the Sacrifices, which are offered in the Temple: for it is very reasonable
to think, that a Soul, which is made one with God by a participation of his
nature, should feel such divine impressions from God, as may both quicken its
motions, and sweeten its work: there is a secret sympathy between things, which
are alike, two unisons will move, when either of them is touched, and two Souls
which are of the same make, and united by a strong and intimate friendship, do
many times feel each others passions at a distance, by a secret and
unaccountable power of nature; and can we think then, but that a Soul, which
heartily loves God, and passionately breaths after a greater likeness to him,
and fuller enjoyment of him, must needs sometimes feel such divine touches and
impressions as are the effects (if I may so speak) of a mutual love and
sympathy of natures: some such thing our Savior has promised, and good men
experience, not in equal degrees indeed, nor equally at all times, but in
proportion to their seize in true Piety and virtue, and to the present
frame and disposition of their own minds.

This is a short and true account of the love of Christ, which deserves forever
to be admired and adored; and it must needs be a very hearty trouble to all
good men to see so great and so generous a love so miserably abused and
misrepresented by childish and romantic descriptions: too many there are, who
cloth our Savior with all the passions and follies of mortal men, and think
they honor him very much, the more extravagant they make him in his love: It
were easy to expatiate in this argument, and to give such a character of the
love of Christ, as I believe, these very men will think profane, when they
find it in any Books, but their own; and possibly it might do good service to
Religion, and tend much to the honor of our Lord and Master to put them out of
conceit with it; but I fear the Reader would think me profane in doing it,
though in their own words, and therefore I shall choose rather only to take
notice of two things, which these men much insist on in their discourses of the
love of Christ, and so dismiss them.

First then, the love of Christ is a love to the Person of a Believer, without
considering any other qualifications, than that he is such an individual
Person; that is, the excellency of Christ's love consists in this, that he loves
for no reason; now I confess this is a wonderful love, but wherein the
excellency of it consists, I cannot see; I am sure we account that man a Fool,
who loves at this rate; we who are reasonable Creatures, think that we are
bound to govern all our actions and the passions of our mind too by reason, and
we account it a reproach to a man to act either against reason or without it,
to do any thing of which he cannot give a reasonable account; and how that
should come to be the perfection of the love of God, which is a reproach to
men, is above my apprehension. Indeed were this true, it would undermine the
very foundations of Religion; for the great end of Religion is to please God,
and to procure his love and favor, but if God and Christ love for no reason,
then it is a vain thing for us to think of pleasing God, or procuring his love
by any thing, we can do: whether we obey him, or disobey him, it is all one as
to this Case; for if he please to love us without any reason, our sins cannot
hinder it, and if it does not please him to love us, our Holiness and Obedience
cannot alter him: when our acceptance with God depends wholly upon a Sovereign
and unaccountable will, nothing we can do can either hinder or promote it, and
therefore all Religion is in vain.

The foundation of this mistake is a Philosophical nicety, that God must act
wholly from himself, and therefore must not be moved by any external cause,
whereas should he love us because we are holy and obedient to him, or hate us,
because we are wicked, his love and hatred would depend upon an external cause,
viz. the holiness or wickedness of Creatures, which unbecomes an Independent
being to depend upon any thing else: the sum of which reasoning is this, that
because God is the first cause of all things, on whom all other things depend,
and he on nothing, therefore he must love and hate his Creatures without any
reason but his own unaccountable will: for this is all the inconvenience they
can object, that when God loves or hates, rewards or punishes his Creatures,
the reason of this difference, he makes between his Creatures must be fetched
from the persons themselves, whom he thus loves or hates; and so it must of
necessity be, if he have any reason at all; for the reason of love or hatred
ought to be in the object, not in the person, who loves or hates: and yet in
propriety of speech God cannot be said to depend on his Creatures or any thing
without himself for the reason of his love or hatred, but his own nature is the
reason of it: he is infinitely holy, and therefore loves holiness and hates
sin, and his natural love to holiness is the reason why he loves holy men, and
his natural hatred to sin is the reason why he hates wicked men; his own
holiness is the reason why he loves holy men, but the holiness of a Creature is
the reason why he determines his love to any particular person, and if they
will call this a depending on Creatures, we must acknowledge that God does thus
depend on his Creatures in the administration of his Providence, in the
distributions of rewards and punishments, and he should not be wise, and holy,
and just, and good, if he did not, that is, if he did not put such a difference
between things and persons, as their natures require. It is a strange notion of
an Independent Being, that he must have no other reason for what he does but
his own arbitrary will, which is so far from being a perfection, that it
destroys all the other perfections of the divine nature.

Secondly, These men tell us too, that the love of Christ is immutable, that
having once fixed his love upon us though without any reason, he can never
alter: that sin it self cannot separate us from the love of Christ; as there
was nothing in us, that was the ground of his planting his love on us, so there
is nothing that shall be able to overturn the thoughts of his love, when once
they are fixed on us: (though this is no certain demonstration, for he who loves
for no reason may give over loving for none) if sin foreseen were not able to
hinder him from planting his heart on us, how then shall it (that is sin
committed) be able to overturn the thoughts of his heart, when once they are
fixed on us? this is a strong and fixed love indeed, which sin it self cannot
alter, but how wise and holy a love it is, let any man judge: herein Com. p. 158.
Dr. Owen tells us the depth of Christ's love is to be contemplated, that
whereas his holy Soul hates every sin, it is a burden, an abomination, a new
wound to him, and his poor Spouse, that is, sinful Believers are full of sin,
failings, infirmities, he hides all, covers all, bears with all, rather than he
will loose them. He adds indeed, by his power preserving them from such sins,
as a remedy is not provided for in the Covenant of grace: I suppose he means
the sin against the Holy Ghost, for there is a remedy provided for all other
sins in the Covenant of Grace: and all other sins a Believer it seems may be
guilty of, and Christ will hide all, cover all, rather than lose him: now this
is as down right Antinomianism, as ever Dr. Crisp, or Saltmarsh vented: There
have been and are to this day a great many wise and learned men, who contend
earnestly for the perseverance of the Saints, that those who are once in a
state of Grace, shall always continue so, but then they found this not on such
an immutable love, as sin it self cannot alter, for this is not reconcilable
with the holiness of the divine nature, nor with those threatenings in the
Scripture against such back-sliders; when the righteous man turns away from
his righteousness, and commits iniquity, and does according to all the
abominations that a wicked man does, shall he live? all the righteousness that
he has done shall not be mentioned; in his trespass that he has trespassed,
and in his sin that he has sinned, in them shall he die. Ezekiel. 18. 24. And if
any man turn back my Soul shall have no pleasure in him: which is a plain
demonstration, the truth of which is acknowledged by all sober Writers, that if
such men can be supposed to relapse into a sinful state, God also will cease to
love them; and therefore they found the immutability of Gods love to them, on
their perseverance in doing good: God loves all good men, but if they cease to
be good, he also must cease to love: and herein the immutability and
unchangeableness of Gods love consists, not that he always loves the same
Person, but that he always loves for the same Reason: for it is no perfection
to be so fixed in our kindness, that where we love once, we will always love,
whatever reason there may be to alter our affection; for by this means we may
love undeserving objects, which is the greatest degeneracy of love: but the
perfection of love consists in loving deserving objects, and in loving upon
honorable reasons, and the immutability of love consists in loving always for
the same reason, which is the only foundation of a virtuous immutability.

The reason of Christ's love to any Person is his Holiness and Obedience: if any
man love me he will keep my words, and my Father will love him, and we will
come unto him, and make our abode with him. John 14. 23. and the
unchangeableness of his love is seen in this, that he will continue to love,
while we continue to obey him: if ye shall keep my Commandments, that is,
continue to do so, ye shall abide in my love, I will continue to love you, as I
have kept my Fathers Commandments, and abide in his love. John 15. 10.

This is the immutability of the divine nature, that God always acts upon
steady and constant principles, that whatever changes there are in the World,
which may occasion very different administrations in his providence, yet he is
the same still, and never changes; whereas should God always love the same
Person, however he changed and altered, God must change and alter too, because
though he still loves the same Person, yet he must love for different or
contrary reasons, or for none at all; and that is the much greater change of
the two, to alter the reason, than the object of love: if God love a good man,
because he is good, and continue to love him, when he is wicked, his love is a
mutable thing, which can love goodness or wickedness, which can love for none,
or for contrary reasons; but if God always love true goodness, and good men,
and never loves any other, whatever change there be in Creatures, God is the
same still, and unchangeable in his love.

Thus you see, while these men pretend to admire and magnify the love of God
and Christ, they make it a despicable and worthless thing, such as a wise man
would be ashamed of, and such as a good man cannot be guilty of, to love for no
reason, and to continue to love contrary to reason: And as this is a great
reproach to God and to our Savior, so is it a great injury to men too; for it
must of necessity make them careless of pleasing God, and secure in their sins,
when they are persuaded that sin cannot hinder God from loving them, nor alter
his love toward them: that if ever he love them, it is for no reason but
because he will, and when once he is resolved upon it, the immutability of his
nature makes it necessary for him to continue to love: that now sin it self
cannot separate us from the love of God: if this were true, the worst man
living would have as much reason to be secure of Gods love, as the best men
have; nay, if the depth, and mystery, and glory of the love of Christ consists
in loving for no reason, or contrary to reason, the worse men are, the fitter
objects are they of the love of Christ.

SECT. II. Concerning the Believers love to Christ.
HAving showed you wherein the Love of Christ consists, I shall now consider,
what are those returns of love which we owe to our Lord and Savior: I take it
for granted, that all men who believe that Christ came into the World to save
Sinners, are of the Apostles mind, if any man love not the Lord Jesus, let him
be Anathema Maranatha; the only dispute is, how we are to express our love to
Christ: now love primarily signifies the inward affection of the mind, but is
made visible by outward actions: as for the affection of the mind, we must
consider, that Christ is our Superior, our Lord and Master, and therefore our
love to Christ ought not to express it self in a fond and familiar passion,
such as we have for our friends and equals, but in a great reverence and
devotion: Superiors must be treated with honor and respect, which requires
that we keep our distance; and therefore our love to our Parents and Superiors
is called honor in the fifth Commandment, Honor thy Father and thy Mother,
and the same religious affection to God which is sometimes called love, is at
other times called fear, which signifies a reverential love, or a love of
honor, and reverence, and devotion: which includes a great delight in the
thoughts of God, a devout sense of his greatness and Majesty, a great
admiration of his Excellencies and perfections, a religious awe and reverence
for him, and all those affections of the Soul, which are expressive of love and
honor.

As for the external expressions of our love, they are as various as the
expressions of honor are: and herein we must have a peculiar regard to the
nature and condition of the Person, and that relation we stand in to him: thus
Christ being the only begotten Son of God, we must have regard to the greatness
and excellency of his Person, that our returns may bear some proportion to it:
Christ having condescended to come into the World in our nature, to suffer and
die for us, it becomes us to admire his love and goodness, to extol and praise
him; to celebrate the memorials of his Death and Passion in that holy Feast,
which he has on purpose instituted to be a thankful remembrance of our
Crucified Lord: since he is our Mediator and Advocate, the truest expression of
our love and honor is to confide and trust in him, to depend on his
intercession for us, to offer up all our Prayers to God in his name, and to
expect an answer to our Prayers for his sake: and when we consider him as our
Prophet and Lawgiver, we must express our love to him in a steadfast belief of
his Gospel, and in a sincere and hearty obedience to all his Laws: love to
equals, who have no authority over each other, but what love gives them, makes
them very flexible and obsequious to each others desires and requests; but our
love to Superiors to our Prince or Parents includes obedience in its own
nature; and therefore this our Savior makes the principal trial of our love to
him; if you love me, keep my Commandments: and he that has my Commandments and
keeps them, he it is that loves me: but he that loves me not, keeps not
my sayings; you are my friends, if you do whatsoever I command you, Joh. 14.
15. 23, 24. and in Chap. 15. verse 14. for there cannot be a more proper
expression of our love and honor to a Lawgiver, than to obey his Laws. And
when we consider our Savior as our Guide and Example, the truest expression of
our love and honor is to imitate him, to live as he lived in the World: For
there is nothing more natural than to imitate what we love and reverence, which
is the plainest demonstration of the greatest honor, in that we think it our
perfection and happiness to be like our Savior.

And that which perfects our love, is an undaunted courage and resolution in
professing the Faith of Christ, whatever dangers and miseries it may expose us
to in this World; as St. John tells us, There is no fear in love, but perfect
love casts out fear, 1 John 5. 18. when we can hate Father and Mother, Wife
and Children, Brethren and Sisters for the sake of Christ, and sacrifice our
lives also for him rather than abjure his Gospel, or violate his Laws. These
are the proper expressions of our love to Christ, which are summarily
comprehended in believing his Gospel, and obeying it; for to be a true Lover of
Christ signifies neither more nor less than to be a good Christian, one who
diligently obeys all the Laws of the Gospel.

This is a short account of the Nature of our Love to Christ, which deserves a
larger Discourse; but I am now hastening to a conclusion, and what I have
already said, is so plain and easy, that it may be understood without a larger
explication. Our love to Christ is not such a subtle, airy, and metaphysical
notion, as some men represent it to be, but is a vital Principle of Action,
which governs our lives, and makes us fruitful in good works: And indeed of all
mistakes there is none more fatal and dangerous than to mistake the nature of
our love to Christ, because this is a practical Error, which has an immediate
influence upon our lives, and one mistake in the Principles or Rules of Action
is of greater consequence than a great many false Opinions, which end in
speculation: And therefore for a conclusion of all, I shall briefly take notice
of those mistakes some men have been guilty of concerning the nature and
expressions of our love to Christ.

And first, as they tell us that Christ falls in love with our Persons, without
considering any qualifications in us, which may make us fit objects of his
love, so in requital to him, we must love the Person of Christ. This I confess
is as certain and evident as any demonstration in Euclide, that if we love
Christ, we must love his Person, for the Person of Christ is Christ himself,
and if we love Christ, we must love him, and if they would be satisfied with
this, the dispute would be at an end; but this will not serve their turn, and
therefore we must examine what they mean by loving the Person of Christ: Now
they oppose our love to the Person of Christ to our love to him upon account of
his benefits, to our love to our selves, and to our duties.

First, we must love the Person of Christ in opposition to his benefits, that
is, we must not consider what advantages we do, or may receive from Christ,
what he ha^h done or suffered for us, but we must love his person purely for
himself without any other considerations to endear him to us: This matter is
very gravely stated and determined by * W. B. who tells us, W. B. Christ's
Personal excellency the object of our love, p. 15.
1. That it is a good and lawful thing to love Christ in reference to his
benefits. This is a very liberal grant, that gratitude which has hitherto been
accounted a great and excellent virtue, is now owned to be a lawful thing. 2.
It is our duty to love Christ's Person, to have our hearts drawn out with love
to the very Person of Christ. This is so certainly true, that even those men,
who love Christ for his benefits, love his Person. But 3. The excellency of
Christ's Person is not the object of my Faith, but Christ crucified. 4. Though
Christ crucified be the object of my Faith, yet the personal excellencies of
Christ are the object of my Love: yea it is a more excellent thing yet to love
the Person of Christ, than the benefits of Christ, a more excellent thing to
have my heart drawn out in love to the Person of Christ, than to have my heart
drawn out in love to him for his benefits. Now what can be the meaning of all
this, but that the excellency and perfection of our love to Christ consists in
loving him for no reason; the proper object and reason of love is Goodness; to
love that which is good for nothing is the folly and degeneracy of love, and it
is as foolish and impossible a task to love a Person, who has been good to us,
not because he has been good, but for no reason: Now this is the case here,
for if you separate the Person and Personal Excellencies of Christ from the
consideration of his benefits, his personal goodness from the expressions of
his love and goodness to our selves and others, it can be no object nor reason
of our love; for a goodness which does no good, or never did any, or which is
all one, is considered as doing none, is so far from being the object of our
love, that it is not the object of our understanding; for we cannot understand
what that goodness means, which never did any good. God challenges our love not
upon account of an imaginary goodness of Nature, which never did any good, but
for the real and sensible effects of his goodness in the works of Creation and
Providence, and the Redemption of Mankind by our Lord Jesus Christ; and Christ
himself challenges our love for the like reasons, because he has loved us, and
dyed for us, and now intercedes for us, and will at the last day bestow a Crown
of Glory and Immortality on us, but never, as I can observe, requires such an
abstracted and metaphysical love to his Person, without any respect to his
benefits.

Indeed these men seem not to understand themselves, when they oppose our love
to the Person of Christ to our love to him upon account of his benefits; for
when you inquire what this Person of Christ is, which is the object of our
love, then they describe his beauty and perfections, the comeliness of his
Person, the sweetness of his disposition, his great riches, that he is a good
suitable to all our wants, that in him we shall find whatever we need; if you
be poor, he is rich; if you be foolish, he is wise; if you be out of the way, I
am the way, says he; if you want a Director in the way, I am the Truth; if you
be in the dark, I am light; if you be wicked and sinful, he is Righteousness,
the Lord our Righteousness. Now either all this signifies the benefits we
receive by Christ, or it signifies nothing, and how then do these personal
Excellencies of Christ differ from his benefits? nay, when they direct us how
to attain to this love to the Person of Christ, they W. B. ibid.
bid us behold how Christ has loved us, and our persons, how many impediments
his love has broken thorough, how free it is, so free that there was no reason
for his love to us, neither likeness, benefit, nor love, etc. and they teach us
to use Christ much, if we would love his person: in any good thing you have,
the more you use it, the more you prize it, and the more you prize it, the more
you love it; if you have a good friend, the more you use him, the more you
prize him, and the more you prize him, the more you love him; if you have a
good Horse, the more you use him, the more you prize him, etc. if you have a
good Knife, the more you use it, etc. if you would love Christ, use him much,
and then the more you will prize him, and the more you will love him.

Now to let pass the rudeness of the Comparisons, this using Christ must
signify his benefits, and to prize and love Christ much, because we use him
much, is to love him, because we make great advantage of him, and receive many
benefits from him* which is neither better nor worse than to love him for his
benefits.

The occasion of all this contradiction and confusion in these men's discourses
is, that they do not distinguish between loving the benefit, and loving the
person upon account of his benefits: It must indeed be acknowledged to be very
brutish and barbarous to delight in the gift, and to take no notice of the
giver, to solace our selves in the effects of the divine bounty and goodness,
and to make no returns of love and thankfulness and duty to God: this is to
love the benefit, but not the person, who bestows this benefit: but those
blessings and benefits we receive from God and Christ are the true reasons, why
we are bound to love them, and could we be supposed to love God and Christ for
no reason, or, as these men phrase it, purely for themselves, without respect
to those many blessings we have received from them, it would not be accepted,
because this is not a reasonable love, but an unaccountable and foolish passion.

The love we owe to God and Christ is no other than gratitude, because God
loved us first, and our love is only a return of his; now thankfulness and
gratitude includes a necessary respect to those blessings and benefits we have
received: it is peculiar to God, who wants nothing, and can receive nothing
from his Creatures, to love without any respect to benefits, but the love of
indigent and dependent Creatures is a love of thankfulness, is a grateful
acknowledgment of those many blessings we receive from God.

Secondly, These men oppose our love to the person of Christ, to our love to
our selves: the first destroys the reason and the object of our love, and this
destroys the principle of it; it is made the Character of a wicked man,
Shephards sincere Convert, p. 4. ed. 1672.
who wants an inward principle of love to God and Christ, that though he seeks
to honor God never so much, yet all that he does, is done out of love to
himself, and therefore God abhors all that he performs. All the good things
such a wicked man does are for himself, either for self credit, or self-ease,
or self content, or self-safety; he sleeps, prays, hears, speaks, professes
for himself alone: hence acting always for himself, he commits the highest
degree of Idolatry -- makes himself a God, etc. Hence the same Author thus
exhorts Sinners; away then out of your selves to Page 84
the Lord Jesus -- go to him, and take hold on him, not with the hand of
presumption and love to thy self, to save thy self, but with the hand of Faith
and love to him, to honor him: and a little after describing the easy ways to
Heaven, Page 109.
all which lead to Hell, he reckons among the rest, the way of self-love,
whereby a man fearing terribly he shall be damned, uses diligently all means,
whereby he shall be saved. Here is the strongest difficulty of all, to row
against the stream, to hate a man's self (our own Souls and eternal Salvation)
and then to follow Christ fully: now is not this a hard case, that before we
can love God and Christ as we ought, we must root out the very principle of all
love; that we must learn to hate Salvation and eternal happiness, before we can
close with Christ for Salvation! he might well say, that this is the strongest
difficulty of all, for indeed it is impossible: love to our selves is the
foundation of our love to all other things, even to God himself; he that does
not love himself, will love nothing else; he that hates himself and his own
Soul, and despises eternal Salvation, will not care for Christ, nor Salvation
by him: all the motives and arguments of the Gospel to persuade us to love, and
fear, and obey God, are founded on self-love; for how is it possible, that we
should be affected with a due sense of Gods goodness to us? that we should be
excited and quickened by the hopes of such great rewards? that we should be
restrained and governed by the fears of punishment? if we did not love our
selves, if we did not care what became of us, whether we were happy or
miserable for ever.

It is a vain thing to persuade a man not to love himself, for this is as
natural and necessary, as it is for the fire to burn, or Sun to shine, it is
not matter of our choice, it is not in our power to do otherwise; and all that
such discourses as these can do, is either to make men Hypocrites, to pretend
to do that which they cannot do; or to make honest men, who cannot thus cheat
and delude themselves, despair of their Salvation, because they cannot find
themselves contented without Salvation, that Christ without Comfort and without
Salvation cannot satisfy them.

It is true, when men set up self in opposition to God, when self-love tempts
them to disobey God, to despise his Counsels, to renounce their Faith and
Religion, this is a very vicious and mistaken self-love, such men neither love
themselves nor God in a proper sense, because it is our interest as well as
duty to obey God: such men are Idolaters, as our Author speaks, because they
set up self above God, and in opposition to him; but when our love to our
selves teaches us to love God, and in all things to submit our selves to his
will and pleasure, we do, as we ought to do; and they who separate our love to
God from our love to our selves, from the care of our own happiness and
Salvation, do plainly declare, that they neither understand the nature of man,
nor the Gospel of Christ.

Thirdly, They oppose our love to Christ to our own duties, that is, they
oppose our love to Christ to the most proper and natural expression of our love
to him: herein Dr. Owen places the chastity of our affections to Christ,
Communion, p. 165.
(which you know is a great marriage duty) in not taking any thing (as our own
righteousness) into our affections and esteem for those ends and purposes, for
which we have received Christ: and God forbid, that any Christian should; for
our own righteousness and duties cannot be our Mediators and Advocates, cannot
expiate for our past sins, nor merit Heaven for us, which Christ has done:
what then is the difference? why it is only this, that the Dr. places the
Righteousness of Christ in the room of our righteousness, to be not only the
foundation, but the condition of the Covenant of Grace, and then makes it an
expression of our chaste affections to Christ, quite to thrust out our own
righteousness, and to allow it no place in our Religion: he first makes Christ
all to us, (more than ever Christ intended to make himself) and leaves no room
for any thing else, and then warns us upon our vow of Chastity not to take any
thing into Christ's place; whereas, as he has ordered the matter, we must take
our own righteousness into Christ's place, or else cast it quite away, for there
is no other place left for it: what he alleges for this, I have sufficiently
considered already, and shall not now repeat it; but is it not very strange,
that when our Savior has made our obedience the great and principal
expression of our love to him, these men should make such a competition between
our love to Christ, and our obedience? should put such jealousies into peoples
heads, what great danger there is of their own duties and righteousness, lest
they should prove like foolish lovers, who when they are to Shephards sincere
Convert, page 197.
woo for the Lady, fall in love with the Handmaid, that is only to lead them
to her: So men fall in love with, and dote upon their own duties, and rest
contented with the naked performance of them (that is, with doing good) which
are only Handmaids to lead the Soul unto the Lord Jesus Christ: is not this
the ready way to persuade people, that our love to Christ consists in something
more refined and spiritual than obedience? which will quickly teach them to
love Christ without obeying him, and not run the hazard of doting and resting
on duties. No man that understands the Gospel of Christ, can think that his own
righteousness and obedience can merit Heaven; when we have done the best we
can, we must acknowledge our selves to be unprofitable Servants, who have done
but our duty; and must ascribe the praise and glory of all to the Grace of God
in and through our Lord Jesus Christ, who pardons our past sins, and our
present infirmities, and bestows such great rewards on us, as we could never
deserve; and if this will not preserve us from doting and resting on duties,
there is no other remedy, but to let them quite alone, since it is so dangerous
to meddle with them: and yet if we believe Mr. Shephard, this will not secure
us; for it is one thing to trust to be saved by duties, another thing to rest
in duties; Sincere Convert* page 170.
a man trusts unto them, when he is of this opinion, that only good duties can
save him; a man rests in duties, when he is of this opinion, that only Christ
can save him, but in his practice he goes about to save himself: that is, does
all the good he can, with as much vigor and earnestness as if we were to merit
Heaven by it, and then thinks to make amends for this ungodly resting in duties
by acknowledging, when he has done all, that he is an unprofitable servant.
But the mystery of this will appear more in what follows.

Thus you see what the object of the Saints love is, the very person of Christ,
in opposition to his benefits, in opposition to self-love, in opposition to
duties: let us now inquire, Secondly, How they express their love to the person
of Christ, and that consists in preferring Christ above all, in admiring his
beauty and excellencies and perfections; the I. O. Com. p. 63.
Soul takes a view of all that is in the World, the lusts of the flesh, etc.
and sees it all to be vanity. -- It views also legal righteousness,
blamelessness before men, uprightness of conversation, duties upon conviction,
and counts them all to be loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ.
-- Beloved peace, beloved natural relations, beloved wisdom and learning,
beloved righteousness, duties, all loss compared with Christ. * They value him
Ibid. page 154.
above all other things and persons; they value him above their lives; they
value him above all spiritual excellencies, and Page 140.
all other righteousness whatever. * He is their joy, their Crown, their
rejoicing, their life, food, health, strength, desire, righteousness,
salvation, blessedness: now who can desire more than this? and yet if we
examine the meaning of it, it will appear to be a mistaken and useless passion,
such as our Savior will not approve, nor accept: I have * already Chap. 4.
Sect. 2.
showed you, what these men mean by the person and personal excellencies of
Christ, that whatever is spoken of Christ, whether in respect of his Gospel and
Revelations, or his propitiation and Sacrifice, or his mediation and
intercession for us, these men convert into personal Graces, his personal
fullness, and righteousness, and wisdom, etc. which we must immediately derive
from the person of Christ; and this is the person of Christ, which these men so
much admire, and prize, and value, above all other things in the World, a
Person in whom there is all fullness, righteousness, life, power, beauty, and
every thing that a Sinner wants; this is the person, whom they prefer before
all legal righteousness, spiritual excellencies, duties, obedience, before the
love of God himself, which is by these men accounted no better than a legal
righteousness; the meaning of all which is, that they prefer the person of
Christ, which has such a perfect righteousness for them, and will save them
without requiring any legal conditions of them, infinitely before the Religion
and Gospel of Christ, before obedience to his commands, before the love and
fear of God: so that the foundation of their love to Christ is a fond
imagination, that he will save them by his righteousness without any
righteousness and holiness of their own; this makes them so fond of the person
of Christ, to call him their joy, and their Crown, their life, food, health,
strength, righteousness, because they look upon him as a refuge and Sanctuary
for the wicked and ungodly, where the greatest, the oldest, the stubbornest
transgressor may shelter himself from the wrath of God; and I have some reason
to think, that Christ will not much prize and value such devoto's as these, nor
their obsequious flatteries or praise.

And yet herein the devotion of these men consists, in admiring, prizing,
valuing, the person of Christ: this is that * Evangelical Righteousness, we
must Shephards sincere Convert, page 173*
gain by duties, more prizing of acquaintance with, desire after, loving and
delighting in Union with the Lord Jesus Christ: a moral man, who rests in
duties (that is, who does what God commands him, and expects to be saved by
Christ) may grow in legal righteousness, that is in true holiness and piety,
but this will not avail, unless we grow in this Evangelical Righteousness: this
is Page 178.
the great end of duties to carry us to the Lord Jesus Christ the only Savior:
hear a Sermon to carry thee to Jesus Christ: fast and pray, and get a full tide
of affections in them to carry thee to the Lord Jesus Christ, that is, to get
more love of him, more acquaintance with him, more Union with him: so sorrow
for thy sins, that thou may be more fitted for Christ, that thou may prize
Christ the more: use thy duties as Noah's Dove did her Wings, to carry thee to
the Ark of the Lord Jesus Christ: -- Or as it is with a poor man, that is to go
over a great water for a treasure on the other side, though he cannot fetch the
Boat, he calls for it, and though there be no treasure in the Boat, yet he
uses the Boat to carry him over to the treasure: so Christ is in Heaven, and
thou on Earth, he does not come to thee, and thou can not go to him, now call
for a Boat: though there is no grace, no good, no salvation, in a pithless
duty, yet use it to carry thee over to the treasure, the Lord Jesus Christ.
When thou come to hear, say, Have over Lord by this Sermon, when thou come
to pray, say, Have over Lord by this Prayer to a Savior, etc. So that it
seems, the whole business of our love to Christ, and Evangelical Righteousness,
consists in some flights of fancy and imagination, in admiring and valuing the
person of Jesus Christ, in getting an acquaintance with him, and Union to him;
and the business of all Religion is to have over to Christ, that we may love
and prize his person and personal Righteousness above all things in the World:
It is not so much the business of Sermons to acquaint us with the nature and
attributes, works and providence of God, and to instruct us in our duty to
him, and to encourage us to the practice of it by all the motives and arguments
of the Gospel, as to have over to Christ, to acquaint us with his fullness, and
Righteousness, and alsufficiency to save us without such a legal Righteousness
of our own: the design of Prayer is not so much to affect our Souls with a
sense of the divine Majesty and greatness, to worship and adore the great
Creator of the World, and to express our trust and affiance in him; as to have
over to Christ, to fetch pardon, and life, and health, and Righteousness from
him: that sorrow for sin is not so much to imbitter sin to us, and to confirm
and strengthen our resolutions against it, as to teach us to prize and value
the person of Christ more who is our Righteousness: in a word, the nature and
design of Religion is now changed from being the homage and worship of God, the
certain means of pleasing him, and transforming us into his nature and
likeness, which is the natural end of Religion, into a Cock-Boat, or Skuller,
to wast us over to Christ.

Here we see the true reason, why these men do so much despise morality in
comparison with those Gospel duties of hearing Sermons, and Prayer, and
Confession, and Humiliation, and Fasting, etc. Because as they handle the
matter, the practice of moral virtues cannot have us over to Christ, cannot
apply the Righteousness and fullness of Christ to us, nor ravish our fancies
with glorious images and Idaeas of his person; and since all the duties of
Religion, are such pithless things, which have no grace, no good, no salvation
in them, but as they have us over to Christ, poor morality must needs be a
worthless thing.

Thus I have finished my designed task, and upon a review of it, it makes me
amazed to think, how strangely these men have transformed the Religion of our
Savior, and disfigured the Gospel of Christ; how they have undermined the
fundamental design of the Gospel, which is to make men good and virtuous and
like to God: how they have misrepresented the ends of Christ comeing into the
World, and abused his expiation and Sacrifice, and Righteousness, and
Intercession to the Patronage of Vice and Wickedness; how they have laid snares
to betray some men to a licentious life, and to entangle others in endless
troubles and perplexities of mind: how under a pretense of advancing the person
of Christ, they have in effect through ignorance, and mistake, and want of
consideration (for I am not willing to suspect any worse cause) banished his
Religion out of the World: I have faithfully and impartially stated the case,
examined their proofs from Scripture and reason, and the result of all is no
more but this, that the only way to please God and to save our Souls, is to
obey the Precepts of the Gospel, trusting in the mediation of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who having perfected the work of our redemption, is become the Author
of Eternal Salvation to all them that obey him.

FINIS.

