SERMONS Preached upon Several Occasions.

Some of which were never before Printed.

By W. SHERLOCK, D. D. Dean of St. Paul's, Master of the Temple, and Chaplain
in Ordinary to his Majesty.

LONDON, Printed for William Rogers at the Sun over against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleetstreet. 1700.

TO THE READER.
ALL the Account I have to give of publishing this Volume of Sermons, is only
this; that most of them were printed before by public Authority, or by such
Applications as to me were equivalent to Commands: And my Bookseller having a
mind to reprint those Sermons which he had an interest in, desired me to add
some few more, to make a just Volume: The choice I have made of such as I have
added, was not for the sake of any curious Composition, or new Conceits, much
less for Wit and Satyr; But I chose such as I hoped might be most useful in
such an (...) as this; And if they shall do any good, which I heartily beg of
God they may, I have all that I aimed at.

Will. Sherlock.

ERRATA.
PAge 25. line 3. for been treated, read be entreated, p. 44. f. indispesanble
r. indispensible. p. 46. l. 27. f. owes, r. our. p. 193. l. ult. for in r. and
p. 239. l. 18. (...). p. 404. l. 21. f. they. r. the. p. 413. l. 3. f.
whenever, r. whencesoever. ^p. 485. l. 8. f. nor, r. not. p. 526. l. 3. r.
one thing. r. Sermon 18 instead of 19.

The CONTENTS.
THE Nature and Means of Church-Unity. Sermon I. 122. Psalm. 6, 7. Pray for the
Peace of Jerusalem: they shall prosper that love thee. Peace be within thy
Walls, and Prosperity within thy Palaces. The faithful and wise Servant; a
Funeral-Sermon. Sermon. II. 24. Matthew. 45, 46. Who then is a faithful and wise
Servant, whom his Lord has made Ruler over his Household, to give them meat in
due season? Blessed is that servant, whom his Lord, when he comes, shall find
so doing. The Measures of Providence toward the Church. Sermon. III. 77. Psalm.
10, 11, 12. And I said this is my infirmity; but I will remember the Years of
the right hand of the Most High. I will remember the works of the Lord: surely
I will remember thy wonders of old. I will meditate also of all thy works, and
talk of all thy doings. The Temptation of Christ in the Wilderness. Sermon. IV.
4. Matthew. 1. Then was Jesus led up of the Spirit into the Wilderness to be
tempted of the Devil. The Charity of lending without Usury. Sermon. V. 4. Luke
35. But love your enemies -- (and do good, and lend, hoping for nothing again)
and your reward shall be great, and ye shall be the children of the Highest,
for he is kind to the unthankful and to the evil. A wounded Spirit an
unsupportable Evil. Sermon. VI. 18. Prove. 14. The Spirit of a Man will sustain
his infirmity; but a wounded Spirit who can bear? St. Paul' s Choice, a Funeral
Sermon. Sermon. VII. 1 Phil. 23, 24. For I am in a strait betwixt two, having a
desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which is far better. Nevertheless to
abide in the flesh is more needful for you. A Sermon upon the Queen's Death.
Sermon. VIII. 39. Psalm. 9. I was dumb, and opened not my mouth, because thou
did it. The Nature and Measure of Charity. Sermon. IX. 2 Cor. 8. 12. For if
there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a Man has, and
not according to that he has not. The danger of corrupting the Faith by
Philosophy. Sermon. X. 2. Col. 8. Beware lest any man spoil you through
Philosophy and vain deceit, after the traditions of Men, after the rudiments of
the World, and not after Christ. TheFolly and Unreasonableness of Deism. Sermon.
XI. 14. Joh. 1. Ye believe in God, believe also in me. The Language and
Interpretation of Judgments. Sermon. XII. 6. Micah 9. The Lord's voice cries
unto the City, and the Man of wisdom shall see thy name. Hear ye the rod, and
who has appointed it. The Divine Presence in Religious Assemblies. Sermon. XIII.
96. Psalm. 9. O worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness. The Use of Music in
Religious Worship. Sermon. XIV. 81. Psalm. 1, 2. Sing aloud unto God our
strength, make a joyful noise unto the God of Jacob. Take a Psalm, and bring
hither the Timbrel, the pleasant Harp, with the Psaltery. The nature and evils
of a vicious Self-love. Sermon. XV. 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2. This know also, that in the
last days perilous times shall come: for Men shall be lovers of their own
selves. The Reasonableness of Faith, and the Preference of unseen things. Sermon.
XVI. 2 Cor. 4. v. 18. While we look not at the things which are seen, but at
the things which are not seen: for the things which are seen, are temporal, but
the things which are not seen, are eternal. The danger of confounding the
Distinctions of Good and Evil. Sermon. XVII. 5. Isa. 20, 21. Woe unto them that
call evil good, and good evil; that put darkness for light, and light for
darkness; that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter. Woe unto them that
are wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their own Sight. The Progress of
Wickedness, and the Difficulties thereof. Sermon. XVIII. 5. Isa. 20, 21. Woe unto
them that call evil good, and good evil; that put darkness for light, and light
for darkness; that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter. Woe unto them
that are wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their own sight.
To the Right-Honourable, Sir John Chapman, LORD MAYOR OF THE City of LONDON.
My Lord,
IN obedience to the Order I received from your Lordship and the Court of
Aldermen, I Present you with this plain Sermon; the whole Design of which is,
not to debate any thing, nor to determine on which side the Truth lies, in
those warm Disputes which have been among us; but to convince all those, who
Love and Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem, how many Controversies there are,
which should be laid aside without Disputing, and how a little condescension to
each other, may either happily Unite us into one Communion, or at least Teach
us to Live together in Love and Charity, notwithstanding some different
Apprehensions of Things; and I hope so Charitable a Design as this, will raise
no new Disputes and Quarrels among us.

That GOD would preserve his Church, restore Peace and Unity among Christians,
bless this Great and Populous City, and direct your Lordship in the Government
of it, in these difficult Times, is the hearty Prayer of,

MY LORD, Your Lordship's Most Obedient Servant, WILL. SHERLOCK.

SERMON I.
Preached before the Lord Mayor, at Guildhall-Chappel, on Sunday, November 4.
1688.
CXXII. PSALM 6, 7. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that
love Thee. Peace be within thy Walls, and Prosperity within thy Palaces.


THough the particular time and occasion of Penning this Psalm is uncertain,
yet so much is plain, that it was after David had settled the Ark at Jerusalem,
and made that City the place of God's House, and of Religious Worship, and the
Seat of Justice and Judgment. There was the House of God, verse 9. that is,
though the Temple was not yet built, if this Psalm was composed by David, as
the Title of it signifies it was, yet there was the Tabernacle and the Ark of
God, which formerly was in Shiloh, and afterward removed from one place to
another, till David settled it in Jerusalem: Thither all the Tribes of Israel
were to resort three times a year to worship God before the Ark of the
Testimony, 4 ver. There was the Imperial Seat, where David had built his Throne
and Palace, and where his Posterity were to dwell and govern Israel; and
therefore it was the Seat of Justice too, as that must be, where the Kings
Throne and the House of God was placed. There are set thrones of judgment, the
thrones of the house of David, 5. ver. These were the peculiar Privileges of
Jerusalem, above any other City in Jury. This was the reason of that peculiar
affection and passionate concern, which David had himself, and exhorts all
others to express for Jerusalem, that he greatly rejoiced to go thither, and to
continue there. I was glad when they said unto me, Let us go into the house of
the Lord; our feet shall stand within thy gates, O Jerusalem. That he exhorts
all people to pray for the peace and prosperity of Jerusalem, and promises a
Blessing to those who love it; as it is in my Text, Pray for the peace of
Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love thee; peace be within thy walls, and
prosperity within thy palaces. All this was not for the sake of the material
Buildings, the beauty of the place, or the convenience of its situation, but
because it was the Center of Unity; Which is builded as a City that is compact
together, whither the Tribes go up, the Tribes of the Lord, unto the Testimony
of Israel, to give thanks unto the name of the Lord, 3. and 4. ver. Which shows
in what respect he commends Jerusalem, that it is built as a City, which is
compact together; not with regard to the Uniformity and regular Order and Union
of its material Buildings, but that it was the Center of a Religious Unity and
Order in Worship, where all the Tribes of Israel met and united in the same
Acts of Worship and Praise to God. There was the House of God, there were the
set Thrones of Judgment. So that to Love Jerusalem, to Pray for the Peace and
Prosperity of it, is to love the House, the Worship, the Name of God; to love
and pray for the Unity, Happiness, and Prosperity of the Church, for the
flourishing State of Religion, and the peaceful Opportunities of Worshipping
God in his Holy Temple, together with the equal and impartial Administration of
Justice, which is so much for the Public Good, to promote the Temporal and
Eternal Happiness of Men, that our Love to Mankind, but especially our Love to
the Brethren, as well as our Zeal for God's Glory and Worship, requires this of
us; For my Brethren and Companions sake, I will now say, Peace be within thee:
Because of the House of the LORD our GOD, I will seek thy good, v. 8, 9.

Thus I have given you a very plain and easy Exposition of this whole Psalm,
and therein have sufficiently Explained my Text. I have but one thing more to
add, to make way for my intended Discourse, and that is, to show you, that this
Exhortation does directly, and not merely by Accommodation and Analogy concern
Us, as well as it did the Jews.

For Jerusalem was but a Type of the Christian Church, as the carnal Israel, or
the carnal Seed and Posterity of Abraham were of true and sincere Christians,
who are the Children of Abraham, by Faith in Christ: And therefore St. Paul
expressly distinguishes between the earthly Jerusalem, and the Jerusalem which
descends from above, 4. Gal. 25, 26. For this Agar is Mount Sinai in Arabia,
and answers to Jerusalem, which now is, and is in bondage with her Children;
but Jerusalem which is above, (or from above, that is, the Christian Church) is
free, which is the Mother of us all. Which in 12. Heb. 22. he calls Mount Sion,
the city of the living GOD, the heavenly Jerusalem. And 3. Rev. 12. it is
called, The city of GOD, the new Jerusalem, which comes down out of heaven
from GOD. And 21. Rev. 2. The new Jerusalem coming down out of heaven from GOD,
prepared as a bride adorned for her husband: Which is a Description of the most
reformed and purified state of the Christian Church on Earth. So that this
Exhortation, To Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem, does most properly belong to
Christians, because the Christian Church is the true Jerusalem, the new, the
holy Jerusalem, descending out of Heaven from GOD, v. 10.

By this time, I suppose, you understand the meaning of my Text, and how much
we are concerned in it; and there are two parts observable in the words: 1. The
Duty to Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem, or of the Christian Church; Peace be
within thy Walls, and Prosperity within thy Palaces. 2. The Encouragement to
this, They shall prosper that love thee.

It is the first of these I shall at present speak to, The Duty to Pray for the
Peace of Jerusalem; wherein I shall consider two things.

1. What we must Pray for. 2. How necessary Prayer is, to obtain these
Blessings.
I. What we must pray for: Peace and Prosperity. Peace be within thy Walls, and
Prosperity within thy Palaces.

Now the Peace of the Church signifies two things:

1. The Unity and Agreement of Christians among themselves. 2. The Preservation
of the Church from external Oppressions and Persecutions.
1. The Unity and Agreement of Christians among themselves: When they profess
the same Faith, and join in the same Worship; when they love like Brethren, and
have a tender affection and sympathy for each other, as Members of the same
Body: This all Christians confess to be a great and necessary Duty, and pretend
to lament the many scandalous Dissentions and Divisions of the Christian Church.

This I am sure, that though Divisions and Dissentions are destructive to all
Societies, yet there is no Society suffers so much by it as the Christian
Church: This destroys Love and Charity, which is the true Spirit of the Gospel,
and the Badge and Cognizance of our Profession; By this shall all men know that
ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another. This turns the Christian Church
into a School of wrangling Disputes, and makes men more concerned what they
believe, than how they live; this gives great offense to the World,
representing the Christian Faith as very doubtful and uncertain, and
Christianity it self as a great Disturber of the Peace of Mankind; this
overthrows all Government and Discipline in the Church, and makes its Censures
despised and scorned, when the most profligate Sinners can shelter themselves
in a Schism, and palliate or expiate their other Crimes by a factious Zeal; and
therefore, if ever we desire to see Christianity flourish, we must Pray
heartily for Peace and Unity among Christians.

But that we may the better understand what we are to Pray for, let us briefly
enquire wherein the Unity of the Church consists; and that is in the Unity of
Faith, the Unity of Communion, and the Unity of Love and Charity.

1st. Unity of Faith: Whereby I do not understand, that all Christians must
agree in all the Opinions and Speculations of Religion; it would be well if it
could be so; but this can never be, while men have such different
Understandings and Abilities, such different Skill and Opportunities of
enquiry; but the Unity of Faith is secured by an Agreement in all the
Fundamental Articles of Religion, though a little varied in some nicer
Speculations; which are like the different Features in men's Faces, which
distinguish them from one another, but do not alter the Human Shape: And this
is the difference between the Disputes which divide Papists and Protestants,
and the Disputes of Protestants among themselves: The first subvert the
Foundations of Christian Faith and Worship, and therefore these Differences can
never be Accommodated and Reconciled; they will not part with their Errors, and
we must not embrace them, if we love our Souls; for as dear a thing as Peace
is, we must not part with Truth for Peace. But now the Disputes among all that
are allowed to be Protestants, whatever mistakes there may be on any side, do
not overthrow any necessary Article of the Christian Faith; and therefore the
Unity of the Faith may be secured amidst all these Disputes. Some of these
Disputes are only inconvenient Modes of speaking, and the difference is only in
Words, when both Parties really mean the same thing; which, I believe, if all
Heat and Passion were laid aside, would in a great measure appear to be the
true State of that Protestant Controversy about Justification by Faith alone.
Others are mere Philosophical Disputes, in which the Christian Faith is not
peculiarly concerned, for they have been, and are disputed in all Religions;
such as the Controversy about God's Eternal Decrees, and the Power and Efficacy
of Nature and Grace; which is only a reviving of that old Philosophical Dispute
about Necessity and Fate, and God's concourse with second Causes to produce
their Effects. And thus it is in some other Cases. Now methinks such Disputes
as these, which do not properly belong to the Christian Faith, should not
divide the Christian Church: Let men dispute about them as Philosophers; but as
Christians, let it suffice them to believe what Christ and his Apostles have
plainly taught us; t at is enough to carry us to Heaven; and methinks it should
be enough to make us agree in the Way thither.

As to Explain this more particularly, but very briefly: There is no good
Protestant but will confess, That we are Justified only by the Merits of
CHRIST's Death and Sacrifice, as the only Expiation and Atonement for our Sins.
That no works of Righteousness which we can do, can make Satisfaction to God
for our Sins, nor merit Eternal Life, which is the Gift of God. That Christ is
our only Savior, and that he is the Savior only of his Body or Church. That
we are incorporated into the Body of Christ, and put into a state of
Justification, by Faith and the Christian Sacraments. That no impenitent
unreformed Sinner, though he do profess to believe in Christ, and be baptized,
shall be saved by Him; and therefore though Repentance and a Holy Life do not
merit the Pardon of Sin, nor Eternal Rewards, yet they are necessarily required
in all those who shall be forgiven and saved by Christ. This I say, all good
Protestants agree in, and all this is plainly taught in Scripture; and whoever
believes this, and practices accordingly, shall certainly be saved: And what
need is there then of reducing all this into Artificial Schemes, wherein Men's
Fancies and Conceits differ? What necessity is there of disputing what the
Office of Faith, or what the Efficacy of Works is in our Justification, when we
all agree that we are saved only by the Mercy of God, and the Merits of Christ
through Faith in his Blood, and the Exercise of Repentance and a holy Life? To
understand the reason and order of things, conduces much to the beauty and
perfection of Christian Knowledge; but Men may be saved, and the Peace of the
Church better secured, without such particular Determinations.

Thus all good Protestants agree, that all God's Works are known to him from
the foundation of the World: That Christ is the Lamb slain from the foundation
of the world: That God knows who are his, and always did so: That we are
predestined to the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself, according
to the good pleasure of his will, to the praise of the glory of his grace,
wherein he has made us accepted in the beloved: That we are predestined
according to the purpose of him, who works all things according to the
counsel of his own will, 1. Ephesians. 5, 6, 11. That when God comes to judge the
World, he will appear infinitely just, and good, and merciful: That bad men
shall have no reason to complain of God, and that good men shall have nothing
to arrogate to themselves. This secures the Glory of God; of his Wisdom,
Goodness, Justice, Power, and Sovereignty; and what need is there to enquire
any farther into the Divine Decrees, than the Scripture has revealed; in the
particular explication of which, when men follow their own Fancies, they vastly
differ from each other, to the great disturbance of the Peace of the Church? We
are assured by plain Testimonies of Scripture, That God desires not the death
of a Sinner, but rather that he should return and live: That our destruction is
of our selves: That all the good we do, is wholly owing to the Grace of God,
who works in us both to will and to do of his own good pleasure: That all the
evil we do, is owing to our selves: That every man is tempted, when he is drawn
away of his own lust, and enticed; then when lust has conceived, it brings
forth sin; and sin, when it is finished, brings forth death. This we all
agree in, and this attributts the glory of all the good we do, to God; and the
shame of all the evil we do, to our selves; this encourages us to do good in a
confident assurance of the Divine Grace; and teaches bad men, that they must
not think to excuse their wickedness by charging it on God: And this is all
that is necessary for us to know, because it is all that is needful to the
purposes of Religion, and a holy Life.

But when men frame this into Philosophical Hypotheses, they then divide as far
from each other, as East and West; and all the attempts of reconciling them is
vain and fruitless, for there is no Medium to unite in. The only way to Peace,
is to silence all these Disputes, as matters which Mankind will never agree
about, and wherein Religion is no more concerned, than the Government of
Kingdoms or States; and on which the Salvation of our Souls no more depends,
than the conduct of our Secular Affairs, or the preservation of this Mortal
Life: For the dispute about Decrees; Predestination; God's Power over our
Wills; how God and Creatures produce the same Effect; what belongs to God, and
what belongs to the Creature in every Action, (since in him we live and move);
concerns every thing else as well as Religion; and yet in all other cases, men
let Philosophers dispute these Points, and quietly go about their Business, and
do what is fit to be done, as if there were no Controversy about these matters;
and I cannot imagine why they should not do so in Religion too: Believe what is
plainly taught, and do what is commanded; use the greatest Wisdom, and our
utmost diligence in doing good, and depend upon the succors of the Divine
Grace, and leave these Disputes to be decided at the day of Judgment, and that
will decide them all. By this means I am sure most of the Disputes among
Protestants, which have given the greatest Disturbance to the Church, would be
for ever silenced, and Christian Religion would not be clogged, nor reproached
with such Philosophical Controversies.

2ly, The Unity of Communion: and that consists in our worshipping God
together: when we resort to the same Church to offer up our united Prayers and
Thanksgivings to God, and to partake of that holy Supper, which is the
Sacrament and Symbol of our Union to Christ, and to each other: and this indeed
is true Church-Unity, and it is greatly to be lamented, that men who profess
the same Faith, and agree in all the Essentials of Worship, should divide
Communion, and refuse to Pray together, and to Feast at the same holy Table of
our Lord. We cannot indeed Communicate with the Church of Rome, because they
have corrupted the very Essentials of Christian Worship. Most men do not
understand their Prayers, and therefore cannot join in Prayer with them: they
worship Images and Pictures, which is expressly forbidden by the second
Commandment. Instead of praying to God in the Name of our only Mediator and
Advocate Jesus Christ, they have joined other Intercessors with him; pray to
Saints and Angels, and the Virgin Mary, to pray for them, and help them. They
worship the Host, which we believe to be nothing but Bread and Wine as to the
substance, and therefore no Object of Worship; and turn the Sacramental Feast
of Christ's Body and Blood into a propitiatory Sacrifice for the Living and the
Dead. Such a Worship as this we dare not join in, because it is Sinful and
Idolatrous. But the case is quite different among Protestants; they pray to the
same God, in the only Name of the same Lord Jesus Christ; put up the same
Petitions, offer the same Thanksgivings and Praises, observe the same Divine
Institutions, without any essential change and alteration, and yet cannot
worship God together; as if it were an impious thing to put up the same
Prayers, and to offer the same Praises to God in a pious, and grave, and
well-composed Form of Words, which others do, it may be not so well and
decently, in their conceived Prayers; as if the Devotion of the Communicant in
receiving so inestimable a Blessing as the Sacramental Body and Blood of Christ
upon his knees, were a profanation of that Holy Feast; as if a white
Linnen-Garment, which never underwent any Religious Conjurations, and is used
only as a decent Habit, without any opinion of its Virtue or Sanctity, were a
just reason to drive men out of the Church, from the Christian Communion of
Prayers and Sacraments. These would be surprising stories to any Christians in
the World, who had never heard before of such Disputes among us.

Pray give me leave to speak my mind freely upon this occasion. Upon the best
and most impartial Inquiries and Observations I can make, I do in my Conscience
believe the Church of England to be the most Apostolical and best Reformed
Church in the World: I see no reason from the nature of things to make any
material Alterations in her Doctrine, or Worship; and therefore; I confess, it
has given me very just Resentments to hear our Church charged with such unjust
Imputations of Popery, Superstition, Idolatry, Will Worship, and what not, and
to see a blind and furious Zeal ready to raze up the very Foundations of it. It
has often grieved me to see such a Church as this rent and torn by Schisms,
which a man of ordinary prudence might easily foresee, would give great
advantage to the common Enemy of the Protestant Faith. This and the care of
men's Souls, and of their temporal Fortunes too, moved several Divines of this
Church, when the Government thought fit to re-enforce the Laws of Uniformity,
to examine and answer all the Arguments of our Dissenting Brethren, which they
performed with that good Temper, with that perswasiveness and strength of
Argument, as will be a Vindication of our Church to future Ages; and I wish it
may upon second thoughts, have yet a better effect upon those, who were not
then persuaded: and this, I suppose, will not be called Persecution, much less
can the many kind Offices they did in keeping off Ecclesiastical Censures, be
called a Persecution.

And yet after all, when it is so apparent, that Prejudices are grown as
obstinate as they are unreasonable; when not the reason of the thing, but the
weakness of some, and the ill designs of others, require some compliance and
condescension, we have reason to hope, that the CHURCH of ENGLAND, which at the
beginning of the Reformation took such prudent are not to offend the Papist by
going farther from them, than was necessary, will whenever it is likely to do
good, condescend a great deal farther, than it is necessary to Reform, to meet
the Dissenter; for while the external Decency, Gravity, and Solemnity of
Worship is secured, no wise and good Man will think much to change a changeable
Ceremony, when it will heal the Breaches and Divisions of the Church: and let
us all heartily Pray to GOD, that there may be this good and peaceable
Disposition of Mind in all Conformists and Non-conformists, toward a happy
Reunion; and all considering Men will think it time to lay aside such little
Disputes, when it is not merely the Church of England, nor any particular Sect
of Protestants, whose Ruin is aimed at, but the whole Protestant FAITH.

3ly, Another kind of Unity is Love and Charity, and a mutual forbearance. This
I confess is a very difficult thing, when the Dispute runs so high as to divide
Christian Communion; for it seems in effect to declare Men to be Heathens and
Publicans, when we refuse to Worship GOD with them: and few Men can bear this,
when so dear an Interest is concerned, as the Salvation of their Souls. And the
truth is, that Forbearance St. Paul so often mentions, was to preserve Men of
different seize, and different apprehensions, in the Unity of the Church,
not to countenance their Schisms and Separations.

But yet, since we are fallen into such unhappy Circumstances, that a great
many Men, whom we have reason to hope, are in other respects very good
Christians, and such as our common Savior will receive with all their
Infirmities, are involved in a Schism, let us still treat them as Christian
Brethren, pay all that Kindness and Respect to them, which is due to the
Members of Christ, to the Children of the same Father, and the Heirs of the
same Promises.

The good Order and Government, and the wholesome Laws and Constitutions of a
Church, must not be presently Sacrificed to the Scruples of every good, but it
may be ignorant and indiscreet Christian; but yet in our Treatment of them, we
must consider, whether we have not reason to think, that Christ will own them
with all their Faults; and if we have reason to believe, that Christ will own
them, we ought also to own them, and pay such Kindness to them as is due to all
sincere Christians, tho under some Mistakes.

Now I am very confident, after all the Heats that have been between the Church
of England and Dissenters, neither of them will Damn each other upon account of
such Differences as are between them: no Church of Englandman will say, that to
Pray Extempore, to Baptize without the Sign of the Cross, to Officiate without
a Surplice, to Receive the Sacrament Sitting, are damning Sins; and I believe
there are very few, if any of our Dissenters, that will say, That the contrary
Practice is Damning; and then there may be good Christians on both sides; and
those who are so, ought to love one another, as Members of the same Body of
CHRIST, though divided in their external Communion by some unhappy Differences.

Schism indeed we do say, is a damning Sin; but there may be Divisions where
there is not always the guilt and formality of Schism; and we hope this is the
Case of all good Men, who separate from the Church, through some invincible
Prejudices and Prepossessions.

This shows what great reason we have to love one another, notwithstanding such
dividing Disputes; but if we would practice this true Christian Charity, we
must take care, that these Differences do not grow up into personal Hatreds and
Animosities. Men's Opinions and Practices may differ, and while they dispute
fairly, they may be Friends still; but when Selflove, Honor, Reputation, and
Interest, is engaged in the Quarrel, this makes the Enmity mortal, and they
must Ruin one another, though they both fall together. This I am sure is not
the Zeal which descends from above, which is pure and peaceable, gentle and
easy to been treated.

2. The Peace of the Church signifies its Preservation from the Oppression and
Persecution of its Enemies: For the Church never wants Enemies, though their
Power be not always equal; and this, I presume I need not persuade you to Pray
for, for you are all sensible what an advantage this is. There is none of you
would choose Racks and Tortures, a Gibbet or a Stake, these are grievous things
to Flesh and Blood, the very thoughts of which make us tremble: though immortal
Life, and the Joys and Pleasures of GOD's Presence, are an abundant Recompense
for the loss of this present Life, and all the Sufferings of this World; yet it
is a very difficult Trial, even to the best Men, who when they see it a coming,
cannot but Pray with the Importunity of an Agony, as our SAVIOR did, Lord, let
this Cup pass from me. Though good Men prefer their future Hopes before all
present Things, yet their Life, their Ease, their Liberties, their Estates, are
valuable things too, and all Men would be glad to get to Heaven without meeting
with such a Storm by the way.

Especially if it be such a Storm as threatens the very Ruin of the Church, and
of the true Religion, to subvert the Faith of many professed Christians, to
entail Ignorance, Infidelity, or monstrous Errors on our Posterity; in such a
case the love of our Religion, of our Country, of our Posterity, will make us
raise our Hearts and our Voices to Heaven, in our fervent and passionate
Prayers for the peace of Jerusalem. And if we do heartily Pray for the peace of
Jerusalem, methinks we should not Sacrifice our Religion to private
Animosities: GOD forbid, were it in my power, and had I never so little
kindness for Dissenters, that I should ever embrace any Proposals which would
Ruin all the Dissenters in England, and the Protestant Religion into the
bargain; and I doubt they are no Protestant Dissenters who would be contented
to Ruin the CHURCH of ENGLAND, though they introduce Popery, and set up the
Church of Rome in its stead.

Thus I have shown you, what that Peace is, which we must Pray for; and I need
not add many words in the second place, to show you, how necessary Prayer is to
obtain these Blessings; for not to insist now on those common Topics, of the
necessity of Prayer in general, and its Power and Efficacy to obtain our
Requests of GOD; I shall desire you only to consider, that this Peace is such a
Blessing, as none but GOD can bestow, and therefore we ought to pray for it.

1. As for Unity and Peace among our selves, this Saint Paul expressly prays
for, 15 Romans 5, 6. Now the God of patience and consolation grant you to be
likeminded one toward another, according to Christ Jesus, that ye may with one
mind and one mouth glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ: for
it is God that makes men to be of a mind. Whoever considers the unruly
passions of men, their different capacities and understandings, and different
interests, will not wonder that the best Arguments, and the most obliging Arts,
do not always prevail; but God can still our passions, enlighten our minds,
overruled our interests, remove our prejudices, and unite and reconcile the
most distant persons: and not to take notice now of that power he has over our
Wills, and his immediate applications to our Minds and Spirits, he many times
effects this by some external and visible Providence. The Gaol and the Stake
presently reconciled the Differences between those two excellent Bishops and
Martyrs, RIDLEY and HOOPER, who before disputed fiercely about some Ceremonies,
as we have done; and I pray God grant us so much Christian prudence and temper,
that we may not need such means to reconcile us; and we have great reason to
hope this, since the Divine Providence has in a great measure already removed
the Prejudices on both sides, and convinced us, that we are not at such a
distance from each other as our Enemies would have us, and as it may be, we
thought our selves to be. Dissenters, I hope, are by this time very well
Satisfied, that the Church of England has no inclination to Popery; and we have
reason to acknowledge, that the Body of Dissenters (for some private Intriguers
on either side do not deserve our notice, nor to be thought on either side)
have not such an irreconcilable Hatred to the Church of England, as to
sacrifice her to a Popish Interest; and this bids fair for a good Understanding
between us; and let us pray to God to continue and perfect it.

2. As for the Preservation of the Church from the Oppression and Persecution
of her Enemies, this is God's care too; and many times nothing but an
All-seeing, Vigilant and Omnipotent Providence can secure her. Many times their
Designs are laid deep and low, full of Intriegue and Artifice, unknown to all
men but themselves, as it was in the Gunpowder Treason, when our King, and
Nobles, and Senators, were designed as a rich Sacrifice to a furious and
Antichristian Zeal; but when the wicked plotteth against the just, and gnasheth
on him with his teeth, the Lord shall laugh at him, for he sees that his day
is coming, 37. Psalm. 12, 13.

Let us then Pray heartily to God, that he would reconcile our Differences and
Divisions, and restore Peace and Unity to his Church; that he would defend us
from all the Plots and Machinations of our Enemies, that we being delivered
from all Persecutions, may evermore give thanks unto him in his Holy Church,
through Jesus Christ our Lord; To whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be
Honor, Glory, and Power, now and for ever.

Amen.
To his much Esteemed Friends the Churchwardens and Parishioners of St.
LAWRENCE Iewry, and St. MARY MAGDALEN Milk-street.
Gentlemen,
THough I had no intention to make this Sermon Public, yet I could not with
any Modesty deny your Request, when you had paid so great a regard to the
Counsel given you in it. I heartily Congratulate your happy agreement in the
Choice of so excellent a Person to succeed the not-to-be-forgotten Dr. CALAMY,
who, I doubt not, will deserve all that Honor and Kindness, which it is so
natural to you to show to your Ministers. I here present you with the Sermon,
as it was Preached, excepting some few things, at the beginning, which were
left out in speaking, to shorten it, as much as I could, without injuring the
Sense. I am sensible the Character falls very short of what our deceased Friend
deserved; but it is every Word true, and I thought, had been as inoffensive too
as it is true; and so I believe it will appear to wise and considering men, and
others may judge as they please. If it will contribute any thing to make both
Ministers and People more faithful in the discharge of their several Duties, I
have what I aimed at, both in Preaching and Printing it, especially if you
please to accept of it as a Testimony of the sincere Respects of

GENTLEMEN, Your very Humble Servant, WILLIAM SHERLOCK.

SERMON II.
Preached at the Funeral of the Reverend Benjamin Calamy, D. D. and late
Minister of St. Lawrence Iewry, London, Jan. 7. 1685/6
24 Matthew. 45, 46. Who then is a Faithful and Wise servant whom his Lord has
made Ruler over his Household, to give them meat in due season?

Blessed is that servant, whom his Lord when he comes, shall find so doing.


IN this and the foregoing Chapter, our Savior acquaints his Disciples with
the Signs and Prognostics of his coming; which plainly have a double aspect,
both upon his coming to destroy Jerusalem, and upon his coming to judge the
World: But the application he makes of it, is of universal use; Watch
therefore, for ye know not what hour your Lord does come, v. 42. which is
excellent advice, in what sense soever we understand the coming of our Lord;
for the coming of our Lord signifies his coming to take account of us, and
whether we apply this to the Hour of our Death, or to the last Day of Judgment,
still it concerns us to watch: that is, to be always diligent and careful in
doing our Duty, and discharging that Trust which is committed to us, that
whenever our Lord comes, we may give up our Accounts with joy.

The Words, I have now read to you, concern the Apostles of Christ, and their
Successors, the Bishops and Pastors of the Church, who are as much obliged to
this watchfulness, as any other sort of Persons, because as they have a greater
Trust, so they have a greater Account to give. This we learn from 12 Luke 42,
43 ver. where our Savior having given that general advice to all his
Disciples, to watch for the coming of their Lord, St. Peter particularly
enquires, how far he, and the rest of the Apostles were concerned in it: Lord,
speak thou this parable unto us, or even to all? ver. 41. To which our
Savior answers, Who then is that faithful and wise steward, whom ^is Lord
shall make Ruler of his Household, to give them their portion of meat in due
season? Blessed is that servant, whom his Lord, when he comes shall find so
doing. Wherein our Savior does particularly apply that general Advice to his
Apostles and their Successors, his Servants, Stewards, and Ministers of the
Gospel: and indeed those particular expressions which are here used do
sufficiently acquaint us, to whom this Advice belongs.

We need not question, who is here meant by the Lord, which is the peculiar
Title of Christ in the New Testament, and it is as evident, what this Household
is, which is the Church of Christ, The House and Temple of the living 1 Cor. 3.
16. 2 Cor. 6 16.
God, The Household of Faith, The Household of God. And Christ is said to be
Faithful as a Son, or Lord, over his 6. Gal. 10.
own House, whose House are we, if we ^ld fast the confidence, and the
rejoicing 3. Heb. 5, 6.
of the hope firm unto the end, in distinction from Moses, who was Faithful as
a Servant.

The Rulers of the Household, or the Stewards in St. Luke, are the Apostles,
Bishops, Presbyters, who are the Governors of the Church, (...) the 20. Acts
28.
Overseers, the Ministers of Christ, the Stewards of the Mysteries of God. The
1 Cor. 4. 1.
Meat, which they are to give in Season, is the Word of Life, which with
respect to the different degrees and perfection of Knowledge is compared to
Milk, and to strong Meat: and therefore they are commanded to feed the 1 Cor.
3. 2. 5. Heb. 12. 1 Pet. 2. 2. (...) Tim. 4. 2.
Flock, to preach the Word, to be instant in season, out of season; to reprove,
rebuke, exhort with all long-suffering and doctrine.

This is sufficient to show you, that my Text does principally concern the
Bishops and Ministers of the Church, who are in an eminent manner the Servants
of Christ in the Instruction and Government of his Church, which is his House;
and in speaking to these words, I shall observe this following method.

I. Consider the Duty of Gospel-Bishops and Pastors, which is to Feed, and to
Govern the Household of Christ. II. The Qualifications of Gospel Ministers,
which are Faithfulness and Prudence, a Faithful and Wise servant. III. The
great rewards of such men, Blessed is that servant.
I. The Duty of Gospel Ministers, whether Bishops or others, and that consists
of two parts. 1. To Feed. 2. To Govern the Household or Church of Christ. They
are appointed Rulers of his Household, to give them meat in due season.

1. To Feed the Flock of Christ. This command Christ gave to Peter, 20. Ac^s 28.
and repeated it three times; Simon, son of Jonas, love thou me more than 21.
John 15, 16, 17.
these? then feed my lambs, feed my sheep. Now to Feed, signifies to instruct
men in the Knowledge of Christ, for Knowledge is the proper food and
nourishment of the Soul, by which it grows in Spiritual Wisdom, and all Virtue
and Goodness; and is as necessary to 1 Pet 2. 2.
our Spiritual Life, as natural food is to the Life of our Bodies. This is life
17. John. 3.
eternal, says our Savior, to know Thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ,
whom thou have sent.

For this reason our Savior appointed Stewards and Dispensers of the Mysteries
of his Kingdom, whose whole business it should be to study the Divine Will
themselves, and to instruct others. For this is a knowledge which must be
taught; Nature may instruct us in the Being of a God, and the differences
between good and evil, and the plain Rules of Morality; but the Mysteries of
the Kingdom, the whole economy of man's Salvation by Jesus Christ, is to be
known only by Revelation. Christ came down from Heaven to reveal this to us,
and he instructed his Apostles, and his Apostles by their Preaching and
Writings instructed the Church, and have left us a standing Rule of Faith and
Manners; but yet it is necessary, that there should be some Men peculiarly
devoted to the Service of Religion, the study of the Scriptures, and the Work
of the Ministry, to instruct and teach those who have neither leisure not
opportunities for enquiry, nor capacity to learn without a Guide, which is the
case of the generality of Christians; especially since Religion has been
clogged with such infinite Disputes, and there has been so much art used to
make the plainest truths difficult, obscure, and uncertain, to corrupt the
Christian Faith, and to make it comply with men's sensual Lusts, or secular
Interests. A Guide and Instructor is absolutely necessary, when there are so
many Turnings and Labyrinths, wherein men may lose themselves, and their way to
Heaven.

But though there were no Disputes in Religion, no difficulty in understanding
it, though all men were agreed about the way to Heaven, though the meanest
Christian understood the Mysteries of Christianity, as well as the greatest
Divine, yet there would be constant need of a Spiritual Guide, while men are
apt to be unmindful of their Duty, and careless in the Practice of it. The work
of an Evangelical Pastor is not merely to instruct the Ignorant, but to exhort,
to reprove, to admonish, to watch over the Lives and Manners of Christians, to
make seasonable Applications to their Consciences, to administer Comfort to
afflicted Spirits, to excite and quicken the slothful, and to encourage the
fearful and timorous, and to assist and direct men in their Spiritual Warfare,
how to obtain a glorious victory over the World and the Flesh. This is to feed
the Flock of Christ, and to give them Meat in due season, to instruct them in
those things of which they are ignorant, and to put them in mind of those
things which they already know, that their Faith may be turned into a principle
of life and action, and this heavenly Food may be digested into Blood and
Spirits, to the edifying of the Body of Christ in all Christian Graces and
Virtues.

2. Another part of the Ministerial Office consists in Acts of Discipline and
Government; Christ has made these Ministers and Servants, Rulers over his
household. No Society can be preserved, 5. Ephesians. 23. 10. John 14.
without Order and Government, which is as absolutely necessary in the Church,
as in the State. Christ is the Head of the Church, the Husband, the Shepherd,
the Lord, which are all names of Authority and Power; and the Church is his
Body, his Spouse, his Flock, his Household, and Family, which are names of
Subjection, and denote a regular and orderly Society; but Christ has now left
this World, and does not visibly appear among us, to direct and govern the
Affairs of his Church; he is ascended into Heaven, where he sits at the right
hand of God, and exercises an invisible Power and Providence for the defense
and preservation of his Church on Earth: He governs us by his Laws, and by his
Spirit, and by his Ministers: for when he 4. Ephesians. 8, 11, 12, 13.
ascended on high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts to men. And he gave
some, Apostles, and some, Prophets: and some, Evangelists, and some, Pastors
and Teachers. For the Perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry,
for the edifying of the body of Christ: Till we all come in the unity of the
Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, to a perfect man, unto the
measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.

When our Savior was risen from the dead, he tells his Disciples, All power is
given unto me both in Heaven and in 28. Mat. 18, 19, 20.
Earth. Go ye therefore, and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: Teaching them to observe all
things whatsoever I have commanded you: and lo, I am with you always, even unto
the end of the World. This is their Commission to p^ach the Gospel, and to
govern his Church; which was not merely a personal Commission to the Apostles,
but extends to all their Successors, as appears from Christ's promise to be
with them in the discharge of this Ministerial Authority to the end of the
World. Thus St. John acquaints us, that Christ after his Resurrection appeared
to his Apostles, when they were met together, and said unto them, Peace be unto
you, as my Father has sent 20. John 21, 22, 23.
me, so send I you. And as he had said this, he breathed on them, and said unto
them, Receive ye the Holy Ghost. Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted
unto them; and whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained. This invested
them with Authority; but then the actual communication of Power, which,
especially at that time, was necessary to the discharge of their Office, was
reserved for the descent of the Holy Ghost; and therefore our Savior commanded
them, Not to depart from Jerusalem, but to wait for the promise of the Father,
that is, the gift of the Holy Ghost. For says he, Ye shall receive power after
that the Holy Ghost is 1. Act. 4. 8, 9.
come upon you, and ye shall be witnesses unto me both in Jerusalem, and in all
Judea, and in Sam^a, and unto the uttermost parts of the Earth.

And accordingly we find, that during the time of the Apostles, the Supreme
Authority of the Church was in their hands, which they committed to their
successors* and has ever since been exercised by Christian Bishops and
Presbyters, with regard to their different Order and Power. But what is this
Power which Christ has given to his Ministers? They have no Rods, nor Axes, as
secular Princes have, to compel men to the Faith of Christ, and to force their
obedience. No, this is contrary to the Genius and Spirit of Christianity. If
men will be Infidels, if they will be wicked, we cannot help it: For though we
walk in the flesh, we do not war after the flesh: For 2 Cor. 10. 3, 4, 5.
the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, such as earthly Princes use, but
mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong holds, casting down
imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge
of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ.

Our Savior in my Text acquaints us what this Power and Authority is; he makes
them Rulers over his Household, to give them meat in due season. This is the
Authority Christ has given to his Ministers, to instruct, to exhort, to
advise, to admonish, to reprove, and that with sharpness too, when there is
occasion for it, according to the power 2 Cor. 13. 10.
which the Lord has given to edification, and not to destruction; as St. Paul
speaks.

But what Authority is this? May not every Christian do the same? Is it not the
duty of us all, as we are able, to instruct, exhort, reprove one another? Yes,
it is; and I would to God it were more generally practiced: but yet every
private Christian cannot do this with the Authority of a Bishop, or a
Gospel-Minister: The Instructions and Exhortations of private Christians, are
acts of Friendship and Charity; and the obligation to it, is that mutual
concernment and sympathy which the Members of the same Body ought to have for
each other: in Gospel Ministers it is an act of Authority, like the Censures of
a Father, a Magistrate, or a Judge.

We do not pretend indeed, as St. Paul speaks, to have dominion over 2 Cor. 1.
24.
your Faith, to exercise a kind of Sovereign Authority, to oblige you to belive
any thing merely because we say it; but yet our Authority is such, that if in
the exercise of our Office we explain the Articles of Faith and Rules of Life
to you, it lays an indispesanble Obligation upon you, carefully to examine what
we say, and not to reject it, without plain and manifest evidence, that what we
teach you is not agreeable to the Will of God revealed in the Scriptures. For
when we come in the Name and Authority of Christ, that man who rejects our
Message, without being sure that we exceed our Commission, rejects the
Authority by which we act; and he that despises, despises not man, but God.
It is our Work and our Commission to instruct you, and it is your Duty to be
instructed; and whoever shall wantonly reject any Doctrines which do not suit
with his humor and interest, or oppose some popular mistakes and prejudices
against the Instructions of his Guide, or turn away his ear from instruction,
and heap to himself Teachers, having itching ears, such a man must give a
severe account of this neglect and contempt to the great Bishop and Shepherd of
Souls. While we are careful to discharge our Office in pursuance of that Trust
our Great Master has committed to us, what our Savior tells his Apostles is
true of the 10. Luke 16.
meanest of us all; He that hears you, hears me: and he that despises you,
despises me: and he that despises me, despises him that sent me.

The like may be said of the Exhortations, and Counsels, and Directions, and
Reproofs, of our Spiritual Guides, they carry great Authority with them; they
are not like the private Admonitions of our Friends, who exhort and reprove out
of kindness, and their particular concernment for us: To reject such Counsels
as these, does mightily aggravate our sin and our condemnation, as every thing
does, which makes our sin more wilful and obstinate; but to reject the Counsels
and Reproofs of our Guide, is a new act of disobedience to that Authority which
Christ has set in his Church. Whether you will hear, or whether you will obey,
we must exhort, reprove, advise; and woe be to us, if we do not, and woe be to
those who will not hear, who will not obey. Our great Master looks upon this as
a contempt of his own Authority, and this is all the Authority we have. We
cannot force you to obey our Counsels or Reproofs, but ours and your Master
will severely punish you, if you do not.

In a word, the Instructions, Reproofs, and Censures of Christ's Ministers,
carry such Authority with them, that they can receive into, or shut out of the
Communion of the Church, which is the only visible state of Salvation.
Remission of sins, and eternal Life, is ordinarily to be had only in the
visible Communion of the Church, and therefore the Power of Receiving into the
Church by Baptism, and of Casting out of the Church by Excommunication, which
is the only Authority Christ has given to these Rulers of his Household, to
receive in and cast out of his Family, is called a Power of Remitting or
Retaining sins, because the forgiveness of Sins is to be had only in the
Communion of the Church, and no man belongs to the invisible Church, who does
not live in Communion with the visible Church, when it may be had.

The Authority of Christ's Ministers is to feed those who are of his Household,
to give them their meat in due season, and to judge who shall belong to this
Household, who shall be received in, or cast out of Christ's Family: This is the
highest Act of Church Authority on Earth, and the only Sanction of all our
instructions, counsels, and reproofs; and therefore this Authority is not
entrusted with every Gospel-Minister, but is committed to the chief Governors
of the Church, the Bishops, who succeed into the ordinary Apostolical Power.

II. Let us now consider the due Qualifications which are required in
Gospel Ministers, and they are two: Faithfulness and Prudence, Who is that
Faithful and Wise servant?

First, Faithfulness: Now Faithfulness in a Servant consists in being true to
his Trust; and when this is applied to Preaching the Gospel, it signifies, that
he is extremely careful to publish the whole Mind and Will of God; which as it
concerns us in this Age, includes these following Rules:

1. To be careful to acquaint our selves with the Will of God, that we may be
Scribes which are instructed unto the Kingdom of Heaven, who are like 13. Mat.
52.
unto a man that is an householder, which brings forth out of his treasure
things new and old. The Priests lips must preserve Knowledge, but we must first
have it, before we can teach it others; and since none of us now pretend to
immediate Inspirations, this is a work (...) difficulty and labor, and
requires as much faithfulness in our Studies, as in the Pulpit. It is no
argument of Faithfulness, whatever it may be of Diligence, to run like Ahimaaz
without 2 Samuel 18. 22.
Tidings, to vent some crude and indigested thoughts for the Oracles of God.

2. Faithfulness requires us to preach nothing for the Will of God, but what we
are sure to be so; to deliver no Message, but what we have received in
Commission; not to indulge our own private conjectures and fancies, nor think
to mend and sublimate Religion by Philosophical Speculations, but to content
our selves with the simplicity of the Gospel, to Preach Christ Jesus, and him
crucified. Nothing has done greater mischief to Religion, than when the very
Teachers of it have been ambitious to be Wise above what is written. All the
Articles of the Christian Faith, as distinguished from the Principles of Natural
Religion, can be known only by Revelation; and therefore there is no reasoning
about them any farther, than to know what is revealed, and what is not
revealed; for whatever is more than this, is so uncertain, and so useless, that
it is not worth the knowing. Since we preach in the Name, and by the Authority
of Christ, we ought not to instruct our People in any thing but what we have
his Authority for, for this is to exceed our Commission. Other nice
Speculations may entertain us in private Conversation; but when we preach in
the Name of Christ, let us only preach his Gospel, and teach them to observe
and do whatsoever he has commanded us.

3. Faithfulness requires, that we preach the whole Will of God; that we
instruct men in all the Articles of the Christian Faith, especially where there
is any apparent and present danger of a mistake; and that we teach them every
part of their Duty to God and men, especially such Duties as they are most
unwilling to learn, and most averse to practice. This is an essential part of
Faithfulness, and requires no small courage too.

There are no times so bad, no hearers so captious, but they will very well
bear some general commendations of Religion, or some common Topics about
Virtue or Vice; which are of great use too, especially in such a scep^cal and
unbelieving Age as this. But a faithful discharge of our Ministry requires
somewhat more; a particular application to the Consciences of men, according to
their wants and necessities, not so much to consult what will please them, as
what will do them good. It mightily concerns a Gospel-Minister, as far as he
can, to maintain a fair reputation in the world; but a good name is nothing
worth, when we can do no good by it, when we cannot get or maintain a good name
without neglecting our Duty, or betraying the Souls of men. I had a thousand
times rather, that men should reproach and revile me for instructing them in
such Duties, as they cannot with patience hear of, than that they should
commend me for my silence.

It is hard to live in any Age, wherein there are not some popular Errors, or
some popular Vices to be corrected; and it is a very dangerous thing to meddle
with any thing that is popular. But what is danger to that man, who is in a
greater danger by the neglect of his Duty? Shall any man call himself a
Minister of the Gospel, and a Servant of Jesus Christ, and in such an Age, as
we now live in, be ashamed or afraid to censure or confute the Errors of Popery
or Fanaticism, or to reprove Schism and Faction, because they are very popular
Vices? Let a man so account 1 Cor. 4. 1, 2, 3.
of us, as the ministers of Christ, and stewards of the mysteries of God.
Moreover, it is required in stewards that a man be found faithful. But with me
it is a very small thing that I should be judged of you, or of man's judgment:
as St. Paul speaks. When we leave out several Flocks, it will be infinite
satisfaction to us, to be able to say, as St. Paul did to the Asian Bishops; I
20. Acts 26, 27.
take you to record this day, that I am pure from the blood of all men. For I
have not shunned to declare to you all the counsel of God.

Secondly, Prudence is as necessary in a Gospel-Minister, as Faithfulness is:
By Prudence I do not mean Cunning and Subtilty, artificial Insinuations and
Addresses, which are more like the Arts of Seducers, than of Gospel Ministers,
Who by good words, and fai^ 16. Romans 18.
speeches deceive the hearts of the simple. Prudence will not allow us in the
neglect of any part of our Duty, whate^er the event be; but we must renounce 2
Cor. 4. 2.
^he hidden things of dishonesty, not walk^ng in craftiness, nor handling the
word of God deceitfully, but by manifestation of ^he truth, commending our
selves to every man's conscience in the sight of God.

Wisdom and Prudence, as it is con^istent with Faithfulness and Honesty ^n the
discharge of our Trust, can signify no more but this; To instruct, Exhort,
Persuade, and perform all the parts and offices of a Gospel-Minister, in such a
manner as may render our ^nstructions and persuasions most effectual; to take
the most convenient seasons, when men are most apt to be wrought on; to teach
them such things as are of most present use to them; to use such Arguments as
are most likely to prevail; to avoid all unnecessary provocations, when the
Duty it self, which we are to teach them is not the matter of the provocation;
for if men will be provoked with hearing of their Duty, there is no help for
that. Prudence never dispences with any part of our Duty, but directs to the
best way of doing it: a Faithful Servant does what he is commanded, and a Wise
Servant does it in the most effectual manner.

III. The last part of my Text concerns the great Rewards of such Faithful and
Wise Servants; Blessed is that servant. What this Reward is, we are not here
particularly told. All good men, we know, shall be very blessed and happy in
the other World, and we may reasonably presume, that Christ, who is the great
Judge of the World, has reserved some peculiar marks of honor for his
immediate Servants: This he plainly intimates to us, in that distinction he
makes between the reward of a Prophet, and of a righteous man: He that
receives a prophet in the name of a prophet, shall receive a 10. Mat. 41.
prophets reward: and he that receives a righteous man in the name of a
righteous man, shall receive a righteous man's reward.

Our reward in Heaven will bear some proportion to the nature of our Work, and
to that service we do for God in this World. Now we cannot do any more
acceptable service, than to serve God in the Gospel of his Son; to use our
utmost endeavors to propagate Religion in the World, and to make other men
wise, and good, and happy. Our Savior himself came into the World on this very
design, and was advanced to the ^ght Hand of Glory and Power, as a ^eward of
it; and those who are work^rs together with him, as St. Paul speaks, 2 Cor. 6.
1.
will receive some proportionable reward ^lso.

The faithful discharge of this Duty is a work of infinite care and difficulty,
that it made an Apostle himself cry out, Who is sufficient for these things! 2
Cor. 2, 16.
It requires the exercise of great care, and great prudence, and great
patience; it is abundantly enough to employ our whole time and thoughts either
in studying the Will of God, or in attending the public Ministries of
Religion, or in private Addresses and Applications to men who want our Advice
and Counsel; we must contentedly bear all the Affronts and Insolences of bad
men, the Frowardness and Peevishness of many professed Christians, the
Gainsayings and Contradictions of sinners. We must go on and persevere in our
Work, though our Persons and our Ministry be despised: when we are reviled, 1
Cor. 4, 12, 13.
we must bless: when persecuted, we must suffer: when defamed, we must entreat:
yea though we are made as the filth of the world, and the offscouring of all
things. This is not very pleasing to flesh and blood, but the harder the work
is, the greater will our reward be, if we be found faithful and wise Servants.

Nay, there is no Work does so ennoble the Mind as this, and qualify us for an
excellent Reward. No man can faithfully discharge this Work, but it must purge
and refine his Mind, and set him vastly above this World, and the little
Concernments of it: It gives us a more clear distinct comprehensive knowledge
of God and divine things, which is an Angelical perfection of the Mind and
Understanding; and he must be a strange man, who can be so constantly employed
in the Contemplation of God, and the things which relate to another and a
better life, and not find his Soul ravished with those unseen and unspeakable
Glories; who is so constantly employed in taking care of other men's Souls, and
takes no care of his own; who is so frequent in his Devotions, as the very
nature of our Work. exacts from us, and not live a most divine and heavenly
life: There are indeed some, who in the most Divine Employment are no great
Examples of such a divine Conversation; but I fear they will not be ^ound in
the number of these faithful and wise servants. Whoever heartily applies
himself to the care of Souls, will in the first place take care of his own; and
the faithful discharge of this Duty, will raise us so much above the ordinary
Level and Seize of Christians, as will prepare us for a greater Reward,
and advance us to a more perfect state of Glory.

Nay, that immediate Relation we stand in to Christ, who is the Sovereign Lord
and Judge of the World, if we approve our selves faithful and wise Servants,
will secure us of a more excellent Reward. The Church on Earth and the Church
in Heaven, is but one Church, one Household and Family; and those whom he has
made Rulers of his Household here, to whom he has committed the greatest places
of Trust and Dignity, need not fear being degraded in the other World, if they
adorn their Office, and faithfully discharge their Trust here: and therefore
our Savior tells his Apostles, Verily 19. Mat. 28.
I say unto you, that ye which have followed me in the regeneration, when the
Son of man shall sit in the Throne of his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve
Thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel: that is, that their Reward and
Glory in the other World, should answer to that place of Trust, and Power, and
Dignity, which they had in the Church on Earth; and this Promise is no more
peculiar to the Apostles, than their Office was.

In a word, If we consider what the state of the other World is, and who is
King there, that it is the blessed Jesus, our Great High Priest, King of Salem,
or the new Jerusalem, and Priest of the most High God, how mean and
contemptible soever our Office is thought here, we need not doubt but the Scene
will be mightily changed, when we come into that Kingdom where the King is a
High Priest.

Let this then, beloved Brethren of the Clergy, be a mighty Encouragement to us
to be very diligent and faithful in the discharge of this great Trust; whatever
Difficulties we meet with, whatever Scorns, Reproaches, or Sufferings, it is
but expecting a while, and our Lord will come, and his Reward is with him: and
blessed, for ever blessed, is that Servant, whom his Lord when (...) comes
shall find so doing.

Yea blessed, for ever blessed, as my ^ext gives us reason to hope, is this ^ur
dear Brother, whose Remains lie ^ere before us, who when his Lord ^ame, was
found thus doing. We ^ay lament the loss of so kind a Relation, so true a
Friend, so faithful a Pastor, and Fellow Laborer, according to the several
interests we had in him; but he, blessed Soul, has fought a good Fight, and
finished his course, and kept the ^aith, and is now gone to receive a Crown of
Righteousness, a Crown of Immortality and Glory. He is now gone to that great
Bishop and Shepherd of Souls, whose Flock he has so carefully and diligently
fed, and whose wandering and straggling Sheep he has reduced into the Fold; To
that kind Shepherd who laid down his life for his Sheep, and therefore will not
fail to reward those who have spent their lives, and were ready to have
sacrificed them too, for the service of Souls.

When we speak of so great a Man, it is below his Character to mention such
things as would be thought considerable Seize in meaner persons; though
indeed a truly great Man does nothing meanly. A great Mind gives a peculiar
grace and decency to common Actions, as it was easy to observe in his very
mirth and freest Humors, that he never gave the Reins out of his hands, but
governed himself by the strictest Rules of Prudence and Religion.

But I shall confine my self to the subject of my Text, and consider him only
as a faithful and wise Steward, and therefore have very little to add; for I
doubt not, but you who knew him, especially you who have enjoyed the benefit of
his Ministry, and have lived under his Care and Conduct, have already applied
what I have discoursed on this Argument, to your deceased Pastor; and would I
have Chosen any particular man to have drawn the Character by, of a wise and
faithful Steward, there are not many men I should sooner have thought on, than
Dr. Calamy to have been the Pattern.

That he did take care to give you Meat in due season, I need not tell you,
because you all know it. If Preaching in season and out of season, if public
Instructions and private Applications, where they were needful or desired, be
feed the Flock of Christ, and to give ^eat to his Household and Family, this ^e
did, and that very faithfully and ^isely too.

In the first place, he took care ^o inform himself, and to furnish ^is own
Mind with all useful know^edge; and his constant Preaching, though without any
vain affectation of Learning, which serves only to amuse, not to instruct, did
sufficiently discover ^oth his natural and acquired Abilities. He had a clear
and distinct apprehension of things, an easy and manly Rhetoric, strong Sense
conveyed to the mind in familiar words, good Reasons inspired with a decent
Passion, which did not only teach but move and transport the Hearers, and at
the same time gave both light and heat: for indeed he was a good man, which is
necessary to make a good Preacher; he had an inward vital sense of Religion,
and that animated his discourses with the same Divine Passions which he felt in
himself.

He did not entertain his Hearers with School Subtilties, or a conjectural
Divinity, with such thin and airy Speculations, as can neither be seen, nor
felt, nor understood; but his chief care was to explain the great Articles of
Faith, and Rules of Life, what we must believe, and how we must live, that we
may be eternally happy. And he did, as a faithful Servant ought to do, as he
declared a little before his death, that he never preached any thing, but what
he himself firmly believed to be true.

I need not tell you what a troublesome World we have lived in for some years
past, such Critical times as would try the Principles and Spirits of men; when
a prevaling Faction threatened both Church and State, and the fears of Popery
were thought a sufficient Justification of the most illegal and irreligious
methods to keep it out; when it was scandalous to speak a word either for the
King or the Church; when cunning men were silent, and those who affected
Popularity swam with the Stream; then this great and good man durst reprove
Schism and Faction, durst teach men to conform to the Church, and to obey and
honor the King; durst vindicate the despised Church of England, and the hated
Doctrine of Passive Obedience, though the one was thought to favor Popery, and
the ^ther to introduce Slavery; but he was ^bove the powerful Charms of Names,
and liked Truth never the worse, because it was mis-called. His public ^ermons
preached in those days, and ^rinted by public Authority, are ^asting Proofs of
this, and yet he was no ^apist neither, but durst reprove the Errors of Popery,
when some others, who made the greatest noise and out^ry about it, grew wise
and cautious. This was like a truly honest and faith^l Servant, to oppose the
growing Di^tempers of the Age, without any regard either to unjust Censures, or
apparent Danger. And yet he did not needlessly provoke any man; he gave no hard
words, but thought it severe enough to confute men's errors without upbraiding
or reproaching their persons. His Conversation was courteous and affable to all
men, soft and easy, as his Principles were stubborn; he could yield any thing
but the Truth, and bear with any thing but the Vices of men. He would indeed
have been the wonder of his Age had he not lived in such an Age, as, thanks be
to God, can show many such wonders, and yet in such an Age as this he made an
Illustrious Figure; though he had his Equals, he had not many Superiors.

Thus he lived, and thus this good man died, for thus he was found doing when
his Lord came. The first symptoms of his Distemper seized him just before his
last Sermon at White Hall, but gave him so much respite as to take his leave of
the World in an excellent Discourse of Immortality, which he speaks of with
such a sensible gust and relish, as if his Soul had been then upon the wing,
and had some fore-taste of those joys it was just a going to possess. And
indeed he encountered the apprehensions of Death, like one who believed and
hoped for Immortality; he was neither over-fond of living, nor afraid to die.
He received the Supper of our Lord, professed his Communion with the Church of
England, in which he had lived, and in which he now died; and having
recommended his Soul to God, he quietly expected how he would dispose of him.

But I must not forget to tell you, that he died like a true and faithful
Pastor, with a tender care and affection for his Flock. When he imposed this
unwelcome Office upon me, he told me, he ^d not desire any praises of himself,
but ^t I would give some good advice to ^s people, who, said he, are indeed
(...) very kind and loving people. And ^is was not the first nor the only time
(...) have heard him own not only your and reception of him at first, but the
repeated and renewed expressions of your affection, which did signally manifest
it self in his late Sickness, and now accompanies him to the Grave. A
Character, which to your honor I speak it, you have now made good for several
successions, and which, I hope, you will never forfeit.

But what that good counsel is, he would have me give you, he told me not; and
therefore I can only guess at his intentions in this. Were he now present to
speak to you, I believe he could not give you better counsel than he has
already done: and therefore my advice to you is,

1. To remember those Counsels and Exhortations which you have heard from your
deceased Pastor. Though the Sower be removed, yet let that immortal Seed, that
Word of Life which he has sown, live and fructify in your hearts, and bring
forth the blessed Fruits of Righteousness. He has showed you the plain way to
Heaven, have a care you do not forget it, have a care you do not wander out of
it. He has recommended the Communion of the Church of England to you. He has
taught you to be Loyal to your Prince, and to be true to your Religion; take
care then, that neither your Religion destroy your Loyalty, nor your Loyalty
corrupt your Religion: remember that beloved person, whose Memory is dear and
sacred to you, was neither a Rebel, Papist, nor a Fanatic.

2. Since you have lost your Guide, a faithful and a prudent Guide, and the
choice of a Successor is in your selves, be very careful, as the concernment
of your Souls requires you should be, of your Choice. Consider what an Age we
live in, which requires an experienced and skilful Pilot to steer a secure and
steady course. Have a care of dividing into Factions and Parties; let not mere
private Interests or Friendships govern you; if it be possible, admit of no
Competitions, much less of Pulpit-Combats, which do oftener occasion lasting and
fatal Divisions, than end in a wise Choice. Remember what a suc^ssion you have
had of Great and Good ^en in this Place, and let it be your ambition still to
equal and outdo it if you can.

And now I shall conclude with one word to you my brethren of the Clergy. We
have lost a faithful and diligent Labourer in God's Vineyard, in a time when we
could ill have spared him; let us then, who still survive, double our
diligence, and express a greater Zeal and Concernment in the defense of
Religion, and in the care of Souls. Let us remember that we are all mortal, and
how little time we have to work in, we know not; but let us so improve the
remainder of our days, that when our Lord comes, he may own us for faithful and
wise Servants, and bestow on us a Crown of Righteousness and Immortality. Which
God of his infinite mercy grant, through our Lord Jesus Christ; To whom, with
the Father and the Holy Spirit, be honor, and glory, and power, now and for
ever,

Amen
SERMON III.
Preached at Whitehall, before the Queen, on the 17th of June, 1691. Being the
Fast Day.
Lxxvii. PSALM 10, 11, 12. And I said, This is my infirmity; but I will
remember the years of the right hand of the most High.

I will remember the works of the Lord: surely I will remember thy wonders of
old.

I will meditate also of all thy works, and talk of thy doings.


THE Psalmist, at the penning of this Psalm, was oppressed with very black and
desponding Thoughts: The state of the Church seems to have been very
calamitous, they had been so long and so grievously afflicted, that he began to
question, whether God would ever be merciful to them again: Will the Lord cast
off for ever? and will he be favorable no more? Is his mercy clean gone for
ever? does his promise fail for evermore? Has God forgotten to be gracious?
has he in anger shut up his tender mercies?

But in my Text he recollects himself, confesses his Wickedness and Sin in
giving the least entertainment to such unworthy Thoughts of God, as if he could
forget his promise and Covenant, which he had made to their Fathers Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, This is my infirmity; want of Faith and Trust in God's
Promises; and to cure this Diffidence, to revive his dying Hopes, and to
confirm his Faith in God, he calls to mind those glorious Deliverances which
God had wrought for his Church, and his People Israel in former Ages: I will
remember the years of the right hand of the most High; those days when God did
so visibly deliver Israel with his own right hand; as it follows 14, 15 Verses,
Thou art the God that do wonders; thou have declared thy strength among the
people. Thou have with thine arm redeemed thy people, the sons of Jacob and
Joseph. And instances in those miraculous Deliverances in Egypt, the Red Sea,
and the Wilderness, as a reason and foundation of a firm Faith and Trust in God
in all Ages; these are those Works of the Lord, and Wonders of Old, which he
will remember, which he will meditate, and talk of, with which he will support
his Spirit, whatever Dangers seem to threaten the final Ruin and Desolation of
the Church; which is the Argument of the 80. Psalm 14, 15. Return, we beseech
thee, O God of hosts: look down from heaven, and behold and visit this vine,
and the vineyard which thy right hand has planted, and the branch that thou
made so strong for thy self.

That God had made a Covenant with Abraham, and chose his Seed and Posterity
for his peculiar People; that he had delivered them out of Egypt by a mighty
hand, and an outstretched arm; that he had given them Passage through the Red
Sea, and fed them in the Wilderness forty Years; that he had fought their
Battles for them, and given them possession of the Land of Canaan, as he had
promised to their Fathers; that he had in all succeeding Ages protected them by
a vi^ble Providence, raised up Judges and Saviors to deliver them out of the
hands of their Enemies, when they cried to him; this was a sure foundation of
their Faith and Hope, that God would not utterly cast off his People, but
though for their sins he might deliver them into the hands of their Enemies,
yet when they repented of their Evil Ways, and returned unto God, God also
would return, and be merciful unto them.

And this is the wisest course we can take, whatever Troubles we suffer,
whatever we fear, whatever our Sins have deserved, whatever our Enemies
threaten, To remember the works of the Lord, and his wonders of old, to
meditate of all his works, and to talk of his doings.

And this is what I at present intend, to make such Remarks on the Providence
of God toward the Jewish Church, not omitting the experience the Christian
Church has had of the same kind and watchful Providence, as may be of present
use to us, both to direct us what we must do, and to give us a firm Hope and
Trust in God's Mercy; for God is always the same under all the Dispensations of
his Grace and Providence; and as the Jewish Church was a Type of the Christian;
so God's Providence toward them, assures us, what we may expect ^n like
Circumstances, or else the Scri^tures of the Old Testament would be of very
little use to us now; whereas St. Paul tells us, That these things happened to
them for ensamples, and they are written for our admonition upon whom the ^nds
of the world are come, 1 Cor. 10. 11. But what difference there is between
their State and ours, and how far we are concerned in the Examples, I shall
distinctly observe under the several Particulars, as there is occasion for it:

1. First then I observe as St. Paul did, That the gifts and calling of God are
without repentance, 11. Romans 29. God having made a Covenant with Abraham, and
chosen his Seed for his peculiar People, whatever their Provocations were, he
would never wholly cast them off; he many times very severely punished them,
delivered them into the hands of their Enemies, who oppressed them, the
Aramites, and Moabites, and Egyptians, and Assyrians, and at last into the
hands of Nebuchadnezzar, who destroyed their City and Temple, and carried them
captive into Babylon, where they continued seventy Years, and then they
returned into their own Country, and rebuilt their Temple and City, and so
continued till in punishment of their great Sin in crucifying their Messiah,
and for their obstinate Infidelity, they were finally destroyed by the Romans,
and dispersed into all Nations, and have never been a Nation since; that is,
till Christ came, who was the promised Seed, in whom all the Nations of the
World are blessed, as St. Paul proves, 3. Gal. 16. To Abraham and his seed were
the promises made: He says not, Unto seeds, as of many; but as of one, And to
thy seed, which is Christ. I say, till Christ, who was the promised Seed, and
typified by Isaac, came, the carnal Posterity of Abraham, descending from Isaac
and Jacob, were the Typical Israel, and God's peculiar People, and visible
Church on Earth, and all this while God never wholly cast them off; but when
Christ came, then the Promise was established to the spiritual Seed of Abraham,
those who are the Children of Abraham by Faith in Christ, as the Apostle proves
in the same place, (...), 7, 8, 9. and in several other places: And this is the
Answer, which the Apostle gives to that terrible Objection against Christ's
being the Messiah, and God's owning the Christian Church for his peculiar and
elect People, as formerly he did the Jews; that then God's Promise to Abraham
and his Seed fails: His Answer is, That the Promise to Abraham and his Seed,
was meant of Christ, and his spiritual Seed, those who are the Children of
Abraham by Faith in Christ; as he proves at large in the 9, 10, 11 Chapters to
the Romans; though he gives another answer to this too, That though the
Promises do no longer belong to Abraham's carnal Seed, yet God so far remembers
his Covenant with Abraham and his carnal Seed, that he has not wholly cast them
off, but will in time engraft them into his Church again by Faith in Christ:
For out of Sion shall come the deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness from
Jacob. But I cannot enlarge on this now.

To apply this then to the times of the Gospel: We certainly learn from God's
Care of the Jewish Church, that God will always preserve and protect the
Christian Church, that the true Faith of Christ, and his true and sincere
Worshippers shall never wholly fail in the World, as Christ promises, That the
gates of Hell shall not prevail against his Church: for God established an
everlasting Covenant with Abraham and his Seed, that is, with Christ, and the
Christian Church, who are the true spiritual Seed of Abraham, to whom the
Promises belong; and if God so punctually performed his Promise to the carnal
Seed of Abraham, while they were to be his visible Church, that is, until
Christ came, who was the promised Seed, we learn by that Example, how he will
protect, defend, and support the Christian Church to the end of the World; till
Christ the promised Seed return again to Judge the World, to put an end to all
Things, and to receive his Church into the Kingdom of his Father.

To this we owe the Continuance and Preservation of the Christian Church to
this Day, amidst all the Dangers which have threatened its final Ruin: when the
Church is tossed on the foaming Billows of this World, like the Ship into which
Christ and his ^isciples entered: 8. Matthew. 23, 24, 25. ^hen there arose a great
tempest in the ^a, insomuch that the ship was covered ^ith the waves; and
Christ was asleep, and his disciples came to him, and awoke ^im, saying, Lord,
save us; we perish. And he says unto them, Why are ye so ^earful, O ye of
little faith? then he ^rose and rebuked the wind and the sea, and there was a
great calm. This was a Figure and Emblem of the condition the Church is very
often in in this World: for most of our Savior's Miracles had some spiritual
significations in them: His curing the Halt, and Blind, and Lame, and Deaf,
represented his Diviner Power in curing the Diseases and Distempers of our
Souls, in making the Blind to see, and the Deaf to hear, and the Lame to walk;
and therefore when he cured the Man that was born blind, he turned his
Discourse to spiritual Blindness, 9. Ioh. 39, 40, 41. When he had fed that
great Multitude with a few Loaves and small Fishes, he discourses to them of
that Bread that comes down from Heaven, and will nourish them unto Eternal
Life, and which he only could give them; 6. John, When he discoursed with
Martha about raising her Brother Lazarus from the Dead, he preaches to her his
Divine Power to raise dead Souls as well as dead Bodies, into immortal Life,
11. John 25, 26. When the Disciples at Christ's command had cast their Net into
the Sea, [after having toiled all night and taken nothing] and encompassed a
great multitude of Fishes, he tells them the meaning of it, that he would make
them Fishers of Men. Thus here Christ's rebuking the Wind and Sea, which were
ready to swallow up the Ship wherein he and his Disciples were, is a Figure of
the State of the Church in this World, and of his readiness to Protect it: How
threatening soever the Dangers are, Christ is in the Ship, and all the Powers of
the World, how much soever they rage and foam, can never swallow up that Ship,
wherein Christ is, unless they can swallow Him up too: and though he may seem
to be asleep, and to take no notice of the Sufferings and Dangers of his
Church, yet the importunate Prayers and Cries of his Disciples will awake him,
and then he will arise to their defense, and hush the Winds and Seas into a
Calm.

This the Church had frequent ex^erience of under the Pagan Persecu^ons, which
raged with Fire and ^word, and all the witty Arts of Cru^lty; when nothing
would serve but ^he final Extirpation of the Name of Christians: But how often
did Christ ^ebuke the Wind and Sea, and restore profound Peace and Rest to his
Church? What a glorious Triumph did he give his Church over the last and most
terrible Efforts of the Pagan Powers, when he raised Constantine into the
Throne, and made the Empire Christian?

And this is a very comfortable Consideration to us at this time: The
Protestant Churches which profess the Pure and Incorrupt Faith and Worship of
Christ, as to all the essentials of Faith and Worship, have now for many Years
groaned under the Antichristian Tyranny and Persecutions, and now at last, and
I hope it may be the last as it is the most terrible Insult of the
Antichristian Powers, a Great and mighty Prince bends his whole Force to root
out the Protestant Name, as well as to Usurp upon the Liberties of Europe: What
he has done in his own Country, and wherever his Power and Influence reached,
I need not tell you: From some of his Subjects he has forced away their Faith;
others to keep their Faith have lost their Estates, their Liberty, their
Country, their Lives

What danger we were in at Home, we all saw and felt not long since, though
some Men would now persuade us, it was but a Dream; but it was a very terrible
Dream, if it was one, and thanks be to God that we are awakened out of it, and
may we never fall into such frightful Slumbers more; or rather let us neither
be lulled asleep, nor dream awake, lest these frightful Dreams prove Realities
at last.

For should that mighty Monarch prevail, and like an irresistible Torrent bear
all before him; as some kind Friends to the Liberties of Europe, and the
Protestant Name and Interest, wish and pray he may; it requires not a Spirit of
Prophecy, to foretell what will become of Protestants: But our Hope and Trust is
in God, that the true Christian Faith shall never be rooted out; and I am as
certainly persuaded, that the Protestant Faith and Worship, as to the
Essentials of it, and ^s opposed to Popery, is the true Christian Faith and
Worship, as I am ^f the truth and certainty of Christia^ity it self: and when I
remember ^y what little beginnings, and weak and contemptible means, GOD spread
^he true light of the Gospel over great part of the European World, when it was
covered with the Egyptian Darkness, and oppressed by the Unsupportable Tyranny
of Popery; notwithstanding all the Follies, Divisions and Miscarriages of
Protestants, I cannot fear, that God will cause our Sun to set again, and that
he will finally remove his Gospel from us; and that gives great reason to hope
that he will ^heck the Pride and Ambition, and ^t a stop to the Successes of a
Prince, who glories in the Extirpation of his ^rotestant Subjects, and at once
en^aves both the Bodies and the Souls of Men; who challenges as absolute a
Dominion over the Faith, as over the Estates of his Vassals, to fill his
Exchequer and Purgatory together. This I am sure, we ought heartily to ^eg of
God in our most solemn Prayers and Fasts; and those who scruple this, if they
understand themselves, must never say the Lord's Prayer more, wherein our
Savior has taught us to pray, Thy Kingdom come, which those who wish success
to Persecuting and Antichristian Powers, do not, and cannot pray.

II. I observe farther, That as God's Covenant with Abraham and his Posterity,
was sure and steadfast, that no provocations could ever tempt him utterly to
destroy them, so he never inflictted any public Judgments and Calamities on
them, but when he was greatly provoked by their Sins. This was God's express
Covenant with them, 26. Levit. That if they walked in his statutes, and kept
his commandments, then he would bestow all Temporal Blessings on them, Rain in
its season, and the increase of their Land, in Corn, and Wine, and Oil; Peace
at home, and Victory abroad, and his special Presence and Favor: I will set my
tabernacle amongst you; and my soul shall not abhor you, and I will walk among
you, and will be your God, and you shall be my people. But if they would not
hearken unto him, and would not do all his Commandments, ^hen he threatens all
sorts of Evils should befall them, sickness of Body, ^o fly before their
Enemies, the un^ruitfulness and barrenness of their Land, that they shall be a
prey to wild Beasts, that the Sword shall devour them, and they shall be
enslaved to their Enemies, and buy their own Bread of them; that they should
suffer Famine to such extremity, as to eat their own Sons and Daughters; that
he would lay waste their Cities, and make their Country desolate; and carry
them away captive into foreign Countries, as you may see at large in that
Chap^er: This was his Covenant with them; and this he punctually observed:
whenever they did obey him, they were a happy and prosperous People, their
Enemies crouched before them, they enjoyed Plenty and Peace, ^nlarged their
Borders, and made their Neighbors Subjects and Tributari^s ^o them; and though
God did not always punish them according to their ^leserts, yet he never did
inflict any public or National Judgments on them, but when they were grown
very corrupt and wicked in their manners; as it were easy to show from the
History of those Times, and all the remarkable Judgments God inflicted on them.

Now, I must confess, when we apply th is to the Christian Church, the case is
very different, for God has not so expressly covenanted with the Christian
Church for external Peace and Prosperity, as he did with the Jews; they were
the carnal Seed and Posterity of Abraham, Heirs of an earthly Canaan and
external Prosperity; but the spiritual Seed of Abraham are Heirs of spiritual
and eternal Blessings, which were typified by the carnal Promises made to the
Jewish Church: the Christian Church was founded in the Sufferings of our Lord;
the Christian Faith was at first propagated by the courage, patience, and
sufferings of the Apostles, and the Primitive Martyrs and Confessors: The Terms
ou^ Savior proposes to us are, If any m^ will come after me, let him deny
himsel, and take up his Cross, and follow me: H^ that loves his life, shall
lose it, but (...) that loses his life for my sake shall find it And therefore
the most sincere Believers, and most exemplary Christians may suffer very
severely in this Worl^ and their support and comfort is, that ^hey shall be
proportionably rewarded ^n the next: this was the great Obje^ction the Jews
made against Christians being the Sons and peculiar People of God, that they
were hated and persecuted for the Faith of Christ, and God suffered them to be
so; whereas he had promised all Temporal Prosperity to the observance of his
Laws and Sta^utes; and if believing in Christ had been the Will and Commandment
of God, he would certainly have made good all the Promises of their Law to the
Disciples of Jesus: An Objection which very much troubled many believing Jews
themselves, who did not thoroughly understand the difference between the Jewish
and Christian Dispensation, between the Law of Moses, and the Gospel of Christ,
and therefore is particularly answered by St. Paul, 8. Romans and in the 7. Heb.

But this shows, that the Faith and Worship of Christ is not always rewarded
with external Prosperity, and we must not expect it should be; and consequently
that very severe Sufferings and Persecutions may befall Christians, not always
for the correction and punishment of their Sins, but for the trial of their
Faith and Patience, to make them conformed to their Suffering Head, to prepare
them for richer and brighter Crowns, to convince and convert their Persecutors,
and to propagate the Christian Faith in the World. Though it is observed by
some of the Ancient Fathers, and particularly by St. Cyprian, That God never
sent a general Persecution upon the Christian Church, but when their Sins, the
general declension of Piety and Discipline, their Worldly-Mindedness, the
formality and coldness of their Devotions called for a Scourge.

Thus it was with the Church, while it sojourned, as I may so speak, in the
world as in a strange land, had no place of its own, no earthly Power and
Authority to support it, but lived under Pagan Powers, was intermixed with them,
and oppressed by them, when they pleased; but the case of a Christian Nation,
where the Power and Authority is Christian, seems very different, and to come
nearer the state of the Jewish Church; for God does not use to inflict Public
Judgments and Calamities upon Nations, but for the Punishment of some Publlick
and National Sins: And, therefore a Christian Nation, which professes the True
Faith and Worship of Christ, preserves the Reverence of Religion, corrects and
suppresses Vice, may expect to be blessed with all external Prosperity; for
righteousness ex^alteth a nation; it does so in its natural tendency and
effects, and it does so by the Blessing of God; and therefore when God brings
any Public Judgments upon a Nation professing the true faith of Christ, we
have reason to take notice of God's Anger and Displeasure; to enquire what is
amiss among us; what that accursed thing is, which has provoked God to
Jealousy, and made him take the Rod into his hand. We have then reason to
humble our selves before God, to deprecate his Anger and Displeasure; to turn
from all the evil of our ways, that hem ay return, and be merciful to us.

But there is one thing worth observing, which may be matter of Hope and
Comfort to us at this time, That God never delivered the Jewish Church into the
hands of their Enemies to oppress them, never carried them away into captivity,
excepting the last Destruction of Jerusalem, in Punishment of their Sin in
Crucifying their Messiah, but only when they were guilty of Idolatry: A
Corruption of Manners might bring other Judgments upon them; but it was
generally, and I think always, for their Idolatry, that God made their Enemies
rule over them, and carried them captive into a Strange land. This we have a
summary account of, Judges 2. how that after the Death of Joshua and those
Elders who had seen all that God did for them, they forsook the Lord, and
served Baal and Ashtaroth; and the anger of the Lord was kindled against them,
and God delivered them into the hand of spoilers, who spoiled them, v. 11, 12,
etc. For this Sin of Idolatry, the Ten Tribes were carried away into a
Perpetual Captivity, and Judah carried captive to Babylon, which they were
threatened with by the Prophets, for their Whoredoms, that is, their Idolatries,
2, 4, 5. chapter of Hosea; and this is the account the Prophet Jeremy gives of it,
Like as ye have forsaken me, and served strange gods in your land, so shall ye
serve strangers in a land which is not yours, 5. Jer. 19.

Now in proportion to God's deal^g with the Jewish Church, we have ^ason to
hope, That though a Church and Nation which professes the true ^aith and
Worship of Christ, may be ^everely punished for their other Sins, ^et while
they preserve themselves ^lean from Spiritual Fornication, from all
Antichristian Idolatries, God will not Un-Church them, nor deliver them finally
up into the Power of Idolatrous Oppressors: I am sure we of this Nation, ever
since the Reformation of Religion among us, though God has made us smart
severely for our other Sins, have yet always found a watchful Providence
defending us from all Attempts, though contrived with Art and Skill, and backed
with Power, to reduce us again under the Roman Yoke. May the same Good
Providence still watch over us, and defend us, and neither suffer our Popish
Enemies to rejoice over us, nor deluded Protestants to make dangerous and fatal
Experiments.

3dly. When God did think fit to correct his People, he always kept the Rod in
his own hand, and prescribed the Measures and Continuance of their Sufferings.
This is so plain, from all the Promises and Threatenings of the Law, and from
the Examples of God's Providence toward Israel, that there is no need to
multiply particular Instances: There was no Good not Evil befell Israel, but by
a particular Providence; God inflicted Judgments on them when he saw fit, and
he removed them again; He gave the Commission to Plague, and Sword, and Famine,
which they could not exceed. In the 26. Levit. we may observe, That God
proportioned his Judgments to their Sins. When their Sins were grown so Public
and National, as to deserve some Public Judgments, yet at first God threatens
them with some more light and gentle Punishments; but if they continued
incorrigible, he tells them he had more terrible Judgments in reserve for them;
which proves, That God determines the Kinds, Degrees, and Continuance of his
Judgments. When David for his sin in Numbering the People, had that hard Choice
given him, of seven years famine, or to flee three months before his enemies,
or three days pestilence; he answers, Let me fall now into the hands of the
Lord, (for his mercies are great) and let me not fall into the hand of man,
(...) Sam. 24. 14. That is, he chose Pe^ilence before the Sword; for Pesti^ence
is God's immediate hand; and ^ho the Sword be God's Judgment too, ^et it is put
into the hands of men, who gratify their own Lust and Rage, and Revenge with
it. And yet, tho God leaves more to man in this, than ^n any other Judgments,
he does not ^ut the Sword wholly out of his own hands, when he puts it into the
hands of men, but gives Laws to it; as appears from the example of the King of
Assyria, whom God sent against Jerusalem, To take the spoil, and to take the
prey, and to tread them down like the mire in the street. Howbeit he means
not so, neither does his heart think so, but it is in his heart to destroy, and
cut off nations not a few: wherefore it shall come to pass that when the Lord
has performed his whole work upon mount Zion, (what he himself, not what the
King of Assyria intended to do), I will punish the fruit of the stout heart of
the king of Assyria, and the glory of his high looks, 10. Isa. 5, 6, 7, -- 12.

Now God has the same tender care of a Christian Nation, that he had of Israel;
He mingles our Cup for us, he prescribes what we shall suffer and how long: and
he corrects as a Father, not to destroy, but to reform; and this is a mighty
comfort, that whatever men threaten, we are in the hands of God, who has the
Winds and Seas a^ his command, who gives Salvation (...) Kings, who delivers
David his Serva^ from the hurtful Sword, Psalm. 144. 10. The most powerful
Oppressors are but the Rod of God's Anger; the more fierce and savage
Instruments God employs to correct us, we may conclude, the more angry God is;
but whatever the Rod is, it is God that strikes, wh^ knows when to strike, and
when to spare: We never have any reason to be afraid of men, whatever their
Power, how great soever their Rage and Vengeance be; but ought to pray to God
as the Prophet does, O Lord correct me, but with judgment, not in thine anger,
lest thou bring me to nothing, Jer. 10. 24. O Lord rebuke me not in thine
anger, neither chasten me in thy sore displeasure* have mercy upon me, O Lord,
for I am weak, O Lord heal me, for my bones are vexed, Psalm. 6. 1, 2. or as it
is in Psalm. 56. 1, 2, 3. Be merciful to me, O God, for man would swallow me up,
he ^ting daily oppresses me; mine ene^es would daily swallow me up, for they
(...) many that rise up against me, O thou most ^igh. What time I am afraid, I
will ^ust in Thee; in God I will praise his ^rd; in God I have put my trust, I
will ^t fear what flesh can do unto me.

4thly, When God does think fit to ^rrect his People, yet he always re^oves his
Judgments upon their sincere ^epentance: This was God's express ^ovenant with
Israel, 26. Levit. 40, ^1, 42. If they shall confess their iniqui^, and the
iniquity of their Fathers, with the trespass which they trespassed against me;
and also that they have walk^d contrary to me, and that I also have ^alked
contrary to them, and have brought them into the Land of their Enemies; (...)
then their uncircumcised hearts be hum^led, and they then accept of the
punishment of their iniquities, then will I remember my Covenant with Jacob,
and also my Covenant with Isaac, and also my Covenant with Abraham will I
remember, and I will remember the land.

Thus in the time of the Judges, when God for their sins delivered them into
the hands of their Enemies, when they cried to God, he raised up Saviors for
them: Nay, many times, when their Repentance was not very sincere, nor lasting,
yet in great goodness and compassion he spared them: When he slew them, then
they sought him, and returned, and enquired early after God; and they remembered
that God was their Rock, and the high God their Redeemer; nevertheless they did
flatter him with their mouth, and they lied unto him with their tongue, for
their heart was not right with him, neither were they steadfast in his Covenant;
but he being full of compassion forgave their iniquities, and destroyed them
not; yea many a time turned he his anger away, and did not stir up all his
wrath; for he remembered that they were but flesh, a wind that passes away, and
comes not again, 78. Psalm 34, etc.

So that how angry soever God be, we have a certain way of appeasing his anger.
Nothing but sin can provoke a merciful God, and a compassionate Father to
punish; He has a great tenderness for all his Creatures; He does not afflict
willingly, nor grieve the children of men; and therefore he is more easily
appeased, than he is provoked; judgment is his strange Work, but he ^ights in
Acts of Mercy, and seems ^ased with an honorable occasion (...) show mercy,
without exposing his ^ws and Government to contempt: ^d therefore Repentance
and Refor^tion will always appease him; nay ^metimes we see, that the very
shows ^d appearance of a public and solemn ^pentance, though it be not so
sin^re and hearty as it ought to be, ^akes him stay his hand, and expect ^r
return. And this is a great encou^gement, and a Powerful obligation on (...) to
return to God when he strikes, (...) humble our selves under his mighty and,
for there is no other way to re^ove his Judgments, and this will do (...).

It is a vain thing to trust in Armies ^d Navies, in the Courage and Con^ct of
Princes and Generals, when ^ur Sins fight against us, when God ^efuses to go
forth with our Armies: ^r no King is saved by the multitude of ^n host; a horse
is a vain thing for safe^y, neither shall he deliver any by his ^reat strength;
but the eyes of the Lord are upon them that fear him, upon them that ^ope in
his mercies. 33. Psalm. 16, 17, 18.

Nay, the justice and righteousness of our Cause will not always secure (...)
of Success; for those who have a very just Cause, may deserve to be punished
and then God may justly punish them and deliver them into the hands (...) their
Enemies: God does not always determine what is Right and Wrong by the events of
War; for he is the Sovereign Judge of the World, and may punish a wicked Nation
by unjust Oppressors, as he often did the Israelites.

The Profession of the true Religion will not always secure us, when ou^ Sins
cry for Vengeance: When the Jews cried, The Temple of the Lord, (...) temple of
the Lord; the Prophet told them, They trusted in lying words; for will ye
steal, and murder, and commit adultery, and swear falsely, and burn incense to
Baal, and come and stand before me in this house, which is called by my name,
and say, We are delivered to do all these abominations? 7 Jer. 4, -- 10. To
glory in the profession of the true Faith, or in a vigorous opposition to the
Errors and Corruptions of Religion, when we are Atheists or Infidels in our
Lives, may make God punish us, but is no reason on our part, why he should save
us; but true and sincere Repen^ance will save us. We profess the sin^ere Faith
of Christ, we fight in a just Cause, if it be lawful to defend our ^elves
against the powerful Oppressor ^f the Protestant, that is, the true Christian
Faith, and the Liberties of Europe; and we have no reason to fear any thing but
our sins: Let us but re^orm our Lives, and put away the evil ^f our doings, and
our Arms will be as Prosperous, as our Cause is Just: God will then gird our
Princes and soldiers ^ith strength to the battle; will teach their hands to
war, and their fingers to ^ght.

5thly. Faith and Prayer are more ^owerful than Arms; as it must neces^arily
be, if God only gives Victory and Success. This we learn from the ^hole History
of the Jews; the Apo^le to the Hebrews gives us a particular ^ccount of the
Power of Faith, II. Heb. ^2, 33, 34. Of Gideon, and Barach, and Sampson, and
Ieptha, and David, who through faith subdued kingdoms, wrought ^ighteousness,
obtained promises, stopped ^he mouths of lions, quenched the violence ^f fire,
escaped the edge of the sword, out of weakness were made strong, waxed
valivaliant in fight, turned to flight the armies of the aliens. Moses his
Prayer was more powerful than Joshua's Arms; for when Moses held up his hands,
Israel prevailed; when he let down his hands, Amalek prevailed, 17. Exo. II.
Hezekiah's Prayer overthrew the Assyrian Army, when Rabshekah came against
Jerusalem, and reproached them with their Trust in God. We must not indeed
expect such miraculous Victories as God gave to Israel; but this makes no
difference; for the Power of Faith and Prayer is the same still; and all
Victory is God's still, who gives Success as well by invisible Means, and
seeming Accidents, as by the most visible interposal of a miraculous Power: For
God gave Israel miraculous Deliverances; not because he could not save them
without a miracle, but because he would make it visible to all the world. That
he was their Savior. But still God hears our Prayers, and answers them; he is
still the Savior and Deliverer of all those who trust in him, and hope in his
Mercy; and therefore the only sure way to conquer our Enemies, is to prevail
with God by our servent and importunate prayers for a Blessing upon our Arms;
to pray in Faith, in ^e, with an entire dependence on (...), and a perfect
Resignation to his (...): Thus Gideon, and Barak, and ^id, and the Worthies of
old, sub^d Kingdoms, waxed valiant in fight, (...) turned to flight the Armies
of Ali^; and there is no other way that I ^w of, still: If God be still the
only ^er of Victory, Faith and Prayer is (...) the only way to obtain Victory
(...) God; and therefore if we are (...) and remiss in our Prayers; if (...) do
not pray at all, or expect no^g from our Prayers, let us not charge any ill
success to ill conduct or ^ardize, but to our Infidelity and ^igion; and indeed
this is the only ^ncholly Consideration in our pre^ Circumstances; if the
Courage (...) Conduct of a Prince, if the Brave^ and Resolution of Soldiers, if
a ^erous Army and Navy, if an Arm ^lesh could give Victory, we have ^on to hope
well; but if God go (...) forth with our Armies, all our ^er Preparations are
vain; and how (...) we expect that, when we will not (...) it, or only mock God
with some ^nal and customary addresses, without being concerned whether he
hears o^ no; or without expecting or at least without trusting and depending on
his help*

6thly. But to encourage those goo^ men, how few soever there are amo^ us, who
have a great sense of the Divine Providence, and a firm Tr^ and Faith in God,
to be very importunate in their Prayers for the Church and Nation, I observe
farthe^ That God many times has spared (...) wicked People at the earnest
interces^ons of some few good men. Thus (...) the intercession of Abraham, God
promised to have spared Sodom, had the^ been ten righteous persons found (...)
that great City: God spared Isr^ when they had so provoked him (...) their
Idolatries, that he threatened (...) destroy them, only at the importu^ of
Moses, as the Psalmist observes; th^fore he said, he would destroy them, (...)
not Moses his chosen stood before him (...) the breach, to turn away his wrath,
(...) be should destroy them, 106. Psalm. 23. (...) Story of which we have, 32.
Exodus 7, (...) At another time, when they had p^voked God by their Idolatries
a^ Whoredoms with the Daughters (...) Moab, and the Plague broke in amo^ them,
then stood up Phineas, and execu^d judgment, and the plague was stayed, (...).
Numb. And therefore when God ^clared his resolution to punish them, (...)
forbad his Prophet so much as to ^ay for them, 7. Ier. 16. And in 14. ^ek. 14.
professes, That he would not ^cept of any Intercessions for them: ^o these
three men, Noah, Daniel, and ^b, were in it, yet they shall deliver ^t their
own souls by their righteousness, ^ith the Lord: Which supposes, that (...)
another time, the Intercessions of ^ese good men would have prevailed; ^d that
it is very extraordinary for God (...) deny it.

And if the importunate Prayers of (...) few good men may obtain Victory ^d
Success, and save a Church and ^ation; let every good man at this ^me cry
mightily to God, especially as ^e Prophet, Isaiah exhorts, Ye that ^ake mention
of the Lord, keep not silence, and give him no rest, till he make Ierusa^em a
praise in the earth, 62. Isa. 6, 7.

7thly. To add no more, and it is a very comfortable Consideration, God many
times saved Israel for his own Names sake, when their sins provoked him to
destroy them. 48. Isa. 9. For my name sake will I defer mine anger, and for my
praise will I refrain for Thee, that I cut Thee not off. 11. v. For mine ow^
sake, even for mine own sake will I do it; for how should my name be polluted?
and I will not give my glory to another. Thus God assigns the reason, why he
did not destroy Israel in the Wilderness, when they so highly provoked him. I
wrought for my name sake, that it should not be polluted before the heathen,
among whom they were, in whose sight I mad^ my self known unto them, in
bringing them forth out of the land of Egypt, 20. Ezekiel. 9. That is, they were
God's peculiar people, the only worshippers of the Lord Jehovah, whom he had
brought out of Egypt by a mighty hand, to make his Name known in the world;
and though they never so much deserved to be destroyed, had he then destroyed
them, his own great Name would have suffered with them; as Moses pleaded with
God; Wherefore should the Egyptians say, For mischief did he bring them out to
slay them in the mountains, and to consume them from the face of the earth? 32.
Exodus 12. And thus the Psalmist prays, Help us, O God of our salvation, for the
glory of thy name, and deliver us, and purge away our sins for thy name sake;
wherefore should the Heathen say, Where is their God? let him be known among
the Heathen in our sight, by revenging the blood of thy servants, which is
shed, 79. Psalm 9, 10.

And this is matter of hope to us, That though our sins are very great, yet God
will not utterly destroy us, but will send deliverance for his name sake; for
the sake of that holy Faith which is professed among us; lest our Antichristian
Enemies should triunph and say, Where is now their God? When the preservation
of a wicked people is for the defense and honor of the true Christian Faith,
we have reason to hope, and good men have a very powerful argument to plead
with God, That he will save us for his own Names sake.

SERMON IV.
^reach'd before the Queen, at Whitehall, February the XIIth, 1691/2.
IV. MATTHEW. 1. ^hen was Jesus led up of the Spirit into the Wilderness, to be
tempted of the Devil.


THE Temptation of our Savior, after his fasting Forty Days, is a very proper
Subject for our Meditation at this time; and suggests ^o many useful
observations, that I shall not wast any time in a needless Preface; but shall
1. Consider in general, what concerns his Temptation; and 2. Explain the Nature
of those particular Temptations wherewith the Devil assaulted him.

1. In general, Concerning our Savior's being tempted by the Devil: Now to
tempt, is to make a Trial and Experiment; and when the Devil tempts, it is to
try, if he can persuade, or seduce us from the Fear, and Worship, and Obedience
of God.

1. Now in the first place it is very observable, that Christ himself, when he
became Man, was tempted of the Devil; and there is no greater mystery in this,
than that he was liable to hunger and cold, and had all the innocent Appetites,
Inclinations, Infirmities of Humane nature; that is, That he was a true and
real Man. The Ancients generally conclude, that the Devil did not know at this
time, how great a Person our Savior was, even the Eternal Son of God; for it
is hardly credible, that had he known this, he would have made so vain and
hopeless an attempt on him: It is likely enough, he thought him to be some
extraordinary person; He knew by the Ancient Prophecies, that the Messiah was
to appear; and knew from the Prophet Daniel, that the time for his coming was
accomplished; nay, it is probable, he knew all the circumstances of his Birth,
and heard that ^imony God gave him at his Bap^, This is my beloved Son; but he
saw he was a Man, though an extraordinary Man; and might not know that he was
any thing more; and having formerly foiled our first Parents in Paradise, in
the state of innocence, hoped for the like success again.

Now if Christ himself was tempted by the Devil, none of us must hope to
escape; tempted we shall be, and therefore must take care to stand upon our
guard, and to fortify our Minds against all temptations.

And this encouragement we have from the Example of our Savior, that to be
tempted is no Sin, unless we yield to a temptation; for He was tempted as we
are, yet without sin; and we cannot imagine, had it been a sin to be tempted,
that God would have permitted the Devil to have tempted our Savior; which may
ease the fears of some Melancholy Christians, who are afflicted with evil and
tempting thoughts which their Souls abhor; for whatever the cause of such
thoughts be, whether a frighted and disturbed imagination, or the suggestion of
wicked Spirits, they can no more defile the Soul, which abhors and rejects them
with grief and indignation, than they can the Paper, on which they are writ.

Nay, hence we learn, that God many times exercises those with the greatest and
most difficult Trials and Temptations, who are most dear to him. He had no
sooner proclaimed Christ his beloved Son, in whom he was well pleased, but he
leads him by the Spirit into the Wilderness, to be tempted of the Devil.

This Life is a State of Trial and Probation; and Temptations, though they
create some trouble and difficulty to good men, yet do them no hurt. If good
men Conquer, Temptations do but exercise, increase, and confirm their Graces,
and make them great and illustrious examples to the World, glorify the Divine
Power in the Victories and Triumphs of his Servants, over the World, the Flesh,
and the Devil; give them a secure hope in God, and a transporting sense of his
Love, and prepare great rewards for them in the next Life. And if they happen
in any particular encounter to be overcome, as St. Peter himself was, when he
denied his Master; yet they rise again with glory; and the sense of their sin,
and the shame of a defeat, fills them with sorrow, indignation, self-revenge,
gives them new spirit, vigor, activity, resolution, makes them more patient of
hardships and sufferings, more unwearied in doing good, more humble and modest,
and more perfectly resigned to the Will of God, to dispose of them and their
Services to his own Glory, as he pleases.

God does not train up those whom he Loves, and whom he prepares for Glory, in
ease and softness; Whom the Lord loves he chastneth; and scourges every son
whom he receives: And the more difficult Temptations he exposes us to, the
greater honor he does us; the more glorious will our Triumphs, the richer and
brighter will our Crowns be. Let us then behold our Savior in the Wilderness,
separated from humane conversation, and all the comforts of Life, in the midst
of wild Beasts and tempting Spirits, and not think, that God uses us hardly, if
at any time he lets loose the Tempter upon us, and gives him power over all we
have, as he did in the Case of Job, to afflict us in our Relations, our Bodies,
our Estates, good Names, or whatever gives us the sharpest and keenest sense of
suffering, and is the most difficult exercise of our Faith.

2. Let us consider the time when our Savior was tempted, viz. immediately
after his Baptism, being full of the Holy Ghost, 4. Luke 1.

1. As soon as our Savior was baptized, he was led by the Spirit into the
Wilderness. For Then in my Text relates to the time of his Baptism; and St.
Luke tells us, this was done in his return from Jordan, where he was baptized
by John.

By this Religious Rite, our Savior had devoted himself to the immediate
service of God in the Salvation of Mankind, and was inaugurated into his
Prophetic Office, by that Testimony which was given to him by a Voice from
Heaven, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased; and this was the
Critical time, both for the Devil to tempt, and for our Savior to baffle all
his temptations, and to triumph over him.

Could the Devil have conquered our Savior in this first assault, there had
been an end of this Glorious design of man's Salvation, when he had enslaved and
captivated the Savior himself; and therefore he began as early with ^he second
Adam, as he did with the first, though not with the like success. Had our first
parents resisted the first ^emptation, we had been happy for ^ver; but they
yielded and brought ^eath upon themselves and their Poste^ity; but the seed of
the Woman, whom God had promised should ^reak the Serpents Head, who was made
manifest to destroy the works, the Kingdom and the Power of the Devil, by God's
order and appointment, first encounters him in his own person, resists his most
furious assaults, makes him re^reat with shame and despair, as foresee^ng his
own destiny, and the final destruction of his Kingdom. As the old Serpent
seduced our first Parents in Paradise, and brought sin and misery and death
into the world, so it was very fitting that the Savior of Mankind should give
the first proof of his Divine power in conquering the Tempter.

This gives us great encouragement to fight under Christ's Banners against the
World, the Flesh, and the Devil; for the Captain of our Salvation has already
conquered, and if we are not wanting to our selves, we shall be more than
Conquerors through Christ who strengthens us.

He knows what the power of temptations is, and what measures of Grace are
necessary to resist them; and if we do not forsake him, he will not forsake us.
He has conquered himself, and knows how to conquer; and if we faithfully adhere
to him, we shall conquer too.

Nay, in case we should some time be conquered, this has made him a merciful
and compassionate High Priest, being in all things tempted like as we are: He
knows the weakness of humane nature, and the power and subtilty of the Tempter,
and prays for us, as he did for St. Peter, That our faith fail not; that if we
fall, we may rise again by Repentance: And this is a mighty Consolation, That
if any man sin, (...) have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous, who is not only a Propitiation for our Sins, but was tempted also,
as we are.

2ly. St. Luke observes, that our Savior was full of the Holy Ghost, (which he
received without measure at his Baptism, when the Holy Ghost descended like a
Dove, and rested on him) before he was led by the Spirit into the Wilderness to
be tempted of the Devil.

For Human Nature (and it was the Human Nature of Christ on which the Holy
Ghost descended) cannot resist such powerful Assaults without Divine
Assistances. And the Example of our Savior assures us, that God will not
expose us to any Temptations, without giving us proportionable measures of
Grace to resist them: That if we are at any time conquered, it is not for want
of power, but for want of will to conquer: that is, the fault is wholly our
own, and we cannot blame God for it.

I doubt, there are few men in the world ^ut the Devil (had he the full power
of ^empting) could find out some Tempta^ions too big for them; but the Divine
Goodness is seen, as well in restraining ^he power of the Devil, that we shall
^ot be tempted above what we are able ^o bear, as by the strengthening our ^inds
by the internal Assistances of his Grace; and therefore our Savior has ^aught
us to pray, Lead us not into ^emptation, but deliver us from evil, (...), from
the wicked One; which ^oes not signify, that we may never be tempted, which is
impossible, while we live in Bodies of Flesh and Blood, and are encompassed
with all the Flattering Objects of Flesh and Sense; but that God would not give
us up into the power of the Devil, to be tempted above what we are able.

Some of the Ancients observe from this Story, That when we devote and
consecrate our selves to God, we must expect to be tempted as our Savior was:
As for bad men, who are the Slaves and Vassals of the Devil, he cannot so
properly be said to tempt, as to govern them; for he is the Spirit that works
in the Children of disobedience: but when men desert his service, he is very
busy to recover his Slaves again; but then our comfort and security too, is,
That when we give up our selves to the Service of God, he takes us into his
protection; the Wicked One cannot touch us without his leave, and he always
proportions our Trials to our Strength.

3dly, Consider the Place of our Savior's Temtation, He was led by the Spirit
into the Wilderness, where there were no tempting Objects, but yet there the
tempting Spirit found him.

Some men think, that the surest way (...) get rid of Temptations, is to get ^t
of the World; to withdraw them^ves from Human Conversation; or (...) make a
show of doing it, without ^ing it; as if the Devil could not ^llow them into a
Desert, or a Cell. ^hile we live in Bodies of Flesh and ^ood we may be tempted
wherever ^e are: If we mortify our Sensual Ap^tites, and our love to this
World, ^e may live very innocently in the ^orld; if we do not, we can never ^t
rid of the World, but wherever ^e go, we carry it in our hearts.

Do these men imagine, they can ne^r be tempted to lust, unless they daily ^e
and converse with beautiful Women? (...) that they cannot love the World
without living in a Court, and enjoy^g all the ease and luxury of a Plentiful
^rtune? or that it is not possible to ^spise the World with as much haughti^ss
and vanity of mind, as any ^an has, who most admires it? That a ^onk cannot be
as proud as an Emperor, ^d glory as much in a sullen Retire^ent, in Voluntary
Austerities, in an ^ffected Poverty, in a Vain Opinion ^f extraordinary
Sanctity, as any Man can do in Wealth and Power? Whence came all those
Superstitions, which have corrupted both the Faith and Worship of Christianity,
and done more mischief to the Church and Religion, than all the looseness of a
Secular Life, but from Deserts and the Cells of Monks and Hermites? Which
proves that the Devil has his Temptations for the Wilderness, as well as for
the Court for the most Religious Devotees, an^ Melancholy Enthusiasts, as well
as f^ the Men of this World; and those t^ most dangerous Temptations too; which
as experience tells us, open a bac^ door for Pride and Ambition, and Secular
Power, and a general corruption of Manners to enter into the Church, and into
the Lives of Christians: An^ therefore we must guard our selve^ against the
Tempter as well in o^ greatest solitudes and retirements from the World, as in
a crowd of busine^ We must have a care of the temptation of Devotion, and
Mortification, (...) Fastings and Penances, of a sullen d^ content at this
World, as well as (...) the temptations of a busy Life, and (...) an easy and
prosperous Fortune.

4thly, I observe, That Christ was led ^y the Spirit into the Wilderness, to be
^empted of the Devil; that is, It was God's appointment, not his own vo^untary
choice. And this Teaches us ^anfully to resist Temptations, when ^he Providence
of God, and the un^voidable circumstances of our Con^ition bring us into
Temptations, but ^ot presumptuously to thrust our selves unto them.

There is always danger in Tempta^ions, especially when we rashly ven^ure upon
them. Let not him that puts on his Armor, boast, as he that puts it off,
is true in our Spiritual Warfare. We have seen great Men conquered, even St.
Peter himself; and therefore, Let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest
he fall, and not unnecessarily venture too near a Precipice, where he may be in
danger of falling.

Our Savior has taught us to pray, that God would not lead us into Temptation,
as I observed before; much less then ought we to lead our selves into
Temptation. We may easily presume too far upon the strength of our Faith, our
Courage, our Resolution, as St. Peter did, who had he been more diffident of
himself, had kept out of the High-Priest's Hall, and escaped the Temptation,
which he could not resist.

We daily see, that Men who presume upon the Strength of their Constitution,
and use their Bodies ill, destroy their Health, and shorten their Lives, while
Men who feel their own weak and crazy Temper, live on with Care to a good Old
Age; and thus it is with respect to the Mind, as well as to the Body:
Presumption will destroy those, whom Fear and Caution will secure; and
therefore, let us not be highminded, but fear.

There are a great many ways, whereby Men expose themselves to Temptation, and
tempt even the Tempter; some of which are very obvious: As to keep Ill Company,
whose Conversation is a daily Temptation: Sloth and Idleness, which betrays Men
to any Wickedness which offers its self: For it is an uneasy thing to have
nothing to do, and that it self is a Temptation, and the Devil never wants
Business to employ such Men in; and I know nothing worse than this, but when
Men choose such Business, as is nothing else but Idleness and Vanity, or can
only minister to their own, or to other Men's Lusts.

But there are other ways, whereby Men thrust themselves into Temptations,
without considering what they do. I might name many, but shall content my self
with some few at present, which are least observed, and which prove Snares to
good Men; as for instance: To impose upon our selves constant Tasks of
Religion, that we will Read and Pray so much, and so often every Day, and
observe voluntary Fasts, and abstain from such innocent Diversions, etc. which
Men commonly resolve in some great Heats and Fits of Devotion, which they fancy
will continue in the same fervor, but never do; and then these Tasks grow very
uneasy, as every thing of Religion does, when it grows a Task; and then they
degenerate into dullness and formality, and then Men either leave them off, and
with that are tempted to leave off Religion it self; or they are so very cold,
that they fancy themselves spiritually dead, and fall into Melancholy, into
Desertions, into Despair it self.

It is a dangerous thing for Men by rash and arbitrary Vows, to tie themselves
up from doing that, which otherwise they might very innocently do, and which
they will be strongly tempted to do, when they have vowed not to do it. The
Guides of Souls know, that this is no imaginary Case, but what they so often
meet with, and see such ill effects of, that it is very fit to warn Men of the
Snare. Were there no other reason against the Monkish Vows of Celibacy,
Poverty, and Obedience, I should think this sufficient, that considered only as
perpetual Vows, they are a dangerous State of Temptation; and for my own part,
I would never advise any Man to make a perpetual Vow to do, or not to do any
thing, which it is not perpetually his Duty to do, or not to do.

Thus to marry with Persons of a disagreeable Age, or a disagreeable Humor, or
a contrary Religion, is to put our selves into a state of Temptation; but such
particular Instances would be endless, and therefore I forbear.

If God lead us into Temptation, he will give us sufficient strength to resist,
if we improve his Grace; if we lead ^ur selves into Temptation, and God ^eave
us to the power and subtilty of ^he Tempter, the sin and the folly is our own.

5thly, I observe by what means our Savior conquered the Devil's Temptations,
and that was by the Authority, and by the Word of God: It is written, Man shall
not live by bread alone. It is written, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God.
It is written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou
serve. These are such Answers, as would admit of no Reply; for the Authority of
God can never be answered.

And thus we must conquer also, if ever we will conquer, by a firm Faith in
God, and Belief of his Word: Faith is our Shield, and the Word of God is the
Sword of the Spirit, and we have no other sure Defense against all Temptations.

This ruined our first Parents in Paradise, when their Reason and Natural
Powers were in their greatest Vigor, Perfection, and Integrity, that instead
of insisting on God's Authority, they ventured to reason the Case with the
Tempter. Set aside the Authority of God, and the Devil will quickly outwit, and
out-reason us; he is skilled in all the Arts of Deceit, and Methods of
Persuasions; and without God's Authority, our Courage, our Resolution, our
Honor, our Reason it self, even all the Rants and triumphant Speculations of
Philosophy, will fail us in the Day of Trial: to Tempt, is either to deceive,
or to persuade, and there is no other secure defense against either but the
Authority, and the Word of God. The wisest Reasoner may be imposed on by so
artificial a Tempter; but God can neither deceive, nor be deceived; and then
while we believe God, and have regard to his Commands, we cannot be deceived
neither: And what is able to resist all the Terrors and Flatteries of the
World, and the Flesh, but the Authority of that God who is our Maker, and our
Judge? What insignificant Names are Virtue and Vice, how weak and feeble is the
sense of Decency and Honor, and the Dignity of Human Nature, and of a Life of
Reason (after we have read or writ so many Volumes about it) when we feel the
soft Charms of Pleasure, and our Eyes are filled with visible Glories? Who
would not part with a fine Thought or two, with some pretty Notions of Moral
Beauty, and Intellectual Pleasures, for a Happiness which may be seen and felt?
But the Authority of GOD, the firm belief of his Promises and Threatenings, the
hopes and fears of another World, are beyond all other Persuasions, unless any
thing can persuade a Man to be eternally miserable.

This may suffice to be spoke in General, concerning our Savior's Temptation.
We come now to consider,

II. The particular Temptations wherewith our Savior was Assaulted, and they
are Three.

1. The first was to relieve his Hunger, after his long fasting, by working a
Miracle: And when the Tempter came to him, he said, If thou be the Son of God,
command that these stones be made bread.

This was a very artificial Temptation, which it may be none but Christ himself
would have been aware of: For what hurt was it, for the Son of God to work a
Miracle? What hurt was it for a Man, who was Hungry, to relieve his Hunger? For
here was no Temptation to excess, but to satisfy the necessities of Nature:
What hurt was it for him, who afterward fed so many Thousands by Miracles, in
this great Distress to have wrought a Miracle to satisfy his own Hunger? This
was very plausible, and looked like very charitable Advice; but yet there was a
secret Snare in it.

1st, For this was made a Trial, whether he were the Son of God or not, If thou
be the Son of God, command that these stones be made bread: Now had he complied
with this, it had argued a distrust of his Relation to God, and of the Love of
his Father; and this was a Temptation to Sin. Thus the Tempter dealt with our
first Parents, made them jealous of God's good Intentions toward them, and by
that Tempted them to Disobedience. The Serpent said unto the Woman, Ye shall
not surely die. For God knows, that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes
shall be opened, and ye shall be as Gods, knowing good and evil. That is, God
envies your Happiness, and therefore has forbid you to Eat of the Tree of
Knowledge of Good and Evil.

Thus the Devil suggested to our Savior, that he had great reason to question,
whether he were the Son of God, because he was destitute of all the Comforts
and Supports of Life, and after forty Days fasting had nothing in the
Wilderness to Eat, unless he would turn Stones into Bread.

And though this part of the Temptation our Savior takes no notice of in his
Answer, but scorns it; yet we find it makes a very powerful Impression upon
other Men, who are apt to measure God's Love or Hatred by present things; when
they are Prosperous, they conclude they are the Favorites of Heaven; when they
are Afflicted and meet with cross Events, then God is angry with them, and has
forsaken them: And though this argues such a stupid Ignorance of Christianity,
that one would think it could be no Temptation to a Christian; yet it is too
Notorious, that three parts of the Melancholy, the Desertions, nay despair of
many Christians, is owing to no other Cause: they think their Condition safe
for the next World, while they are Prosperous in this; but as soon as the World
begins to Frown, they are irrecoverably Damned; but would such men consider,
that our Savior himself wanted Bread in the Wilderness, and had no place
whereon to lay his Head; it would cure these Desertions, if there be no greater
Guilt, which a strait Fortune awakens the sense of, which I doubt is too often
the Case.

2dly, There was another Snare in this, to persuade our Savior, to supply the
necessities of Nature by extraordinary means, without the immediate Direction
and Command of God; for this had been a distrust of God's Care and Providence,
to have relieved his own wants by preternatural and uncommanded Methods: And
therefore to this he Answers, It is written, Man shall not live by bread alone,
but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God. That is, Bread
indeed is the ordinary Provision God has made for the support of Man's Life;
but when these ordinary and natural Provisions fail, he has other ways to
support Life, as he fed the Israelites with Manna and Quails in the Wilderness,
and gave them Drink out of a Rock; but then we must patiently and securely
expect by what means God will provide for us; ^d till the word proceed out of
his mouth, ^l we have some particular Command ^d Direction for it, we must take
no ^xtraordinary, Uncommanded, much ^ss Forbidden ways, to preserve our ^ives:
for this is want of Trust in God, ^r want of Submission to his Will. ^xtream
want and necessity is almost (...) irresistible Temptation to humane Nature, to
distrust the ordinary Pro^isions of Providence, and to provide ^r our selves by
what means we can; and to justify what we do by such ne^essities: it requires a
great degree of ^aith and Trust in God, when we have ^o Prospect of ordinary
Succors, pati^ntly to expect God's Provision, without going out of God's way:
But ^hus our Savior was Tempted, and ^as taught us how to conquer this
Temptation, Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word which
proceeds out of the mouth of God: If Bread fail, we must expect by what other
means God will supply our Wants, and not transgress those Laws God has
prescribed us, how desperate soever our Condition seem to be.

2dly, The next Temptation is in the other extreme, to presume so far upon his
Interest in God's Favor and Protection, as to make dangerous and vainglorious
Experiments of God's care: He set him upon a pinnacle of the temple, and said
unto him, If thou be the Son of God, cast thy felf down: for it is written, He
shall give his Angels charge concerning thee, and in their hands they shall
beat thee up, lest at any time thou should dash thy foot against the stone.

When the Tempter perceived, that Christ wholly relied on the Directions and
Authority of Scripture, he inforces his Temptation with Scripture too,
misunderstood and misapplied. And these are the most dangerous Temptations of
all, which impose upon Men with a show of Religion, as our late Experience of a
wild Enthusiastic Age will tell us; when nothing so bad could be thought of,
but some Men had Scripture-Examples, or Precepts, or Prophesies, or Parables,
to justify it; and therefore we must be aware of this, as well as of all the
other Arts and Stratagems of the Tempter.

In answer to this our Savior proves, that this Text could not mean, that God
would command his Angels to bear him up in their hands, if he should ^ling
himself from the Pinnacle of the Temple, because we are expressly forbid, to make
such Experiments of God's Protection, as this: It is written, Thou ^halt not
tempt the Lord thy God.

To tempt is to try, and to tempt God is to try what he will, or can do for us,
beyond his Promise, and beyond the ordinary Methods of his Pro^idence;
especially when we either ^urmur against God, for not answer^ng our
unreasonable demands, or pre^ume upon his favor to do that, which he has
forbid us to do, or ex^ect his Protection and Blessing, when we put our selves
out of the ordinary ^rotection of his Providence: it were ^asie, had I time, to
give instances of ^ll these ways of tempting God; the ^emptation of our Savior
concerns ^e last I mentioned, out of a vain-glo^ous humor, and a presumption
of God's peculiar favor to us, volunta^ly without any reasonable pretense,
^uch less necessity, to thrust our selves ^to apparent and unavoidable Dangers,
and expect God should save us by Mi^cles: for this is what our Savior was
tempted to, to fling himself down from the Pinnacle of the Temple, in a
presumptuous confidence of God's care of him, that he would command his Angels
to bear him up in their hands.

This looks like Faith in God, a plerophory of Hope, and full assurance of his
Love, but indeed is Vanity, Pride, Insolence, Presumption, and a tempting of
God. It is such an Affront and Indignity, as wise Men will not bear from their
best Friends, when they impose upon them, not to do them a real kindness, but
to gratify their vanity and humor in such Demands, as a wi^ Man cannot
honorably grant.

And yet there is a more dangerous and fatal Presumption than this, when men
have such a strong Imagination o^ their being the Sons, the Chosen and Elect
People of God, that they thin^ they cannot do any thing to forfe^ God's Love:
they may make mo^ bold with God's Laws than other Men, for God sees no sin in
his People; nay indeed, that it is no Sin to advanc^ themselves, and the Cause
they ha^ Espoused, which they call the Glor^ of God, by extraordinary means,
tha^ is by transgressing all the known and ordinary Rules of Justice and
Charity.

These are dangerous Temptations, and we have seen the miserable Effects ^f
them; and therefore let no man ^ink, that he is so great a favorite of Heaven,
as to have God at his beck ^o save him by Miracles, when he ^ilfully exposes
himself to such Dan^ers, as nothing but Miracles can De^ver him from; much less
to think, ^at God will alter the nature of Good and Evil for his sake; that he
will dis^ense with his Laws, (Laws which ^re as Eternal and Unchangeable as ^is
own Nature) when ever such vain ^nthusiasts pretend to serve themselves, and
his Glory by the breach of them: (...) is written, Thou shall not tempt the
Lord thy God.

3. These two Temptations were ma^aged with great Art to deceive; the ^hird is
open and barefaced. The Devil in express words tempts him to ^dolatry, with
the Promise of all the Kingdoms of the World, and the Glory of them; which he
had drawn a beautiful Landscape of, and showed him from a high Mountain: All
these things will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me: Or as St.
Luke relates it, All this power will I give thee, and the glory of them; for it
is delivered unto me, and to whomsoever I will, I give it. Which in some sense
was true at that time; not that the Devil had the Supreme and Absolute disposal
of Kingdoms, for St. Paul assures us, that all the Powers even of the Pagan
World, were of God, and ordained by 13 Rom 1.
God. But yet he was at that time the God of this World, and had a more visible
Kingdom than God himself. The true Worshippers of God were a^ that time chiefly
confined to Judea, a^ very little spot of Earth; but all the Power and Glory of
the World was in the hands of Idolaters, who Worshipped the Devil and wicked
Spirits: And the force of the Argument is, as if he had said to our Savior,
You call your self the Son of God, and Worship him, but will God do that for
you, which I can and will do, if you Worship me? You your self see, that he has
no Kingdom but Judea to bestow on you, and that also is at present in the hands
of my Worshippers; but what is that to all the Kingdom of the World, which are
at my disposal and which you see your self are mine and under my Government.
But our ^aviour without disputing the value of ^is World, or what Power the
Devil ^ad in the disposal of it, chides away ^e Tempter with Indignation, Be
gone ^atan, For it is written, Thou shall wor^ip the Lord thy God, and him only
shall ^ou serve. But though Christ refused ^is proffer, his pretended Vicar has
^ken it, and revived the old Pagan ^olatry for the Kingdoms of the ^orld, and
the Glory of them.

This is the prevailing Temptation (...) this day, to corrupt Religion, the
^aith and Worship of God, for some ^mporal Advantages: too many Men ^ink That
the best Religion, which ^ill best serve a secular Interest; and we have reason
to think, that ^o many do this, and know that they do; that their furious ^eal
for a false Religion is not all ^gnorance and Mistake, but an undis^mbled Love
of this World: For can ^e think, that the Devil never tempt^ any Man but
Christ, knowingly ^d willingly to renounce the true Re^gion, and the true
Worship of God ^r this World? No doubt he does, ^d very often prevails too; and
these knowing Idolaters, who make a downright bargain to Worship the Devil for
the Kingdoms of the World and the Glory of them, are those who abuse the
Ignorant and Credulous with a false and hypocritical Zeal.

But let us remember, that we mus^ Worship the Lord our God, and him only must
we serve: Let us remember what our Savior tells us, What shall it pro^ a man,
if he gain the whole world a^ lose his own soul? Or, What shall a man give in
exchange for his soul? Let us ^member, that the end of Religion (...) to please
God, to Glorify him, to (...) like him, and to enjoy him for ever^ and this
will give us a secure Victo^ over the World and the Devil: Whi^ God of his
infinite Mercy grant, throug our Lord Jesus Christ; To whom with t^ Father and
the Holy Ghost, be Hono^ Glory, and Power, now and for ever

Amen.
SERMON V.
^each'd before the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, at St. Bridget's Church,
on Tuesday in Easter-Week, 1692.
IV. LUKE 35. ^t love ye your enemies, -- (and do good, and lend, hoping for
nothing again) and your reward shall be great, and ye shall be the children of
the Highest, for he is kind to the unthankful, and to the evil.


OUR Conformity to the Death and Resurrection of our Savior, consists in dying
to (...), and walking in newness of life, ^ich St. Paul tells us is represented
(...) the External Ceremony of Bap^m; the baptized Person being buried with
Christ in Baptism, and rising out of his watery grave a new born Creature, 6.
Romans 3, 4. For in that he died, he died unto sin once; but in that he lives,
he lives unto God: Likewise reckon ye also your selves to be dead indeed unto
sin, but alive unto God, through Jesus Christ our Lord, 9, 10. And the
principal Exercise of this Divine Life, which is our conformity to the
Resurrection of Christ, is a Divine Conversation. If ye then be risen with
Christ, seek those things which are above, where Christ sits at the right
hand of God: Set your affections on things above, not on things on the earth,
3. Col. 1, 2. And to set our affections on things above, does not only signify
to think sometimes of Heaven, and to desire to go to Heaven when we dye, which
very worldly-minded men may do; but to lay up for our selves Treasures in
Heaven, which are durable and eternal, in opposition to those perishing
Treasures on Earth, which are subject to Thieves, to Moths and Rust 6. Matthew.
19, 20, 21. To make to our selves friends of the mammon of unrighteousness,
that when we fail, they may receive us into everlasting habitations, 16. Luke
9. Now ye all know what this means: viz. To purge our minds from the love of
Riches, and from all covetous Desires; to improve ^r Estates in Acts of Piety
and Cha^ty, for the Service of God, and to ^pply the wants of the poor and
mi^rable: to return our Money into the ^ther World, where it will increase ^to
Eternal Life and Glory: for this (...) truly to have our Conversation in
^eaven, to live above this World, to ^t loose from all the Enjoyments of it; ^o
live to God, and another World, ^o improve every thing we enjoy here, ^o secure
and advance our future Hap^iness: when men are Charitable upon ^hese Principles
and these Designs, they ^ust live a very heavenly Life; For where our Treasure
is, there our hearts will be also.

This our Ancestors, who appointed this Annual Solemnity, seem to have been
very sensible of, That there is no particular Grace or Virtue, the exercise of
which is a more visible demonstration of a Divine and purified Mind, which is
risen with Christ, and lives to God, as Christ does, than the Grace of Charity;
and therefore that there was no time more proper to exercise Charity, and to
exhort Christians to Charity, and to show Charity in all its Pomp, and humble
Bravery, than the Feast of the Resurrection; wherein we commemorate the Love of
our Lord in dying for us, and his triumph over Death, and in full assurance of
a blessed Immortality, of which the Resurrection of our Savior was an ocular
Demonstration, send our Hearts and our Eyes after him to Heaven, and
contemplate that Glory to which he is advanced, and to which he has promised to
advance us.

This then is my proper work at this time, to exhort you to Charity; proper
both to the nature of this Holy Feast, and to the original Institution of this
Solemnity; and it may reasonably be hoped, that the Annual Returns of it,
wherein all the Arguments to Charity are so earnestly pressed on you, should
keep this Divine Fire always burning and glowing in your Breasts. You have so
often heard all the Arguments to Charity, that it is impossible you should
forget them; and there is one that is worth all the rest, which no Christian
can forget, who remembers that there is a Heaven and a Hell, and which no
Christian can resist, without despising ^is Soul, and Eternal Life and Death;
and that is, That Heaven is the Re^ard of Charity; that Hell is the Pu^ishment
of Uncharitableness; which is ^o plainly and expressly taught, and so (...)
repeated by our Savior, that it is as certain and unavoidable, as that there
is a Heaven and a Hell; and if Heaven be not a sufficient Encouragement to
Charity, nor Hell sufficient to deter us from Uncharitableness, it is to no
purpose to use any other Arguments, which can never persuade, if these cannot;
or if they could, would neither carry us to Heaven, nor keep us out of Hell;
for to be charitable only for temporal reasons, is to give our goods to feed
the poor, without a true Divine Charity; which St. Paul tells us, will profit
nothing, 1 Cor. 13. For such a Charity as does not raise us above this world,
can neither carry us to Heaven, nor keep us out of Hell. And therefore instead
of drawing together all the Arguments for Charity which you have so often
heard, and showing them in a new dress, my design at present is to recommend to
you a very excellent, but a very neglected part of Charity, which our Savior
presses on us in my Text, viz. The Charity of Lending, Do good, and lend,
hoping for nothing again.

In speaking to which Words, I shall 1. Show you what this Duty is. 2. What an
excellent Charity it is to lend. And how this may be improved to the most
excellent purposes.

1. What this Duty is, or what our Savior means by lending, hoping for nothing
again. And it can signify but two things; and I see no reason to think, but
that our Savior might mean both. 1. To Lend, without hoping for any increase;
or to lend freely, without Usury. 2. To lend, where the very Principal may be
in danger, when we have little reason to hope that we shall ever see our own
again.

1. To lend freely, without Usury; for our Savior commands this, as an Act of
Charity, Do good, and lend: And though to lend, even upon Usury, may in many
cases prove a great kindness to the Borrower, yet Charity is not the motive of
the Lender, it is ^ot Charity, but Traffic and Mer^handize of Money: and
though the Jews were expressly forbid to lend their Brethren upon Usury, yet our
Savior ^ntimates there was something like this, and equivalent to it, which
spoil^ed the Charity of lending, even without Usury; that they would not lend
^o the poor; who though they should repay them what they borrowed, yet were
never likely to be in a condition to lend to them again; but they would lend to
the Rich, from whom they expected the like returns of kindness; as you may see
in the Verses before my Text; 33, 34. And if ye do good to them that do good to
you, what thank have ye? for sinners also do even the same. And if ye lend to
them, of whom ye hope to receive, (not only your own, but the like kindness of
lending to you when your occasions require it), what thank have ye? for sinners
also lend to sinners, to receive as much again; (...), equal returns of
kindness; which if it be not Usury of Money, is Usury of Kindnesses, but is not
Charity; like inviting our Rich Friends and Neighbors to a Feast, who can
invite us again; which though it be no fault, is no Charity, for that consists
in entertaining the poor, who can make us no return, 14. Luke 12, 13, 14. And
thus our Savior exhorts us here, but do you do good, and lend, hoping for
nothing again; neither for Usury, nor for such returns and exchanges of
kindness.

It was for the sake of this Duty, that Usury was so strictly forbidden by the
Jewish Law, that men might the more freely lend their Money to those who
wanted, when they had no present use for it themselves; and had no way to
increase it; and as far as the Reason and Charity of this Law extends, so far
it still obliges, and so far Usury is still forbid to Christians.

This is not well considered by those who so universally condemn all Usury; and
because the right understanding of this will be of great use to settle some
men's minds, and to explain and enforce this duty of Lending, which I now
recommend to you, it cannot be thought a digression from my present Design, to
give you the true, but short state of this matter.

It is confessed on all hands, That Usury is forbid by the Law of Moses; but
the great mistake is concerning the Nature of Usury, or what that is which the
Law forbids and condemns by the name of Usury.

Some think that all Increase of Money, when men lend a Sum of, Money to
receive the Principal again with Interest, is the Usury which the Law forbids;
and therefore that this is absolutely unlawful in all cases, and in all
degrees; though we all know, That Trade, to which we owe all the Riches and
Greatness of our Nation, and so many excellent Charities too, cannot be
maintained without it: That some men, who now live comfortably in the world,
maintain their Families with Credit and Reputation, and do many acts of Charity
themselves, could not Trade at all; others could not drive such flourishing and
spreading Trades without borrowed Money, nor borrow without Interest: That many
Widows and Orphans are maintained by Interest, who must in a few years be
Beggars, had they no other way to live, but to spend the Principal. This is so
contrary to the sense and reason of Mankind, and to all the rules of Justice
and Charity, and so impracticable in the present state of the world, that while
it is possible to put any other sense upon the Law, I would never think of
this. And the comfort is, that the Law expounds it self otherwise, and gives no
color for such an Interpretation as this, That all Increase of Money is forbid
by it.

For 1. The Law it self allowed the Jews to take Usury of Strangers of other
Countries, though not of their Brethren, or natural Jews, 23. Deuteronomy. 20. Unto a
stranger thou may lend upon usury, but unto thy brother thou shall not lend
upon usury. And therefore God did not absolutely forbid the Jews to increase
their Money, for they might lend to strangers upon Usury; which proves, that
this was not an universal Law to them, much less is it so to all mankind. And
that proves that there is no moral and intrinsic evil in Usury; for if all
Usury had in its own nature been unlawful, God could not have allowed the Jews
to take Usury of strangers; for he cannot allow the least moral evil. The truth
is, I never could yet see the least shadow of an Argument to prove, that Usury
is evil in its nature, unless that Money cannot beget Money, be thought an
Ar^ument; but that is as good an Argu^ent against buying Corn or Wine, or ^y
thing else with Money; for it is ^nnatural for Money to beget Corn or Wine: But
if the barren nature of Money, that it cannot naturally pro^agate it self, be a
reason against Usu^y of Money, this is no reason against ^sury of Corn, which
is equally for^id: for it is natural for Corn to pro^agate its kind, and
multiply it self; and yet the Usury of all Victuals is ^s much forbid, as the
Usury of Mo^ey, 23. Deuteronomy. 19. Now if Usury be ^ot morally evil, it can be
unlawful (...) none, but those to whom God has ^rbid it; and there being no
prohibi^on of it in the New Testament, which (...) the Law of the Christian
Church, it cannot be unlawful to Christians, ^hatever it was to the Jews.

2. And yet the Jews themselves were ^ot expressly forbid, however they ^ight
understand it, to lend their Money upon Usury, to all their own ^rethren, but
only to the Poor: So that had any Rich Jew come to bor^ow Money of them, for
any thing that appears by the Law, they might have lent Money to him upon
Usury. This Observation will clear this whole matter; and therefore I shall
turn you to all the Texts of the Law, which forbid Usury, and the reading of
them will convince you, That Usury was forbid only in favor of the Poor.

The first Text is, 22. Exodus 25. If thou lend money to any of my people that
is poor by thee, thou shall not be to him as an Usurer, neither shall thou lay
upon him Usury: Where no Usury is forbid, but only lending to the Poor upon
Usury: Thus 25. Lev. 35, 36, 37. And if thy brother be waxen poor, and fallen
to decay with thee, then thou shall relieve him. -- Take thou no usury of him,
nor increase, but fear God, that thy brother may live well with thee: Thou
shall not give him thy money upon usury, nor lend him thy victuals for
increase. It is true, in the Repetition of this Law, 23. Deuteronomy. 19, 20. it is
only said, Thou shall not lend upon usury to thy brother, usury of money, usury
of victuals, usury of any thing that is lent upon usury. Unto a stranger thou
may lend upon usury, but unto thy brother thou shall not lend upon usury,
that the Lord thy God may bless thee in all that thou set thine hand unto,
in the land whither thou go to possess. This seems to forbid lending upon
Usury to any Jew, whether Rich or Poor: but this being only a repetition of
those Laws in Exodus and Leviticus, in all reason must be expounded by them;
and though the Poor are not expressed, the Circumstances of the place prove,
that they only are meant; for though Rich Men may sometimes have occasion to
borrow Money, yet none but the Poor, who have no Money to buy, can ever have
occasion to borrow Victuals upon Usury; and the difference the Law makes
between a Brother and a Stranger shows, that it is intended as an Act of
Charity, which they owe to their Brethren, though not to strangers. For which
Reason also they were forbid to make any of their Brethren Bondmen, though
they might buy the Children of the Heathen and Strangers for Bondmen and
Bond-maids, 25. Levit. 39, etc. and the Blessing God promises shows, that it is
the Reward of Charity.

In other places, where Usury is mentioned, some Circumstance or other
determines it to the Poor. This was the case, when Nehemiah reproved the Nobles
and the Rulers for exacting Usury, 5. Nehem. When the Prophet Isaiah threatens
great Desolations against the Land, he thus describes it, And it shall be as
with the people, so with the priest -- as with the lender, so with the
borrower, as with the taker of usury, so with the giver of usury to him, 24.
Isa. 2. That is, the Lender and the Usurer shall be reduced to the same
Distress and Poverty, as those suffer who borrow upon Usury; which shows, that
none but Poor Men used to borrow upon Usury in those days. Thus when the
Prophet Jeremiah complains, Woe is me, my Mother, that thou have born me a man
of strife, and a man of contention to the whole earth: I have neither lent on
usury, nor men have lent to me on usury, yet every one of them does curse me,
15. Jer. 10. it plainly intimates, that Usury is such an Oppression of the
Poor, as both deserves and very often procures Curses. And therefore the
Prophet Ezekiel joins Usury with the Oppression of the Poor, and other Acts of
Violence, 18. Ezekiel. 7, 8, 10, 11, 16, 17. He who has oppressed the poor and
needy, has spoiled by violence, has not restored the pledge, has given forth
upon usury, and has taken Increase, he shall die. But he that has neither
oppressed the poor, nor has withheld the pledge, neither has spoiled by
violence, but has given his bread to the hungry, and clothed the naked with a
garment, that has taken off his hand from the poor, that has not received
usury nor increase, he shall live. Which makes it very plain, what is meant by
Usury, when to take Usury, is joined with Violence and Oppression of the Poor;
and to lend without Usury is reckoned among Acts of great Charity and Goodness.

There is but one place more, as I remember, that mentions Usury, 15. Psalm 5.
and there putting forth Money to Usury is joined with taking a Reward against
the Innocent, which shows, that it was an Act of Violence and Oppression. For
indeed among the Jews, who were no Merchants, nor maintained any Foreign Trade
with other Nations, no men had occasion to borrow Money, much less Victuals,
but to supply their present wants, and to take advantage of the Necessities of
the Poor, to increase their own Fortunes by increasing their Poverty, was
against all the Laws of Goodness and Charity; and therefore this Usury, which
was the only Usury known in those days, is strictly forbid, as all other Acts
of Oppression are. All other kinds of Usury are introduced by Trade and
Commerce; and though it is against Charity to lend upon Usury to men, who
borrow to supply their wants, yet if men borrow to increase their Trade and
Fortunes, there is Justice and Equity in it, that the Lender shall make some
Increase of his Money, as well as the Borrower. This is not properly Usury, but
Traffic and Commerce; and I know no reason, why Men may not Trade with Money,
as well as with other Commodities.

And this I take to be the true reason, why the Jews were permitted to take
Usury of Strangers, but not of their Brethren, because their Heathen Neighbors
were Merchants, as is plain of Tire and Zidon, 23. Isai. They improved their
Money by Trade, and therefore it was fit they should pay Interest for it;
especially if they were to lend upon Usury only to such Strangers as came among
them for Trade, but did not dwell and sojourn with them; which seems probable
from ^5. Levit. 35. where the Stranger that ^ojourns with them seems to be
entitu^ed to the like Charity as a Brother. ^f thy Brother be waxen poor, and
fallen to decay, thou shall relieve him, yea, though he be a stranger, or a
sojourner, that he may live with thee, take t^ou no ^sury of him, nor Increase.
For a Stranger never signifies a Proselyte of Justice, who by Circumcision was
incorporated into the Body of Israel, made a Brother, and entitled to the
Privileges of a Natural Jew, but only a Proselyte of the Gate, who renounced
Idolatry, but did not undertake the Observation of the Law of Moses; and yet
they were not to take Usury of these Strangers if they were poor, no more than
of their Brother, according to that Law, 22. Exodus 21. Thou shall not vex a
stranger, nor oppress him, for ^e were strangers in the land of Egypt.

The Answer our Savior gives to the Servant who hid his Talent in the Napkin,
seems to justify this Account, unless we can suppose, that his Lord would have
been pleased with unjust and wicked Gain. 25. Matthew. 27. Thou ought to have
put my money t^ the Exchangers, and then at my coming I should have received
mine own with usury. So that though it was unlawful to lend Money upon Usury to
the Poor, it was not so to the Exchangers, who traded in Money. And our
Savior's driving the Money Changers out of the Temple, no more proves that he
disallowed that Profession, than that he disallowed selling Oxen, and Sheep,
and Doves for Sacrifice, for he drove them out also; the Fault was not in the
Merchandise no more of Money, than of Sheep, or Oxen, or Doves, but they made
his Father's house, a house of Merchandise, 2. John 14, 15, etc.

It is certain the ancient Fathers, who were professed Eenemies to Usury,
opposed it under this Notion; for their great Arguments against Usury, are
levelled against Uncharitableness and Oppression of the Poor, as appears from
Gregor. Nyssen, St. Ambrose, St. Basil, and others; and yet it is no wonder,
should we meet with some Passages in them against Usury considered as Trading
and Merchandise of Money: For it is well known, that they were not much greater
Friends to Trade and Merchandise, than they were to Usury, which they thought
^nbecoming a Christian, as ministering only to Covetousness and Luxury. And yet
I suppose, the greatest Enemies at ^his day to Usury, will not carry the
Quarrel so far, as to condemn Merchandise. And yet under this Notion of
Covetousness and sordid Gain (which is equally applicable to all Trade) Usury
is forbid the Clergy by the Seventeenth Cannon of the First Council of Nice;
but no Council ever forbad it to the Layety, or threatened Church Censures
against them for it, which they would certainly have done, had they thought it
evil in its self.

This may satisfy us in what Sense Usury is forbid, both by the Law of Moses
and the ancient Writers of the Christian Church, viz. as contrary to Charity;
when we lend upon Usury, where Charity requires us to lend freely: When we take
Increase of the Poor, who borrow to supply their Wants, and sink them still
more irrecoverably into Poverty by such Exactions: This always was, and always
will be hateful to God, and to all Good Men, and yet such detestable. Usurers
there are among us, who grow rich upon the Ruins and Spoils of the Poor, and
drink the Tears of Widows and Orphans; but when to lend without Usury is no
Charity, and to take Usury is no Oppression, there Usury it self is no Crime.

And hence we learn (which is the great thing I aimed at.) that Usury was
forbid only for the sake of Lending, which proves, that to lend freely to the
Poor, is a great and necessary Act of Charity: Though a Man never took a Penny
for Usury in his Life, yet if he neither gives, nor lends to the Poor, he is
guilty of all that Uncharitableness, for which Usury is condemned; nay in most
Cases, even these worst sort of Usurers are the more charitable Men: For
excepting some very hard Cases, it is greater Charity to lend even to the Poor
for Usury, than not to lend at all.

For this Reason the Emperor Leo was forced by a New Constitution to permit
Usury, which his Father out of a pious Zeal had wholly forbid, because he
found, that when Men were forbid to take any Usury, they would not lend at all,
which was a greater ^ardship to the Poor, than Usury it ^lf.

Merely not to take Usury is no Vir^e, but to lend to the Poor without ^sury
is. To lock up our Money in ^ur Chests to rust and canker, and to ^o no good
with it, is what St. James (...) severely threatens rich Men for, Go ^ow ye
rich men, weep and howl for your ^iseries, which shall come upon you; your
^iches are corrupted, and your garments ^re moth-eaten; your gold and your
silver ^s cankered, and the rust of them shall be (...) witness against you, a
Witness of your Covetousness and Uncharitableness, that you have done no good
with it, ^ut hoarded it up to rust and canker for want of use. 5. James 1, 2, 3.

This Controversy then may be stated and decided in a few words. Usury is a
very great Sin, that is, to lend our Money upon Usury to those who borrow for
Necessity and Want, and to exact such Payments with Rigor and Severity, to
strip such miserable People of that little that remains, to imprison their
Persons, and make them end their Lives in a Goal. To lock up our Money, and do
no good with it, is to hide our Talent in a N^kin; for Money is improvable, a^
must be improved, either for Char^ or Increase, to be a new and perpet^ Spring
of Charity. To declaim (...) against Usury, and not to exhort men (...) lend to
the Poor without Usury, is to (...) stake or overlook the true End and D^ sign
of the Law, and ^o betray unch^ ritable Men to a greater Evil than Us^ry it
self; but if men lend freely to t^ Poor in such Proportions as Chari^ requires,
they may very innocen^ and virtuously, without transgress^ this Law against
Usury, lend their Money for Increase to the Rich.

2. But our Savior seems to mea^ something more by lending, hoping for nothing
again, not only to lend freel^ without Usury, but to lend, where the Principal
may be in Danger, when we cannot reasonably promise our selves to receive our
own again: no man can deny, but this is great Charity; but then this must be
conducted by the measures and proportions of giving: what Charity will oblige
us to give, it will as reasonably oblige us to lend; but where the Retu^n is
very hazardous, it can oblige us to lend, no more than what it would become us
to ^e, and yet in such Cases, lending ^y be a greater Charity than giving, ^ich
is the Second thing proposed, ^ich I can speak but briefly to.

2. The Excellency and Advanta^s of this Charity of Lending, and ^w it may be
improved to be the best ^rpose.

Now if we compare Giving and ^nding together, Lending has much ^e Advantage of
Giving, as to ^e true End and Purposes of Cha^y.

To lend is a greater Obligation to ^dustry, than to give; and there cannot be
a greater Kindness done to the ^oor, next to keeping them from star^ing, than
to teach them Industry. I ^eed not tell you, that there are many ^oor, who will
never work, while they ^an meet with charitable People to ^ive; nay, who choose
to be sick, to ^e lame, to be blind, to move Chari^y, rather than work to
supply their Wants; but when Men have nothing ^o live on, but the improvement
of lent Money, which they know they must repay when it is called for, this must
make them industrious; for it both encourages their Industry, and keeps the Rod
over them; especially were this made a standing Rule to give nothing to those
who are able, but will not work, who have a Stock lent them to trade with, and
neglect to improve it.

Thus what we give does but one single Act of Charity, for we can give it but
once; but what we lend may circulate, as the Blood does in our Veins, and
communicate Warmth and Spirits to more parts of the Body than one: that is,
what we lend, may be lent again, and do a great many successive Charities, as
great, or greater than that one single Charity had been, if we had given it:
And that certainly is one of the greatest and noblest Charities which is most
diffusive.

But yet to make this Charity of ^ending the more effectual, it must be
confessed, that a Public Bank of Charity. raised out of such free Loans, will
have many Advantages above any Private Acts of this Nature; and I can ^y no
means think this either impracti^able or difficult.

I doubt not but most of this Ho^ourable Assembly could contrive very
Advantageous ways of doing this, were Men but Charitably disposed. For suppose
you should make your Hospitals, or your Companies, such Public Banks, or if it
could be more Public, still the more Useful, and the more secure, where
charitable People may safely deposite their Money without Use, or those who
cannot spare the whole Interest, may abate some part of it; and where the
running Cash may be lodged, which Men expect no Interest for; this might easily
rise to a very vast Sum, which with wise Improvement would make a sure and
lasting Fund of Charity.

And could any thing in the World be more easy than this, which no man could
feel? What would it be to a Rich Man, who has many thousands employed in Trade,
or secured at Interest; or if he knows when he has enough, has no need to
increase it, to drop some thousands into such a free Bank, to sanctify and
prosper his Trade, and other ways of Gain, and to secure a Blessing to his
Posterity? How may others are there, who could spare a hundred, or it may be
some hundred pounds out of their Stock, and not feel the want of Interest, or
at least, if they could not spare the whole Interest, might spare the half, or
third part of it? How many are there, who have some hundreds by them useless,
which they would not, and could not with any reason grudge to lay up in a safe
Bank? How many are there, who would easily be persuaded to lend, were there
such a safe Bank to receive it, who are very unwilling to give? And were there
such a Bank of Charity once settled, there would be very little need of giving.

For I know not any kind of Charity, but might be provided for in this way,
were men but free and liberal in lending. It would enlarge your Hospitals,
clear your Streets of Beggars, the great Reproach of this City; maintain those
who cannot work, and employ those who can; put poor Children to Apprentice,
provide Stocks for ^ngenious and Industrious Young Men, ^ho want them; redeem
Prisoners, and, which Justice and Honor requires ^f you, as far as possibly
you can, may (...) some measure provide a Fund for ^our Orphans.

This would advance the Glory of ^his great City, it would perpetuate and
consecrate the Memory of such ^orthy Persons, as would begin and ^romote such a
lasting and extensive Charity; the Children which are un^orn, would rise up and
call them bles^ed; it would draw a great share of ^e Charitable Money of the
Nation ^to your hands, which would quicken ^rade, and increase your Riches; and
^bove all, it would procure all the great ^ewards which are promised to
Chari^y, both in this World, and in the ^ext.

But whatever becomes of this Pro^osal, you must always remember, that (...) is
great Charity to lend as well as ^o give: This is what our Savior ex^ects from
us, this is what he Com^ands, To do good, and lend, hoping for nothing again;
and if out of a greedy desire of gain, we will lend nothing freely to the
Relief and Encouragement of the Industrious Poor, this will make all our other
Usury and Increase, which is Lawful and Innocent in it self, when it neither
Oppresses the Poor, nor stops our Charity, to become sin.

SERMON VI.
^reach'd before the Queen at Whitehall, June 26. 1692.
Prove. XVIII. 14. ^he spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity: but a wounded
spirit who can bear?


ONE great Objection against Providence, is taken from the many Evils and
Calamities which mankind suffer; which would ^e a reasonable Objection, were
they more than are deserved, or more than ^are necessary for the wise
Government of the world. But besides other Answers that may be given to it, the
Wise-man's Observation in my Text furnishes us with Two very plain Answers. 1.
That the Sufferings of this ^ife are not disproportioned to our strength to
bear them; and when Afflictions and Misfortunes are necessary to the wise
government of the world, it is a sufficient vindication of Providence, that God
lays no more on us, than what the spirit of a man can bear; The spirit of a man
will sustain his infirmities. And 2dly, That the only Evils that are
intolerable and insupportable, are wholly owing to our selves; and then we have
no reason to quarrel at the Divine Providence, when God is more merciful to us
than we are to our selves. But a wounded spirit who ca^ bear?

For the Explication and Improvement of these Words, I shall 1. Enquire what is
meant by sustaining Infirmities. 2. By what means the spirit of a man can
sustain his Infirmities. 3. What is meant by a Wounded Spirit. 4. How
unsupportable a Wounded Spirit is. 5. Conclude with some Practical Inferences
from the whole.

1. What is meant by sustaining Infirmities: Now Infirmities in this place
being opposed to a Wounded Spirit, must signify only external sufferings,
whatever is grievous and afflicting, excepting the disorders and troubles of
our own minds. And by sustaining Infirmities is not meant, that we must ^ot
feel them, nor have any afflicting ^ense of them; for the Stoics themselves
would not say, that pain was ^ot pain; for then there would be no need of
Patience Non ego dolorem, dolorem esse nego. cur en^m fortitudo desid raretur,
sed eum opprimi dico patientia, si mo^o est aliqua patientia. Cicer.
^o bear it; but that Patience, ^f there be any such thing, can conquer pain.
And therefore to sustain Infirmi^ies, is to feel, but not to sink under the
weight of them; as that man sustains his burden, who can go upright, and not
stagger, at least not fall, though he feels the weight of it on his shoulders:
That is, he who can in any measure enjoy himself under suffering, does so far
sustain it; and the more perfectly we can enjoy our selves, though the
brightness and gaiety of our Spirits may be a little sullied and overcast, the
more complete and perfect is our Conquest over all the Calamities of Life.

2dly, But the great Enquiry is, How the spirit of a man can sustain his
Infirmities? And that is done Three ways: 1. By Natural Courage, and Strength
of Mind. 2. By the Powers of Reason. 3. By the Diviner Aids and Succors of
Religion.

1. Natural Courage, and Strength of Mind: A man of Spirit thinks it a reproach
to be easily disturbed and ruffled, to be put out of humor by every accident,
to sink under the common Calamities of life; nay, to be wholly mastered by the
most extraordinary and formidable Events. There is an inbred Greatness in human
Nature, which does not care to confess its own weakness, which will not yield,
or submit, or own a Conquest; an untaught Courage, which supports the rude and
illiterate part of mankind, even without Reason and Discourse; which is
improved by a sense of Honor in men of Fortune, increases by exercise and
discipline, by hard labor, and difficult trials, and is lost by ease, and
luxury, and softness, which makes the Mind as tender as the Body, to feel all
the Vicissitudes of Fortune, as a crazy and distempered body does the change of
Weather. God has put a spirit into man, which can bear his Infirmity; and if we
have it not, it is our own fault.

2dly, The spirit of a man sustains ^is Infirmities by the Power of Reason,
which adds to our Natural Courage, gives us a more confirmed sense of De^cency
and Honor, teaches us the true value of things, quiets our Passions,
undeceives our abused Imaginations, convinces us that some fancied evils are
none at all, others not so great as we thought, and that the worst condition
has its allays, which make it tolerable to a Wise and Good man.

I am far from thinking, That the mere Power of Natural Reason, and Moral
Arguments, is able to support us under all events, much less, that the
Arguments of the Heathen Philosophers, though they said a great many wise and
good things, were sufficient to this purpose; but yet it is certain, That
Reason is the strength of the Mind, and it is the Mind which must bear up under
external Sufferings; and it is as certain, that Nature furnishes us with a
great many Arguments to bear them easily without fainting: As for Instance:

We must consider the state of the World, which is in a continual flux and
motion, and does not long show the same face of things; that the various Lusts
and Passions of men among whom we live, will create a great deal of trouble to
us; and that our mortal bodies are liable to pain and hunger, and many
Calamities. This is the state of all mankind in this world; and if after all,
it be desirable to live, to come into, and to continue in this world, upon
these terms, we must make the best of our condition, and bear our sufferings
patiently, and not repine, if we escape as well as the generality of Mankind:
In such a state of life we must not promise to our selves a complete and
undisturbed Happiness; for then we must be disappointed, and be very uneasy and
impatient at such a disappointment; but we must expect to suffer more or less,
and that will make us think we escape well, when our Sufferings are but light;
and teach us to arm our selves against those which are greater, with courage
and patience.

Thus a Wise man sees through the frightful or flattering Disguises of things,
and judges by Nature, not by Fancy and Opinion; and then he finds no mighty
reason to be disturbed about many things, which are judged and resented as
great Calamities by unthinking Men. Reason teaches them, that Nature is
contented with a little, and that poor men enjoy themselves, and have their
Pleasures and Satisfactions, as well as the Rich; and therefore Poverty without
pressing Wants, is not so great an Evil, as it is thought by some men; and then
it can be no intolerable Evil neither, to fall from a high and prosperous
Fortune to a meaner State. Reason teaches them, that a good man, who is
conscious to himself of his own Virtue and Integrity, ought not to be concerned
for unjust Reproaches, which are the effects of Ignorance or Malice. That
undeserved Honors, unjust Praises and Commendations, are only the
Entertainments of Fools; and that unjust Reproaches ought not to put Wise men
out of countenance. And thus it is in other Cases; There is a vast difference
between the natures of things, and men's Opinions; and were our Passions and
Resentments governed by Reason, and proportioned to the nature of things, not
to the Opinions of men about them, it would make our Condition in this World
much more easy and tolerable. But I cannot now particularly show you all the
variety of Arguments, whereby men may support themselves under several
Calamities of Life; it is sufficient to my present purpose, that Reason gives a
new strength and vigor to the spirit of a man to sustain his Infirmities.

Thirdly, But the greatest Supports of all, are the Arguments Religion
furnishes us with; as to name but two at present. 1. That whatever we suffer,
is not the effect of a blind Chance, or fatal Necessity, but is ordered by a
Wise and Good Providence. 2. That if we bear our present Sufferings with
patience and submission to the Will of God, and make a wise use of them to our
improvement in Grace and Virtue, our very sufferings shall be greatly rewarded
in the next World. These two Principles are the Foundations of all Religion,
and as certain as any thing in Religion; all other Arguments without this
belief, cannot support us, and there are no Sufferings too great for a man to
bear, who is thoroughly possessed with a firm belief and vigorous sense of these.

Can we our selves, or the kindest ^riend in the World, choose better for ^s
than God? Do we suspect his Wisdom, or his Goodness? Can he mistake our
Condition, who knows our Frame? Can he be wanting in his care of us, or in good
will to us, who made us? What is it we desire, but to be happy? and if God
intends our happiness in his severest Corrections, why should we complain?
Religion teaches us, that the care of our Souls is of much greater concernment
to us than bodily Ease or Pleasure; and if God sees Pain and Sickness, Poverty
and Disgrace, necessary to cure, or restrain our vicious and distempered
Passions, or to improve and exercise our Graces, have we any reason to complain
that God takes such severe methods to save our Souls? Had we rather be
miserable for ever, than suffer some present want and pain? The Soul is the
best part of Man; and to take care of a man, is to improve his better Part; and
this is the Design of God's Providence toward particular men, to train them up
to Virtue by such methods of Kindness or Severity, as he sees them want.

This I confess may be very grievous and afflicting at present, but then we
have the hopes of Immortal Life to support us; and can that man be miserable,
can he sink under present Sufferings, who has the hope of Immortal Life, as the
Anchor of the Soul, both sure and steadfast? To believe that all things. at
present are intended for our good, and shall work together for our good, if we
love God; and that when we have out-rid the Storms of this World, by Faith, and
Patience, and Hope, These light afflictions, which are but for a moment, shall
work for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory: This, if any
thing, will make all the Sufferings of this Life easy: if natural Courage, or
natural Reason fail, the Spirit of a man, supported by Religion, will sustain
his Infirmity.

Thirdly, Let us now consider what is meant by a wounded Spirit: This is a
metaphorical Expression, and signifies a Spirit which suffers pain and trouble.
A wound in the Body, is a Division of one part from another, which is always
painful; and though a Spirit cannot be thus divided, yet because a Wound causes
Pain; a Spirit which is disordered, and suffers pain, is said to be wounded: As
for instance,

Some men's Spirits are wounded with the disorders and violence of their own
Passions; they love, or hope, or fear, or desire, or grieve immoderately; and
all Passions are very painful, when they are in excess. Upon this account the
Wicked are said to be like a troubled sea when it cannot rest, whose waters
cast up mire and dirt: there is no peace, says my God, to the wicked.

Other men's Spirits are wounded with a sense of Guilt; their own Consciences
reproach and shame them, and threaten the Vengeance of God against them; they
have gratified their Lust, or Revenge, their Ambition, or Covetousness; and
dreamt of nothing but ease and pleasure; the Temptation was very charming as it
came toward them, but now the heat and impetus is allayed, and the enjoyment
over, they cannot review what they have done, without horror; their affrighted
Consciences draw the most amazing scenes of Judgment, and paint their Fancies
with all the blackest Images of Terror; The Sinners of Sion are afraid, fear
has surpised the Hypocrites. Who shall dwell with devouring fire? who shall
dwell with everlasting burnings?

4thly, This is the wounded Spirit, and such a wounded Spirit who can bear?
This is Matter of Sense, and therefore for the Proof of it, we must appeal to
the Sense of Mankind; and there is no danger in this Appeal; for though some
Men may scorn to confess, what they feel, yet if all Men's Minds be of a make,
we can feel in our selves, what other Men feel: And then we all know, that
Anger when it grows immoderate, and increases into Rage and Fury, worries the
Mind, and sharpens it self into such a keeness, as cuts deep into our own
Souls; that an immoderate love of Riches, or Honors, or Pleasures creates us
infinite Trouble, torments with an impatient Thirst, with restless and uneasy
Expectations, distracts us between Hopes and Fears, kills with Delays and
Disappointments; and there are but few Men, who can long dissemble their inward
pain and uneasiness, but confess it in their Looks, and Words, and Behavior,
by external and visible Symptoms of Frenzy and Distraction.

And yet all this is nothing to the Agonies of a guilty Mind, as any Man ^ust
confess who knows what it is to ^e Self-condemned, and to live under ^he
Apprehensions of God's Wrath, and ^he terrible Expectations of endless
Torments; for with what Courage and Patience can any Man bear such a Thought as
this, That he must be miserable for ever? Some Men may laugh away the Thoughts
of Hell, but it is certain, that no Man who believes in good earnest, that
there is a Hell, and that he himself is in the most apparent danger of falling
into it, can bear this Thought: The many sad Examples of despairing Sinners,
who at the last moment groan out their Souls in Agonies and Horrors, are an
undeniable Proof of this. Men who do not believe a Hell, may laugh at it, till
they feel it; but for experiments sake let them only suppose that there were a
Hell, and that Hell were to be their Portion, and then let them tell me, how
they can bear such a Thought.

This is sufficient to satisfy us, how unsupportable a wounded Spirit is; but
to give us a deeper and more lasting Sense of it, I shall further observe, that
a wounded Spirit has no refuge or retreat, has nothing left to support it self
with. The Spirit of a Man can bear his Infirmities, but when the Spirit it self
is wounded, there is nothing to support that; this wounds our Courage, our
Reason, makes all external Comforts tastless, and deprives us of all the
Comforts of Religion.

For 1st. What Courage can any Man have against Himself, against the Wounds and
Disorders of his own Mind? Courage is nothing else, but a firmness of Mind to
govern its own Resentments and Passions; to suffer Pain, and Reproach, and
other Evils without immoderate Grief, and to encounter dangers without an
amazing fear; but when the Mind it self is oppressed with Grief, and Fears and
Cares, the Disease which Courage should prevent, has already seized the
Spirits. Courage fortifies us against external Evils, to keep them at a
distance from wounding our Spirits; but the Disorders of our own Passions are
inward Wounds, which we must feel and languish under. When our own Consciences
reproach, chide, and threaten us, the good Opinion and Courtships of the World
cannot defend us from our selves, we cannot stop our ears against (...), we
cannot harden our selves against ^s Terrors, it is a domestic Fury, which when
it is provoked and awaken^d, will be heard, and will make us ^emble, will make
us judge and con^emn our selves, and begin our own ^orments in frightful
Horrors and Ago^es of Mind.

2dly, Whereas Reason can fortify the ^ind against all external Calamities,
^hen our Spirits are wounded, that ^ttle Reason we have left proves our
^ormentor. When we are under the ^ransports of violent and disorderly ^assions,
Reason cannot be heard, or is ^ibed by Passion to justify its own Ex^esses. Wise
Counsels are lost on such ^en, as much as a Lecture of Philo^phy would be in
the Noise and Di^raction of an Alarm or Battle.

What a sullen and obstinate thing is ^rief! how does it pore on its own
^isfortune, nourish its Disease, and ^espise all Arts of Diversion, that it is
^ommonly above the cure of any thing ^ut Time, which weakens the Impres^on, or
tires men with their own Com^laints!

When our Consciences are wounded with Guilt, this arms all the Reason we have
against us, for Reason in such Cases can never be on our side; then Reason
discovers our Shame and Danger, aggravates our Sins, and many times drives such
awakened Sinners into the very Horrors of Despair, disputes against the
possibility of their Pardon, and blots their Names out of all the Promises of
the Gospel, how large and universal soever they be. The Guides of Souls, who
are always consulted upon such Occasions, (how much soever they are despised at
other times) could tell a great many sad Stories of thi^ kind, enough to convince
Sinners, that even Wit and Reason is a very dangerous Enemy, when a guilty
Conscience turns the edge of it against our selves.

3dly, When there is no Ease and Comfort within, there is no other Remedy, but
to seek for Support and Comfort from abroad; and there are a great many pretty
Diversions in the World to entertain Men, who are at leisure to attend them,
but these are no Entertainments to a wounded Spirit. When men are galled by
their own Passions, by Fear, Emulation, Jealousy, Discontent, in the very midst
of laughter ^e heart is sorrowful. As great as Ha^n was, all his Riches and
Power ^ailed him nothing, while he saw ^ordecai the Jew sitting at the King's
^ate, 5. Esth. 13.

The good things of this World are ^ry considerable, when there is an ea^ and
cheerful mind to enjoy them; ^t they cannot make a man easy and ^ppy, whose
Mind is disturbed; they ^ay entertain an easy Mind, but can^t quiet the Tumults
and Disorders of ^ssions, nor give any Ease to a wound^ Spirit.

Much less can external things ap^ase the Horrors of a guilty Consci^ce. Away
all ye vain Delights, will ^ch a man say, what have I to do with ^easure, when
Torments, everlasting ^orments, must be my Portion? Why ^o you tell me of
Riches and Honors, ^hen the great God is my Enemy, ^hen I am despised and
abhorred of my ^aker, and am thought worthy of no ^etter Portion than Eternal
Flames? (...) am not at leisure to attend the Flat^ering Courtships of this
World; my Thoughts are taken up with a more ^readful Prospect of things to
come. O Eternity! Eternity! the never-dying Worm, the never-dying Death!

4thly, Nor can a wounded Spi^ find any Support from the Considerations of
Religion, unless it find its C^ there. If the Belief of a Divine Providence and
another World can cure o^ Love to present things, it will give u^ quiet and
easy Passions too; but without this a wounded and distemper'^ Spirit will
reproach God as well a^ Men, and rage against Heaven it self like that wicked
King, This evil is (...) the Lord, why should I wait on the L^ any longer? As
Solomon observes, T^ foolishness of Man perverteth his wa^ and his heart
fretteth against the Lord.

If the Fear of God, and of tho^ Punishments He has threatened again Sin, makes
us true and sincere Pe^tents, conquers our vicious Habi^ and reforms our Lives,
this is such (...) wounded Spirit, as God will bind up again, such a broken and
contrite hea^ as God will not despise; but the Though^ of God and of a future
Judgment, a^ very terrible to Impenitent Sinners It is a dreadful Prospect to
look into the other World, and to see those Lakes of Fire and Brimstone,
prepared for the Devil and his Angels. And this (...) all that Bad men can see
in the next ^orld.

Thus we see how supportable all ^ternal Evils and Calamities are, how
^supportable a wounded Spirit is; and ^e comparing these two Cases will ^ggest
some very useful Thoughts to ^s.

As, First, This is a great Vindicati^ of the Providence of God, with ^spect to
those Evils and Calamities ^at are in the World. Sufferings are ^ery necessary
in this corrupt and de^enerate State of Mankind; but though ^od sees it
necessary to punish Sinners, ^et he has made abundant Provision to ^pport us
under all external Suffer^gs: He inflicts nothing on us, but that the Spirit of
a Man can sustain, ^d support it self under; but our ^reatest Sufferings are
owing to our ^elves, and no more chargeable on the ^rovidence of God, than our
Sins are. nothing that is external can hurt us, ^hile our minds are sound and
health^l; but it is only a disordered or guilty ^ind which gives a Sting to
Afflicti^ns: God corrects in measure, as we ^re able to bear; but we our selves
tie the Knots, or add the Scorpions to the Scourge.

Secondly, This greatly recommend^ the Divine Wisdom, in that Provisio^ God has
made for our Support und^ Sufferings.

As, ^t, Since the generality o^ Mankind were not likely to prove any^ great
Philosophers, GOD has bestowed on them such a measure of Nature Courage, as
will bear Afflictions bette^ than the Reason and Philosophy (...) more thinking
men; and we may generally observe, that those who man the least use of their
Reason, and ha^ the least share of External Comfor^ have the greatest Portion
of this ^taught Courage, because they need (...) most.

2. God has provided the great^ Supports for the best men. Tho^ who use their
Reason, and examine the nature of things, will more easily be^ Poverty, and
Disgrace, and such other Evils, than men who judge by Opinion and popular
Mistakes.

Those who live by Reason, and govern their sensual Appetites and Inclinations,
and use the things of this World, so as not to be mastered by them, retain that
Courage and Strength of Mind, which is lost by softness and Effeminacy.

But a truly devout man, who be^ieves the Wisdom and Goodness of Providence,
and the Rewards of the next Life, has the greatest Support of all. Whereas an
impenitent Sinner, who wounds his Conscience with Guilt, and an Atheist, who
believes neither a God nor a Providence, have nothing but Sottishness and
Stupidity to support them; and could things be better ordered for the
encouragement of Virtue and Religion? Good men, whatever their Condition be,
have the Advantage of the Wicked, even as to this present Life; they may be
easy, and enjoy themselves in all Conditions, for GOD has provided for their
present Support; but if bad men be Sufferers, they have nothing to support
them; and though they be prosperous, they feel such Disorders of Passions, or
such guilty Fears, as sour all their other Enjoyments.

3. God has so wisely ordered things, that we cannot support our selves under
Sufferings without making a wise and good use of them; for the best Arguments
to comfort us under Sufferings, will afford us no comfort unless they make us
better. It is a great comfort that Afflictions are appointed by a wise and good
God: But he who considers this, will naturally enquire into the Reason, why God
strikes, will search and try his way, and turn unto the Lord; will hear the
rod, and who it is that has appointed it.

That Afflictions are ordered for our good, will make us endeavor to reap the
Spiritual Benefit of them: for that Afflictions are useful, is no Comfort at
all, unless we make a wise use of them; unless they bring forth the peaceable
Fruits of Righteousness.

No Man can take Comfort in the Rewards of the next World, without bearing his
Sufferings well in this; for our Sufferings will have no reward, unless they
make us better; unless they purify our Minds, and exercise our Faith and
Patience and Submission to the Will of God.

3dly, I observe, That it is better to suffer than to sin even with respect to
our present ease, because Sufferings may be born by an innocent and virtuous
Mind, but Guilt inflicts an unsupportable wound upon the Spirit; and ^ose
Sufferings which the Spirit of a Man can bear, are rather to be chosen, ^han
what the Spirit of a Man cannot ^ear.

Lastly, I observe, That the Government of our own Passions contributes ^ore to
our Happiness than any exter^al Enjoyments. While our Minds are disordered with
violent and tumultu^us Passions, we can never be Easy and Happy, whatever else
we enjoy: for this gives such a Wound to the Spirits, as no external Enjoyments
can heal. But he who has his Passions under government, who knows how to Love
and Fear, Desire and Hope, though he may be a great Sufferer, can never be
miserable, because he can support himself under all other Sufferings. What a
wrong Course then do the generality of Mankind take to make themselves happy!
They seek for Happiness without, when the Foundation of Happiness must be laid
within, in the Temper and Disposition of our Minds. An easy quiet Mind will
weather all the Storms of Fortune; but how calm and serene soever the Heavens
be, there is no peace to the wicked, who have nothing but noise, and tumult,
and confusion within.

To God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, be Honor, Glory, and
Power, now and for ever, Amen:

SERMON VII.
Preached at the Funeral of the Reverend Richard Meggot D. D. and late Dean of
Winchester, December the 10th. 1692. at Twickenham.
I. Phil. 23, 24. For I am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart,
and to be with Christ, which is far better.

Nevertheless to abide in the flesh is more needful for you.


ST. Paul wrote this Epistle to Philippi from Rome, where he was in Bonds for
the Gospel; but though his Body was confined to a Prison, his Soul, his great
Divine Soul, was at Liberty to visit the Churches he had planted, to advise and
counsel and comfort them, to increase their Knowledge, and to confirm their
Faith, to instame their Zeal, and to spur them forward to more perfect
Attainmens in all Piety and Virtue.

The Philippians seem greatly concerned least the Progress of ^e Gospel should
be hindered by St. Paul's Imprisonment, and lest they and the whole Church
should be deprived of the Labors and Ministry of so great an Apostle, should
this Persecution extend to Life, as they had reason to fear it would.

As for the first, St. Paul assures them, That his Bonds were for the
furtherance of the Gospel; for his Imprisonment was taken notice of both in the
Court and City, which made Men curious to know, what that Doctrine was, which
he preached, and for which he suffered Bonds; and this published the Gospel
more effectually than his Preaching could have done, Verse 12, 13, etc.

As for the second, he tells them, He was no farther concerned either about
Life or Death, but that Christ might be magnified in his Body. If he lived, his
Life was wholly devoted to the Service of Christ, and of his Church; if he
died, it would be for his own great Advantage. To me to live is Christ, and to
die is gain; verse 20, 21. and this made it a hard choice to him, whether he
should desire to live or die: whether he should get rid of his Bonds, and make
his Escape out of a troublesome World into the Regions of Ease and Rest, to
reap the Fruit of his Labors here in the eternal Enjoyment of his Lord, whom
he had so faithfully served; or whether he should live to Encounter with a
thousand Difficulties and Deaths in the Service of Christ, and of the Souls of
Men. What I should choose I wot not: for I am in a strait betwixt two, having a
desire to depart and to be with Christ, which is far better: nevertheless, to
abide in the Flesh is more needful for you.

Was there ever such a Dispute as this before, That a Man, who was as certain
to go to Heaven, as he was to die; who had himself been snatched up into the
third Heavens, and had his Mind possessed with strong and vigorous and lively
Idea's of the Glories of that place, who had seen and heard such things as
could not be expressed; who saw a Crown, a glorious immarcessible Crown
prepared for him; I say, that such a Man should make any question what he
should choose, whether immediately to take possession of this Crown and Kingdom,
or to live longer in this World to suffer Bonds and Imprisonments, Hunger, and
Cold, and Stripes, and all the ill usage which he had so often met with, for no
other reason but still to preach the Gospel, and to enlarge the Borders of
Christ's Church. What a Contempt is this, not only of the little Pleasures and
Satisfactions, but even of all the Miseries of Life! What a Triumph is this
over the World, over all the Frowns and Terrors of it! What a Triumph is this
over Self! such a degree of Self-denial as the Gospel it self does not command,
which is in some sense to deny Heaven, to deny all the Joys of Christ's
Presence for the sake of doing good! For it is to delay, to put off Heaven, to
adjourn his own Happiness, that he may live the longer to serve his great
Master, though with great Difficulties and Labors. What Love was this to his
Lord! what Love was this to the Souls ^f Men! it is certainly the most per^ect
imitation of the Love of Christ, ^at is possible to Man; Christ so ^oved us, as
to come down from Heaven to live a laborious Life, and ^o die an accursed Death
for us; this great Apostle so loved his Lord, and so loved the Souls of Men,
that ^e made it his choice to stay some time out of Heaven, and to encounter
all the Miseries and Terrors of this Life, to serve Christ and his Church.
Where is this Divine Spirit now to be found! Let us, my beloved Brethren, who
are entrusted also with the Care of Souls by the great Shepherd and Bishop of
our Souls, blush to think how far short we fall of this Example: let this
inspire us with a flaming Love and Zeal for the Souls of Men, for whom Christ
died, and make us at least contented to deny our selves some of the Ease and
Security and Pleasures of Life, to serve the Church of Christ, which he has
purchased with his own blood.

But to keep my self within some Bounds, I shall briefly Discourse on these two
Heads; which are very proper for this Occasion, and very proper to my Text.
First, The great Rewards of faithful Pastors and Ministers of Christ, and how
much it is for their advantage to be removed out of this World. St. Paul was
very sensible of this, which made him desire to depart, and to be with Christ,
which is far better. Secondly, How necessary the Lives of such Men are to the
Church, and what a great loss it is, when God removes them out of it.
Nevertheless to abide in the Flesh is more needful for you.

1. Let us then consider in the first place the great Rewards of the faithful
Ministers of Christ, and how much it is for their advantage to depart, and to
be with Christ. Now I do not here intend a comparison between Heaven and Earth:
Good God! what different things are these! and what Christian doubts, whether
Heaven be a happier Place than this World! Heaven! whither no Troubles or
Sorrows can follow us; no persecuting Sword, no persecuting Tongue: where we
shall be delivered from all the Wants, Necessities, and Infirmities of the
Body, from ^unger and Cold and Nakedness, ^m wracking Pains and languishing
^cknesses; where there is eternal Ease ^d Rest and Joy, without labor, without
discontents, without quarrels; ^here our Souls shall be perfected in ^owledge
and in love; where we ^all dwell in the Presence of God, see ^m as he is, and
know him even as ^e are known; where we shall dwell ^ith Christ, adore his
Love, behold ^s Glory, and be transformed our ^lves into the likeness and image
of ^s Glory. We have but obscure im^rfect Conceptions of these things ^w;
Heaven will outdo our highest ^xpectations, as much as the most ^erfect state
of Happiness in this World, ^ways falls short of what we expect^; and this is
the case of all good ^en, it is a mighty happy Change ^ey make, when they
remove from ^arth to Heaven.

But there are different Degrees of Glory in the next World, proportion^d not
only to our different attain^ents in Virtue, but to those different Trusts in
Services which we have been employed in, and have faithfully discharged here.
We read of the Reward of a Prophet. that he who gives a Cup of cold Water to a
Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall have a Prophet's Reward, which must
signify some peculiar Reward that shall be bestowed on Prophets: We know so
little of the other World, that we cannot conceive, what these different
Rewards shall be: The Prophet Daniel represents it by an external Glory, 12.
Dan. 3. And they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament;
and they that turn many to righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever. But
our Savior represents this by a different degree of Rule and Empire, 12. Luke
42, 43, 44. And the Lord said, Who then is that faithful and wise steward, whom
his Lord shall make ruler over his household, to give them their meat in due
season? This is the honorable Character of Gospel Ministers in this World,
that they are Rulers in God's household, to instruct and feed them with the Word
of Life; and their Reward is proportioned to their Work: Blessed is that
servant, whom his Lord, when he comes shall find so doing. Of a truth I say
unto you, That he will make him ruler ^ver all that he has. What this Rule
^ignifies in the other World, is a Myste^y to us, especially since we have
^ancied the other World to be only a State of Contemplation, not of Acti^n,
where we shall have nothing to do ^ut to see God, and to love and to praise
him, but no service to do for ^im; but we know there are different ^orders of
Angels, who are employed in great Trusts and Offices, Archangels, Angels,
Thrones, Dominions, Principalities and Powers, which are names of Rule and
Government, though we know not what their Power and Authority is, nor how they
Govern; in like manner our Savior promises his Apostles, Verily I say unto
you, that ye which have followed me in the regeneration, when the son of man
shall sit on the throne of his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones,
judging the twelve tribes of Israel, 19. Matthew. 28. The like we may see in the
Parable of the Pounds and Talents; He who has gained ten Pounds had Rule over
ten Cities; and he who gained five Pounds had Rule over five Cities: for these
Servants to whom the Lord gave these Pounds and Talents to improve, plainly
signify his Stewards, and the Ministers of his spiritual Kingdom: for no other
Persons have in so peculiar a manner this honorable Character of the Servants
of Christ throughout the Gospel. And if there be Order and Government among the
Angels themselves, Why should we think that there is nothing like this among
glorified Saints? If Angels are the Ministers of God, there is no reason to
think that Heaven is a State of mere Rest and Contemplation, especially when
Happiness consists in Action. And if Christ have any Ministers of his spiritual
Kingdom in the next World, it is most reasonable to think, that those shall
have the greatest Authority, and be employed in the noblest Services, who have
been his faithful Stewards and Ministers in this World. For the Church on Earth
and in Heaven is the same Church, though their State be very different; and
therefore they do not lose their relation to Christ, nor their station in his
Church by removing to Heaven. It is a Sacerdotal Kingdom, our High Priest is
King; and therefore a Priest of Jesus, how mean soever this be thought now,
will be one of the highest Characters in Heaven. What the Happiness of this is,
we cannot tell; but we know that there are no empty Titles in Heaven, but every
degree of Dignity there signifies a peculiar degree of Happiness; and what an
advantageous exchange then is it for a faithful Minister of Jesus to be removed
from Earth to Heaven?

For let us consider what the State of Christ's Ministers is in this World;
what it was in St. Paul's days he tells us, 2 Cor. 6. 4 -- 10. In all things
approving our selves as the Ministers of God, in much patience, in afflictions,
in necessities, in distresses, in stripes, in imprisonments, in tumults, in
labors, in watchings, in fasting; by pureness, by knowledge, by
long-suffering, by kindnesses, by the Holy Ghost, by love unfeigned, by the
word of truth, by the power of God, by the Armor of righteousness on the right
hand and on the left; by honor and dishonor, by evil report and good report,
as deceivers and yet true; as unknown, and yet well known; as dying, and behold
we live; as chastened and not killed; as sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; as
poor, yet making many rich; as having nothing, and yet possessing all things.
Which describes a most laborious Life, a Scene of Wants, of Difficulties, of
Sufferings; a perpetual exercise of passive Virtues, to reconcile the most
appearing Contradictions, to live and struggle and contend in this World, and
to fetch their Comforts and Supports from Heaven.

This indeed is not always the State of the Christian Church, nor of the
Ministers of it; but yet in the greatest external Prosperity of the Church, the
Ministers of Religion, who discharged their Trust with Diligence and
Faithfulness, find many difficulties to encounter.

The care of Men's Souls is it self a mighty Trust; and Who is sufficient for
these things? consider but the Charge St. Paul gives to Timothy, 1 Epistle 4.
11, and c. Let no man despise thy youth, but be thou an example of the
believers, in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in
purity; give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to doctrine; neglect not
the gift that is in thee, which was given thee by Prophesy, by laying on of the
hands of the Presbytery: Meditate upon these things; give thy self wholly to
them, that thy profiting may appear to all; take heed to thy self, and to thy
doctrine; continue in them, for in doing this thou shall both save thy self,
and them that hear thee. Here is work enough to employ the whole Man, and our
utmost care and diligence and prudence; work for the Study, for the Closet, for
the Pulpit, as the same Apostle exhorts and charges Timothy, to preach the
word, to be instant in season, out of season; to reprove, rebuke, exhort, with
all long-suffering and Doctrine, 2 Timothy 4. 2. But yet though there be Labor
and Diligence in this, it would be a delightful work, were our Labors always
blessed with success; could we rescue the Souls of Men from the Dominion of
their Lusts, and from the power of the Devil; could we turn them from Darkness
to Light, and from the power of Satan unto God; but we must often expect to
labor all night, and catch nothing; we must contend with the Lusts and Vices
of Men, must bear their Folly, their Frowardness, their Reproaches, and
Censures, and Injuries; be thought Troublesome, Pragmatical, and Busy-bodies,
for our charitable Exhortations and Reproofs, and watchfulness over their
Souls. And when the Church is at ease and rest from without, how often is it
rent and torn in Pieces with Schisms and Heresies? as St. Paul forewarned
Timothy, The time will come when they will not endure sound Doctrine, but after
their own lusts shall they heap to themselves Teachers, having itching ears,
and they shall turn away their ears from the truth, and be turned unto fables,
3, 4. ver. and what infinite Labors and Difficulties does this create to the
Ministers of the Gospel, to heal the Breaches of the Church, to confute
Heresies, Atheism, Infidelity, and to be scorned and persecuted for it with a
bitter Rage and Zeal? That St. Paul might well add, But watch thou in all
things, endure afflictions, do the work of an Evangelist, make full proof of
thy ministry, 5 verse. We ought not indeed to be discouraged by such
difficulties as these, because our Reward will be great in Heaven; but it will
be a happy Day when Our warfare shall be accomplished, when we shall cease from
our labors, and our works shall follow us: when we can say with St. Paul, I
have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith,
henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness.

2. Thus to die is their gain; Nevertheless, it is more needful for the Church,
that they should abide in the flesh: And a great loss it is to the Church, when
they die. I need not use many words about this, for the case is plain. The
Death of every good Man, who is very useful to the World, in what way soever he
be useful, is a very great loss; for Death puts an end to his doing any more
good in this World: but as to take care of the Souls of Men, is to do the
greatest good to Mankind, because the Happiness of our Souls is of the greatest
concernment to us; so to lose a faithful and a prudent Guide must be the
greatest loss.

We indeed of this Church, have great reason to bless God, that he has sent
forth so many able and painful Laborers into his Harvest, that it is not the
loss of every good Man that can much affect us at ordinary times: for there are
great numbers of wise and good Men to perpetuate a Succession of able and
faithful Guides* but a St. Paul is at any time, and in any Age of the Church a
great loss: Nay, Men who are much Inferior to St. Paul, but yet fitted with
peculiar Abilities to serve the Church at some certain Seasons, and in some
difficult Circumstances, are a very sensible loss at such a time, when their
service is most needful.

A Man of Counsel and Conduct, who is fit to sit at the Helm, and knows how to
steer in a Storm, is a great loss, in times of Difficulty and Trouble, when the
Church is assaulted on all hands, and it is hard to avoid one Mischief or
Inconvenience without runinto another.

A Man of Goodness and Temper, who knows how to govern his own Passions, and
how to soften and manage the Passions of other Men, is a very sensible loss,
when the Passions of Men are broke loose, and disturb the Peace of the Church,
and even threaten the ruin of it.

A Man of Learning and sound Judgment, who can distinguish between Truth and
Error in all its most artificial and flattering Disguises, is a great loss,
when old Errors are revived, and new ones broached; when we must dispute over
again the very Being of a God, the truth of the Scriptures, and Articles of the
Christian Faith.

A Man of great Diligence and Industry, Courage and Resolution, to defend the
Truth, to oppose Heresies and Schisms, to preserve the Unity of the Church, and
the Integrity of the Christian Faith, is a very great loss, when the Church is
encompassed and assaulted with busy and restless Enemies.

A Man of an exemplary Life, and untainted Virtue, who shines like a Light in
the midst of a crooked and perverse Generation, who maintains the declining
Honor and Reputation of Religion and true Virtue, is a mighty loss in a
profligate Age, when men are grown such Strangers to the sincere practice of
Virtue and Religion, that they begin to think there is no such thing.

But I can go on no farther; the very mentioning of these things brings the
fresh Idea of our deceased Brother to mind, and the afflicting Sense of that
great loss, which we suffer by his Death. It becomes us to Reverence and Adore
the Wisdom of the divine Providence, even when we cannot understand the Reasons
of it. We are certain God is never wanting in his Care of his Church; and yet
had we been made Judges of this Case, we should have thought it a very ill time
to have spared him.

He was abundantly furnished with all good Learning, both for Use and Ornament;
he was an accomplished Scholar, and a well-studied Divine; he knew Books and
read them, and judged of them: He was a Scribe instructed unto the Kingdom of
Heaven, ^ho like a Householder could bring forth ^ut of his treasure things New
and ^ld, 13. Matthew. 52. He had careful^y perused the ancient Philosophers,
^rators and Poets, to discover what Nature taught, which gave him a truer
Knowledge and greater Value for the Excellency and Perfection of the
Gospel-Revelation.

He had true and clear Notions of Religion, and he was Master of them; he knew
why he believed any thing, and was neither prejudiced nor imposed on by popular
Opinions; he was a hearty and zealous assertor of the Doctrine, Worship,
Government and Discipline of the Church of England; he saw nothing material,
which could be changed for the better, which made him jealous of Innovations,
as not knowing where they would end. He was a Friend to all sincere Christians,
pitied their Mistakes, and bore with their Frowardness; but did not think that
Christian Charity required him to sacrifice Truth, or good Order and
Government, to the pretenses of Peace and Unity.

He was for several Years a very diligent and constant Preacher to a numerous
Auditory, till his own Diocesan, who knew his Worth, and the weakness of his
Constitution, and was desirous to preserve him for the Service of the Church,
provided this Place where we now are, for his Ease, and Health, and Retirement;
where he lived many Years a constant Preacher, though his Labors were then
diviued between his two Cures, which did not lessen his Preaching, but made the
Benefit of it the more diffusive. For indeed he was an admirable Preacher, not
for Noise and Lungs, but for well-digested useful pious Discourses, delivered
with all that becoming Gravity, Seriousness, and a commanding Elocution, as
made them sink deep into the Minds of his Hearers, and made them hear. This I
speak with Assurance and Confidence in this place, which was so long blessed
with his Labors, With what fineness of Thought, pe^spicuity and easiness of
Expression, instructing and entertaining Images of Things, he expounded the
Doctrines, and inculcated the Laws of our Savior; how plainly he Taught, with
what Vehemence and Passion he Exhort^d, with what tender Sharpness he Re^roved:
remember how he used both to Please and Instruct, to Chide and Shame you
without making you angry; ^ow he has warmed and chafed your Minds into the most
pious and serious Resolutions, and sent you home from this place wiser and
better than you came; and if you grew cold, and suffered your good Resolutions
to die again, consider, I beseech you, what Account you have to give.

As he grew in Years, it was necessary by degrees to ease his Labors; he could
not Preach so often, but yet continued to Preach. And yet had he not Preached
at all, or much less than he did, he had not ceased to be a very useful Pastor
to the Church; for he was a Man of great Experience, and great Prudence and
Foresight; fit for Government and Counsel; who knew Men and Things; was
dexterous in his Applications, zealous without Passion or Peevishness, steady
and resolved without violent Oppositions, and needless Provocations; who served
the Church and the Truth with little Noise, and without making many Enemies:
And I am sure at such a time as this, there is more need of such Men, and a
much greater scarcity of them, than of good Preachers.

But he was not only a good Preacher and a prudent Guide, but a very good Man:
he Preached continually by his Life and Example: his Conversation was Innocent,
Entertaining, and Useful; he was a true sincere Friend, very Courteous,
Affable, Civil to all Men, but never pretended Friendship where he had none: he
was ready to do all good Offices, was Liberal, Generous, and Charitable; a Man
of a true public Spirit, who scorned to serve himself to the Injury of others;
who hated little Arts and Tricks, mean and servile Compliances: he was an open
and generous Enemy, if we may ever call him an Enemy, who never wished, never
intended any hurt to any Man; but my meaning is, that when any Dispute and
Quarrel happened, as such things will sometimes happen, he was open and
undisguised, any Man might know what he disliked, and had no reason to fear any
thing worse from him, than what he would ^ell them. In a Word, He was a very
^ood Christian, and that made him ^ood in all Relations, and that Crowned all
his other Labors; he took care, ^s St. Paul did, Lest while he preached to
others, he himself should become a castaway. And now he is gone to rest, and
we ^ust all shortly follow him; God grant that we may all so run our Race, and
^inish our Course, that when we depart ^his Life, we may rest in Him, as our
^ope is this our Brother does; and may ^eceive that Crown of Righteousness,
which God the Righteous Judge, will ^t that Day bestow on all his faithful
Servants, and on all those who love his Appearing.

SERMON VIII.
^each'd at the Temple-Church, December 30. 1694. Upon the Sad Occasion of the
Death of our Gracious Queen. And Published at the Earnest Request of Several
Masters of the Bench of Both Societies.
XXXIX. Psalm 9. ^as dumb, and opened not my mouth, because thou did it.


THIS may be thought a very improper Text for the Feast of our Savior's Birth,
when our ^ouths ought to be filled with the Prai^ of God, and sing with the
whole ^ire of Angels, Glory be to God in the ^hest, on earth peace, good will
toward ^n. This indeed is that Peace, which ^e World cannot give, and which
the World cannot take away; whateve^ the External Appearances of Providence
are, here we find a safe retre^ and a never-failing Spring of Joy: F^ he that
spared not his own Son, but (...) livered him up for us all, how shall (...)
not with him also freely give us all things Who then shall separate us from the
(...) of Christ? Shall Tribulation, or Distre^ or Persecution, or Famine, or
Nakedness or Peril, or Sword? -- Nay, in (...) these we are more than
Conquerors thro^ him that loved us. For I am perswad^ that neither death, nor
life, nor ^gels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things
to co^ nor height, nor depth, nor any ot^ creature, shall be able to separate
(...) from the love of God, which is in C^ Jesus our Lord, 8. Romans 32, 35, 37,
(...) While our minds are warmed w^ such thoughts as these, we shall (...) able
to bear up under the great Trials, if not with Cheerfulness yet at least with
Patience and a qui^ Submission to the Will of God. A^ if ever there were
occasion for su^ comfortable and supporting Thoug^ the Divine Providence has
made it (...) necessary at this time, to bear the (...) (...) an Incomparable
Lady, our most ^acious Queen; whose Death all ^od Subjects must Lament, and I
^ay God forgive those that do not. ^ch severe Providence as these, will ^ach
the greatest and most unbroken ^inds, to serve the Lord with fear, and to
^joyce with trembling. But how se^re soever Providence is in some par^cular
instances, the sense of the Di^ne Goodness i^ the Redemption of ^ankind by the
Incarnation and ^eath of his own Son, should teach (...) to be dumb, and not
open our mouths, ^cause it is his doings.

In speaking to which words, I ^all, 1. enquire, What may be called ^e doings
of the Lord? 2. What it (...) to be dumb, and not to open ^ur Mouths? 3. The
force of this ^rgument, to oblige us to a quiet and ^atient Submission under
the great^st sufferings, That it is God's do^ng.

1. What may be called the do^ng of the Lord? This may be thought (...) very
needless question; for are ^here any Events, Good or Evil, which are not God's
doing? If w^ believe a particular Providence, w^ must answer, No; and yet some
things are more peculiarly God'^ doings, than others are, with respect to this
present Argument, a^ God's doing it, is a reason for (...) quiet and patient
Submission to the Divine Will.

In many cases men bring Ruin and Misery upon themselves by the^ own sin and
folly, and then they may thank themselves for it; but have no reason to
complain of Providence; and when they cannot charge Providence with their
misfortunes, patience it self is not properly a Submission to God; because
their sufferings are no more God's will, than their sin and folly is.

If men destroy their Estates by profuseness and prodigality, and their Bodies
by intemperance, and lust; if ill-contracted Friendships, indiscreet Bargains,
or an ungovernable Tongue, perplex their Affairs, and prove very troublesome or
dangerous, all this is owing, not merely to Providence, but to themselves; and
they must be contented to reap the fruit of their own doings, and to implore
the Divine Goodness and Providence to deliver them from the evil consequences
of their own sin and folly.

Whatever evils we suffer, which are not the natural or moral effects of our
own sin or folly, they are properly God's doings, as inflicted by God, either
for the punishment of our sins, or for the trial and exercise of our virtues,
or to serve the wise ends of his Providence in the world.

Those Evils which we do not immediately bring upon our selves, God inflicts on
us, either by the ministry of wicked and injurious men, or by the disorders of
Natural Causes, or by some seeming casual and fortuitous Events; for the
Actions of Men, the Powers of Nature, and what we call Chance and Fortune, are
all in the hands of God, and therefore are more or less his doings.

But if we may say, That some things are more peculiarly the care of
Providence, than others, Life and Death are certainly so; no man can be Born or
Die, without the particular Order and Appointment of God: Our Savior tells us,
not a sparrow falls to the ground without our Father; much less men; and
assures his Disciples, that all the hairs of their head are numbered; and their
Lives are more sacred than their Hairs. Some men are of opinion, That God has
absolutely Decreed the certain term and period of every man's life; But I know
no foundation for this, neither in Scripture nor Reason; nor does any man
believe it, but those who subject all Mankind, and all the Things of this
World, to irreversible Necessity and Fate, which is the strength of the
Atheistick Hypothesis; though incautiously espoused by some men, who are so far
from being Atheists, that I hope they are very good Christians. And therefore,
I suppose, these Christian Fatalists, if I may so call them, mean no more than
what we all own, That no Sparrow, much less a Man, falls to the ground without
our Father; that God not only foreknows the period of every man's Life, and by
what means he shall Die, but with Infinite Wisdom and justice, Orders and
Appoints it; ^ot by an absolute and unconditional ^ecree, but as the Wise
Determi^ation of a Free and Just Prov^ce.

And if God have any more con^ernment for Nations and Commonwealths, than he
has for particular men (as we, who can attend but a few things at once, and
therefore make the matters of greatest importance our more particular care, are
apt to conceive) then the Lives and Deaths of Princes must be more particularly
Ordered and Determined by God; because Nations, it may be many Nations and
Countries, more than their own, are concerned in the consequence of it; and of
the more universal concernment any thing is, the more we are apt to think it
belongs to the Care of God.

For this reason some Philosophers have confined the Providence of God to the
Heavens, and Heavenly Bodies, which have such a univerversal influence on
things below; or to Nations and Public Societies, and to the several kinds and
species of Beings, not to particular Men or Creatures.

And so far they were in the right, that if the Divine Providence could not
equally take care of the whole World, and of every particular Creature in it;
it would certainly in the first place take care of the great Springs of motion.
But though this be no reason for God's peculiar care of one thing more than
another, because his All-seeing Eye, and Almighty Arm, can equally take care of
all; yet our Savior has taught us from the worth and value of things, that God
will certainly take the more care of them, and in case of any Competition give
the preference to things of the greatest moment. Behold the fowls of the air,
for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather into barns; yet your
heavenly Father feeds them; are ye not much better than they? And if God so
clothe the grass of the field, which to day is, and to morrow is cast into the
oven, shall he not much more clothe you, O ye of little faith? 6. Matthew. 26,
30. Where from God's care of mean Inferior Creatures, the Fowls of the Air, and
the Grass of the Field, he more strongly concludes his care of Men; and by the
same reason from his care of particular men, we may more strongly conclude his
care of Kingdoms and Nations, and therefore of the Lives of Princes, who are
the great Ministers of his Government and Providence, and whose Lives or Deaths
make such a mighty Change in the Affairs of the World. So that when, or by what
means soever Princes dye, this is God's doings; and how severe soever we may
feel it, We must be dumb, and not open our mouths, because he has done it;
which is the

2. Thing to be explained, What is meant by being dumb, and not opening our
mouths. For this seems a very hard saying in the strict literal sense, that we
must not complain of our Sufferings, when we feel 'em smart: Humane Nature
cannot bear this; we must feel our Sufferings, and when we feel them, we must
complain: To have no sense of what we suffer, is Stupidity, not Submission; it
is irreverence for the Judgments of God, and in some cases the most
unpardonable baseness and ingratitude to Men. To be unconcerned for the Death
of our dearest Friends, or greatest Patrons and Benefactors, not to pay
Nature's Tribute to their Memories in a Sigh and a Tear; not to long after
them, and send some vain Wishes to call them back; not to preserve their Idea
fresh in our minds, and to think with some uneasiness of those happy hours
which their Conversation sweetn d; to part with our Friends, as if we suffered
nothing by their loss, and were as well without them; is so far from being a
Virtue, that such a man is incapable of ever being a Friend, and never deserves
to have any; much more then, when we lose a public Friend and Benefactor, the
greatest of Friends and Benefactors, which is a good Prince.

Let us briefly consider, what we have lost in the loss of our Gracious Queen,
and try if we can bear the thoughts of it without complaining. She was the
Glory of her Sex, and an Ornament to the Crown she wore; made truly Great by
Nature, Birth, and Education.

She had a large and capacious Mind, a quick and lively Apprehension, and a
piercing and solid Judgment: She had a strength and firmness of Mind beyond her
Sex, and such a dexterity in managing the greatest Affairs, as would have
become the greatest and most experienced Ministers. Never was there greater
skill in Government, with less fondness for it, which she could take up and lay
down, with the same equality and indifferency of Mind; Though, I doubt, I must
unsay that; for she was always grieved at the occasion of taking the
Government, and as glad to resign it.

Never was Majesty better tempered with easiness and sweetness. She knew how to
be familiar, without making her self cheap, and to condescend without meanness.
She had all the Greatness of Majesty, with all the Virtues of Conversation; and
knew very well, what became her Table, and what became the Council Board.

She understood her Religion, and loved it, and practiced it; and was the
greatest Example of the Age, of a constant, regular, unaffected Devotion, and
of all the eminent Virtues of a Christian Life. In the midst of all the great
Affairs of State, she would rather spare time from her sleep, than from her
Prayers, where she always appeared with that great composure and seriousness of
Mind, as if her Court had been a Nunnery, and she had had nothing else to do in
the World.

In all the Ease and Prosperity of Fortune she had that tenderness and
compassion for those, who suffered, which sufferings themselves cannot teach
meaner Persons. She was Charitable to the utmost of her Power, amidst all the
Expenses of War and Government; and when a proper Object was presented to her,
was always pleased, when she could grant their requests, and very uneasy to
deny.

In short, her greatest and most ^placable Enemies, (for Virtue self will meet
with Enemies in this ^orld) had no other Fault to ^arge her with, but her
Throne; which is the only thing, for which ^ost other Princes are valuable. ^he
ascended the Throne indeed before she desired it; but was ^rust into it, not by
an hasty ^mbition, but to save a sinking Church and Kingdom; and I hope England
will always have reason to ^ay, That an empty Throne could ^ever have been
filled with a nobler Pair.

But though the necessary absence of the King, to give check to the Progress of
a Powerful and Insulting Monarch, engaged her more than she desired in State
Affairs; yet the promoting of true Religion, and the service of the Church of
England, [the greatest and best Nursery of it, since the Apostolic Age], was
her constant and natural Care. This her Thoughts were full of, and she had
formed great and noble Designs, had she outlived the Difficulties and Expenses
of War; and been at leisure to attend the peaceful Arts of Government.

I have reason to say this, from those frequent Intimations I have had from our
late admirable Primate, who had great Designs Himself to serve the Christian
Religion, and the Church of England, in its truest Interests; and had inspired
Their Majesty's, and particularly the Queen, who had more leisure for such
Thoughts, with the same great and pious Designs: It may be no Churchman ever
had, I am sure not more deservedly, a greater Interest in his Prince's Favor;
and the great Use he made of it, was to do public service to Religion; and,
what ever some Men might suspect, to the Church of England, though it may be
not perfectly in their Way: And the greatest Fault I know he had, was, That
some envious and ambitious Men could not bear his Greatness, which he himself
never courted, nay, which he industriously avoided.

Before this, all England knew and owned his Worth; and had it been put to the
Poll, there had ^en vast Odds on his side, that (...) would have been voted
into the ^e of Canterbury; for no Man had ^er a clearer and brighter Reason
truer Judgment, a more easy and ^ppy Expression, nor a more (...), fearless
Honesty: he was a ^e and hearty Friend, and was a ^e Friend wherever he prof^
^d to be so: Though he had man Enemies at last, he took care (...) make none.
He was obliging (...) all Men; and though he could ^t easily part with a
Friend, he ^uld easily forgive an Enemy, (...) that Bundle of Libels witnesses,
which was found among his other ^pers, with this Inscription: These ^e Libels;
I pray God forgive them; do.

But I cannot give you the just Character of this Great Man now; that I have
already said, I con^ss, is an Excursion, which I hope ^ou will pardon to the
Passion of (...) old Friend; and learn from Two great Examples, That neither ^e
greatest Innocence, Virtue, or Merit, can defend, either Crowned or Mitred
Heads, from the lash^ of spiteful and envenomed Tongue^ But what a Loss has
Religion and the Church of England, in such a critical Time, in the Death of
such a Queen, and such a Prelate! I pray God make up this Loss.

In a word, That great Passion which afflicts and oppresses our good King,
gives an unexceptionable Testimony to the incomparable Worth of our deceased
Queen; The too severe and visible Effects of it, show, that it is not an
ordinary, nor a dissembled Passion; Nor is it an ordinary thing, for a Prince
of so great a Mind, who can look the most formidable Dangers, and Death it
self, in the face, without fear; whom all the Powers of France cannot make look
pale or tremble, to sink, and faint, and to feel all the Agonies of Death in
the dying. Looks of a Beloved Consort. All Story cannot furnish us with many
Examples of such soft and tender Passions, in such a warlike and fearless Mind;
and what but a mighty Virtue could so charm a Prince, as to forget his natural
Constancy and Resolution? I Am sure though we ^y very dear for the Experiment
(...) the loss of an excellent Queen, ^e have so much the more reason (...)
think our selves happy in a ^ng; for a due mixture and tempe^ment of such
fearless Courage and ^avery, and such tender Passions, is ^e most perfect
Composition of an ex^ellent Prince.

And now it may be, you will tell ^e, that I have taken great pains (...)
confute my Text, and that I ^ave done it effectually; for we ^ght not to be
dumb, but may ^ery justly complain of such a loss ^s this.

This I readily grant, That we ^ay complain of such a loss; but ^his is no
confutation of my Text. ^e may complain, and give Ease and Vent to our Sorrows
by such Complaints, while we do not complain against God, and accuse him
foolishly. To submit to the Will of God, which is here expressed by being Dumb,
and not opening our Mouths, does not signify, not to feel our Losses and
Sufferings, or not to complain of them; but not to reproach the Divine
Providence, no^ to cast off our Hope and Trust in God. Job felt his Sufferings,
and complained of them in as moving and tragical Expressions, as any other Man
could, and yet is proposed to us, as an Example of admirable Patience, because
he did not charge God foolishly, nor cast off his hope in him.

This we never can have any reason for; for whatever we suffer, it is a wise
and merciful Providence which inflicts it: But yet Mankind are very apt, when
they suffer hard things, either to deny a Providence, or which is more absurd,
and unreasonable, to reproach it; for if there be a God, he is Wise, and Good,
and Merciful, and Just, which is the Notion all Mankind have of God; and if
this God governs the World, all Events are ordered with Wisdom, Justice, and
Goodness; and all thinking Men, in cool and sober Thoughts, will be ashamed to
quarrel with such a Providence.

But yet we are very apt to ask Questions, which we cannot easily answer, and
then to make our own ig^rance an Objection against the Di^ne Providence.

As in the Case before us, the ^dden and untimely Death of an ^cellent
Princess, who had Strength ^d Vigor of Age, which promised (...) much longer
Life, and who ^ould certainly have done great ^ood to the World, as long as she
^ad lived; but is cut off in the ^igor and Strength of Age, and all ^er
Thoughts, even all her great ^d excellent Designs of doing Good (...) the
World, perish with her; ^hile Tyrants and Oppressors live ^o be the Plagues and
Scourges of Mankind.

Now though we do not know ^he particular Reasons of such Pro^idences, yet it
is easy to frame some general Answers, which may ^atisfy all the Friends of
Providence.

If the Objection relates to our selves, who suffer by this Loss, there is a
very plain Answer to it, but a very terrible one; That God is Angry with us,
and by the untimely Death of an excellent Princess, who made it her whole Study
and Design to do us Good, threatens his Judgments against us, if we do not take
Care to prevent them by a timely Repentance.

If the Objection relates only to the untimely Death of an excellent Princess,
that she should so suddenly be snatched away from the Joys and Pleasures of a
Throne; this is no Objection at all; at least not a^ Objection fit for
Christians to make: For can we think, that the greatest and most happy Monarch,
loses any thing by the Exchange, if he be translated from Earth to Heaven? That
the Joys of Paradise are not greater than a Crown? Our good Queen did not think
so, who knew what an Earthly Crown meant, but was willing to part with it for
Heaven; who saw Death approaching without fear, and prepared to receive its
Stroke with that calmness and sedateness of Mind, as nothing could give but an
innocent Conscience, and much greater Hopes.

But as for our selves, though we must acknowledge that we have re^eived a very
great Loss, in the ^eath of an excellent Queen, yet we ^ave no reason to
quarrel at Pro^idence, while God preserves our ^ing to go in and out before us.
^e had indeed perpetual Day; and ^o sooner was one Sun withdrawn, ^ut another
ascended our Horizon, ^ith equal Luster and Brightness: ^his was a peculiar
Happiness which we never had before, and which the Necessities of our Affairs
^equired now; but though God has ^ut us short in this, we have a King still,
the Terror of France, and the Protector of Europe; a King, whom Affection as
well as Blood has Naturalized to us; who loves our Nation and our Church, which
he has once delivered, and God grant ^e may live long to settle and pro^ect
both. We have no reason to fear our Enemies, either at home or abroad, while a
Prince is at the Helm, who wants neither Counsel nor Courage; especially if we
follow that noble Example, which the Two Houses of Parliament have set us, to
give him such fresh Assurances of our Fidelity, as may strengthen his Hands
against his and our Enemies Abroad, and make him easy and safe at Home.

To conclude, This is God's doing, and it becomes us to be dumb, and not to
open our Mouths, because he has done it: He is the Sovereign and Unaccountable
Lord of the World; who shall say unto him, What dos^ thou? Life and Death are
in his hands; the Fates of Princes and Kingdoms. That he has done it, should be
a sufficient Reason to us to submit, because though he does things great and
wonderful, and beyond our Understanding, yet he never does any thing but what
is wise and good: This I Am sure is the most effectual way to turn even the
severest Judgments into Blessings, to reverence God, and to humble our selves
under his mighty hand, and implore his Mercy, to repair those Breaches he has
made upon us. We must not complain of Providence; but we may make our
Complaints to God, and be the more importunate in our Prayers for the
Preservation of our King. The Death of our excellent Queen both calls for, and
will justify and recommend such humble Importunities; and the preservation of
our King, will, in a great measure, make up this Loss to us; Which God of his
infinite Mercy grant, through our Lord Jesus Christ; to whom with the Father,
and the Holy Ghost, be Honor, Glory, and Power, now and for ever,

Amen.
SERMON IX.
Preached before the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, and the Court of
Aldermen, at the Parish Church of St. Bridget, on Tuesday in Easter-Week, April
6. 1697.
2 Cor. VIII. 12. For if there be first a willing mind, it is accepted
according to that a man has, and not according to that he has not.


THE Occasion of these Words was this. The Christians of Iudaea were at this
time in great Want, by reason of a general Dearth, which was foretold by Agabus
at Antioch, Acts II. 28. And there stood up one of them, named Agabus, and
signified by the spirit, That there should be great dearth throughout all the
world, which came to pass in the days of Claudius Caesar. Upon this Notice, the
Disciples, every man according to his ability, determined to send relief unto
the Brethren which dwelt in Iudaea.

This is that Contribution for the Saints which St. Paul directs them about, at
the Conclusion of his first Epistle to them, Chapter 16. and this is what he
inculcates on them in this and the following Chapter, but with so much Art and
Insinuation, that though he uses the most powerful Arguments, yet he would not
seem to persuade, nor to think that they needed any Persuasion; for it is not
Honorable for Christians, whose Religion is Charity, to need such Persuasions
and Importunities. They may be directed in their Charity, and put in Mind of
such particular Charities as are of the greatest Necessity, or the most present
use, or have the most general Influence, or do the greatest Reputation and
Service to Religion; or their Charity may be heightened, inflamed, and
enlarged, by the proper Arguments and Motives of Liberality; but their Religion
teaches them to be Charitable, and the Name and Profession of a Christian is a
Reproach to them without it: And this is all the Apostle aims at even in his
soft and tender way of Persuasion; not merely to persuade them to contribute to
the Necessities of the Saints, which he knew they were willing ^o do; but that
they should contri^ute liberally, with a free and cheerful Heart, and open
Hand; which is the ^um of all his Arguments, as I shall show you in the
Conclusion, if Time permit.

But the great Difficulty concerns the proper Measures of a liberal and
overflowing Charity. Our Savior has prescribed no set Bounds and Proportions
to our Charity; and it is thought as possible to be imprudent and excessive, as
too frugal and sparing: We have many other Obligations upon us besides CHARITY;
to provide for our own comfortable Subsistence, to take Care of our Wives and
Children, and to discharge all other Duties and Offices according to our
Station and Character in the World: All which ought to set Bounds to our
Charity. But what these Bounds are, is thought the great Question, which is not
easily answered: This is true; nor can any certain Measures be prescribed; nor
does the Apostle pretend to it: But though there is a great Latitude in true
Christian Charity, which does not consist in a Point, but admits of different
degrees and Proportions; yet the Apostle, in my Text, directs us to such a
Principle, as is much better and safer than any stated Rules, because it will
be sure never to sink below the just Proportions of Charity; and will render
all we do, be it more or less, very acceptable to God. For if there be first a
willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has, and not according to
that he has not.

In which Words, I shall observe Three Things, which are expressed, or
necessarily implied in them. First, That a great readiness and Forwardness of
Mind, to do Good, is the true Spirit of Charity; which gives Value and
Acceptance to all we do. Secondly, That this readiness of Mind to do Good, to
Relieve the Necessities of those who want, will observe the just Proportions of
Giving, will give according to what a man has: as is necessarily implied in
the Words; for if a willing Mind be accepted, according to what a man has, it
is, because it gives according to what a man has. Thirdly, That where there is
this Willing Mind, with a fitting Proportion according to our Abilities,
whether it be more or less, which we give, it is equally acceptable to God.
Such a Man is accepted according to what ^e has, not according to what he has
^ot. I shall speak as briefly as I can to each of these, that I may not be
prevented in such an Application, as is proper to this Solemnity.

First, That a great Readiness and Forwardness of Mind ((...) signifies) to do
Good; to relieve the Necessities of those in Want, is the true Spirit of
Charity, and gives Value and Acceptance to all we do. Such a Willingness of
Mind, when (...), it is the Principle and first Mover in all our Charitable
Actions, is (...) very acceptable to God.

This, I think, I may take for granted; for what is the Grace and Virtue of
Charity, but a Charitable Inclination, Disposition, Temper, Habit of Mind? And
what is this but a Readiness and Forwardness to do Good? Our Inclinations and
Passions are the Principles of Action, and therefore have a natural Tendency
toward their proper Acts and Objects, and will act when they have the Power
and Opportunity of Action: Charity is Love, the Love of Pity and Compassion to
the Miseries and Sufferings, and Wants of our Brethren; and Love in all other
Instances is a very restless active Principle; and so will our Love to the Poor
and Miserable be, if it be Inclination and Habit.

There is no man but will pretend to be very ready and willing to do Good,
though he never does any: For to have no Inclination to do Good, is so
Infamous, that those who do no good, are ashamed to own it; but to do no good,
is a plain Evidence against them, when nothing can hinder them from doing Good,
but the want of Will and Inclination to do it; when God has furnished them with
the means of doing Good, and there are thousands of Objects to exercise their
Charity, and to move their Pity, if they had any. The Will is accepted for the
Deed, both by God and Men, when it is not in our Power to do that Good which we
sincerely desire to do, and which we would certainly do, were it in our Power;
but it is to mock both God and Men, to pretend a Willingness, when ^t is
visible to all the World, That a Will to do Good is the only thing we want. But
such a Readiness and Wil^ingness of Mind as is Active and Vigorous, as
contrives and lays Designs of Charity, or embraces such as are offered, and
takes all wise Opportunities of doing Good, this is very accepta^le to God, as
being the most Divine and God-like Temper, the Image of ^is own Goodness, and
the noblest Exercise of our Love to Men, inspired with the Love of God. Now in
Mo^al Actions it is the Principle that gives the Value; not so much the Gift,
as the Mind of the Giver; and therefore St. Paul tells us, That though we give
all our goods to feed the poor, and have not charity, we are nothing, 1 Cor.
13. 3. God can feed the poor without us, if he so pleases; but as for several
other wise ends of Providence, so he has ordered, That the poor shall be always
with us for the trial and exercise of our Virtue, but the Virtue is not the
Gift, but the Charity. And could we perform all the Acts of Charity without a
charitable Mind, the World might be better for it, but not we our selves.

2dly. This readiness and forwardness of Mind to do good, will observe the just
proportions of Charity, will give according to what a man has. I observed
before, That our Savior in his Gospel has prescribed no fixed Measures nor
Proportions of Charity: Nor could he reasonably do this, considering the nature
of Charity; which though it be not so absolutely free, that we may choose
whether we will be charitable or no (for charitable we must be at the peril of
our Souls); yet the proportions must be free, or it is not Charity, but a
Poor's rate, as all the positive Laws, which God gave the Jews for the relief
of the Poor, were no better; and therefore, by the wiser Jews, were never
placed to the account of Charity, but of Justice, and a Legal Righteousness:
Which is the very distinction St. Paul makes between a righteous and a good
man, Romans 5. 7. But scarcely for a righteous man wi^ one die, yet peradventure
for a good man one would even dare to die. A Righteous man is one, who is
legally Righteous, and observes what the Law requires; but a Good man is one
who is acted by a free, unconfined and generous Goodness.

Now upon this pretense, That there (...) no proportion assigned to Charity,
^ere are too many, who content them^lves with very little, indeed with no^ing
which can properly be called Cha^ty. But I wonder in the mean time that these
men make of all those Com^ands and Exhortations which we find (...) the Gospel
to Charity, which are so ^any, so pressing and importunate, and ^und on us by
so many promises of ^esent and future Rewards, and with (...) many terrible
Threatenings denoun^d against the uncharitable; that sure^ they must mean
something; and as ^illing as men are in these Cases to ^etend Ignorance, I
believe there are ^w men living, but know in some mea^re what Charity means:
And though ^ey may dispute how much they ought ^o give, yet certainly know,
that they ^ught to give; and that to give nothing, or what is next to nothing,
all Circumstances considered, is not Cha^ity.

A Charitable Temper and Disposition of Mind is an indispensible Duty, and the
most Essential Part of the Christian Religion. This our Savior commands, and
he need command no more, for Charity is and will be a Rule and Measure to it
self. Where this Divine Principle is, it will teach us when, and how, and in
what Proportion to give: The Sun needs no Rules and Directions how to
communicate its Light and Heat. Nature is the surest and most infallible Rule,
and Law to it self; and thus it is proportionably in Moral as well as in
Natural Agents. For what is the immediate effect of Nature and Life, can never
be taught without its Principle; cannot exceed its Principle, and cannot fall
below it. All the Rules in the World can never teach that man Charity, who
wants the Principle; a Charitable Mind needs no Rules, but turns naturally on
its own Byas; which will direct its Motions right.

There is a great difference indeed between Natural and Moral Agents, Natural
Agents are necessarily determined to some one End, and therefore have but one
Principle, which uniformly and steddily pursues the Ends of Nature; but Moral
Agents, as they act freely, so they have many different Principles,
Inclinations, and Passions, which stint and limit each other; that none of them
can act to their utmost Vigor, but as they are mutually poi^ed and balanced:
And this is the ^ork of Reason and Religion, to put ^em into their Natural
Order, and to ^t just Bounds to them; and that pro^ortions the degrees of their
Activity ^d Strength; but yet every Principle, ^nless violently oppressed, will
act ac^ording to its Nature, as it more or ^ess prevails. And this gives
Mea^res and Proportions to all our Acti^ns; as to show you this in our pre^ent
Case.

Charity is that Love to Mankind which makes us pity all their Wants and
Sufferings, and inspires us with a ^reat Zeal and Concernment to Help and
Relieve them. If you enquire, What the Natural Measure of this Charity is? I
know no other Natural Measure, but its Natural End, that is, To relieve all
that suffer and are in want; for that is what Charity would do, and what all
Charitable Men heartily wish that they could do. Well! but this is impossible,
for there are too many miserable People for any man to Relieve them all. This
is true, and Want of Power must of Necessity set Bounds to our Charity; but
since we cannot Relieve all, we must relieve such as we can; and wisely
consider where the greatest Necessities, and greatest Obligations are: Which
will give the Preference to Christians before Infidels; to Good Men before the
Wicked; to God's Poor, whom the Divine Providence has made Poor, to the Poor of
their own Making, whom Idleness, Luxury, and Vice have made Poor and Miserable.
Well! But how far must we Relieve these Poor? Must we give as long as we have
any thing to give, and make our selves the Objects of Charity? By no means!
There are other as Natural Principles as Charity, which must set Bounds to it.
Self-Love is a Natural and Necessary Principle; no man is bound to love any man
better than himself: To love our Neighbor as our selves, is all that the
Gospel it self makes our necessary Duty; though some Great and Generous
Friendships, and Divine Charities, may go further, as far as concerns this
Life. Next to Self-love, our Natural Affection for our Wives and Children must
take place, as ingrafted in it, and thought the Best and the Dearest Part of
it, as being nearest to our selves, and what the best ^en are the most tenderly
concerned ^or. And this is the chief thing, which among men of any Principles,
disputes ^he Bounds of Charity: For as for those stupid Brutes, who love Money
only to look on, or to count their Bags and Securities, without suffering
themselves, or any body else, to use it, they are not fit to be named: For I
can hardly reckon them among reasonable Creatures. But men's Care of
themselves, and of their Wives and Children (not to descend at present to other
Relations, which may come within the compass of Charity, though of a nearer and
more sacred Obligation) is thought a very Prudent and Reasonable Consideration
in this Case, and indeed is so; for there is a great deal of Truth and Reason
in that common Saying, rightly understood, That Charity begins at Home.

The great Controversy then is between our Love to our Selves, our Wives and
Children; and Charity to the Poor. Now there is no Dispute, but the First must
have the Preference; but yet Charity to the Poor must have its Place also: And
then the only Question is, In what Proportion this must be? And that is a very
hard Question, if you put it in Arithmetic, for I can name no Proportion; nor
has our Savior thought fit to name any: But, as I observed to you before, True
Charity will assign a just Proportion to it self: For a true Charitable Mind
will spare what it reasonably can, and never below the Proportion of Charity;
and will spare more or less, according to the Degrees of its Charity. I must be
forced to represent this in short to you, that I may not be tedious.

That Love we have for our selves, and for our Natural Dependents, will
generally secure us against exceeding the Proportions of Charity, that there is
seldom any Danger on that side. On the other hand, if we have a true Charitable
Mind, and a sincere Compassion for the Sufferings of others, we shall certainly
do what we our selves, considering our Circumstances, and what all Charitable
men who know our Circumstances, will call Charity. But then, the more Intense
and Fervent our Charity is, this will still increase the Proportion, and
sometimes to such Heights, as can hardly escape the ^ensure of Affectation and
Folly: And ^ere it not for the Interposition of the ^ivine Providence, might
sometimes ^rove very fatal to themselves and their ^amilies. As to give you the
Account ^f this in short; There are Two things ^bsolutely necessary to dispose
men to ^ive Liberally: A just Sense of the Miseries of others; and a true
Judgment of our own Abilities.

As for the First:

A Charitable Mind is very easy to receive the Impressions of Charity; and the
more charitably it is disposed, still the more easy. Every pitiable Object
moves and affects such men, and they are no more able to resist the Silent
Oratory of meager Looks, naked Backs, and hungry Bellies (were they not
sometimes hardened by Cheats and Vagabonds) than to deny themselves what is
Necessary to Life: Much less can they deny any known and unquestioned Charity;
for since Charitable they are, and Acts of Charity they will do, they are very
glad to know how to dispose of their Charity, to do that Good which they intend
by it. A soft and tender Mind, which feels the Sufferings of others, and
suffers with them, is the true Temper and Spirit of Charity; and Nature prompts
us to ease those Sufferings, which we feel: This makes us so ready to supply
our own Wants, because we have a quick and smart Sense of them; and the
Christian Sympathy and fellow-feeling of Charity, will proportionably incline
us to relieve our Suffering Brethren, when we feel in our selves what it is
they suffer. An inward Principle is more powerful than all external Arguments;
and Sense and Feeling is this Principle; and Charity is this Sense.

Thus as for Proportions, a Charitable Mind sets no other Bounds to its
Charity, but only Ability; that the only Question is, Whether we can spare any
thing from our selves and Families; and what we can spare? Now when Charity is
the judge of this, it is always a favorable Judge on the side of the Poor and
Miserable, and always the more favorable Judge, the greater the Charity is: It
will teach us to think, That we want less, and consequently can spare more,
when we consider how much others want: At least it will teach us to abate of
what we do not want; of all Idle and Superfluous Expenses; of all needless Pomp
and Ceremony, which is more than our Station and Character requires; and it is
incredible to think what an inexhausted Fund this would be for Charity: Did we
truly estimate our own Wants, rectify our Expenses, and set just Bounds to our
Desires, many of us would soon find, that we have a great deal to spare: And
nothing will so effectually do this, as Charity; and therefore Charity is the
best Rule and Measure to it self. So that there is no great occasion to dispute
Proportions; let us learn to be Charitable, and Charity will teach us what to
give. Every man can tell when another is Charitable; and a Charitable man can
tell when he himself is so; and as our Charity increases, so we shall abound in
the Fruits of Charity; for the more we love, the more liberally we shall give.

This is not to leave what we will give to Charitable Uses, to our own free
Choice, as a Trial of our Ingenuity, as some represent it: For had this been
the Case, there should have been some Proportion fixed, less than which we
should not give, though we might give as much more as we pleased; for otherwise
nothing is matter of strict Duty, but all is left to Ingenuity; which is so far
from being true, that there is not a more necessary Duty in all Religion than
Charity; and even the greatest Degrees and Heights of Charity, are all Duty:
For we are commanded to be Charitable, and to aim at the highest Degrees of
Charity; and the Proportion of giving is referred to the Principle, and
included in the Degrees of Charity; such a Proportion as such a Degree of
Charity will give, is as much a strict Duty as such a Degree of Charity is.

The very nature of Charity proves that thus it is, and that it cannot be
otherwise. For merely to give, or not to give; to give more or less, is no
certain proof of a charitable, or uncharitable Man; how liberally soever we
give, we are not charitable, unless we give from a Principle of Charity, and
our Charity be as great as our Gift. So that had God prescribed how much every
Man must give to the Poor, they might have observed this proportion of Giving
without any Charity, and then such Gifts as these had been no acts of Charity,
when the Gift and the Charity was parted: But a Charitable Man will give, and
will give in proportion to the degrees of his Charity, and therefore Charity,
and the increase of Charity, is the only proper object of Command; for he will
give liberally, who loves much; and the proportion of giving is commanded in
the degrees of Charity, which alone can prescribe, and will observe a just
proportion.

Let no Man then enquire, how much he must give; the proper enquiry is, how
much he must love. Let no man satisfy himself with some small trifling
Presents, which bear no proportion to what he has, upon pretense that God has
prescribed no proportion of giving; but let him ask himself, Whether, in his
own Conscience, what he gives, bears any proportion to that love and charity to
the poor and miserable, which God requires: and let him remember, that though
God has not fixed the proportions of giving, he requires great degrees of
Charity; and though Men may give liberally without Charity, yet not to give in
some due proportion, is a certain sign of want of Charity, when there wants no
ability to give.

Give me leave to observe by the way, that what I have now said of Charity, is
true of all other Christian Graces and Virtues; that it is the principle, which
both must and will give laws and measures to the external acts of such Graces
and Virtues: As to instance at present only in the Acts of Religious Worship,
the measures and proportions of which are as much disputed, and no more
determined and limited by the Laws of our Savior, than those of Charity: We
are commanded to fast, and pray, and to communicate at the Lord's Table, and to
read and meditate on the Holy Scriptures, and such other acts of Religion; but
we are not told, how often we must fast and pray, and receive the Lord's
Supper, nor how much time we must spend in our public or private Devotions;
for though all the public Exercises of Religion must be regulated by the
public Authority of the Church; which as to time and place, and other external
circumstances, is the safest rule; yet our private Devotions are free, and both
public and private Devotions have a great latitude; and thus as it is in the
case of Charity, some men think, they can never spend time enough in the
public and private ^xercises of Religion; and others ^hink a very little will
serve the turn, and any trifling pretense is sufficient to ^xcuse them from
their Closets, or the Church, and especially from the Lord's Table.

And the resolution of this is the same, ^s in the case of Charity; We are
commanded to be devout Worshippers of God, and the true spirit of Devotion
^aturally prescribes the external mea^ures and proportions. Devout minds, who
have a true sense of God, and of their constant dependence on him; That they
owe all temporal and spiritual Blessings to him, and daily need the pardon of
their Sins, the ptotection of his Providence, and the supplies of his Grace,
will never fail to worship God, whom they inwardly reverence and adore; and as
our devout sense of God increases in strength and vigor, the external
expressions of devotion will be more frequent, more lively and affecting; for
nature will exert it self, and will exert it self in proportion to its strength
and vigor. But to return.

3. The third thing I proposed, I must at present wave; that where there is a
willing mind, with a fit proportion, according to our abilities, (which, as you
have heard, there will be, where there is a truly willing and charitable mind)
whether it be more or less that we give, it is equally acceptable to God. Such
a man is accepted according to what he has, not according to what he has not;
and indeed there is no great occasion to insist on it; for it is self-evident,
that God will not exact that from us, which we have not.

Only we must observe, that this does not excuse any man from Charity, though
he have nothing to give; he must have a willing charitable mind to make him
accepted; nor does it excuse those from Charity, who have but little to give,
for they must give according to what they have: nor does it excuse those, who
have nothing to give, from other acts of Charity, which require the giving
nothing, and a great many such acts of real charity there are, which poor
people may do for each other, though they have not a penny in their purse.

But it is time now to turn my Discourse to the proper business of this great
Solemnity. Public Charities are always reckoned amongst the greatest Ornaments
of any Country, and make up the most lovely and charming part of their
Characters: Stately and magnificent Buildings show great Art, and great Riches,
and a gallant and noble Genius, but great Charities have something divine, and
strike the Mind with a Religious Veneration. There may be much more magnificent
Shows than this Day's Procession, but none which affect wise and good Men with
a sincerer Pleasure: To follow a great number of Orphans in the mean but decent
Dress of Charity, singing the Praises of God, and praying for their
Benefactors, is beyond all the Roman Triumphs, however adorned with a pompous
Equipage, and great numbers of Royal Slaves.

These present us with nothing but the miserable Spectacles of Spoil and
Rapine, the uncertain Changes and Vi^issitudes of Fortune, the lamentable Fate
of conquered Princes and People, and the Pride and Insolence of Conquerors; but
here are the Triumphs of a generous Goodness and divine Charity, Triumphs
without Blood and Spoil, without Slaves and Captives, unless redeemed Slaves,
rescued from the Jaws of Poverty, and all the Injuries and Miseries of a ruined
Fortune: That to me this great City, and this honorable Train, never looks
greater than in this humble Pomp. A Pomp not for Vanity and Ostentation, but to
endear and recommend Charity, by showing the visible and blessed Fruits of it:
and to the same End, I must give you an account of the present State of these
public Charities. The Report was here Read.


THAT these are all great Charities I need not tell you; indeed all so great,
that it is hard to know, to which to give the Preference, and what occasion all
these Charities have of fresh, liberal and constant Supplies, the Report
acquaints you.

But I cannot pass over one thing I observe in this Report, and which, I fear
many necessitous People feel, that there have been no Orphans taken into
Christ's Hospital this Year, nor, as I remember, for two Years last past. I do
not mention this by way of Reflection, as any fault in the administration and
government, but to put you in mind how much that excellent Foundation needs
your Supply; and though I do not love to compare Charities, they being all of
great use and necessity in their kind, yet I think this Foundation has
something to plead for it self beyond any other.

A helpless Age, destitute of Friends, and all means of Support will plead ^or
it self without saying any thing: ^t is a pitiable Sight to see poor ^nnocent
Children turned helpless in^o the wide World to starve, or beg, or steal, or to
suffer all imaginable Difficulties and Necessities at home: without Education,
without Government or Discipline, without being used ^o labor, or taught any
honest way of living; which, as they grow up, ^mproves into a Habit of
Idleness, and that betrays them to all degrees and kinds of Wickedness, trains
them up to the Gallows, or fills our other Hospitals with Vagrants and
miserable People.

There is nothing, which all wise Commonwealths have been more concerned for,
than the Education of Children, which proves a great Support, and gives great
Ease and Security to any Government, by breeding up useful Members of it: So
that this is a Charity, which would in a great measure make some other Chariti^
less needful; and it is certainly a greater Charity to prevent the Miseries of
Mankind, than to relieve them.

This is a Charity wherein every Member of this great City, is most nearly
concerned, because they and no others have a right to it. It is a provision for
their Posterity, against a^ the sudden Strokes of Fortune, which no Man can be
secured from; Here it is that Families, which are unexpectedly ruined by the
uncertain Chances of Trade may be raised again by Charity; at least, by the
Virtue and Industry, which their Education teaches them, and those fair
Advantages, with which, according to their several Capacities, they are placed
in the World; they have a new Opportunity given them of trying a better
Fortune, or rather (...) more propitious Providence. So that every Citizen is
concerned to promote and enlarge this Charity* because no Man knows who shall
want it, (...) not for his Children, yet for his Grandchildren, or remoter
Descendents; and possibly to Men, who are ^sible of the uncertain Changes of ^e
World, and have a religious Re^rence for the Divine Providence, it ^ould be no
mean Argument to pro^ote this Charity, were Care taken ^at the Descendents of
Benefactors, ever they should want this Cha^ty, should certainly have it.

It is certainly for the Honor of his great City to make the best ^rovision it
can for the Children of ^nfortunate Citizens; and those on whom Providence has
smiled, while ^hey have seen their Neighbors ship^rack'd by such unavoidable
Acci^ents as no Prudence or Conduct ^ould escape, cannot make a more proper
Acknowledgment of the Di^ine Goodness than this.

I shall add but one thing more of ^his nature. This is the only Charity which
is most likely to raise a Fund of Charity: Among such great Numbers as have
their Education in this place, there have been, and we may reasonably hope
there always will be, not a few, who will raise their Fortunes in the World,
and remember their Beginning was Charity. I Am sure such Men ought to do so, and
then such an Hospital as this, may help to support and enlarge it self, and in
time raise new Hospitals, for new Colonies of Charity.

But while I plead for Christ's Hospital, I would not be thought to divert the
whole current of Charity into this one Channel; as things now are, there is
absolute necessity of other Charities: the Sick, Diseased, and Maimed, are
great Objects of Charity, especially Soldiers and Seamen, who venture their
Lives, and lose their Health and their Limbs in the service of their Country,
to defend our Fortunes, Liberties, Lives and Religion. There is none of us, but
would think it a very poor Recompense for the loss of Health and Limbs, to be
cured upon Charity; it is certainly the least that we can do for them; so very
little, that if it be Charity to do it, it is Barbarity to deny it, and that is
but a very small degree of Charity, which is but one remove from Barbarity it
self.

As for other sick, and diseased, and lame People, who cannot be at the charge
of a Cure, where Sickness, ^isability, and Poverty meet, this ^akes them double
Objects of Cha^ty, especially as it often happens when these Disabilities fall
upon the ^dustrious, who before supported themselves and their Families by
ho^est Labors without Charity.

Nay, as for those, who may be just^y thought the least Objects of Cha^ity, the
wicked and vicious, who ^eap the deserved fruits of their own Wickedness, I am
sure, they are the Objects of the greatest Pity, because this Life will not end
their Miseries; and if we can prolong their Lives here to save their Souls it
will be Charity indeed, and what Effect the sense of their Wickedness and
Sufferings, and the Grace of God may have upon them, no Man can tell.

As for distracted Persons, I believe, no Man, who considers what a Blessing
Reason and Understanding is, and what a Misery the want of it is, can think of
them without the most sensible Compassion: I think all other Evils whatsoever
are to be preferred before it, and therefore to restore them to their Senses
again, which we hear by the Blessing of God is often done, or however to keep
them from doing themselves, or others any Injury, and to preserve human Nature
from that Contempt, which such public Spectacles expose it to, is a very
extraordinary Charity.

Now all this shows, that a charitable Man need not be at any great loss how to
dispose of his Charity; here are too many very proper Objects of Charity, (if
God so pleased) and we ought to be very thankful to God, that we our selves are
not in the number; for it is more blessed to give, than to receive.

But then the great numbers of miserable People, who in several kinds want our
Charity, is a very powerful Argument to greater Liberality and Bounty. For this
I must add to what I have already said concerning the measures and proportions
of Charity; that a truly charitable Mind will increase its Proportions
according to present Wants; will sometimes abridge it self even in the
Conveniences of Life to supply great and pressing Necessities; for a great Love
will not only spare, what it easily can, but when there is great reason for it,
will deny it self to do good.

And here I intended to have represented to you our Apostles Arguments for a
liberal and bountiful Charity; but I fear I have already too much trespassed;
and where there is a willing Mind, so many and so great Objects of Charity, are
themselves very pressing Arguments. And therefore as the Apostle endeavors to
inspire his Corinthians with an holy Emulation of the Zeal and Forwardness of
the Churches of Macedonia, how that in a great trial of affliction, the
abundance of their joy, and their deep poverty, abounded unto the riches of
their liberality; so I shall only desire you to emulate the great Examples of
past and present times, and that you would set as great Examples for times to
come. If any thing deserves our Emulation, great and generous Charities do,
which are a resemblance and imitation of the divine Goodness, than which
nothing can more endear us to God or Man: We owe all our present Foundations to
Royal Bounty and private Charities; and thanks be to God, our present Age, as
bad as it is, is not without some great Examples; and though true Virtue is
void of the Pride, and Vanity, and Envy, and Jealousies of Earthly Rivals, yet
it fires at great Examples, and is ashamed to be outdone by Equals in love to
God or Men; especially when the Honor of the Church, whereof they are Members,
and the Religion, which they profess, is concerned.

It is well known how many pious and charitable Foundations are owing to Popish
Superstition; they hoped to expiate their Sins, and to merit Heaven by their
good Works, and in this hope, and this persuasion, they did a very great many.
We understand better than to think of meriting any thing of God, much less of
purchasing a liberty of sinning, by Acts of Charity; but if those great Rewards
which are promised to Charity, and which we profess to believe, will not make
us charitable, without the Opinion of Merit and Satisfaction: Charity is so
great and excellent a Virtue, and so very useful to Mankind, that at least thus
far Popery will be thought the better Religion; and therefore as the Apostle
argues, As ye abound in every thing, in faith, and utterance, and knowledge,
and all diligence, and in your love to us, see that ye abound in this grace
also: As we have a more Orthodox Faith, a clearer and a distincter Knowledge,
and a purer Worship, than the Church of Rome, let us excel in Charity too, and
convince the World, that to renounce Popery, is not to renounce good Works.

SERMON X.
Preached before the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen at
Guild Hall Chapel, on Sunday, April 25. 1697.
Coloss. II. 8. Beware lest any man spoil you through Philosophy and vain
deceit, after the traditions of men, after the Rudiments of the world, and not
after Christ.


HAD St. Paul lived in our Age, it would have required little less than the
Courage and Bravery of the Spirit of Martyrdom to have said this: And nothing
but the Authority of so great an Apostle (which though some Men do not much
value, yet they dare not openly despise) can skreen those who venture to say i^
after him.

What some Men call Philosophy and Reason (and there is nothing so foolish and
absurd which some Men will not call so) is the only thing which those Men
adore, who would either have no God, or a God and a Religion of their own
making. And what Attempts some have made to undermine all Religion, and others
to corrupt and transform the whole Frame of the Christian Religion, upon a
Pretense of its contradicting Natural Reason and Philosophy, is too well known
to need a Proof. That thus it was in his days, and that thus it was likely to
be in future Ages, St. Paul was very sensible, when he gave this Caution to his
Colossians; and I Am sure it is as proper a Caution for us, as ever it was for
any Age since the writing of this Epistle; for this vain Pretense to Reason and
Philosophy never more prevailed, and never did more mischief to the World.

It is an endless and fruitless Task to go about to confute all the absurd
Hypotheses and wild inconsistent Reasonings wherewith Men abuse themselves and
others: The Experience of so any Ages wherein Philosophy was in all (...)
Glory, and the several Sects disputed ^d wrangled eternally, without ending ^y
one Controversy, gives no great En^uragement to hope for much this way; (...)
least it can never be expected that ^dinary Christians should be better
^structed and confirmed in the Faith by ^hilosophical Disputes.

The Christian Religion has from ^e very Beginning been corrupted by (...)
mixture of Philosophy: Thus it was (...) the Apostles days, and thus it has
^een more or less in all Ages of the Church to this day; and the direction the
Apostle gives for the security of the Christian Faith, is, Not to dispute such
Matters, but to distinguish between Philosophical Disputes, and Matters of
Revelation; and to reject all the Pretenses of Philosophy, when it does or
seems to contradict the Faith of Christ, or would make any corrupt Additions to
it.

Beware lest any man spoil you through Philosophy and vain deceit; (...), is to
make a Prey, or to carry away as a Prey; that is, to seduce them from the
Christian Faith, or from the P^rity and Simplicity of it: Through Philosophy
and vain deceit, that is, through the vain deceit of Philosophy, which cheats
Men with a flattering but empty appearance; may unsettle weak Minds; but cannot
lay a sure and solid foundation of Faith; may cheat Men out of their Faith, but
when that is done, can give them nothing certain in the room of it: For it is
but after the traditions of men, and after the rudiments of this world: Some of
these Doctrines may possibly plead Prescription, as having been so long
received, that no Man knows their Original; or if they have the Authority of
some Great Name, yet it is but a Human Authority, and they are but the
traditions of men; and of Men, who at best had no better Information than from
the visible appearances of Nature, and their own imperfect Observations, and
corrupt or defective Reasonings, after the rudiments of this world: And is this
an Authority to oppose against the Faith of Christ, which both wants that
Divine Confirmation which he gave to his Doctrines, and contradicts them? For
they are not after Christ, neither taught by Christ, nor consonant to what he
taught.

These Words might afford great Variety of Discourse; but I shall confine my
self to what is most Useful, and reduce that into as narrow a compass as I
can, by showing,

I. What great need there is of this Caution, To beware lest any man spoil us
through Philosophy and vain deceit.

II. What great reason we have to rejectall these vain Pretenses to Philosophy,
when they are opposed to the Authority of a Divine Revelation.

I. As for the first of these, Whoever considers what an Enemy these vain
Pretenses to Philosophy have always been to Religion, will see need enough for
this Caution.

True Reason, and the true Knowledge of Nature, which is true Philosophy, would
certainly direct us to the Acknowledgment and Worship of that Supreme Being who
made the World: And yet we know, that there never was an Athiest without some
Pretense to Philosophy, and generally such loud noisy Pretenses too, as make
ignorant people think them very notable Philosophers, and that tempts some vain
empty Persons to affect Atheism, that they may be thought Philosophers.

That this is vain deceit, all Men must own, who believe there is a God: And if
it be possible to pretend Philosophy for Atheism it self, it is no great wonder
if it be made to patronize Infidelity and Heresy: But this plainly shows of
what dangerous Consequence it is to admit Philosophical Disputes into Religion,
which if at any time they may do any service to Religion, much oftener greatly
corrupt it, and shake the very Foundations of it; of which more anon.

At present I shall only show you how the Matter of Fact stands; That most of
the Disputes in Religion are nothing else but the Disputes of Philosophy, and
therefore according to the Apostolical Command, to be wholly flung out of
Religion, and not suffered to affect our Faith one way or other. To be a
Philosopher and a Christian, to Dispute and to Believe, are two very different
things: and yet it is very evident, that most of the Arguments against
Revelation in general, and most of the Disputes about the particular Doctrines
of Christianity, are no better than this vain deceit of Philosophy; that were
the Matters of Faith, and the Disputes of Philosophy truly distinguished, this
alone would be sufficient to settle the Faith of Christians, and restore Peace
and Unity, at least in the great Fundamentals of Religion, to the Christian
World.

1. As to begin with Revelation in general. The Books of Moses are the most
Ancient, and that considered, the best attested History in the World; the whole
Nation of the Jews, whose History he writes, pay the greatest veneration to
him; and if we believe the Matters of Fact which he relates, he was certainly
an Inspired Man, who could neither deceive, nor be deceived. And it is
impossible to have greater Evidence for the Truth and Authenticalness of any
Writings, at such a distance of time, than we have for the Writings of the New
Testament; and indeed the Infidels of our Age have very little to say purely
against the Credibility of the History; and then one would think, that all
their other Objections should come too late, unless they will justify Pharaoh
in disbelieving Moses, and the Scribes and Pharisees in disbelieving our
Savior, after all the Miracles they did: For if they will disbelieve Moses and
Christ, though they have nothing material to object against the Truth of these
Histories; nothing, which they would allow to be good Objections against any
other History; they must by the same reason have disbelieved them, though they
had seen them do all those great Works which are reported of them in such
Credible Histories. But whatever the Authority of these Books are, they think
they may securely reject them, if they contain any thing which contradicts
their Reason and Philosophy, and they find a great many such things to quarrel
with: They think Moses's History of the Creation very unphilosophical; That the
Story of Eve and the Serpent is an incredible Fiction; That the Universal
Deluge is absolutely impossible, and irreconcilable with the Principles of
Philosophy: and it does not become Philosophers to have recourse to Miracles:
That what we call Miracles are not the effects of a Divine Power, but may be
resolved into Natural Causes; That Inspiration and Prophesy is nothing but
natural Enthusiasm, and all the Pretenses to Revelation a Cheat and Imposture;
That Nature teaches us all that we need to know; That there is no other certain
knowledge but this; That we are not bound to believe any thing which our own
reason cannot grasp and comprehend, and therefore Revelation is perfectly
useless; and God himself cannot oblige us to believe any thing which does not
agree with the Reason of our own Minds, and the Philosophy of Nature. Those who
understand the Mystery of Modern Infidelity, know that these, and such like,
are the wise Reasons for which they reject and ridicule all Revealed Religion,
and endeavor to rob and spoil men of one of the greatest Blessings in the
World, a Divine Revelation. So that Infidelity is resolved into these vain
Pretenses to Philosophy, that Men will understand how to make, destroy, and
govern the World better than God.

2. As these Men oppose Reason and Philosophy to Revelation, so others either
deny the fundamental Articles of Christianity for the sake of some
Philosophical Difficulties, or corrupt the Doctrines of Christianity by a
mixture of Philosophy. The Gospel of our Savior is the plainest Revelation of
the Will of God that ever was made to the World; all its Doctrines are easily
understood, without Art and Subtilty; and yet there is not a more nice,
intricate, perplexed thing in the World, than what some Men have made the
Christian Faith: All the Subtle Disputes of Philosophy are brought into the
Church; and Plato and Aristotle are become as great Apostles, as St. Peter, or
St. Paul: As to give some few Instances of it; for time will not permit me to
discourse it at large.

What are the Arian, Socinian, Pelagian Controversies, but mere Philosophical
Disputes, with which these Heretics corrupted the Catholic Faith?

There is nothing more plain and express in Scripture than the Faith of Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, or the Doctrine of the Trinity in Unity; and that great
Art and Subtilty which has been used, and to so little purpose, to pervert
those Texts of Scripture, wherein this Doctrine is contained, is an evident
proof, That this is the plain, natural obvious sense of those Texts, since it
requires so much Art and Criticism to put any other sense on them; and that
will not do neither, till men are resolved rather to make any thing of
Scripture, than to find a real Trinity there. If then this Faith be so plainly
contained in Scripture, what makes all this dispute about it? What makes those,
who profess to believe the Scripture, so obstinate against this Faith? Truly
that which makes some men Infidels, makes others Heretics, that is, a vain
Pretense to Philosophy.

The first Philosophical Dispute is about the Divine Unity: We all own with the
Scripture, that there is but one God; but we say further, as the Scripture
teaches us, That there are Three, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, each of which is
true and perfect God. This they say is a Contradiction; and if it be so, there
is an end of this Faith, for both parts of a Contradiction cannot be true: But
to be Three and One upon different accounts, and in different senses, is no
Contradiction; for thus three may be One, and One Three; and this is all the
Scripture teaches, or that we profess to believe, whatever the Mystery of this
Distinction and Unity be: But this will not satisfy these Philosophical Wits,
unless they can comprehend how Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are really and
distinctly Three, and essentially One, the manner of which the Scripture gives
no account of, and therefore this is no dispute in Faith but only in Philosophy.

Another objection concerns the Divine Generation, how God can beget a Son of
his own Substance; which the Arians thought inferred a Division of the Divine
Substance.

And a Third Objection concerns an Eternal Generation: how it is possible that
the Father should beget an Eternal Son; that the Son should be begotten without
any beginning of Being; and that the Father should not be at least some few
moments before the Son, and consequently the Son not Eternal. Now we all grant
that we can give no Philosophical account of this, no more than we can of the
simple Divine Essence, or of Eternity it self; but we may believe that God has
an Eternal Son, as we do that there is an Eternal God, without knowing how any
thing is Eternal: These are Disputes in Philosophy, and such as none but vain
Men will dispute about, as being acknowledged above our Compre^ension,, and
therefore no reasonable ^bjection against our Faith.

Thus as for the Doctrine of the Incar^ation, nothing can be plainer in
Scripture, than that the Son of God was made ^an; That the Word was made flesh,
and dwelt among us; That God was manifest in the flesh: And all the Disputes
about this Article are purely Philosophical: Some men reject it, because they
cannot understand how God and Man can be united in one Person? Others confound
the Divine and Humane Nature as Eutyches did: or divide the Persons, as
Nestori^us did; both which indeed destroy the Article of the Incarnation? for
the Word is not made Flesh, unless the same Person, who is God is Man too, and
continues perfect God and perfect Man after this Union: But all these Disputes
concern the Philosophy of the Union of the Divine and Humane Nature in Christ;
and if we would separate between Faith and Philosophy, such Disputes might soon
be ended.

Thus most of the difficulties in the Pelagian and Quinquarticular Controversy,
are ultimately resolved into mere Philosophical Disputes about Fate and
Prescience, Liberty and Necessity, and God's concourse with Creatures, or the
Powers of Nature and Grace: And would time permit, it were easy to show this in
most of the Controversies of Religion, That it is not what God has revealed,
and what he requires us to believe, but such nice Philosophical Questions as
men raise about these matters, which occasion all these Disputes.

It has often been proposed as a means of Union to silence all Disputes, To
confine our selves to Scripture-Words and Expressions, without determining the
signification of them: But this would make only an Agreement in Words, not a
Consent in Opinions; not could it secure the Peace of the Church, while all men
knew, that under the same form of Words, they had very different and contrary
Meanings, which would still make them as much Heretics to each other, as if
their Words did as expressly contradict each other, as their Faith. But would
men reduce all their Disputes to Scripture, and make that the only Rule of
their Faith, without intermixing any Philosophical Disputes with it, this would
be an infallible means of Union; for it is only this vain pretense to
Philosophy, which raises all ^ese Disputes, and then tempts men to ^ervert the
Scriptures to justify their ^hilosophy.

In all these cases we are concerned to ^quire what the true sense of the
Article (...); for this the Scripture teaches, and ^o far our Faith is
concerned; and these ^re not only justifiable, but necessary Dis^utes, if the
true Faith be necessary: And ^uch were the Disputes of the Catho^k Fathers with
the Sabellian, Arian, and ^hotinian Heretics; Whether Father, ^on, and Holy
Ghost, were only three Names, or three Appearances or Manifestations of the
same one single Person, or any other Three, but three True, Proper, Coeternal,
and Coequal Persons: Or whether He, who is in Scripture called the Son of God,
be a Creature, though the most Excellent Creature; or a Son, and God by Nature,
truly begotten of his Father's Substance: Or whether Christ be God Incarnate,
or a mere Man: And their ancient Creeds pretended to no more, than to teach
what the Catholic Faith was, not to expound the Philosophy of the Trinity and
Incarnation. And thus far we must explain the Faith, as to know, and to let
others know, what it is we believe; and if to assert the ancient Catholic
Faith against old and New Heresies, should be called new Explications, we
cannot help it; for we must explain what the Scripture teaches about these
Articles, and how the Catholic Church always understood them: But that which
we are to beware of, is, Not to mix Philosophy with our Faith, nor to admit of
any mere Philosophical Objections against the Faith, nor to attempt any
Explications of these Mysteries, beyond what the Scriptures, and the Faith and
Practice of the Catholic Church will justify.

Indeed the Importunity of Heretics did very often engage the Catholic
Fathers in Philosophical Disputes; but this they did, not to explain the
Christian Mysteries by Philosophy, but only to show, that as incomprehensible
as these Mysteries are, the Philosophy of Heretics, and their Objections
against these Articles, were very absurd: And such Disputes as these may
sometimes be absolutely necessary, and of great use to shame these vain
Pretenses to Philosophy, while we do not put the Trial of our Faith upon this
Issue.

Secondly, Let us now consider what ^eat reason we have to reject all the ^in
Pretenses to Reason and Philosophy, ^en opposed to a Divine Revelation. ^r that
is all the Apostle intends in this ^ution; not to discourage the use of ^eason,
or the study of Philosophy, which are great Improvements, and a ^lightful
Entertainment of Humane ^inds, and with a wise and prudent ^onduct may be very
serviceable to Re^gion too; but we must not set up any ^onclusions in
Philosophy against the ^hristian Faith, nor corrupt the Faith ^ith a mixture of
Philosophy, nor re^ct any revealed Truths, for want of ^atural Ideas to
conceive them by.

To shorten this Discourse as much as (...) can, I shall at present only show
you that reason we have to believe those ^octrines which are thought the most
^ysterious and inconceivable, notwith^tanding any Objections from natural
Reason and Philosophy against them. And the account of this must be resolved
unto the Nature, Use, and Authority of Revelation; that Revelation as to such
matters as are knowable only by Revelation, must serve instead of Sense,
Natural Ideas, and Natural Reason; that is, That we must believe things whi^ we
do not see, things which we ha^ no Natural Notion or Conception of things which
are not evident to Nature Reason; for without this, there is little use of
Faith, no Authority of pure Revelation.

It is true, the General Corruption o^ Mankind made it very necessary for God
to revive the Laws of Nature, and to reinforce the observation of them by his
own Authority and Command; but the proper work of Revelation is to discover
such things to us as Nature cannot teach, of which we have no Natural Notion,
nor any Natural Evidence; At least, thus it may be, if God knows more than
Natural Reason teaches, or can comprehend; and thinks it fit to reveal such
Supernatural Truths to us, when he sees it useful for Mankind.

Now if God ever does reveal such things to us, if we believe upon God's
Authority (which is the strickt Notion of a Divine Faith,) we must believe
without any Natural Evidence, merely because God has revealed it; and then we
must believe such things as are not evident to Sense and Reason; and then it
can be no Objection against Revelation, nor against the belief of any such
^pernatural Truths, that we have no Natural Notion, nor Natural Evidence ^f
them, that they are what we cannot ^onceive and comprehend.

To believe no farther than Natural ^eason can conceive and comprehend, is ^o
reject the Divine Authority of Reve^tion, and to destroy the distinction
be^ween Reason and Faith. He who will ^elieve no farther than Natural Reason
^pproves, believes his Reason, not the Revelation; and is in truth a Natural
Philosopher, not a Believer: He believes ^he Scriptures, as he would believe
Plato and Tully; not as inspired Writings, but ^s agreeable to Reason and the
result of wise and deep Thoughts; and this puts an end to all the Disputes
about Faith and Revelation at once: For what use is there of Faith? What matter
whether the Scriptures be divinely inspired or not; when we are no farther
concerned with them than with other Humane Writings, to believe what they teach
agreeable to our own Reason? Let these Men then either reject Faith and
Scripture, or confess that Revelation, as to all supernatural Truths, must
serve us instead of Sense and Reason. I would gladly know of them, whether they
would not believe such Supernatural Truths, as are not evident to Reason, were
they sure that God had revealed them? I guess they will not be so hardy as to
say, That they would not believe God himself, should he reveal such things as
their Reason cannot comprehend; and if they would believe God in such matters,
why will they not believe a Revelation which they themselves acknowledge to be
Divine, in such matters? For is there any difference between believing God, and
believing a Divine Revelation? If God does know, and can reveal such Mysteries,
and is to be believed when he does reveal them, and such Doctrines are
contained in an undoubted Revelation; then the unconceivableness of them can be
no Argument against the Truth of the Revelation, or that sense of the words,
which contains such Mysteries.

Let us then consider the natural consequence of this, which is of great moment
in this dispute, viz. That we must allow of no Objections against Revealed
Mysteries, which we will not allow to be good Objections against Sense and
Reason; which is a necessary and unavoidable consequence, if Revelation, with
respect to supernatural Truths, stand in the place of Sense and Reason.

Now no man questions the Truth of what he sees and feels, or what he can prove
to be true by plain and undeniable Reason, merely because there are
unconceivable difficulties in it; as there are in every thing, even the most
certain and familiar things in Nature: And if Revealed Truths are not more
unconceivable than many natural objects of Sense and Reason, why should their
being unconceivable be a greater objection against believing a Revelation, than
it is against believing our Sense and Reason in matters equally unconceivable?
When God has revealed to us, That he has an Eternal and only begotten Son,
though we cannot comprehend the Mystery of the Eternal Generation, why should
we not as firmly believe it, as we do, that Man begets a Son in his own
likeness, the Philosophy of which we as little understand? Nor can we any more
conceive the Union of the Soul and Body, than we do the Incarnation of the Son
of God, or the Union of the Divine and Humane Nature in one Person? And if we
own the Authority of Revelation, why should we not as well believe what
Revelation teaches, how unconceivable soever it be, as we do what Sense and
Reason teaches, though it be alike unconceivable.

All men are sensible, that it is very absurd and foolish to deny the Being of
any thing which they have certain evidence of, because they cannot comprehend
the Nature and Reasons of it: The Man who rose up and walked before the
Philosopher, who was disputing subtly against the possibility of Motion, put
a scorn upon all his Arguments, by showing him that he could move: And
therefore we see, that all men believe their Senses and Reason against all the
difficulties in Nature, and will never be persuaded, by the subtillest
Disputant, that that is not, which they certainly see and know to be. Now for
the same reason, if Men will allow the Authority of Revelation, they must
believe what is revealed, how unconceivable and incomprehensible soever its
nature be; for when we know what a thing is, (and this may be known by
Revelation as well as by Sense, as those Men must confess, who acknowledge a
Divine Revelation) no difficulties in conceiving it, must persuade us to deny
that it is.

This is very plain in it self, though few men consider it, That to disbelieve
what is Revealed, for the sake of any difficulties in understanding or
conceiving it, is to reject the certainty of Revelation; For what other account
can be given of that difference men make between the Evidence of Sense and
Reason, and of Revelation, but that they allow Sense and Reason to be good and
certain proofs of the Being of such things as are evident to Sense and Reason,
how Mysterious soever their natures are; but that mere Revelation is no certain
proof of the Being of any thing which is not evident also to Sense and Reason,
how plainly soever it be revealed; that is, that Revelation alone can prove
nothing; for if Revelation it self could prove the certainty of what is
revealed, the difficulties in Nature and Philosophy could no more disprove a
Revelation, than confute our Senses. Now let any man judge, whether this be not
unequal usage, to expect more from Revelation, than they do from Sense and
Reason, and not to believe Revelation upon the same terms that they believe
their Senses.

Should Men resolve to believe nothing which they see, till they could give a
Philosophical account of the Reasons, and Causes, and Natures of all they see,
as they refuse to believe a Revelation any farther than they can conceive and
comprehend the thing revealed, they must of necessity be as great-Scepticks, as
they are Infidels. For as for Contradictions, it is an easy matter to make or
find seeming Contradictions in what we do not understand; for when we know not
the Philosophical Natures of things, nor how they act, and yet will be
reasoning and guessing at them, all our false guesses may be full of
Contradictions and Impossibilities, because we know not the true Mystery of
Nature. It is this vain humor of Criticizing upon Nature which makes so many
Atheists. They go upon the same Principle with Infidels and Heretics, To
believe nothing which natural Reason cannot conceive and comprehend; now they
cannot comprehend the Notion and Idea of a God, which they say, is made up of
Contradictions and Impossibilities, and therefore they reject the Being of a
God: They cannot conceive a Creating Power, which can give Being to that which
had no Being before, which they think a plain Contradiction to make Something
of Nothing; and therefore they reject the Creation of the World, and either
assert the Eternity of the World, or at least the Eternity of Matter: They can
conceive no Substance but Matter and Body, and therefore reject the Notion of a
Spirit, as Nonsense and Contradiction: They will allow nothing to be wisely
made, which they understand not the reason and uses of, and therefore they
fancy a great many botches and blunders in Nature, which cannot be the designs
and contrivance of Wisdom, but the effects of Chance; and then the consequence
is plain, That the World was made by Chance, not by a Wise Author.

Now, I confess, if this way of Reasoning be allowed, it will be impossible to
defend either Sense, or Reason, or Revelation, against the Cavils of Atheists
and Infidels; for there are unconceivable and incomprehensible Secrets and
Mysteries in them all; and if to conceive and comprehend the Natures of things,
must be made the measure and standard of true and false, we must deny our
Senses and Reason, as well as our Faith; and if we do and must believe our
Sense and Reason beyond our Comprehension, why must we believe nothing that is
Revealed any farther than we can conceive and comprehend the Nature and Reasons
of it?

The Sum is this: Humane Knowledge, whatever the means of knowing be, whether
Sense, or Reason, or Revelation, does not reach to the Philosophical Causes and
Natures of things, but only to their Being, and Natural Virtues and Powers; and
as a Wise man, who knows the Measure of his understanding, expects no more from
Sense and Reason, than to know what things there are in the World, and what
they are, as far as they fall under the notice of Sense and Natural Reason; so
we must expect no more from Revelation, than the knowledge of such things as
Sense and Natural Reason cannot discover. But we must no more expect the
Philosophy of Supernatural Truths from Revelation, than we do the Mysteries of
Nature from Sense and Reason.

Now since Humane Knowledge is not a knowledge of the Mysterious Natures of
things, but only to know what things there are, and what they are; there can be
no contradiction between Sense, and Reason, and Revelation; unless one denies
what the other affirms, not that one teaches more than the other teaches, or
that one cannot comprehend what the other teaches. Reason teaches more than
Sense teaches, or can comprehend; and Revelation teaches more than either Sense
or Natural Reason teaches, or can comprehend; but this is no contradiction, but
only a subordination between these different kinds and degrees of Knowledge;
but as for Unconceivableness and Incomprehensibility, that is no argument
against any thing; for Sense and Natural Reason can no more comprehend their
own Objects, than they do what is revealed: And it is manifest perverseness to
make that an objection against Revelation, which we will not allow to be an
objection against Sense and Reason.

This is sufficient as to the reason of the thing; but as far as it is possible
to remove men's Prejudices also against believing Mysteries, I shall briefly
answer two very popular Objections.

1. It is thought very unnatural, that when God has made us reasonable
Creatures, and therefore made Natural Reason to us the measure of Truth and
Falsehood, he should require us to believe without Reason; as we must do, if he
reveals such things to us as we know not, and cannot possibly know the reasons
of. If we must believe with our Understanding, how can we believe things which
we cannot understand?

This were a reasonable Objection, were it true; for we cannot believe what we
have no knowledge nor understanding of; for Faith is Knowledge, though not
Natural Knowledge.

But do we not understand what it is we believe? Do we not know what we mean,
when we say, we believe in Father, Son, and Holy Ghost? Nay, do not our
Adversaries understand what we mean by it? How then come they to charge us with
believing Contradictions and Impossibilities? For if they know not what we
believe, they cannot know whether we believe Contradictions or not. And if we
do understand what it is we believe, then we do not believe without
understanding, which is absolutely impossible, if we know what it is we believe.

And we know also why we believe: Our Faith is founded in Sense and Reason, and
resolved into the Authority of God, which is the highest and most infallible
Reason. The Miracles which Christ and his Apostles wrought, were evident to
Sense, and owned by Reason to be the effects of a Divine Power; and the Answer
the Blind man gave to the Pharisees, when Christ had opened his eyes, speaks
the true Sense of Nature: Herein is a mavelous thing, that ye know not from
whence he is, and yet he has opened mine Eyes. Now we know that God hears
not Sinners; but if any man be a Worshipper of God, and does his will, him he
hears. Since the World began was it not heard that any man opened the Eyes of
one that was born blind: If this man were not of God he could do nothing, 9
John 30, 31, 32, 33. And all Mankind own, that the most absolute Faith is due
to God, and to those who speak from God; and this, as I take it, is to believe
with Reason.

But still we believe such things, whose Natures we do not understand, and
cannot account for by Natural Reason, and this is to believe without Reason. We
believe, that God the Father has an Eternal Son, and an Eternal Spirit; and
that, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are but one Eternal God; but this is what
Natural Reason cannot comprehend, nor give us any notion or conception of, how
God can have an Eternal Son, and an Eternal Spirit, really distinct from
himself, and yet with himself One Eternal and Infinite God: Reason can give no
account of the Eternal Generation of the Son, nor of the Eternal Procession of
the Holy Spirit; and is not this to believe without Reason, which a reasonable
Creature ought not to do, and which we ought not to think, that God who made us
reasonable Creatures, expects from us.

And this I grant would be a material Objection, were Reason the Judge of the
Nature and Philosophy of things; and did Reason require us to believe nothing
but what we understand and comprehend. But then we must no more believe Sense
and Reason, than Revelation; for we do not comprehend the Nature of any one
thing in the World, how evident soever it is to Sense and Reason, that there
are such things. Nature is as great a Mystery as Revelation, and it is no
greater affront to our Understandings, no more against Reason for God to reveal
such things to us as our Reason cannot comprehend, than (...) is to make a
whole World, which ^eason cannot comprehend.

When we make it an Objection against any thing, that it is without Reason, or
^s we apprehend, against Reason, and contrary to Reason; we must first con^ider
whether it be the proper object of Reason; otherwise it is no Objection; as it
is no Objection against Sounds, that we cannot see them; nor against Colors,
that we cannot hear them; because Sounds are not the Objects of Sight, nor
Colors of Hearing.

Now no man pretends, that the pure Natures and Essences of things, or their
Essential Reasons, Properties, Unions, Operations, are the Objects of Humane
Reason; for no man living knows any thing about them.

And yet this is all the Incomprehensibility men have to complain of in the
Doctrine of the Trinity, and the Incarnation; That they cannot comprehend, how
God can beget an Eternal Son; nor how Three Divine Persons should be so united,
as to be essentially One God; nor how the Divine and Humane Nature can be
united into one Person, Godman: All which concern the Essence, and Essential
Properties, Operations, Unions, Relations, of the Deity, which a modest man
might allow to be incomprehensible, if God be Infinite, though he could
comprehend the Natures, Essences, and Essential Reasons and Properties of
Created Beings; but when all Created Nature is such a Mystery to us, that we
know not the pure Nature and Essence of any one thing in the World, is it an
affront to our Reason, that we cannot comprehend the Divine Nature?

Such Matters as these are neither without Reason, nor against Reason, nor
contrary to Reason; because Reason has nothing to do with them, and can take no
cognizance of them: They belong not to Reason, but to that Infinite Mind, which
comprehends it Self, and the Ideas of all possible Beings. A perfect
comprehensive Knowledge of Nature belongs only to the Maker of all things; for
it is not only to know what things are, but how to make them; which would be a
vain Curiosity, and useless Knowledge to those, who have not a Making and
Creating Power. This is to know things a priori, with an Intuitive Ideal
Knowledge, which is infinitely more superior to Reason, ^an Reason is to
Sense: And it is the ^ffectation of this Intuitive making Knowledge, which
makes some Men Atheists, and others Heretics.

2dly. Another great Objection against such a Revelation as contains matters
which Natural Reason cannot comprehend, is, To what purpose such ^a Revelation
serves? What Merit there can be in believing such Doctrines? And of what good
use such a Faith can be to us.

Now I confess I cannot think it meritorious merely to believe things which are
incomprehensible; or that God any more intended to puzzle our Faith with
revealed Mysteries, than to puzzle our Reason in making a Mysterious World.
Whether we receive our information from Sense, or Natural Reason, or
Revelation, it is certain we must believe Mysteries, if we believe any thing;
for all things have something mysterious and incomprehensible in their natures;
what natural Reason cannot account for, and what God never intended we should
understand: For God never intended to teach us how to make the World, nor how
every Creature was made; and therefore we cannot, and are not concerned to know
the internal Frame and Constitution of Nature.

But though neither Natural nor Revealed Knowledge extends to the Reasons and
Causes of Nature, and of essential Properties and Operations; yet both natural
and revealed Knowledge is of as much use to us, as if we did perfectly
understand all the secret and incomprehensible Mysteries of the nature of God,
or of the Natures of Creatures. Both natural and revealed Knowledge are alike
upon this account. That they only acquaint us what things are, and what ends
they serve; and then we know what use to make of them, without understanding
the secret Mysteries of Nature.

Is this World, or any thing in it, the less useful to us, because we cannot
conceive how God created all things of nothing? Or because we do not understand
the Nature of Matter, nor how the several parts of Matter came by their
different Virtues and Qualities? Is Corn, or Fruit, or Herbs the less
nourishing or refreshing, because we know not how they grow? Does it require
any Philosophy to know how to eat and drink and sleep? Will not our Food
nourish us, ^less we understand how it is concoct^ and turned into Chile, and
Blood, ^d Spirits? Nay, is it of no use to ^ow that God is an Eternal,
Omnipo^nt, Omniscient, Omnipresent Being, ^less we can conceive how any Being
^n be Eternal without a Cause, and without a Beginning? Or can compre^end how
he can do and know all things ^d be present in all places at once, without
Extension, and without Parts? ^e may make all the use that can be ^ade of this
World, and of every thing (...) it, without understanding the essential ^easons
and Causes, or internal Nature ^f any thing; and we must do so, if we will make
any use of it; and we know God to all the ends and purposes for which Creatures
ought to know God, though his Nature be incomprehensible,

And thus it is in matters of pure Revelation, such as the Doctrine of the
Trinity, and the Incarnation; how unaccountable soever the Mystery of a Trinity
in Unity, the Eternal Generation, and the Incarnation of the Son of God be, yet
it is the most useful Knowledge in the World: Though we know not how the
Eternal Father begat an Eternal Son of his own Substance, nor how this Eternal
Son in time became Man; yet it is the most desirable Knowledge in the world to
Sinners, to know, That God has an Eternal Son; and that he so loved the world,
as to give his only begotten Son for the redemption of mankind, that whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life; and that this
Eternal Son of God became Man, lived a poor, necessitous, laborious Life, and
died an accursed Death for the Salvation of Sinners; and to know, That the Holy
Spirit, which proceeds from Father and Son, dwells in the Christian Church, and
quickens and animates the whole Body of Christ. If this be true (as we must
suppose in this Argument,) all Mankind must confess, that this is a very useful
Knowledge; and never the less useful, because a Trinity in Unity, and the
Eternal Generation, and the Incarnation of the Son of God, are great and
unconceivable Mysteries. Could we give a Rational and Philosophical Account of
the Eternal Generation, and of the Incarnation, we should know more than we now
do; but Faith makes it as useful to all the purposes of Religion, as the most
perfect intuitive Knowledge could do.

This is a sufficient Answer to that Objection against the Usefulness of such
Mysteries as have something incomprehensible and unconceivable in their
Natures: Which is an equal Objection against all created Nature, which is but
one great Mystery; and yet the World is a very useful World, and we know in
some good degree what use to make of it: And the Knowledge of those Gospel
Mysteries which are the Subject of our present Dispute, are manifestly of
infinite use to us, if the certain knowledge of the Pardon of Sin, and Eternal
Life, by the Obedience, and Sufferings, and Death, and Intercession of the Son
of God Incarnate, be of any use; and therefore it became the wisdom and
Goodness of God to reveal these Mysteries of Salvation to us.

Especially if we add to this, That the lapsed state of Humane Nature makes
Supernatural Knowledge necessary. Natural Knowledge we grant was sufficient for
a state of Nature, though no man would have had reason to complain, had God in
a state of Innocence by a more familiar intercourse with Man, or by the
frequent Conversation of Angels, improved his Knowledge beyond the mere
seize of his Natural Faculties; and it is not improbable, but this might
have been; I am sure there is an impatient thirst after knowledge in Humane
Nature, and such a great curiosity for secret and hidden Mysteries, that it
looks very unnatural for Men to complain, that God reveals more to them than
Nature teaches.

But yet I say, Natural Knowledge must be allowed sufficient to all the ends of
Humane Life, while Man continued Innocent; for that is the Original state of
Human Nature, as all men must grant, who believe that Man was made by God.

But when man sinned, he forfeited the Favor of God, and a natural
Immortality; and whether he should be restored or not, and by what means he
should be restored, depended wholly on the Sovereign Will and Pleasure of God:
And therefore the Light of Nature, though it could direct an Innocent Man how
to Please and Worship God, and to preserve himself Immortal, it could not teach
Sinners how to make atonement for Sin, nor give them any certain hopes that
God would forgive Sins, and bestow immortal Life on them; which makes it
necessary, that the Religion of a Sinner be a revealed Religion. And if God in
infinite Goodness is not only pleased to restore Sinners to Grace and Favor,
but to advance them to a supernatural state of Perfection and Happiness both of
Soul and Body in the next World; this must be done by supernatural Means, and
therefore requires a supernatural Knowledge; for the Light of Nature can
neither raise us above Nature, nor discover supernatural Truths to us: and this
makes it necessary to know and believe such things, as we have no natural
Notion or Idea of, Such things as neither eye has seen, nor ear heard, neither
has it entered into the heart of man to conceive. If Nature cannot save us, it
cannot discover to us the way of Salvation neither; and if we must be saved by a
supernatural Grace and Power, it must be supernaturally revealed; and what is
Supernatural, is the Object of Faith, not of natural Knowledge.

This seems to me to give a plain account, why God thinks fit to reveal such
Mysteries to us as Nature cannot teach, and as we have no natural Notion of,
because our lapsed state has made such Supernatural Revelations necessary to
the recovery of Mankind; and when we are fallen below the relief of Nature, and
of Natural Knowledge, we ought to be very thankful to our good God for
Supernatural Knowledge, and supernatural Means of Salvation.

To God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, Three Persons, one
Eternal God, be Honor, Glory and Power, now and for ever.

Amen.
SERMON XI.
THE Folly and Unreasonableness OF DEISM.
Preached before the King at Hampton Court, June 16. 1700
John xiv. 1. Ye believe in God, believe also in me.

I Shall not consider these Words as they relate to what follows, but only
observe in them, that our Sa^iour not only requires his Disciples to ^elieve in
God, but that they should believe also in him, that is, to believe that he came
from God, and has revealed his Will to the World: And from hence I shall take
occasion to consider the Case of Deists, who pretend to own, that there is a
God, and to pay such Worship to him, and to obey such Laws, as mere Nature
teaches, but reject all Revealed Religions, even the Gospel of Christ it self,
as no better than Cheats and Impostors.

This Profession of Deism is grown very fashionable among our great Pretenders
to Wit and Philosophy; and I am very glad, that such Men are ashamed of the
Name of Atheists, and hope, that a serious Consideration of the Folly and
Unreasonableness of Deism; that is, to believe a God, and to deny all Revealed
Religion, may dispose them to an impartial Inquiry into the Grounds and Reasons
of the Christian Faith.

I. The Folly of Deism.
I will begin with this, to make Men consider a little what they intend by it,
or what wise End it will serve. Every one sees, what Men intend by Atheism, to
deliver themselves from the Fears of invisible Powers, that they may follow
their own Inclinations, and do what they like best themselves, without any Awe
of God, or Reproofs and Terrors of Conscience, or the dismal Apprehensions of
unknown and endless Punishments in the next World: And this is the wisest
Course Men can take, who resolve to be wicked, that they may sin with Ease and
Pleasure, without the bitter Allays of Shame and Fear.

But now if a Deist really is, what he pretends to be; that is, if he does
really believe, that there is a God, and that the Soul is Immortal; and that
Good Men shall be rewarded, and Bad Men punished in the next World; he believes
a great deal too much to sin with Security. and a great deal too little to have
any comfortable Hopes of a better Life. That this is certainly the most
hopeless State that a Man can be in in this World, it has all the Restraints
and Fears of Religion, but none of the Supports and Comforts of it: As to show
this briefly.

1. He who does heartily believe, that there is a God, who will punish Men for
their Sins, not only in this World, but in the next, believes too much to sin
with Security, though he believes nothing at all of Revelation. For if Nature,
as they grant, teaches Men, that there is a Holy and Just Governor of the
World, who observes what we do, and will punish Wickedness, Natural Conscience
also will accuse, and terrify, and condemn wicked Men. Thus St. Paul assures
us it was with the Heathen World, before they had any Revelation of God's Will.
For when the Gentiles, which have not the Law, do by Nature the things
contained in the Law, these having not the Law, are a Law unto themselves,
which show the Work of the Law written in their Hearts, their Consciences also
bearing witness, and their Thoughts the mean while accusing, or else excusing
one another, 2 Romans 14, 15. And the same is attested by all the Heathen
Orators, Philosophers, and Poets. And those natural Terrors of Conscience, and
Fears of Vengeance, were in those Days, before Men had ever heard of the Gospel
of our Savior, so very unsupportable to bad Men, that they took Refuge in
Atheism against them, as Lucretius does very honestly confess, and admires his
Master Epicurus, for his brave and bold Attempt, in delivering the World from
the Fears of God and of Religion.

So that whoever believe a God, and live wickedly, must fear on, whether they
believe the Gospel or not, that Deism can do them no Service: And yet I am
pretty confident, that the only thing which tempts so many Men to deny all
Revealed Religion, is the fear of that terrible Vengeance which the Gospel of
our Savior denounces against all wicked Men; Lakes of Fire and Brimstone,
Blackness of Darkness; the Fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels; the Worm
that never dies, and the Fire that never goes out. They are not willing to
believe the Punishments of the Damned to be so terrible, nor so certain as the
Gospel represents them; and therefore prefer the Light of Nature, which gives a
more uncertain Account of such Matters, before the Gospel Revelation. They can
more easily bear, and more easily baffle the natural Fears, Misgivings, and
Jealousies of a guilty Conscience, than such express Declarations of God's
Wrath against Sinners. The Holiness and Justice of God make it very reasonable
and probable, that God should punish Sinners. But the Goodness of God gives
great reason to hope too, that he will not be so severe as the Gospel
threatens; much less, that he will make any of his Creatures, though Sinners,
eternally miserable.

This is the true Mystery of Deism, when it signifies any more than concealed
Atheism. Mo Man chooses Deism, as the more certain way of Salvation; but that
which makes them so fond of it, and so averse to believe any more than the
Light of Nature teaches, is, that they are not so certain to be damned.

But this is a very vain Design.

1. For can there be greater Folly than to pretend to believe the Punishments
of bad Men in the next World, and yet to reject the Gospel, for fear of being
too certain of them? Would not a wise Man in a Matter of such Consequence as
this, be glad to know certainly what he must trust to, and to know the very
worst of his Case?

The meaning of this indeed is very plain, and a very wise Design it is: they
like the uncertain Fears of Nature much better than the certainty of the
Gospel-Revelation, because they are resolved to sin on, and to venture the
Punishments of the other World, which they can the more safely and honorably
do, the less certain they are.

But is it either safe or honorable to venture future Miseries? Would not a
wise Man in a Matter of such vast Consequence choose to be safe? And though we
reject the plain and express Revelations of the Gospel, if it be still
reasonable to fear (as it must be, if Nature teaches, that God will punish
Sinners) it cannot be safe to venture. Men who pretend to live by mere natural
Reason, ought to look upon reasonable Fears, as certain Rules to live by; for
they have no other: And ^n they gain nothing by rejecting ^e certain
Revelation; for they must fear on, and if they act reasonably, must live as if
their Fears were certain; and if they don't, though they reject Revelation,
Natural Conscience will make them fear and tremble too, whether they will or
no. Though the Light of Nature does not give us such certain Evidence of future
Punishments as the Gospel does, yet the natural Fears of a guilty. Conscience
will as certainly torment us, as if we did believe the Gospel: For a reasonable
Fear has a certain Torment proportioned to the Object of our Fears. Men do not
fear merely according to the Evidence they have for things, but according to
the Concernment of the things they fear: And when eternal Miseries are the
Objects of our Fear, a little Evidence will raise a terrible and furious
Passion.

2. And though the Light of Nature does not so particularly acquaint us what
the Punishments of the Damned are, nor how long they shall concontinue, as the
Gospel does, yet this gives very little relief to a Deist: Though he (...) not
believe the Scripture Acco^ ^f Eternal Punishments; yet when his Fears are
awakened, he can set no bounds or measures to them. The fear of unknown
Miseries paints the Fancy with as frightful Representations, as the Gospel
makes; for when we know not particularly what to fear, we always fear the worst
that can be. This gave occasion to those Poetical Descriptions of Styx and
Acheron, and the Infernal Judges and Furies, and those various Torments
inflicted on Tyrants and other bad Men; and though they did not positively
assert the Eternity of Punishments, yet they set no Bounds to them, but what
the Principles of their Philosophy inferred, in the various Transmigrations of
Souls, or Periodical Revolutions, or the final Conflagration, which they
thought their Gods themselves could not escape. The Light of Nature prescribes
no Measures nor Limits to the Punishment of Sinners, and therefore a Deist can
never prove, that they are not so great and so endless as the Gospel describes
them; and if Reason cannot prove them to be less, guilty Fears will never make
them less; especially since the Gospel is now published to the World, and those
who will not believe it, yet know what it says; and though ^hey can bribe their
Reason not to believe it, their Fears will be very apt to believe the worst.

And now I would desire these Men, who think themselves so safe, if they can
^gh the Gospel, and all Revealed Religion out of the World, seriously to
consider, what they intend, or what they gain by it. If they do sincerely
believe, that there is a Righteous God, who will judge the World, and punish
wicked Men, they are as much obliged to live a Holy and Virtuous Life, as a
Christian is; and if they do not, they are exposed to the same Rebukes, and
Lashes of Conscience, and guilty Fears. That they have not so much certainty of
this by the Light of Nature, as the Gospel gives us, makes no difference, if
they fear it; their Fears will be as great and outrageous, the Sting of Sin
will be as sharp; but their Strength to resist the flattering Temptations of
the World will not be so great: The more certain our Faith is, the more easy
and secure our Victory will be; and to weaken our Evidence, is only to make our
selves an easier Prey. And if this be what they aim at, to sin more easily and
securely at present, and by degrees to conquer their Natural Fears, which they
can more easily do, and so make Deism an easy Step to Atheism, I confess they
are in a hopeful way: But while they believe a God, and (...) Rewards and
Punishments of the next Life, it will do them no Service to reject the Gospel;
they may weaken their Faith by it, but not cure, but increase their Fears.

Secondly, As a Deist, if he be true to the Principles he professes, the belief
of a God, and of the Rewards and Punishments of the next life, gains no^ing at
all by rejecting the Gospel ^evelation, so he loses all the Sup^rts and
Comforts of the Gospel. ^xcepting those terrible theatnings, which the Gospel
denounces against ^penitent Sinners, every thing else (...) it is a true (...)
glad tidings (...) great joy to Mankind: It gives us (...) many signal Tokens
and Pledges of ^e divine favor, and such express ^romises of Gods care of
good Men (...) this World, and of the glorious re^ards of the next, as mere
nature at ^ost affords but very imperfect con^ectures of; that the Deist, if he
have any generous hopes of immortality ^eft, should be glad to have some better
assurance of immortal happiness, ^han nature gives, and can think it no
advantage, that the Punishments of the next life are uncertain, when the
Rewards of it are as uncertain too, if we will allow no other Evidence but the
Light of Nature. But I shall consine my self at present but to one thing, which
all Mankind are equally concerned in, and which we can never be assured of, but
by Revelation, and that is, the certain pardon and forgiveness of Sin.

If God be holy and just, a Sinner (as all Mankind are) must be punished;
except he be pardoned; and therefore can have no good hopes toward God, till
he is assured of his pardon.

Now the mere light of nature gives us no absolute assurance of the pardon of
Sin, no, not so much as it does, that God will punish Sinners, and therefore a
Deist, who rejects the Gospel Revelation, cannot possibly be so certain, that
his Sins shall be pardoned, as that he shall be punished for them.

The Holiness and Justice of God makes him an irreconcilable Enemy to all Sin,
and the only refuge Sinners have, is in the Goodness of God; but Goodness does
not so necessarily prove, that God will forgive Sin, as Justice does, that he
will punish it. For Goodness in its own nature must give place to Justice, that
is, Goodness cannot pardon, while it is unjust to pardon; for an unjust
Goodness is no divine Perfection.

So that the Goodness of God, how great soever we conceive it to be, (and we
cannot conceive it greater than it is) does not necessarily prove, that God
must or will pardon Sinners, but only that he will pardon Sinners when it is
wise and just to do so: but who can tell, when God will think it wise and just
to do so, without a Revelation? or who can tell, what it is, that makes it wise
and just for a good God to forgive Sins? A good Man does not always think
himself bound to forgive those Personal injuries and affronts, which are
offered him, much less is a kind and merciful Prince, who is entrusted with the
Administration of Justice, and the Sacred Authority of Government, bound to
forgive every Malefactor out of pure good nature, which would soon dissolve
Government, and make Authority contemptible; and if we consider God as the
Supreme Governor of the World, it will satisfy us, that to forgive Sins is not
the immediate effect of goodness, but must be tempered and accommodated to the
Justice and Wisdom of Government, which we understand so little of, that we can
never certainly learn from the mere light of nature, when and upon what terms
God will forgive Sin.

The general hope and expectation of Mankind is, that God will forgive all
humble penitent Sinners, and yet I cannot find, that any Man ever thought, that
mere Repentance was sufficient to obtain our Pardon; for all Religions had some
instituted Rites to appease their Gods, which seems to argue, that Natural
Sense they all had, that some Atonement and Expiation as well as Repentance,
was necessary to pardon.

Nor can Reason prove the contrary. Repentance renders Men fit objects of
mercy, when no other reason hinders; but the reasons of Government may
supersede the Inclinations to show mercy. How often does a merciful Prince hang
a penitent Malefactor without any blemish to the Mercy of his Government; and
if good Men and good Princes are not always bound to forgive Penitents, then
Repentance it self alone cannot entitle us to Mercy.

So that we can have no Security of the pardon of our Sins but by the Gospel of
Christ, wherein God has expressly promised the remission of Sins to all true
Penitents in the Name, and through the Merits and Mediation of Christ.

Good God! what a consolation is this to Sinners! who would be without the
certain hopes of Forgiveness for all the World. How terrible is it to believe
that there is a just God, who will punish Sinners, without knowing or believing
a Savior! did these Men duly consider Things, they would think Deism to be the
most dangerous State in the World, which has no Covenant, no Promise, no
Priest, no Sacrifice; which might be the Religion of the State of Innocence,
but is no Religion for Sinners.

Secondly, Let us now consider the unreasonableness of Deism, and how
inconsistent it is with it self: For to deny all Divine Revelation, does
extremely weaken the belief of a God; and to acknowledge the Being of a God,
makes it highly reasonable to believe a Revelation.

First, That to deny all Divine Revelation does extremely weaken the belief of
a God.

A Deist indeed has this visible World for the Proof of a God, as St. Paul
argues; The invisible things from the Creation of the World are clearly seen,
being understood by the Things that are made, even his Eternal Power and
Godhead, Romans 1. 20. And this I grant is a very good Argument, but loses very
much of its Strength in the Mouth of a Deist. For though it be highly
reasonable to think, that the World was made by that Supreme and Sovereign
Being, whom we call God, yet had we no other notice of the being of a God, but
from this visible Creation, had there never been any Commerce or Intercourse
between God and Men, had he never since the making of the World, given any
Signs or Tokens of his Power and Presence, it would have been a very strong
Praesumption, that there is no God, notwithstanding all the Arguments from the
Frame of this visible World, that there is one: For it seems as unreasonable to
think that there should be a God in the World, and Mankind hear nothing of him,
see no visible Marks of his Care and Providence, in matters of the greatest
Consequence (as the Worship and Glory of God, and the Salvation of Men's Souls
certainly are) that they should receive no Notices of his Will, what Homage he
expects from them, and what he will accept, that there should be no
Communication between Reasonable Beings and the Supreme Mind, as it is to
think, that the World could be made without a God. For what end did God make
reasonable Creatures, but to make himself known to them, which is the highest
happiness and Perfection of Reasonable Beings; and can we then imagine, that
when God had made the World, and made Man, he should withdraw himself into
Silence and Ob^curity, and take no farther notice of Mankind, nor make any
other Discoveries of himself to them, than what they can imperfectly spell out
from the visible Creation.

And on the other hand, though we must not urge the Authority of Revelation to
prove a God, which would ^e to beg the Question, yet the being of a Revelation
we may; for whatever proves a Divine Revelation proves a God.

The wisest and acutest Philosophers among the Heathens thought this the best
and most sensible Proof of a God.

Balbus the Stoic, having begun his Cicero de natura Deorum.
Proof of the Being of a God from ^his visible Creation, and the univer^al
Consent of Mankind in this Belief, ^e resolves the Firmness and Stability of
this Persuasion into those visible Signs which their Gods oftentimes gave of
their own Power and Presence; Quod presentiam soepe Divi suam declarant. And
the Argument is certainly a very good one, though the Particular Instances he
gives of it, may be vain and fictitious, and want sufficient attestation to
gain belief: But had Balbus instead of the Apparitions of Castor and Pollux,
and their ridiculous Rites of Divination, seen the Miracles of Moses and of
Christ, the familiar Conversation of God with Abraham and Moses, the terrible
Appearance of Mount Sinai when God delivered the Law in an audible Voice, and
the infallible Accomplishment of Prophesies, that is, had his Proofs of a
Divine Power and Presence been as undeniable, as his reasoning from such Divine
Appearances to the Being of a God, is unanswerable, all the Wit and Sophistry
in the World could never have evaded this Argument; for it would be impossible
to persuade Men there is no God, when they do little less than see him in such
present and sensible Effects, as can have no other Cause but a God. However
thus much we learn from this dispute, that according to the Sense of the wisest
Men, such visible Effects of a Divine Power and Presence are the most
irresistible Argument for the Being of God; that the wisest Men did believe,
that if there is a God, he would give some undeniable Proofs of his own Being
in the Acts of Government and Providence, as well as of Creation: And that if
there never had been any such sensible Appearances of such a Divine Power and
Presence, it would at least have rendered the Being of God very doubtful.

This should make all those who heartily believe a God, to think and speak more
honorably of Revelation; for the Belief of a God and of Revelation will stand
and fall together; that a Deist, who ridicules all Revelation, takes a very ill
Course to persuade the World, that he believes a God.

Secondly, The unreasonableness of Deism will further appear, if we consider,
that to acknowledge the Being of a God makes it highly reasonable to believe a
Revelation. I do not say, that to believe a God obliges us to believe every
pretended Revelation: for the truth of any particular Revelation depends on
those peculiar Marks of Divinity and Credibility, which it bears on it: but
whoever beleives, that there is a God, cannot think it incredible, that God
should reveal himself and his Will to Mankind; nay will see great reason to
believe, that he has done so, as the State of the World in the different Ages
and Dispensations of it, did require, and would admit. For,

First, No Man, who believes, that there is a God, can question, whether God
can, if he so pleases, make a more perfect manifestation of himself, and his
Will, to Mankind, than he has done by the Works of Nature: for what cannot he
do, who made the World, and is infinite in Wisdom and Power? as to consider
particularly some of those ways, whereby God is supposed to reveal himself to
Mankind.

God is a pure and infinite Mind, who cannot be seen by Mortal Eyes, and yet
will any Man say, that God cannot by some visible Appearances convince Men of
his immediate Presence beyond all possibility of Doubt? that he cannot either
with or without such visible Appearances, speak to them, and talk as familiarly
with them, as one Man converses with another? And then whatever Truth there be
in the Story, which is another Enquiry, there is nothing in its own Nature
incredible in those Relations we have of God's appearing to Adam, and
conversing with him in Paradise; of his appearing to Abraham and Jacob, who saw
God face to face, Genesis 32. 30. Of his speaking to Moses face to face, as a Man
talks with his Friend, Exodus 33. 11.

Cannot God, who formed our Minds, and knows all the Springs of Thoughts, draw
such clear and bright Scenes and Pictures of things on our Fancy and
Imagination, whether sleeping or waking, as shall need no other proof of their
Divinity but themselves? As Light is known by it self, and the first Principles
and Maxims of Reason by their own Evidence.

Cannot the Son of God, who made the World, and made Man, if he so pleases,
cloth himself with Humane Nature, and appear and converse in the World, as a
Man, and familiarly instruct Mankind in the Will of God, and the Way to Heaven.

There is no question then, but God can, if he pleases, inspire Men with the
Knowledge of his Will, either by Dreams and Visions, or by an audible Voice,
and a familiar Conversation, o^ by an immediate Impression upon the higher
Faculties of Reason and Understanding; so that if there be a God, there may be
Prophets inspired by God to reveal his Will to Men: And therefore the Pretenses
to Prophecy, must not be laughed out of the World, but examined: The thing is
not incredible, because it is what God can do; but the Prophet must be tried,
because there may be Cheats and Impostures.

Now the trial of a Prophet, whether he come from God, is by such Works, as no
Man can do except God be with him; that is, in short, by what we call Miracles,
and foretelling things to come. And here again, he who believes that there is a
God, cannot think either Miracles, or a Prediction of future Events impossible:
For what cannot that God do and know, whose Power and Knowledge are infinite?
What cannot that God do, who made the World? Is it such a Difficulty to him,
who framed our Bodies out of the ^ust, to give Health to the Sick, or Sight to
the Blind, to make the Deaf to Hear, and the Lame to Walk, and to ^aise the
Dead? We all know, this is above Humane Power; and therefore if ^uch things be
done, they must be done by the Power of God; and we know, that God can do them;
and therefore Miracles are not impossible or incredible to him who believes a
God.

Thus far the Deist must agree with me, unless he have a very mean Opinion of
his God: For a God who cannot reveal his Will to Mankind, who cannot inspire
Prophets, nor work Miracles, nor foretell things to come, is no God, has not the
Wisdom and the Power of a God. Now this is a great Point gained; for if God can
do all this, then there is no Objection against the Nature of the thing; and
the only Dispute is about Matter of Fact, whether God have revealed his Will to
Mankind; whether there ever were such inspired Men sent by God to instruct the
World; whether there ever were any true Miracles wrought, or any certain
Predictions of things to come; and when Men are satisfied, that such things may
be, as they certainly may be, if there be a God, it will dispose them to a more
modest and impartial Examination of such Matters, and not suffer them to
despise Revealed Religion at all adventures: For in Matters, especially of such
vast moment, no wise Man will reject and scorn what may be true, till he can
prove it to be false.

2. Since then we must confess, that it is possible that God should reveal his
Will to Mankind, let us consider, which is most probable, which is most
agreeable to those Notions we have of God; that he should, or should not, make
such a Revelation of his Will.

Now if we may judge of this by the general Sense of Mankind, there was not a
Man in the World in former Ages, who believed a God, but did believe also some
kind of Commerce and Communication between God and Men. This was the Foundation
of all their Religious Rites and Ceremonies, which every Nation pretended to
receive from their Gods.

This gave Birth to all their Superstious Arts of Divination, that they
believed their Gods had a perpetual Intercourse with Men, and by various Means
gave them notice of things to come: and the Stoic in Tully thought, That ^e
Acknowledgment of a God did as ^ecessarily infer Divination, as Divina^on did
prove the Being of a God. Ego ^im sic existimo, si sint ea genera divi^andi
vera, de quibus accepimus, quoeque co^imus esse Deos: vicissimque si Dii sint,
esse ^ui divinent.

Is it possible, as I observed before, to ^magine, that God should make
reaso^able Creatures, who are made to know ^im, and to be happy in the
Knowledge, and Love, and Admiration of him, and withdraw himself from them,
without giving them any visible Tokens of his Presence, or any other View of
his Glory then in the weak and glimmering Reflections of his Works. Had Man
preserved the Innocence and Purity of his Nature, (for whether we believe the
History of Moses or not, if we believe, that God made Man, we must believe,
that he made him Holy) he had been fit for the Presence and Conversation of
God, as Angels, and Holy and Pure Spirits are; and in this State there can be
no doubt, but God would have shown himself and his Glory to Man in some Measure
and Proportion, as he does to the Angels in Heaven, as the History of Moses
assures us, that God did to Adam in Paradise. So that Man was made, if I may so
speak with Reverence, for the Conversation of God, which pious and devout Souls
recover in some measure on Earth, and which we all hope perfectly to enjoy in
Heaven.

Sin indeed, as necessarily it must, has made a greater distance between God
and Man; but if we must live in the other World, and be happy or miserable
there (as the Deist professes to believe) if God still exercises any Care and
Providence over Mankind, it seems absolutely necessary, that he should give
some sensible Tokens of his own Being and Presence, and instruct them more
perfectly in his own Nature and Will, then the Light of Nature teaches. For how
much soever Men may magnify the Light of Nature, it is certain the State of
the World was very ignorant and corrupt, and Mankind knew little of God, beyond
a general Persuasion, that there was such a Being, and therefore worshipped a
Multiplicity of Gods, and any thing for God, and that with such ridiculous and
barbarous Rites, as were a Reproach to the Name both of God and Man. And can ^y
Man who believes a Divine Provi^nce, think that God takes no care of ^s own
Glory and Worship, nor of the ^uls of Men? And it is certain he has ^ken none,
if he have not revealed ^mself and his Will to the World,

Especially when we consider, that in ^ose dark Times of Paganism, the De^l and
Evil Spirits had every where ^eir Temples, and Altars, and Priests, ^d
Sacrifices, frequently appeared to ^eir Votaries in visible Shapes, and
in^ituted their own Rites of Worship, and ^ave forth their Oracles and
Responses, and by their various Arts of Divinati^n, gave them notice of many
Events. ^or though these were Cheats and Im^ostures, they were not all the
Cheats ^f Priests, but of Evil Spirits, who im^osed both upon Priests and
People, and ^y these Arts begot in them a great O^inion of their own Divinity,
as we must confess, unless we will deny the Credit of all Histories. And when
this, by the secret and hidden Counsels of God, was the miserable and
degenerate State of Mankind; can we think, that God should leave himself
without any other Witness than the Light of Nature? should give no
Demonstrations of a Power superior to all these vulgar Deities, nor give Men
any certain Notices of his Will, no Rules of Conversation or Worship.

It is certain in Matter of Fact, that all the Reformation which has been made
in Men's Faith, and Worship, and Manners, is owing to the Jewish and Christian
Religion: This put a stop to their absurd Idolatries, and restored the Worship
of the One Supreme God in the World; which is so wonderful a Change, as could
not have been wrought without some visible and irresistible Proofs of Divinity.

This is sufficient to show, how unreasonable it is in those Men who believe a
God, to deny all Revelation. For it is certain, that God can reveal Himself and
his Will to Mankind, if he pleases; and that the Nature and Providence of God,
and the State of the World, makes it highly reasonable to think he has done it.
The Design of all which is no more but this, to remove Men's Prejudices against
the very Notion of a Revealed Religion: For were this effectually done, they
would soon discover the most unquestionable Characters of Divinity in the
Gospel of our Savior. I am sure, if we do believe a God, and another World,
nothing can be so desirable as a more explicit and perfect Account of ^he Will
of God, and the Way to Heaven, than mere Nature can give us.

What Impression this may make upon professed Deists I cannot tell; they ^ave
so used themselves to laugh at every thing that is serious, and to confute ^he
wisest Arguments with bold and profane Jests, that little Good can be expected
from them: But I hope this may caution those, who are not yet ^nfected, and
make the Name of a Deist ^n a Christian Nation, as contemptible ^s the Name of
an Atheist, they are both ^wing to the same Cause; they live much alike; they
are equal Enemies to Christianity, and equally dangerous to any Government,
where they themselves are not ^ppermost. It is a great Reproach to a Christian
Nation, where such Doctrines are publicly owned and professed, and such
Persons courted and flattered as ^he most refined Philosophical Wits. I pray
God this Nation do not find the ^ischievous Effects of it both in Church and
State. Government can never be long secure without the Sacred Authority of
Religion; and destroy Revealed Religion, and we shall quickly have none, as is
too visible in the Lives of Deists. I Am sure, it is a vain thing to talk of a
Reformation of Manners, while such Men are suffered to poison the very
Fountains, to undermine all Religion, and to root up the very Foundations of
Piety and Virtue. I do not love to prophecy ill Things; but that Nation cannot
reasonably expect to receive Good from God, which is so unconcerned for his
Glory and Worship; it being the standing Rule of his Government. He that
honors me, I will honor; but those which despise me shall be lightly
esteemed.

To God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, be Honor, Glory, and
Power, now and for evermore.

Amen.
SERMON XII.
Preached on September 2. 1699. Being the Fast for the Fire of London, at the
Cathedeal Church of St. Paul's, before the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, and Citizens of London.
Micah vi. 9. The Lord's Voice cries unto the City, and the Man of Wisdom
shall see thy Name. Hear ye the Rod, and who has appointed it.


WHen the State of this World is Happy and Prosperous, it is no wonder to see
Men indulge themselves in Ease and Luxury, forget God, or grow careless and
formal in Religion. For though it might reasonably be expected that happy
Creatures, who rejoice in the Blessings of Heaven, should be very devout
Worshippers of that God from whose Bounty and Goodness they receive all; yet
Humane Nature in this degenerate State is very fond of sensual Pleasures: And
when an easy and plentiful Fortune puts it into Men's Power to enjoy as much of
this World as they will, there are but very few who can set Bounds to their
Enjoyments, and taste the Pleasures of this Life, without taking large and
intoxicating Draughts of it; and this sensualizes Men's Minds; and a carnal Mind
is Enmity against God; says unto God, Depart from us, for we desire not the
Knowledge of thy Ways.

Never any People had more sensible Demonstrations of the Power and Presence of
God amongst them, and his particular Care of them, than the Israelites had; and
yet Moses tells us in his Prophetic Hymn, Iesurun waxed fat, and kicked; thou
art waxen fat, thou art grown thick, thou art covered with Fatness; then he
forsook God which made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock of his Salvation,
Deuteronomy. 32. 15. And thus God complains, Isa. 1. 2, 3. Hear, O Heavens, and give
ear, O Earth, for the Lord has spoken; I have nourished and brought up
Children, and they have rebelled against me. The Ox knows his Owner, and the
Ass his Master's Crib; but Israel does not know, my People does not consider.
And as much as we may despise and abhor the Ingratitude of the Jews, this is
the general State of Mankind; and we may find too many Examples of it in all
Times and Nations.

But it seems much more unaccountable, when the Judgments of God are abroad in
the World, that the Inhabitants thereof should not learn Righteousness: Because
Judgments are apt to awaken Men, and make them consider. When God speaks in
Thunder and Lightning, those must be deaf indeed, who will not hear. This is
the merciful Design of Providence in sending such terrible Judgments on the
World, to make Men consider their Ways and their Doings, and to convince them
that there is a God that judges in the Earth. For Judgments have a Voice, had
we but Ears to hear: They proclaim the Power and the Majesty of God; a terrible
Majesty, and irresistible Power; the^ scourge and they threaten Sinners, an^
call for Weeping, and Mourning, an^ Fasting: And how unthankful soever the Jews
were to God for his great Mercie^ and Deliverances, yet they were not so
insensible of his Judgments? When he sle^ them, then they sought him, and
returned and enquired early after God, and remembered that God was their Rock;
and the High God their Redeemer, Psalm 78^ 34, 35.

This we are exhorted to in my Text To hear the Rod, and who has appointed it:
To consider for what reasons those Evils which we at any time suffer, are come
upon us, and what God intends by the Rod; which is the only way to grow better
by our Afflictions, and to prevail with God in great Pity and Compassion to
remove them.

But this is the great difficulty; Who shall reveal this Secret to us? How
shall we distinguish between the Corrections of God, and the Wickedness of Men?
How shall we understand the Language of the Rod, and to whom it speaks; for
what Sins it strikes, and who are those Achans that are the Troublers of our
Israel; and what God expects from us in such Cases?

I shall briefly explain these things to you, and apply it to the present
Occasion.

But I must premise, That I only address my self now to those who believe a God
and a Providence; and that God has revealed his Will and the Rule of his
Providence in the Holy Scriptures. As for Atheists and Infidels, who have
neither Eyes nor Ears, they can only feel the Rod like Bruits, not hear its
Voice like Men: Though the Lord's Voice cries unto the City, it is only the
Men of Wisdom that see his Name.

Now as for those who believe a God and the Holy Scriptures, there are two very
plain Interpreters of God's Judgments; Natural Conscience, and the Word of God.
For the Judgments of God have not an Articulate Voice to acquaint us in plain
and express Words, upon what Errand they come; but they are Signs which speak
by an Interpreter; and if we carefully attend to the Dictates of Natural
Conscience, and to the Word of God, we cannot mistake their meaning.

1. As first, No Man who attends either to the Dictates of Natural Conscience,
or to the Word of God, can doubt who it is that has appointed the Rod: This is
the first and most natural question of all; and yet a great many who profess to
believe a God and a Providence, seem not well satisfied in this Point: They
allow that some Judgments are the Hand of God, but are not willing to grant
this of all; especially when they see what the immediate and visible Causes of
such Sufferings are.

Some of the greatest Evils which either private Men or Public Societies
suffer, are manifestly owing to the Injustice and Wickedness of Men; and they
can no more believe that it is the Will and Appointment of God, that they
should suffer such Evils, than that it is the Will of God that others should do
them And all such Rods as are not appointed by God, can teach us nothing but
the Wickedness of those by whom we suffer; for if God has not sent them, they
can bring us no Message from God. And yet most Men are in some degree infected
with this Disease: We suffer many Evils which we are not willing to ascribe to
God, and then we learn nothing from them but a little Worldly Policy and
Prudence, to take better care of our selves and our Affairs, to be jealous and
distrustful of Men; or, it may be, to watch our Opportunities to revenge the
Injuries we suffer, and to return them with Interest: And yet we profess to
believe a Providence; though it were as Honorable to God to deny his
Providence, as to deny his Sovereign Disposal and Government of all Events; or
rather, they are both an equal Reproach to him. For a Providence which does not
take care of Creatures, is little worth; and we cannot say that God takes care
of his Creatures, if any Evil befalls them without his Will and Appointment.

But Natural Conscience sees the Hand of God in all the Evils we suffer:
Whatever the visible and immediate Causes and Instruments of our Sufferings
are, a guilty Conscience takes notice of the Divine Vengeance; the Terrors of
God take hold upon him, and he trembles before his Judge, though he do not see
him; he is afraid of God, when he feels only the Hands of Men. And what is the
meaning of this? What is the Language of these guilty Fears, but that whatever
the Rod be that strikes, it is moved and directed by a Divine Hand; that the
Wickedness and Injustice, the Wrath and Fury of Men, is no other than the
Vengeance of God? For why should the Evils we suffer from Men so terrify a
guilty Conscience, had we not a Natural Persuasion, that all these Evils are
sent by God, whoever are the Instruments of them?

Thus it is natural in all such Cases to fly to God for help. Atheists
themselves cannot wholly prevent this; but when they are surprised with any
sudden Dangers, Nature is too quick and too powerful for their Philosophy, and
surprises them into an Acknowledgment of God and a Providence, which they must
do Penance for when their Fright is over. Sinners who forget God in Prosperity,
fly to him in their Distress; remember that God is their Rock, and the High God
their Redeemer. And if this be a Natural Acknowledgment of Providence, as it
certainly is, it owns the Hand of God in our Sufferings, as well as his Power
to save; for both equally belong to the Supreme and Sovereign Lord of the
World; and it is not merely his Power to help, which makes Sinners fly to God
in their Distress, but a Sense of his Anger in what they suffer: They do not
fly to God as Men do to a powerful Patron, but as Criminals do to the Mercy of
a provoked Father or Prince: When they fly to God, it is to implore his Mercy
as humble Penitents, to appease his Anger, that he may remove his Judgments;
and when we fly to the Mercies of God to remove the Rod, it is an
Acknowledgment that it is ^e that strikes, as well as he alone that can save.

And that Conscience judges right in all this, however some Men may attribute
it to a Superstitious Education, is evident from Scripture, which expressly
tells us, That God does whatsoever pleases him both in Heaven and in Earth.
That none can stay his Hand, or resist his Will, or say unto him, What do
thou? That there is no Evil in the City, which the Lord has not done. If Job
be stripped of all his large Possessions in a day, it is the Lord that gave, and
the Lord that takes away. If the mighty King of Assyria invade Israel, and lay
waste their Cities and Country, he is the Rod of God's Anger, and the Staff in
his Hand is his Indignation, Isa. 10. 5, 6. Affliction comes not forth of the
Dust, neither does Trouble spring out of the Ground, but God is the Judge, he
puts down one, and sets up another, Psalm. 75. 7, 8. This shows us, that
whatever our Sufferings are, it is God that appoints the Rod, and then it must
nearly concern us,

2dly, To hear the Rod, what and to whom it speaks. Now in this Case also,
Conscience and the Word of God are the best Interpreters of God's Judgments.
The Rod teaches another way, but teaches the same thing that Conscience and
Scripture teach us; that is, it proclaims aloud the Evil of Sin, and God's
Anger and Displeasure against it, and calls us to Repentance, and Reformation
of our Lives.

When the Judgments of God are upon us, Conscience knows their Errand, and
calls all our Sins to remembrance, and sets them in order before us. Nothing
but Guilt makes us afraid of God; and how quiet and secure soever* Sinners are
at other times, the Judgments of God will awaken their guilty Fears; and if Men
will hearken to the Voice of an awakened Conscience, it will certainly tell
them why God strikes; and we cannot take a safer Course, than to reform those
Sins of which our Consciences then accuse us.

All the Threatenings of Scripture are against Sin, and all the Judgments there
recorded, especially Public and National Judgments, were inflicted for the
Punishment of Sin; and these are to be our Examples, as they are the standing
Rules and Measures of Providence. God never punishes but for Sin, though he may
exercise particular good Men with difficult Trials; and therefore when bad Men
and a wicked Nation suffer, they may certainly know the Cause; they have
sinned, and God is angry, and summons them to Repentance; for this is the fruit
of all, to take away Sin. The Voice of Judgments is the same with the Voice of
Conscience, and the Voice of God's Prophets; Wash (...), make ye clean, put
away the Evil of ^our Doings from before mine Eyes: Cease to do Evil, learn to
do well; seek Judgment, relieve the Oppressed, judge the Fatherless, plead for
the Widow, Isa. 1. 16, 17.

This is plain enough, and sufficiently known, if it were but sufficiently laid
to Heart; and this is all that we are concerned to know of the Judgments of
God. The secret and hidden De^gns of Providence, which many times surpize the
World with unexpecte^ Events, are the Care of God, an^ belong not to us, till
the Scene o^ pens, and we see what part is allo^ ted us in it. Whatever God be
a^ doing, we have nothing to do but t^ amend our Lives, which will remov^ the
Scourge from us, and entitle us t^ the Care and Protection of Providenc^
Whereas to busy our selves with Poli^ tick or Prophetic Guesses at unknow^
Events, to paint our Imaginations wit^ black and frightful, or with gay an^
charming Scenes of Things, as despond^ ing Fears, or sanguine Hopes inspire the
Prophet, can do us no good, but may d^ a great deal of hurt to our selves an^
the World. This is not the Voice o^ the Rod, which makes no new Reve^ lations
to us, but only awakens the Convictions of Conscience, and enforce^ the
Reproofs and Threatenings of the Word, with such sensible and smarting Proofs of
the Evil of Sin, and God's Anger against it, as will make all Men consider, who
have not lost their Senses; and many times restore Sense and Understanding to
those who had lost them.

But this to some Men will seem a very dull Account of God's Judgments, which
will neither gratify their Curiosity, nor ill Nature; nor, which they think
worse, leave them any excuse to palliate their Hypocrisy.

The Judgments of God declare God's Anger against Sin, and call us to
Repentance: This Men will own, but do not like to hear it expressed in such
general Terms, as if when God sends his Judgments amongst us, he were angry
with ^s for all our Sins, and called us to repent of them all: This they think
hard, that they must part with all their Sins, to remove these Judgments; nay,
this they think cannot be the Truth of the Case, because the World is always
very wicked, and yet the Judgments of God are not always abroad in the World:
And therefore they suppose, that when God does execute Judgments, it is not Sin
in general, but some particular Sins, which so highly provoke him; and could
they learn what they are, and reform them, they might see happy Days again: And
this sets Men at liberty to favor what Sins they please, to reproach and
accuse each other, and to charge all the Evils and Calamities they suffer upon
one another, without thinking of reforming themselves.

Thus to be sure it always is, when there are differing Parties and Factions in
a Nation, who judge very differently of Good and Evil: They will all confess
they are great Sinners, and, it may be, too many of all Parties are guilty of
the same Sins; but those Sins which are common to them all, must pass for
nothing, because so far they are all agreed. But then there are peculiar
Party-Sins, which every Party dislikes in each other; and what they dislike,
they conclude God dislikes too; and to these they attribute all the Evils they
suffer* As if the Judgments of God were not to reform the World, but to decide
some Party-Quarrels, which will never be decided this way, when every Party
will expound Judgments in favor of themselves.

But all Men see that this is to judge by a false and partial Rule: This is
neither Conscience nor Scripture; for Conscience equally condemns all Sin, and
so does the Scripture too. I grant, though there is always a great deal of
wickedness committed in the World, God does not always inflict Public
Judgments, which are commonly executed when Wickedness and Impiety is grown
public too; when public Government is remiss in punishing Wickedness, or the
Numbers and Power of Sinners are grown too great for the Correction of public
Justice: But we shall always find in Scripture, that when God did inflict
public Judgments, he called for a general Repentance and Reformation; and if
this were not so, no Man could understand the Voice of the Rod without a Spirit
of Prophecy. But this deserves a more particular Consideration, both with
respect to those Sins for which God most commonly sends his Judgments, when he
sees fit to execute a public Vengeance; and the necessity of an universal
Reformation, when the Judgments of God are upon us.

1. The most general Account the Scripture gives us of public Judgments, is an
universal Corruption of Manners. Thus the Prophet describes the State of the
Jewish Church, when God threatened his Judgments against them: Ah ^nful Nation,
a People laden with Iniquiry, a Seed of evil Doers, Children that are
Corrupters; they have forsaken the Lord, they have provoked the Holy One o^
Israel, they are gone away backward. And the whole Head is sick, and the whol^
Heart faint. From the Sole of the Foot unto the Head, there is no Soundnes^ in
it; but Wounds and Bruises, and pu^ trifying Sores: they have not been closed,
nor bound up, nor mollified with Oint meant, Isa. 1. 4, 5, 6. And in Verse 10 he
calls them, The Rulers of Sodom, an^ People of Gomorrah. When Wickednes^ is
grown universal, and has infected al^ Ranks and Orders of Men, such a Nation
is ripe for Judgment; but it add^ greatly to the Guilt and Provocation when Men
are not contented to b^ wicked, without bidding open Defiane to God and to all
Religion. Woe unt^ them who draw Iniquity with Cords of Vanity, and sin as it
were with Cart-rope^ Who deride all the Threatenings of God and even dare his
Power and Justice That say, Let him make speed and have en his Work, that we
may see it; and le^ the Counsel of the Holy One of Israel dra^ nigh, and come,
that we may know i^ Who mock at the differences of Goo^ and Evil, and value the
Reputation o^ their Wit and Philosophy too much to be^ cheated with such empty
Names. Woe unto them that call Evil Good, and Good Evil, that put Darkness for
Light, and Light for Dar^ss, that put Bitter for Sweet, and Sweet (...) ^itter.
Woe unto them that are wise in their own Eyes, and prudent in their own Sight.
Who having first destroyed the eternal and essential differences of Good and
Evil, change their Names too at pleasure, and think themselves the only wise
Men in the World for doing so. This takes off all Restraints, and gives the
Reins to their Lusts, and they live, just as they believe, without making any
difference between Good and Evil. Woe unto them that are mighty to drink Wine,
and Men if strength to mingle strong Drink; who justify the Wicked for a
Reward, and take ^ay the Righteousness of the Righteous from him. Therefore as
the Fire devou^eth the Stubble, and the Flame consumes the Chaff, so their
Root shall be as Rot^nness, and their Blossom shall go up as the Dust, because
they have cast away the Law of the Lord of Hosts, and despised the Word of the
Holy One of Israel, Isa. 5. 18, etc. The like Account we find in the other
Prophets. And when the State of a Church and Nation is so corrupt, we need not
enquire for what particular Sins God strikes; but yet there were some Sins
which God expressed (...) severer Indignation against, and seldo^ delayed to
punish; such as their Id^ latry, and Contempt of the God o^ Israel, of his Word
and Prophets; Profanation of his Worship; Athe^ istical Notions of Providence,
and (...) Good and Evil; or their abominab^ Hypocrisy, in committing all the
Lew^ ness and Villainies which Men cou^ commit, and sheltring themselves in a^
external Form and Appearance of R^ ligion, which the Prophets every when
complain of. To these Causes is o^ ing the universal Corruption of Man ners;
for it is impossible any Nati^ should so universally degenerate, t^ they have
either corrupted their Re^ gion by Superstition and Hypocrisy, lost all Sense
of it; and therefore t^ calls for a speedy Vengeance.

As for what more particularly co^ cerns the Christian Church, we man learn
from the Epistles to the Sev^ Churches of Asia, what it is provok^ our Lord
either severely to punish us, to remove the Gospel from us. T^ Church of
Ephesus, though she had a^ quitted her self well in many thing yet had left her
first Love, had abated very much of her Zeal and Fervor for the Name and
Religion of Christ. The Church of Pergam^s is threatened for suffering those
among her who taught Idolatrous Worship, and fleshly Lusts: And the Church of
Thyatira likewise for suffering the Woman Ieza^el to commit Fornicat^on, and to
eat things sacrificed to Idols. The Church of Sardis made a glorious and
pompous Profession of Religion, but without the true Life and Spirit of it; ^e
had a name to live, but was dead: And the Church of Laodicea grew very cold and
indifferent even in the Profession of Religion, as well as in the Practice of
it; she was neither hot nor cold, (...) lukewarm. All these our Savior summons
to Repentance, and threatens to punish or destroy them if they did not, Chap.
2, and 3. of the Revelations.

The Application of all this to our selves is so obvious, that I need not
multiply Words about it: We are that very Nation wherein all these Evils meet;
it is hard to name any Vice which is not openly committed amongst us without
Fear or Shame: Nay, things are come to that pass, that to be a modest Sinner,
to boggle at any Wickedness, o^ to blush at it, is as great a Reproach as to be
Virtuous: And though some Men are ashamed to own themselves Atheists, yet to
believe in Christ, and to own any Revealed Religion, or t^ talk seriously of
Providence, of God* governing the World, and punishin^ Cities and Nations for
their Wicke^ ness, is thought a Jest; and I wi^ it were a Jest only among vile
an^ mean People, of no Fortune or Education; whereas we often see that the^
Condition makes them modest, and u^ taught Nature teaches them better, t^ they
are corrupted by the Examples (...) Men of Wit and Figure in the Worl^ And as
for those who pretend to Rel^ gion, it is a very melancholy Prospec^ to observe
how little of the true Li^ and Spirit of Christianity there is (...) mong them.
There is indeed Noi^ and Zeal, and Faction enough amon^ some People, and that
makes others (...) cold and indifferent: The Tempers of the Church of Sardis
and Laodicea, the one that had a Name to live, but wa^ dead, the other that was
lukewarm^ make much the greatest Parties amon^ us; and the very best Men, I
fear, are too much inclined to the State of Ephesus, which had left her first
Love, those great Passions and Ardours of Devotion which ought to inspire the
Minds of Christians.

Let us then hear the Rod and tremble: See how God dealt with the Jewish Church
for these Sins; see what our Lord has done to the Churches of Asia; and though
we cannot say what God will do to us, because we know not what wonderful
Designs are in the Womb of Providence, yet we know what we do, and how God has
dealt with those who have done as we do; which is too just reason to fear that
he will deal so by us too, unless we repent and reform, which they did not. For,

2dly. When the Judgments of God are upon us, the Reformation must be universal
too: It concerns every Man to reform himself; for a Nation can never be
reformed, but by the Reformation of particular Men, who make up the Nation; and
therefore when we are summoned to Repentance, as the Judgments of God summon us
all, every Man must examine himself what he has to repent of, and reform
himself. But yet there is great difference between a National and Personal
Repentance and Reformation, and they serve very different Ends.

A Nation may be said to be reformed, and God may in great Mercy remove his
Judgments, though (what is never to be expected) every particular Man do not
repent and reform himself: But then such a National Reformation requires the
Execution of public Justice against public Wickedness to make Sin publicly
infamous, and to teach the greatest and most powerfu^ Sinners Modesty: To
banish, if no^ Sinners, yet Sin out of our Courts, and out of our Streets, and
to make it once more seek for Night and Darkness for a Covering; that Virtue
may no longer blush in Company, or need Apologies; Nor Vice dare to brave it at
Noonday.

There has indeed of late been some Care taken by public Laws and Royal
Proclamations, to punish the Profanation of God's Name by accursed Oaths; but
yet in most Cases Men may be as vile as they please, and as publicly so as
they please, and little or no notice taken of them; nay, they may talk and
write what they please against God and Religion, ridicule the History of Moses,
and the Gospel of our Savior, and the Mysteries of the Christian Faith, and
gain Credit and Reputation by it. I hope there are not many Christian Nations
in the World, which in so public a manner permit these things. We have talked
of Liberty of Conscience, and Reformation, to good purpose, if the only Effect
of it be a Liberty of ridiculing the Christian Faith; which might make one
suspect that all the Zeal some Men have expressed against Popery, was at the
bottom of it a Zeal for Atheism and Irreligion; which the Discipline of Popery,
as bad a Religion as it is, would not endure; it is indeed well fitted to make
Atheists and Infidels, but will make Men have a care how they profess it. And
it is to be feared, that this Skepticism, and Infidelity, and Contempt of
Religion, will prove a Backdoor to let in Popery again upon us.

But to leave these Thoughts with those whose proper Care and Business it is;
whether a Nation will be reformed or not, it concerns every particular Man to
hear the Rod: The Judgments of God warn us of his Anger and Displeasure against
Sin, that we may fly from the Wrath to come; and we do not hear the Voice of
the Rod, nor improve Judgments to their true end, if we do not so repent and
reform, as to save our Souls; and this to be sure must be a Personal and an
Universal Reformation. And yet even with respect to present Judgments, a
Personal Repentance and Reformation is of great use; for when the Judgment is
Public and National, God many times makes a remarkable distinction between
Persons: Say ye to the Righteous it shall be well with them, for they shall
reap the fruit of their Doings: Woe unto the Wicked, it shall be ill with him,
for the Reward of his Hands shall be given to him: Which is spoke with respect
to Public Judgments, Isa. 3. 10, 11. Which is a sufficient Encouragement for
particular Men to repent, and reform their Lives, whatever others do.

But it is time to apply what I have now discoursed, to the particular Occasion
of this Day's Solemnity; though possibly some may think that this Application
comes too late; it might have been very seasonable one or two and thirty Years
ago, while the Marks of this terrible Vengeance were fresh and visible; when
the Ruins of our Houses and Churches could only tell us where London stood, and
show us its Funeral Pile, where its Glory lay in the Dust: When so many
thousand Families felt the smart of their ruined Fortunes, and were either
forced to begin the World again, or sunk irrecoverably under it. This fiery
Vengeance had a Voice then, and a very terrible Voice, enough to awaken the
most stupid and Lethargick Sinners. But when we see our City rebuilt more
beautiful than ever, as the little poor Remains of the old one witness: When
our Riches and Glory are increased beyond the Example of most former Ages, it
seems too late to lament over the Ashes and Rubbish of our fired City, when
there are no visible Remains of these Ruins to move our Pity or Sorrow: And
indeed were this the only Design of this Annual Fast, it were high time to put
an end to it, or to turn it into a Thanksgiving Festival: For it is in vain to
expect, that after three and thirty Years, the return of this Day should revive
and renew our Sorrows and Lamentations, when our Ruins are removed, our Losses
repaired, and those frightful Impressions which the sight of that devouring
Fire made on us, forgot; and little left to put us in mind that our City was
burnt, but the Inscription upon the Monument, and the sight of a New City, with
the several Dates of its Resurrection; which must needs qualify all melancholy
and sorrowful Reflections on what is so long past.

But though the Design of this Solemnity is not to represent and act over again
a new doleful Scene of Horror, Confusion, and Amazement, which neither Nature
nor Art can imitate, as we saw it once on this Day, without such another
amazing Sight, which God grant we may never see again till the General
Conflagration; yet it is of great use to keep up a lively Sense of such
Judgments upon our Minds, which become the Subject of Reason, of cool Thoughts
and wise Consideration, when the Terror and Frightfulness of them is over.

Judgments could never make a lasting Reformation in the World, were we
concerned to remember them no longer than we feel their Smart; but they are
intended both for Punishment and Instruction; the Punishment ends with the
Smart, and that puts an end to all whining and tragical Complaints; but this
alone is the Discipline of Fools or Brutes: The Instruction is for Men, and
this is to last as long as Memory, and Thought, and Reason last. What could the
Fire of London teach us thirty three Years ago, which it does not teach a wise
Man still? And what Thoughts and devout Passions became us then, which are not
still on this Day the proper Exercise of our Devotion?

When we saw our Churches and Houses in Flames, when we saw those furious
Torrents of Fire rolling down our Streets, and despising all the Opposition
that Humane Art or Strength could make, as if they had known by what a Divine
and Irresistible Commission they acted; there were few Men to be found, who did
not express a great Fear and Reverence of the Power and Justice, and terrible
Majesty of God, who did not see and own the Hand of God, and the visible Tokens
of his Displeasure, and begin in good earnest to think of reforming their
Lives, and making their Peace with God, who had now taken the Rod into his own
Hand.

When we saw our Riches make to themselves Wings and fly away as an Eagle
toward Heaven; when we saw all our Pride and Glory, the Toil and Labor of our
whole Lives, the Food and the Instruments of our Lusts, vanish into Smoke and
Dust; this effectually taught us the Uncertainty of all present things, and
made us seriously consider what an ill State those were in, who had nothing to
trust to but such vanishing Treasures; and how reasonable our Savior's Command
is, Not to lay up for our selves Treasures on Earth, where Moth and Rust do
corrupt, and where Thieves break through and steal; but to lay up for our
selves Treasures in Heaven, which are not subject to such Casualties; which
will make us bear such Losses better when they come, and secure our eternal
Interest.

When Men saw their Riches and Treasures vanish in a Cloud, it naturally made
them consider how much of this they owed to the Poor, how much they daily spent
upon their Lusts, and how much they had unjustly got; that is, how much of what
God had taken from them was not their own, and how much they had abused the
Gifts of God: Very wise and pious Thoughts, had they lasted; and yet too plain
to be missed by those who thought at all, when they saw these Lessons written
in bright Characters of Fire.

Now was all this, do you think, calculated only for Sixty six? Is not God the
same still? a Just and Righteous Judge, who is angry with the wicked every day,
though he do not every day bend his Bow, and let fly his Arrows; though he do
not every day make the Earth tremble and quake, and the very Foundations of the
Hills to shake, because he is angry; though we do not every day see a Smoke go
out of his Presence, and a consuming Fire out of his Mouth; though he do not
upon every Provocation appear in his terrible Majesty, riding upon the
Cherubins, and flying upon the Wings of the Wind. Methinks one such Example
might serve us for some Ages, without expecting or desiring to be summoned
again to Repentance by new Terrors. God is gracious and merciful, slow to
anger, and of great kindness: He delights more to display his Glory in Acts of
Goodness and Bounty to his Creatures; but Judgments are his strange Work, which
makes the signal Execution of them so very rare; and the way to have them rare,
is not to forget them, to learn Righteousness by the things which we have
suffered; to fear and tremble before that God who is so terrible in his Doings
toward the Children of Men.

But if the Fire of London was too long since to work upon our Fears at this
distance, (though I confess I wonder how any Man who saw that Sight, should
ever forget it, or remember it without a just Awe and Reverence of God;) but, I
say, if these Impressions of Fear and Terror are lost, let the Beauty and Glory
of our New City, our increasing Riches, our flourishing Trade, our Ease and
Plenty, teach us to Love and Reverence, and Worship and Praise that God, who in
the midst of Judgment has remembered Mercy; who has plucked us as a Firebrand
out of the Fire, and has not suffered our Enemies to triumph over us, who
said, Down with it, down with it, even to the Ground. This is the way to
perpetuate our Prosperity and Glory, if the Remembrance of past Judgments
teaches us to Fear God, the Sense of his present Mercies to Love him, and both
to Obey him.

Which God of his Infinite Mercy grant, through our Lord Jesus Christ: To whom,
with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be Honor, Glory, and Power, now and ever.

Amen.
SERMON XIII.
THE Divine Presence IN Religious Assemblies:
Preached at the Cathedral-Church of St. Paul, the First Sunday after Opening
the QUIRE, December, 5. 1697.
Psalm xcvi. 9. O worship the Lord in the Beauty of Holiness. --


WE have lately made our first Solemn Appearance before God in this House with
all the External Solemnities of Worship, and, I hope, with those Transports and
Ardours of Devotion, which such great Occasions require: Excepting thos^
Christian Feasts, which contain the Mysteries of our Redemption by Jesus
Christ, Two more joyful Solemnitie^ could not well have met in One Day the One
a Feast of Dedication, the (...) there of Peace. Blessed Union! Man these Two be
never parted: May the Church enjoy Rest and Ease under the Gracious Influences
of a Victorio^ Prince; and may the Throne be est^ blished in Peace by its Love
and Ze^ for God's House.

The Public Solemnities of Worshi^ and the Public Peace of Church a^ State,
are the most comprehensive Ble^ sings which we can enjoy in this Worl^ They are
an Inferior Accomplishme^ of the Angelick Hymn at the Birth (...) our Savior;
Glory be to God in t^ Highest, on Earth Peace, Good Will (...) wards Men.

These are the Matter of our prese^ Joy, which ought not to be confin^ to one
short Day, but to be had in pe^ petual Remembrance, as we hope a^ pray, that
these Blessings may be pe^ petual.

But my present Design relates to God's House, and that Worship, which we must
pay to God there. O worship the Lord in the Beauty of Holiness.

1. And first I shall begin with the Beauty of Holiness: the right
understanding of which may possibly turn some Men's Curiosity into Devotion.
There is, I think, no dispute, but that by the Beauty of Holiness, the Psalmist
means the Tabernacle or Sanctuary; for if David was the Penman of this Psalm,
the Temple at Jerusalem was not then built, and thus it is applied in this
Psalm, ver. 6. Honor and Majesty (...) before him, Strength and Beauty are in
his Sanctuary: and v. 7. Give unto the Lord the Glory due unto his Name, ^ing
an Offering, and come into his Courts; which is immediately explained in the
Words of my Text, O worship the Lord in the Beauty of Holiness; and thus the
Seventy render it both here and in Psalm 29. 2. (...), in his Holy Tabernacle:
This was the peculiar Place of Worship under the Law, which is called the
Beauty of Holiness, from that excellent and incommunicable Majesty which dwelt
there.

There is such frequent mention mad^ in the Old Testament of God's peculi^
Presence in some places above other^ Of the House of God, where he dwel^ where
he places his Name, where (...) sits between the Cherubims, and such (...)
peculiar Sanctity and Holiness for the reason attributed to these Places, the
no Man denies the Distinction and H^ liness of Places under the Jewish D^
spensation: But there are too many, wh^ think, that the Gospel of Christ has p^
an end to all such Distinction of Place^ as it has done to all other Jewish C^
remonies; that God has no oth^ Church now, but the Assemblies (...) Christians,
and the Hearts of devo^ Worshippers, in what Place soever the^ meet; that to
think God is more pr^ sent, or more acceptably worshipped (...) one Place than
in another, is either P^ began or Jewish Superstition; that to b^ have our selves
with greater Reveren^ in a Christian Church, than we do (...) our own private
Houses, unless it be i^ the immediate Acts of Worship, is n^ better than to
worship Wood, and Brick^ and Stone, as if they had some peculia^ Sanctity in
them.

This, as slight a Matter as some may think it, is of mischievous consequence
to Religion, as it delivers Men's Minds from those awful Regards to the Divine
Presence, which ought to possess them when they approach God's House; as is too
often seen in a careless and irreverent Worship: And therefore I shall take
this Occasion briefly to represent this Matter, which when truly stated, will
admit of little dispute.

To assert in loose and general Terms the Holiness of Places, and that
Religious Regard and Reverence, which is to be paid to them, may, I confess,
give just Offense to Christian Ears, as if the Place and House it self had such
a Holiness, that we must not only worship God in such a Place, but that we must
pay some Religious Reverence to the House it self with relation to God: For if
once we admit of any kind of Relative Worship, I know not where we can stop,
but may as well worship Pictures, and Images, and Crucifixes, as Holy Places,
upon account of their relation to God and Christ. But yet no understanding
Christian will deny, that we must worship God with all Humility of Soul and
Body, wherever we know, that God is peculiarly present to receive our
Worship; that if there be any such Places, where God is thus peculiarly
present, we must approach his Presence, and behave our selves while we continue
there, with all Religious Reverence and Devotion. It is the peculiar Presence.
of God, which is the only Holiness of any Place, and which alone challenges our
Religious Adorations. And the reasonableness and necessity of this, every one
must own, who acknowledges the peculiar Presence of God in the appropriated
Places of Worship: For if God be peculiarly present there to receive our
Worship, whenever we approach his Presence, we ought to approach him with all
the external Signs of Reverence; which is not to reverence the Place, but to
reverence that excellent Majesty, which is peculiarly present in that Place.

So that rightly to understand this Matter, I must briefly explain the
Scripture Notion of God's peculiar Presence in the Places of Worship, and what
Reverence such a Presence requires from us, when we approach such Places.

First then I observe, that though it be the constant Doctrine of Scripture,
that God is essentially present in all Places, yet there are some Places which
are peculiarly called his Presence; and thus it has been ever since the
Creation; wherever God manifested himself peculiarly present, such Places
were called his Presence, and became the ordinary standing Places of Worship.

It does not seem improbable to me, that though all Paradise might be called
the Presence of God, yet there was some peculiar Place, even in Paradise it
self, where God did most ordinarily appear to our first Parents: for we read in
Genesis 3. 8. that when Adam and Eve had eaten the forbidden Fruit, they heard
the Voice of the Lord God; that is, the Eternal Word, walking in the Garden in
the cool of the Evening, and Adam and his Wife hid themselves from the Presence
of the Lord God, amongst the Trees of the Garden. Which seems to intimate, that
there was some particular Place in Paradise where God used to meet with them,
from which they fled, and by so doing, thought to hide themselves from the
Presence of God.

In the Story of Cain and Abel, this seems more plain; there was at that time
some peculiar Place, whither they brought their Offerings to God, and therefore
where God was supposed peculiarly present to receive their Offerings, Genesis 4.
3, 4. and in v. 14. Cain complains, Behold thou have driven me out this Day
from the Face of the Earth, and from thy Face shall I be hid; that is, from thy
Presence; as it is expounded ver. 16. Cain went out from the Presence of the
Lord, and dwelt in the Land of Nod. Where it is plain, the Presence of the Lord
signifies a certain Place, where God was so present, as he was not in other
Places; for we can never go out of the Essential Presence of God, as the
Psalmist witnesses, Psalm 139. 6, 7, 8, 9. Whither shall I go then from thy
Spirit, or whither shall I go from thy Presence: If I climb up into Heaven thou
art there; if I go down into Hell thou art there: If I take the Wings of the
Morning, and remain in the uttermost Parts of the Sea, even there also shall
thy Hand lead me, and thy Right Hand shall hold me; and therefore in this Sense
the Land of Nod was as much God's Presence, as where Abel and Cain dwelt
before; but Cain went out from the Presence of God into the Land of Nod; that
is from that place, where God dwelt, and conversed with them, into a Land where
he never vouchsafed such a peculiar presence.

In the History of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, we not only learn, that in those
days, they always had their peculiar and appropriate places of worship, but
that they pitched their Tents, and built their Altars, either in such places,
as God directed them to, or where God appeared to them, and those were the
places, where God ordinarily Converst with them.

Thus the Lord appeared unto Abram in the place of Sichem in the Plain of
Moreh, and there he built an Altar unto the Lord, who appeared unto him: Genes.
12. 6, 7. hither he returned again when he came out of Egypt unto the place of
the Altar which he had made there at first, and there he called on the Name of
the Lord. Genes. 13 4. so that the appearance of God to him in this place, had
made it a standing place of Worship; and here God appeared to him again, and
renewed his Promise to him, after the departure of Lot.

After this by God' s command Abram removed his Tent, and dwelt in the Plain of
Mamre, and there he built an Altar to the Lord, Genes. 13. 18. and here God
frequently appeared to Abram as we may see in 15, 17, 18, Chap. Thus when God
appeared to Isaac at Beersheba, he built an Altar, and called upon the Name of
the Lord, and pitched his Tent, and took up his abode there, as in a place,
where God was present, 26 Genes. 24, 25.

Thus as Jacob was going toward Haran, being forced to lodge all night in the
Field, in his Dream he saw a Ladder set upon the Earth, and the top reached to
Heaven, and the Angels of God ascended and descended on it, and God himself
stood above it, and renewed his Promise and Covenant to Jacob: From hence Jacob
concluded, that God was peculiarly present in this place, how dreadful is this
place, this is none other, but the House of God, and this is the Gate of
Heaven; and therefore he calls the place Bethel, and set up the Stone for a
Pillar, whereon he lay, and powered Oil on it and vowed, that if he came again
in peace to his Fathers House, that Stone, which he had set up should be God' s
House, 28 Genesis and accordingly when he was returned from Padan-Aram, God
himself commanded him to go up to Bethel and dwell there, and to make there an
Altar to God, who appeared to him, when he fled from the Face of his Brother
Esau, 35 Genes. 1.

After the Days of the Patriarchs, the next instance of this nature, is that of
Moses to whom God appeared in a burning Bush, and said, Draw not nigh hither,
put off thy Shoes from off thy Feet, for the place whereon thou stand is
holy ground, that is, consecrated by the Presence of God, to whom we must
approach with all external Reverence, which pulling off the Shoes was an
expression of in those Eastern Countries, 3 Exodus 1, etc. and a like example we
have in Joshua 5 Chap. 13, 14, 15.

And this is a true Account of the holiness even of the Jewish Tabernacle and
Temple: There were indeed great Mysteries concealed under Types and Figures,
but these Types were not the holiness of the place, but God's peculiar Presence
there. When Moses had set up the Tabernacle, a Cloud covered the Tent of the
Congregation, and the Glory of the Lord filled the Tabernacle, 40 Exodus 34.
Thus at the Dedication of Solomon's Temple, when the Priests were come out of
the Holy Place, the Cloud filled this House of the Lord, so that the Priests
could not stand to minister because of the Cloud, for the Glory of the Lord had
filled the House of the Lord, 1 Kings 8. 10, 11. This was a visible Sign, that
God had taken possession of this House, and would dwell there, as Solomon
expounds it 12, 13, ver. Then spoke Solomon, the Lord said he would dwell in
the thick darkness. I have surely built Thee a House to dwell in, a settled
place for Thee to abide in for ever. For this reason it is called the House of
God, his Habitation, his Dewlling Place, his Gate, his Courts, and (which is
the true Interpretation of all this) his Presence. Let us come before his
Presence with thansgiving 95 Psalm. 2. that is, to his House and Temple, where
God is present, which is therefore called appearing before the Lord, as all the
Tribes of Israel were commanded to do three times every year, at the three
solemn Festivals, and this appearing before the Lord, was their coming up to
Jerusalem to worship at the Temple.

This I hope sufficiently proves, that both before and under the Law, God, who
is essentially present in all places, was yet so peculiarly present in some
places, as he was not in others.

2. But for the better understanding this, we must inquire, what this special
and peculiar Presence of God is. For this seems a great difficulty to some Men,
that God who is present every where, should not be equally present in all
places: But the Account of this I think is plain and short, that though God is
present every where, he is not equally present in all places to all purposes,
which is the only possible distinction, that can be made concerning the
Presence of an omnipresent Being. God is present in Heaven, in Earth, and in
Hell; but he manifests himself very differently in each, and these different
Manifestations are a different kind of presence.

As to keep to my present Subject: God is present in all the Earth, as the
Supreme Lord, Governor, and Preserver of all things; but in some Places he was
peculiarly present to reveal his Will to Men, and to receive their Homage and
Adorations: And this is that, which is peculiarly called the Presenc^ of God in
Scripture, as is evident from all the instances, which I have already given.

But is not God present in all place^ to hear the Prayers of good Men, wh^ call
upon him? Yes, most certainly and so he was both before, and under the Law, and
yet we see, that he sanctifie^ some places with his more peculiar pre^ sense
for the Public and Solemn Acts of Worship. A Prince may receive (...) private
Petition from a private Hand (...) wherever he is present, but yet may think it
very fitting to appoint a Presence of State to receive the public^ Homage and
Addresses of his Subjects (...) thus in fact it was in the Jewish Temple and
was as reasonable as the public Solemnities of worship are, without which
Religion it self would be banished the World. For did Men once believe, that
they could worship God as well at home as at Church, that God is no more
present in religious Assemblies; than in their private Closets, there were an
end of Public Worship and of Religion with it. This is too visible in those,
who have entertained this Opinion, they eit^ quite desert the Public Worship,
and grow careless and unconcerned for Religion, or if they do sometimes come to
Church, it is to comply with Popular Custom and Opinion, or only to gratify an
itching Ear, and Athenian like, to hear some new thing. But when God who has
his Throne in Heaven, has his Footstool and Presence on Earth, where he
commands us to pay our Homage; this preserves the Sense of God and of Religion
alive in the World, and gives a just awe and reverence for God, when we
approach his Presence.

This is a very Sensible Reason for appropriated places of Worship, where God
vouchsafes his more peculiar Presence: if this were not originally a Divine
Institution, as the Instances I have already given fairly intimate it was, then
mere natural Reason taught it all Mankind; for there never was any Nation,
which worshipped any God, but they erected Temples for their Worship: The
Poverty and persecuted State of the Christian Church for the three first
Centuries, have made some think that they had no Churches, or appropriated
Places of Worship; but a learned Man of our own Mr. Mede.
has proved beyond all contradiction, that this is a mistake; and the Zeal o^
Christians in building Magnificent Churches in the Reign of Constantine, the
first Christian Emperor, shows plainly wha^ their Sense was of this matter.

And it is as evident, that all Nations did believe, that the Gods they
worshipped, were peculiarly present in their Temples. The Pagans did not
believ^ their Gods to be Omnipresent, and therefore endeavored by Magical
Spell^ and Charms, to shut them up in their Images and Temples, that they might
know where to find them; and in thi^ Notion, the ancient Christians abominated
the thoughts of Temples and Images, since they worshipped a God, wh^ fills
Heaven and Earth with his Presence; this indeed was a corruption o^ Natural
Religion, as Polytheism and (...) dolatry was, but shows, how necessary they
thought a Divine Presence to (...) place of Worship.

The Jews understood better, tha^ God could not be confined to any place^ that
the Heaven and Heaven of Heaven^ could not contain him, as Solomon owns in his
Prayer of Dedication, but yet begs, that God would be graciously pleased to be
present to hear and answer the Prayers and Supplications, which should be made
to him in that House; which is all the peculiar Presence he prays for, which is
necessary to make a House of Prayer, the name God himself gives to the Jewish
Temple; My House shall be called a House of Prayer.

Now if this be the proper notion of God's House, that it is a House of Prayer,
a House where God is peculiarly present to hear our Prayers, we must own, that
every Christian Church is as much the House of God as the Temple at Jerusalem
was, unless we will deny, that God is as present in Christian Assemblies, and
in places dedicated to Christian Worship, as he was in the Jewish Temple; which
is to make Christianity a more imperfect Dispensation than Judaism; for that is
certainly the most perfect state of the Church, where God is most peculiarly
present.

There is indeed a great difference between the Jewish Temple and Christian
Churches, but as to the Presence of God, which only makes a Temple, the
advantage is greatly on the Christian side.

The Ark of the Covenant, the Tabernacle and Temple, contained many Types and
Figures of Christ; but these Types were not the Presence of God, nor the Object
of their Religious Worship, which had been Idolatry against the Second
Commandment; but for the sake of these Types, God chose that place for his
peculiar Presence: Now instead of these Types, we have the Antetype it self,
the Son of God made Flesh, who though ascended into Heaven, has promised his
peculiar Presence in all the Assemblies of Christians; which is such a Presence
of God, as never filled the Jewish Temple, till Christ appeared; for which
Reason God tells them, that the Second Temple, though it fell vastly short of
the External Beauty and Magnificence of the First, yet should excel in Glory,
by the personal Appearance of Christ in it, Haggai 2. 3, 7. Malach. 3. 1. So
that Christ having promised, that wherever two or three are gathered together
in his Name, he will be in the midst of them, every Christian Church has a
Divine Presence greater than the Temple. For though we should grant, that this
Promise extends to all the occasional Meetings of Christians, whatever the
Place be, yet it much more extends to all the Solemn and Public Places and
Acts of Worship.

Thus there was but one Temple in the whole Land of Canaan, God for Mystical
Reasons, confining his more peculiar Presence to that House, where he had
placed the Types and Figures of Christ, through whom only we have Access to
God; but now this blessed Jesus, who is greater than the Temple, is in all
Christian Assemblies, and makes every Christian Church greater than the Temple:
In this Sense our Savior told the Woman of Samaria, Woman, believe me, the
Hour comes, when ye shall neither in this Mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem,
worship the Father, John 4. 21. which does not signify, that hereafter there
should be no peculiar and appropriate Places of Worship, but that the Presence
and Worship of God, should no longer be confined to any one Place, neither to
the Temple of Jerusalem, nor Samaria; but it should be free all the World over,
to erect Houses of Prayer and Worship, where God would be as present with them,
as in the Temple of Jerusalem; for there should be an end now put to that
Typical State and Typical Worship, which was confined to the Temple, and the
true Worshippers shall worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth; and this
Spiritual Worship is confined to no one Place, but will find God present all
the World over; which is so far from abrogating all peculiar Places of Worship,
such as the Temple at Jerusalem and Samaria were, that it makes every Church,
whatever part of the World it be in, in a truer Sense the House of God, than
ever the Temple at Jerusalem was.

And there is one thing more of great consequence, which we learn from this,
that we now want no new Appearance of God to consecrate a Place for his
Worship, as it was in the Days of the Patriarchs, nor any new Command to
appoint us where to build a House for God, as it was under the Law: Our Savior
has consecrated every part of the World, where Christians live, to be such Holy
Ground as is fit to receive a Temple and House of God; and his Promise to be in
the midst of the Assemblies of Christians, gives us as great an Assurance of a
Divine Presence in such Places, as if like the Tabernacle and Temple, we saw
them again filled with a Cloud and a visible Glory.

Having thus shown you, that God, who fills all Places, is yet peculiarly
present in some Places; and what this peculiar Presence is, that God is present
as the Object of our Worship, to hear our Prayers, and to receive our Praises
and Thanksgivings, our Alms and Oblations, let us now consider the Exhortation
of my Text, which is the natural Improvement of this, O worship the Lord in the
Beauty of Holiness.

1st. And here first I observe, that the very External Beauty and Ornament of
God's House, is one Part of Homage, which we owe to him. The Riches and visible
Glory of Solomon's Temple, was one of the Wonders of the World; a Divine Art
and Nature conspired to build a House, as fit as Art and Nature could make it,
to signify the incommunicable Majesty and Glory of that God who dwelt there.
And this Nature taught all Mankind; the Magnificence of their Temples did not
only show their Devotion, but what their Art, and what their Riches were. And
the Primitive Christians, when they enjoyed Peace and Plenty under Christian
Emperors, were so far from thinking this a Piece of Pagan or Jewish
Superstition, that their first Care was to erect Beautiful and Stately
Churches, to rival and outdo all the External Glory of Pagan Temples; and it
was always accounted a great Instance of the Piety of Princes to encourage and
promote such Works.

But you will say, what is all this to God? Can we think, that he, who has made
the World with such unimitable Art and Beauty, can be pleased with any House we
can build for him, whatever Art or Riches we bestow on it? But this very
Objection answers it self: For God has made this Beautiful World for his
Temple, and has chose the most Glorious Part of it for his Throne; which shows,
that though he be an infinite pure Spirit, he does not despise an External
Glory; for thus he must represent his invisible Greatness and Majesty to his
Creatures. And therefore when he thinks fit to vouchsafe his Presence with us
on Earth, we must provide the most honorable Reception for him that we can;
and when we have done all that Art and Nature can do, we have so far expressed
our Devotion and Reverence for the Divine Presence.

This Objection lay against the Temple at Jerusalem, as well as against
Christian Churches; and yet David thought it very undecent, and a want of a
just Reverence for God, that he himself should dwell in a House of Cedar, and
the Ark of God dwell within Curtains, 2 Samuel 7. 2. which should be considered
by those Men, who think all that is bestowed upon Beautifying and Adorning
God's House a vain and superfluous Expense, when they think no Cost too great
to adorn their own.

2dly. The House of God too must be used as God's House; that is, must be
separated from common Uses, and appropriated to the Worship of God. It must not
be a Place of Trade and Commerce, and ordinary Conversation, as we learn from
our Savior's Zeal in driving those who sold Oxen, and Sheep, and Doves, and
the Changers of Money out of the Temple; which he did at two several times; the
first immediately upon his entrance on his Ministry, Ioh 2. 13, 14, 15, 16. the
second immediately before his Crucifixion, Matthew. 21. 12, 13.

Some learned Men observe, that the Place of this Merchandise in the Temple,
was the Court of the Gentiles; and from hence conclude, that our Savior's Zeal
was not confined to the Jewish Temple, but concerned all Christian Churches, to
which the Court of the Gentiles bore a greater Analogy; but whatever Force
there may be in this, I think the Reasons our Savior gives, do much better
explain his meaning: Make not my Father's House a House of Merchandise, John 2.
16. and it is written, My House shall be called a House of Prayer, but ye have
made it a Den of Thieves, Matthew. 21. 13. Which Reasons have no relation to the
typical State of the Jewish Temple, but equally concern all Places, which are
the House of God, and the House of Prayer; that is, where God vouchsafes his
peculiar Presence to hear our Prayers.

And indeed, when Christ expressed so much Zeal for the House of God, when the
typical Glory of the Jewish Temple was at an end, having received its
Accomplishment in his own Person, it is a very good Reason to believe, that he
intended this as a standing Rule for the Religious Use of all Christian
Churches and Oratories: I am sure the Reason is universal and unanswerable,
that the House of God, which is a House of Prayer, ought not to be profaned by
any common Uses.

3dly. Let us worship in the Beauty of Holiness; that is, let us resort to the
House of God, to the House of Prayer, there to offer up our Prayers and
Thanksgivings to him. For if God have a House, where he has promised his
peculiar Presence to hear our Prayers, that is the proper and peculiar Place of
Worship. The Scripture makes it a very material Circumstance of Worship to
approach God's House, to enter into his Courts, to come into his Presence, to
own our selves his Servants and Worshippers; and without disparaging private
Prayers, or Closet and Family Devotions, there is no reason to think God will
own those for his Worshippers, who deny him this public Homage.

There is no doubt, but God knows our Prayers, wherever we make them, for he
knows our very Thoughts; but to hear Prayers, signifies a gracious and
favorable Acceptance; and this no Man can promise himself, who will not pray,
where God has promised to hear.

All the Promises of the Gospel are originally made to the Christian Church,
the Body of Christ, and to particular Christians, as Members of, and in
Communion with the Christian Church. But those cannot pretend to be in
Communion with the Church, who never Communicate with it; who, though they form
no Schism, yet withdraw themselves from its Public Assemblies, and will either
be no Christians (which I fear is too often the Case) or will be Christians by
themselves. Now if they know of any Promises made to them in this single
Capacity, let them take the Comfort of it; for my part I know of none. Those
who live in Communion with the Church, and serve God in his House, as often as
Leisure and Opportunity will permit, may expect a Gracious Return to their
Private Prayers, which are offered to God in the Name of Christ, and in the
Communion of the Church; but this is no Encouragement to those, who set up
Private Devotions against Public Worship.

4thly. Let us worship the Lord in the Beauty of Holiness; that is, when we
approach the House of God, let us take care to worship him: This is the proper
Work of the Place; we have no other Business here; and it is Profaneness not
to do it. There is no Reverence due to the House, as I observed before, but
there is to that God who dwells in it. When Moses and Joshua were commanded to
put off their Shoes, because the Ground was Holy, it was not to worship the
Ground, but that God who was present there. And for the same Reason, if we
believe the Presence of God in Christian Churches, it will not only justify,
but require all the visible Signs of a Religious Reverence, that to uncover the
Head, and bow the Body may escape the Censure of Superstition or Idolatry.

And while we are in the House and Presence of God, especially in time of
Worship, we must carefully abstain from all irreverent Behavior, Laughing,
Whispering, Talking, or any such Indecencies, as unbecoming the Presence of a
Prince, or any Superiors, much more the Presence of God.

And yet this is too familiar a Practice, and that among some, who if they have
no sense of, or Reverence for the Divine Presence themselves, yet in good
Manners and common Prudence, ought not to affront Christian Assemblies, nor set
such a scandalous Example to others. What St. Paul said to the Corinthians
concerning their irreverent Behavior at the Lord's Supper, is very applicable
to these Men: Have ye not Houses to converse, and talk, and laugh in, or
despise ye the Church and Presence of God?

And when we approach the House of God, let us heartily join in all the parts
of Worship, with Attention of Mind, and fervent Passions. This becomes the
Place, and the Presence we are in. We come to worship God; and not to worship
him is a Contempt, and a Contempt put upon him in his own Presence.

And truly I know not how to excuse those from this Contempt, who turn their
Backs upon any part of the Christian Worship. You may easily guess what I mean:
Is Communicating at the Lord's Table any Part of the Christian Worship? Nay, is
it not the principal Part of it? How comes it to pass then, that when our
Churches are crowded at Prayers or Sermons, the Table of the Lord is deserted?
Certainly if Christ be ever present with us, it is in this Mysterious Supper:
Why then do we fly from the Presence of our Lord? Why do we approach his House,
and refuse to eat and drink at his Table, though he offers us the dearest
Pledges of his Love, his Flesh to eat, and his Blood to drink?

To God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, be Honor, Glory, and
Power, now and for ever.

Amen.
SERMON XIV.
Preached at St. Paul's Cathedral, November 22. 1699. Being the Anniversary
Meeting of the Lovers of Music.
Psalm LXXXI. 1, 2. Sing aloud unto God our strength, make a joyful noise unto
the God of Jacob. Take a Psalm, and bring hither the Timbrel, the pleasant
Harp, with the Psaltery.


TO Praise God is acknowledged by all men to be the most Excellent part of
Divine Worship; it is the Religion of happy Creatures, and the Natural Homage
due to Infinite Goodness, which is the most Glorious Perfection of the Deity.
It exercises the best Passions of our Souls in the most perfect manner, Love,
Joy, Reverence, Admiration, which are the proper Passions of Devotion, made for
God, who is their last Object; and made for the praise of God, which is their
most perfect Exercise. We cannot well conceive, what other Acts of Religion can
be proper for Heaven; when we shall be advanced to the utmost perfection of our
Natures; when we shall have put of Mortality and Corruption, and all other
wants with them; when a Complete and Consummate Happiness shall leave no more
place for Desire; when we shall have nothing more to ask of God, nothing more
to expect, but the secure Possession and Enjoyment of those Pleasures which
fill but never satiate; which are Eternally repeated, and are Eternally New and
Fresh; I say in such a State as this, as Faith will be turned into Sight, and
Hope into Enjoyment; so Prayer also, which is so great a part of the Worship of
Sinners, and indigent Creatures, will be all turned into Thanksgiving and
Praise. Now as for this reason St. Paul prefers Charity before Faith and Hope;
because, though they are admirable Graces for the state of Christians in this
World, and absolutely necessary to carry us to Heaven; yet they cannot enter
into Heaven themselves, where Charity attains its greatest Glory and
Perfection; so by the same Reason it appears, that Praise and Thanksgiving is
the most excellent part of Worship, because this is the Religion of Heaven, and
therefore ought to be the chief Delight and Entertainment of those who hope to
go to Heaven.

But what is it to praise God? Is it only to sing aloud, and to make a joyful
noise to God? Does it consist merely in the Harmonious Melody of Voices, and
Musical Instruments? Does he praise God best, who composes the best Anthems, or
sings them best? Or do we think, that we then praise God best, when we feel our
selves the most transported and ravished with excellent Music, performed by
the best Voices, the choicest Instruments, and the greatest Masters? This is a
very easy and a pleasant way of praising God, if this would carry us to Heaven;
but this is only to praise the Music, the Composition, or the Performance,
when we think of nothing else, come for no other end, and mean no more by it. I
would not have you mistake me; I do not appear in this place at this time to
decry or disparage the use of Music in the Worship of God, which would neither
become this Presence, nor my own Character; but to persuade and direct you to
turn the Delights and Charms of Music, into the Raptures of Devotion which
would the most effectually silence all the Enemies of Church-Musick, and
Cathedral-Worship, while as a divine Poet of our own Sings, This would visibly
turn Delight into a Sacrifice.

Now since Music, what ever it be, and how well soever performed, is of no use
or value in Religion, but as it serves the true ends of Devotion; we must
enquire, What that Harmony and Melody is which is so acceptable to God; How fit
External and Sensible Melody is to promote this; and how it may and ought to be
improved to that purpose.

1. As for the first, I need not tell any Man, who understands the Nature of
Christian Worship, that it is only they Melody of the Heart, as St. Paul
speaks, that pleases God; All true Christian Worship, whatever the externals
of it are, is the Worship of the Mind and Spirit. This alone is that Worship
which it becomes a reasonable Creature to pay to his Maker, his Sovereign Lord
and Savior, as the Blessed Virgin sang, My Soul does magnify the Lord, and my
Spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior. For it is the Mind only that can praise
God, though the tongue must sing his Praises. The best composed Hymns, the most
Musical Instruments, the most Charming Voices, are but lifeless Mechanical
Sounds, till they are Animated and Inspired by the Devotion of the Heart; and
God takes no more pleasure in the best Voices, than in bodily strength or
beauty. Now the Melody of the Heart, is the Consent and Harmony of all the
Powers and Passions of our Souls in the Praises of God. When Love, and Joy, and
Admiration, and the profoundest Reverence bear their several Parts, and offer
up our whole Souls as a Living Vocal Hymn of Praise: Then we sing aloud in our
Hearts to God, when we feel the greatest Transports and Ecstasies of these
Divine Passions, which swallow us up in God, and unite us to the Heavenly
Quire: Then we sing with true Melody in our Hearts to God, when these Divine
Passions, which are Essential to Praise and Thanksgiving, charm all our earthly
Passions into a Calm; quiet all their Storms and Tumults; leave no jarring
Discords, no Discontents, no Sollicitous Cares, no Jealousies, no Envyings, to
discompose the Harmony of our Souls, which must be all Peace, all Love, all
Joy, to sing with a true Divine Melody the Praises of God. This, and nothing
else, is the true Praise of God, when our minds are filled with such bright
Ideas of his Glory and Perfections, with such a lively Sense of his Majesty,
Wisdom, Goodness, Power, discovered in his great and wonderful Works of
Creation, Providence, and the Redemption of the World by our Lord Jesus Christ,
as transport us with Love, Admiration, and Joy. A Heart thus full of God, will
break forth into Songs of Praise; When the Fire is kindled within, as the
Psalmist observes from his own Experience, we shall then speak with our
Tongues; Here our Praises ought to begin, to be sure here they must always end,
in the Heat and fervor of our Affections, and an inward feeling of the Divine
Praises, if we would have them an acceptable Worship of God. As far as the
Harmony of Voices or Musical Instruments serve this End, they are excellent
Helps to Devotion; but it is only their Subserviency to the Devotion of the
Mind, which gives them any Value, or allows them any Place in Religious Worship.

2dly. Let us then consider of what Use Music is to excite and quicken our
Affections, and to give a new Life and Spirit to Devotion. Man is not all Soul
and Spirit, but a compound Creature, consisting of Soul and Body; and while our
Souls are vitally united to Bodies, they receive most of their Passions from
them; at least feel the most strong and vigorous Motions from those Impressions
which our Senses make; and Sight it self does not more variously affect our
Minds than Hearing does; Words and Sounds have very powerful Charms, and give
as quick a Turn to our Thoughts and Passions, as Sight it self, and not only
Words but even a diversity of Sounds, are fitted by Nature to express, and to
excite very different Passions. Love, Joy, Admiration, Desire, Fear, Sorrow,
Indignation, Revenge, give some distinguishing Notes and Accents to the very
Voice, which no Art, but Nature teaches, and which betrays the Passion without
speaking a Word; And such different Notes will also as forcibly imprint such
Passions on our Minds, as they naturally represent, and that many times whether
we will or no; which is a great Secret in Nature, and shows an unaccountable
Sympathy between Sounds and Passions; which are by turns the Natural effects
and causes of each other: and there needs no other proof what the natural power
of Music must be, to raise and to calm our Passions; and the Experience of all
Mankind tells us, that thus it is; when the Composer knows how to fit Notes to
Passions; which the Knowledge of Humane Nature, not the mere proportion of
Sounds must teach him. Without this a fine piece of Music is like a company of
fine Words put together, without any great Sense or Meaning; they make a fine
Sound, and that is all.

Now if there be a Natural Sympathy, and mutual Causality between Sounds and
Passions, there is no doubt, but true Devotional Music will Excite or Heighten
our Devotional Passions, as we daily see and complain, that wanton and amorous
Airs are apt to kindle wanton Fires; for Nature will act like it self, whether
you apply it to good or to bad purposes. If there be no force in Music to give
a good or bad tincture to the Mind, why do any Men complain of wanton Songs?
They may then blame the Poet, but neither the Composer nor Singer; for the
Music, it seems, does no hurt: if there be, Why do they condemn Church-Musick,
which will have as good an Influence upon a devout Mind, as the other has a bad
One?

Why then should any Man think Music improper for the worship of God? It is a
Natural Power, though improved by Art, as most other natural Powers are; and
all Natural Powers are made for the Worship and Service of God, as far as they
are capable of serving him; which Music is in a very high Degree, if it have
such a Natural Power over our Passions, as to Increase and Actuate, though it
cannot create Devotion.

Both Poetry and Music were originally used to celebrate the Praises of God;
lost their Glory, when they descended to meaner Subjects, but were profaned by
a prostitution to men's Lusts and Vices. The first account we have of singing,
is the Song of Moses, Exodus 15. when God had made the Children of Israel to
pass through the Red Sea on dry ground, and had drowned the Egyptians; and we
cannot have a more ancient Account than this, which is the most ancient History
in the World. And throughout the Old Testament, both Vocal and Instrumental
Music, was not only used in the Worship of God; but this was the Chief, if not
the only Use of it. This is acknowledged by all; but some will not allow it to
be a Pattern for Christian Worship. They reckon Music among the Ceremonies of
the Jewish Law, fitted to the carnal State of that People, and abrogated with
the other Legal Ceremonies, by the more perfect Dispensation of the Gospel,
which requires a more Spiritual Worship. But a few words will show, how
unreasonable this Pretense is.

The Song of Moses and Miriam was before the giving of the Law, and therefore
no part of it; and though this is the first time we read of Singing, there is
no Reason to think, that this was the first beginning of it. We read of no
Institution of Singing, though we do of Singers; that Singing seems as Ancient
and Natural, as public Worship.

But suppose Singing had been part of the Mosaical Law; the Gospel of o^r
Savior abrogates nothing of that Law, but such Types as receive their
accomplishment in Christ, or such Appendant Ceremonies as were mere Signs and
Figures of an Evangelical Righteousness: But what is Singing a Type of any more
than speaking? For it is only a more Harmonious and Emphatical way of speaking;
and I see no Reason, why Men may not reject Vocal Prayer, as well as Vocal
Music, because they were both used by the Jews. Whatever Objections are now
made against Church-Musick, which I have not now time particularly to examine,
were as good Objections in David's time, as they are now; and yet then Prophets
composed Hymns, and Prophets set the Tunes; for so the chief Musicians to whom
David directs his Psalms, as the Titles of some of them express, were Prophets
as well as Musicians; and methinks Men should speak more favorably of such
Practices as were under the Direction and Government of Inspired Men.

In the Vision of the Prophet Isaiah, 6 Chapter 1, 2, 3. v. The Seraphims are
represented crying one to another, Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of Hosts,
Heaven and Earth are full of his Glory. This is acknowledged to be a great
Example o^ Antiphonal singing, in which one answers another. But then they say,
this plainly refers to the Ancient Temple-Worship, and must not be admitted a
Precedent for Christian Practice. But if the Temple-Worship be a fit Precedent
for the Worship of Angels, Why may it not be a Precedent for the Worship of
Christians? whose Worship as pure and Spiritual as it is, falls vastly short of
Angelical Worship. But do not the Angels then thus Worship God in Heaven? this
would be a new Objection against our Liturgy, never thought of before, which in
the Te Deum teaches us to Sing, To Thee all Angels cry aloud, the Heavens and
all the Powers therein.

To Thee Cherubin and Seraphin continually do cry.

Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Sabboath.

Heaven and Earth are full of the Majesty of thy Glory.

And if the Angels thus sing in Heaven, surely the Precedent is not unworthy of
the Christian Church on Earth.

The like Representation we meet with of the four Beasts, and twenty four
Elders, Rev. 4. And the same Answer is given to it, That the Images in the
Apo^lyptick Visions are fetched from the Law, ^d not from the Gospel. But
whenever these Images were originally taken, this Book was directed to the
Christian Churches, and therefore was a Rule and Precedent for them. It all
along describes the State of the Christian, not of the Jewish Church, and
therefore their Worship too: And if we look into the fifth Chapter, we shall
find these four Beasts, and twenty four Elders were Christians, who were
redeemed by the Blood of the Lamb, and sung the Song of the Lamb; Thou art
worthy to take the Book, and to open the Seals thereof; for thou wast slain,
and have Redeemed us to God out of every Kindred, and Tongue, and People, and
Nation, and have made us into our God Kings and Priests, and we shall reign
upon the Earth, Ver. 9, 10. This I take to be a Christian Hymn, and therefore a
Pattern for Christian Worship.

And as much as some smile at the Conceit, I cannot but think, that the general
Exhortations in the new Testament, to sing to God, To admonish one another in
Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, Singing and making Melody in our Hearts
to the Lord; though the^ are not an Apostolical Institution of Quire, nor do
prescribe the particula^ Forms of Cathedral Worship; yet the^ justify it all,
as far as it is fitted to the true Ends of Devotion; for the Apostle^ knew
after what manner they sung i^ the Jewish Church; and had this bee^ so unfit,
as is pretended for Christian Worship, they would not have exhorted Christians
to sing, without giving them a Caution against Jewish Singing.

And now it does not seem to me much to the purpose, to enquire whether this
Practice was for any time intermitted in the Christian Church and When, and
upon what Occasion i^ was Restored; For if what I have now discoursed hold
good, it justifies the Use of Music in Religious Worship, whenever it can be
had; though there may be some Times and Circumstances, which will not allow it.
Though it could be certainly proved, that this was disused for the first three
Centuries in the Christian Church, while they were under a state of
Persecution: This would be no greater Argument to me against Cathedral-Worship,
than it is against Cathedral Churches: The Poverty and afflicted State of the
Church at that time would allow neither; but Prosperity by degrees restored
them to both. We may as well argue against the Use of Music in the Jewish
Church, because under the Babylonish Captivity they hung their Harps upon the
Willows, and refused to sing the Songs of Sion in a strange Land, to those who
carried them away Captives. The Primitive Christians in those days never
declared their dislike of this way of Worship, but their Condition would not
bear it. No Christian will deny, that singing the Praises of God and their
Savior, was always a principal part of Christian Worship, and therefore was
the worship of the Primitive Christians, unless they were defective in a
Principal part of Worship; so that the only Dispute can be about the manner of
Singing; and the chief thing objected, is the Antiphonal way of singing; which
is acknowledged to have been used in the Jewish Church, and therefore has the
same Authority that Singing has: But yet I will yield the Cause, if any Man can
give me a good Reason, why it should be very Lawful, and an excellent part of
Religion, for a hundred Men, suppose, to sing a whole Psalm together; but very
Unlawful, and a Corruption of Religion, to sing it Alternately; Fifty to sing
One Verse, and Fifty the Next; when by their Answering each other, they
mutually excite each other's Devotion, and signify the Consent and Union of
their Prayers and Praises in the Whole.

But setting aside the afflicted State of the Christian Church, the Professed
Enemies of Cathedral-Worship allow us as Great and Early Authorities as we
desire. St. Basil, St. Ambrose, and St. Chrysostom, always will be Venerable
Names. The Church was restored to Peace but in the Fourth Century, and then
this Worship revived, and that by the Authority and Example of as Great and
Good Men as any the Church had.

That Erasmus himself, and many Reformers, were great Enemies to this way of
Worship, as it was then practiced in the Church of Rome, is no great Wonder,
when their Hymns, as well as their Prayers, being performed in an unknown
Tongue, all their Singing was mere Noise, which could contribute nothing to
Devotion. But this is no greater Argument against our English Hymns and
Anthems, than against our English Prayers. If they meant any thing more we must
demand their Reasons: For as for Authority, our own Reformers and Reformation
have, an^ that deservedly, a much greater Authority in the World.

But I must hasten to a Conclusion: Which brings me to the Third Thing I
proposed, How Music may, and ought to be improved to the Purposes of Devotion:
And here I must beg leave to speak something briefly to Three Sorts of Men;
Composers, Singers, and Hearers; which will serve for the Application of the
Whole.

First, As for Composers, Those who set our Hymns and Anthems to Musical Notes.
I do not pretend to Skill in Music, much less to be able to Teach such great
Masters as this Age has bred; but I hope in some Measure I do, and may be
allowed to Understand and Teach Devotion, which is all I intend in this; for
that which according to all the Rules of Art must be allowed for excellent
Music, may not always be proper for Devotion.

It is a great Mistake in Composing Hymns and Anthems, to consider only what
Notes are Musical, and will Delight and Entertain the Hearers: The true Rule
is, What Notes are most proper to Excite or Quicken such Passions of Devotion,
as the Words of the Hymn or Anthem Express. This indeed cannot be done without
Skill in Music, but true Devotion is the best Director of that Skill; for a
Devout Mind will judge of the Devotion, as a Skilful Ear does of the Music of
Sounds: That the most certain way for the greatest Masters to Compose such
Hymns and Anthems as are fit for the Worship of God, and may best serve the
Devotions of Christians, is to work their own Minds first into all those
Heights and Flames of Devotion, which they are to Express in Sounds: which they
will find a double Advantage in; it will make them Good Christians, and
Admirable Composers of Church-Musick.

A Devout Ear without any great Skill in Music, soon finds the want of this.

A Grave, Serious Mind, which is the true Temper of Devotion, is disturbed by
Light and Airy Compositions, which disperse the Thoughts, and give a Gay and
Frisking Motion to the Spirits, and call the Mind off from the Praises of God,
to attend merely to the agreeable Variety of Sounds, which is all that can be
expected from such Sounds as have nothing of Devotion in them: Which is so much
the worse still, when, (as is now grown very common in such Compositions) they
are elogged with Needless and Endless Repetitions. A Repetition serves only to
give an Emphasis, and it requires a great Judgment to place it Right; and is
very absurd when it is placed Wrong: but we often see, that there is too little
Regard had to this: The Skill of Altering Notes is the whole Design, which when
there is not very great occasion for it, is like Schoolboys Varying Phrases,
or like Ringing the Changes; which how entertaining soever it be, when we have
nothing to do but to attend to Sounds, is yet very Nauseous and Offensive to
Devout Minds in Religious Worship. I thank God, the Ordinary Service of our
Church is very Grave and Solemn, and well fitted to Devotion: And as for more
Modern Compositions, the Governors of Churches ought to take care to receive
nothing into the Worship of God, but what is fitted to serve Devotion; and this
would effectually answer the greatest Objections against Church-Musick.

Secondly, As for those who are Employed in Singing the Church Service and
Anthems, to assist the Devotions of the Congregation, it certainly becomes them
to behave themselves very Devoutly in it. Musical Instruments, which have no
Life and Sense, may Minister to our Devotions, though they are capable of none
themselves; but it gives great Offense and Scandal, to see those who are daily
employed in Singing Praises to God, to show no Signs of Devotion in themselves,
much more by an Irreverent Behavior to betray great Symptoms of want of
Devotion. I thank God we have no great reason to make this Complaint in this
Church, and, I hope, shall every day have less; but this is a good occasion to
mind all such Persons, how Devout they ought to be, (if Music be a Help to
Devotion;) who have this Advantage from Art and Nature, first to Excite their
own Devotions, and then to Assist the Devotions of others; which last must be a
very tasteless uneasy Employment, if they have no Devotion of their own: And a
great Reproach also to their Art, when they themselves are Witnesses, how
little Devotion it Teaches.

But there is one thing, which I believe is not so well considered, which yet
is just Matter of Scandal; for those who Sing Divine Hymns and Anthems at
Church, and whose Prosession it is to do so, to Sing Wanton and Amorous, Lewd,
Atheistical Songs out of it. Men, who have entered themselves into the Service
of the Church, have Consecrated their Voices to God; not so, as never to Sing
any thing else but Hymns and Anthems, but yet so as never to Sing any thing to
the Reproach of God, Religion, or Virtue. This unbecomes any Man, who calls
himself a Christian, much more those whose peculiar Employment it is to Sing
the Praises of God.

Thirdly, As for Hearers, they ought also to consider, That their Business at
Church, is not merely to be Entertained with Music, but to Exercise their
Devotions, which is the true End of Church-Musick; to Praise God with the more
servent Passions. It is a Contempt of Religion, and of the House of God, to
come only to please our Ears, to hear Better Voices, and more Curious
Compositions, and more Artful Singing than we can meet with in other Places.

This I have reason to fear is the Case of very many who resort hither; who,
especially on the Lord's Day, Crowd into the Church to hear the Anthem, and
when that is over, to the great Disturbance of the Worship of God, and the
Scandal of all good Christians, Crowd as fast out again. Though there is this
good in it, that they make Room for Devouter People, who immediately fill up
their Places, to attend the Instructions of God's Word. But I hope this will
not be charged upon the Service of our Church, that Men who have no Devotion,
come only for Music: For Church-Musick cannot create Devotion, though it may
improve it where it is.

But indeed we ought all to be aware that the Music does not Employ our
Thoughts more than our Devotions; which it can never do, if as Common Sense
teaches us it ought to be, our Minds be in the first place fixed and intent
upon the Praises of God, which are expressed in the Hymn or Anthem; which when
conveyed unto us in Musical Sounds, will give Life and Quickness to our
Devotions; not first fixed on the Music, which most probably will leave the
Devotion of the Anthem behind it. Those who find that Music does not Assist
but Stifle their Devotion, and many such there may be, had much better keep to
their Parish-Churches, and prefer Devotion before Music. For to come to Church
without any Intention to Worship God in his own House, or to pretend to Worship
him without Devotion, are great Affronts to the Divine Majesty.

In a word: Those who profess themselves Lovers of Music, ought to consider,
what the true End of Music is, and to improve it to the Noblest Purposes. The
mere Harmony of Sounds is a very pleasant and innocent Entertainment: Of all
the Delights of Sense, this is in it self the least sensual, when it is not
abused to recommend Vice, and to convey impure Images to our Minds: But yet
merely to be delighted with Charming and Musical Aires, does not answer the
true Character of a Lover of Music: For it is the least thing in Music to
please the Ear; its proper, natural Use, and the great Advantage and Pleasure
of it, relates to our Passions: To Compose, to Soften, to Inflame them; and the
Diviner Passions it inspires us with, the more it is to be admired and valued,
and then Music must attain its greatest Glory and Perfection in true Devotion:
That the Lovers of Music ought to be very Devout Men, if they love Music for
that which is most valuable in it, and its last and noblest End.

To conclude:

It concerns the Lovers of Music to vindicate it from all Profane Abuses; not
to suffer so Divine a thing to be prostituted to Men's Lusts: To discountenance
all Lewd, Profane, Atheistical Songs, how admirable soever the Composition be:
To preserve Music in its Virgin Modesty, and without confining her always to
the Temple, make the Praises of God her Chief Employment, as it is her greatest
Glory.

Thus have I spoke my Mind very freely; showed you the Use and the Abuses of
Music, which was one great Inducement to me to comply with the Desires of
those Honorable and Worthy Persons, who imposed this Office on me, that I
might have an Opportunity of Saying that which I thought fit should be said at
one time or other, and for saying of which, there could not be a more proper
Occasion than this.

And I hope this may plead my Excuse with all good Christians if it have drawn
my Sermon out to too great a Length, and given too long an Interruption to the
Entertainment of those, the least part of whose Business it was to hear a
Sermon.

To God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, be Honor, Glory, and
Power, now and ever.

Amen.
SERMON XV.
Preached before the QUEEN at White Hall in Lent.
2 Timothy iii. ver. 1, 2. This know also, that in the last days perilous times
shall come: For men shall be lovers of their own selves.


IS Self-love then so dangerous a thing, as to make the Times perilous? What
Times then can be prosperous and happy? What Age produces such Monsters as do
not love themselves? And where is the Man that would be contented to live in
such an Age?

The Apostle then, by the Lovers of their own selves, cannot mean all those who
are acted by this natural Principle of Self-love to take care of their own
Happiness; for that is all Mankind, in all Ages of the World, and cannot be the
Character only of the last Days, nor the cause of perilous Times.

Self-love is the very Life and Spirit of the reasonable World, which has no
other Spring of Motion: It unites Men into Societies, is the Parent of all Arts
and Sciences; it makes us take care of our selves, and it teaches us to do good
to others: It is no Virtue it self, because it is not Matter of our choice, but
as necessary as our Being; but it is the Seed and Principle of all Moral
Virtues, as it obliges us to make our selves happy, to preserve our Health, to
increase our Fortunes, to gain the Goodwill and good Opinion of our Neighbors,
to be easy to our selves, and to make the World easy to us; which requires
the Practice of all healthful, thriving, and sociable Virtues.

It is Self-love which inspires us with that Divine Principle of Universal
Goodness and Charity, to do to other Men, what we desire they should do to us:
It is this which makes us soft and tender to all the Impressions of Kindness,
which makes us feel other Men's Sufferings, and other Men's Resentments in our
own; which makes us relish the Sweetness and Pleasure of doing Good, by the
Pleasure of receiving it, and gives us an Antipathy and Abhorrence of doing
Injuries, from our natural Aversion to suffer them.

It is this Self-love which makes Mankind governable, and secures the Peace and
good Order of Humane Societies. Humane Laws would signify very little without
Rewards and Punishments, and Rewards and Punishments would signify as little
as Laws without Self-love: For could Men be unconcerned for themselves; did
they neither hope nor fear any thing, they could be governed only as Beasts
are, by external Force. It is the love of our selves, which makes us delight in
Humane Conversation, and promote the Public Good, wherein all Men's private
Fortunes are involved.

In a word: This Self-love is the Principle of all Religion, which teaches us
to love and worship God, who is eternal and essential Love and Goodness; to
praise him for our Being, for our Preservation, for all the Enjoyments of this
Life, and for the great Hopes and Expectations of the next: It teaches us to
reverence his Laws, to fear his Justice and Power, to depend on his Providence,
to pray for the Supply of our Wants, and for the Pardon of our Sins (...) It
gives Virtue and Efficacy to Faith and Hope, which are the great
Gospel-Principles of Obedience: For what would the belief and expectation of
unseen Glories signify, if Men were not concerned to make themselves eternally
happy? So wild and extravagant is that Enthusiastic Conceit of serving God
without respect to the Recompense of Reward; which contradicts the whole Scope
of the Gospel, all the Motives, and all the Principles of Evangelical
Obedience, the Examples of all good Men, and of Christ himself, who for the Joy
that was set before him, endured the Cross, despised the Shame, and is set down
at the Right Hand of God.

This is sufficient to prove, that St. Paul did not intend to condemn all
Self-love, which when it acts regularly is the natural Principle of all Moral
and Religious Actions; and having prevented this Objection, which lay in my
way, for the further Explication and Improvement of these Words, I shall do
these three Things.

1. Inquire what that Self-love is, which the Apostle here condemns. 2. How
dangerous and perilous such Times must needs be, wherein this Self-love
prevails. 3. Show the Folly and Unreasonableness, as well as Wickedness and
Impiety of it.
1. What that Self-love is which the Apostle condemns. For can Self-love be the
fruitful Parent of all Piety and Virtue, and the cause of all the Evil and
Wickedness which is committed in the World? Can the same Fountain send forth
sweet water and bitter? and yet thus we see it is, both good and bad Men act
from a Principle of Self-love, and design their own happiness and satisfaction.
This inspires good Men with great and generous designs, sets them above this
World, makes them devout Worshippers of God, and very just and charitable to
Men: and it is the same Principle which acts in bad Men, and drives them into
all the Excesses of wickedness; they gratify their own Inclinations and
Appetites ^y it; they find present Ease and Pleasure; they do what they love,
they please themselves; they pursue what they call Happiness, which is
Self-love still, though turned off of its natural Bias by mistaken Notions of
Happiness.

All Men love themselves; but Self-love does not act alike in all Men, because
they are not all agreed what Self to love: For Man consists of Soul and Body,
of Spirit and Flesh, which have different Interests, Appetites, and
Inclinations, and have distinct Pleasures and Satisfactions of their own. A
good Man loves his whole Self, Soul and Body too, and designs and endeavors
the Happiness of both, which is the entire Happiness of a Man; and this is a
virtuous Self-love, which makes the Flesh subordinate to the Spirit, governs
our sensual Appetites by Reason, improves our Minds in Wisdom and Knowledge,
raises our Souls up to God, and entertains them with the love and the
admiration of that best of Beings; and above all things, secures an eternal
Interest, the Salvation of our Souls, and the glorious Resurrection of our
Bodies into immortal Life.

But a Bad Man loves but one part of himself, and that the meanest part too,
and made much more mean and vile by being loved alone. His Self-love is nothing
else but the love of the Flesh, and of the Lusts, and Appetites and Pleasures
of it, a love of this World, and all the objects of Sense, which gratify a
carnal and fleshly Mind; the Soul is no part of his care, so far from it, that
he is not willing to believe he has a Soul, unless it be to subdue Reason to
Sense and brutish Passions, to stifle the natural notions of a Deity, to root
up all the seeds of Piety and Virtue, or to charm his Conscience that it may
not chide and condemn, and disturb him in his Enjoyments.

For the understanding of this we must observe, that when the Scripture
condemns the love of our selves, it does not mean our Personal Self, for so
every man does, and must love himself or his own Person, but it is to love
something for our selves, which we will have to be our selves, when God never
made it to be so, which is our own Self, or a Self of our own making, and to
love this Self in opposition to the Love of God and Men, which is to love our
selves only, and to make all other things subordinate to Self, which is the
adequate notion of a vicious Self-love.

1. It is a Self of our own making, that is, it is what a Sinner will call
Himself, and will account his whole Self; and in pleasing of which he places
his whole happiness, though it be but a little part of that Self, which God
made. God made Man Soul and Body, but such Men will call nothing themselves but
Flesh: God made Man for a rational and intellectual Happiness, as he made him a
reasonable Creature; but such Men place their whole Happiness in Sense. Now
Flesh is not the Man of Gods making; the Pleasures of Sense are not the
Happiness of a Man: Man was made to enjoy the Pleasures of Sense in conjunction
with those of Reason, and in subordination to the Diviner Pleasures of the
Mind; but a sensual Happiness he was not made for; that is the Happiness of an
inferior and brutish Nature: And those who will have this to be their Self and
their Happiness, are their own Creatures, not Gods; and are lovers of their own
Selves, of their own Inventions, their own Ways and Devices, as the Scripture
speaks.

2. Such Men are Lovers of themselves in opposition to the Love of God: that is
they are lovers of Pleasures more than lovers of God, as the Apostle here
speaks: They prefer their own Will and Humor and the Gratification of their
Lusts before the Will and Laws of God, and in contradiction to them. A Good Man
lives in subordination to God, as a Creature ought to do to his Maker and
Sovereign Lord; the Will of God is the Rule of his Will and Choice, the Love of
God gives Laws and Bounds to his Love of himself: He pleases himself in such
Instances as God allows, he denies his own Will and Appetites, Inclinations and
Interests when they oppose the Will and Laws of God: Such a Man can hardly be
said, to have any Self, to have any Will, any Love, any Desires of his own, for
God is all this to him; God lives in him, he is more Gods, than he is his own,
as St. Paul speaks. I live, yet not I but Christ lives in me, 2 Gal. 20. But a
Bad Man has divided himself from God, cast off his obedience, affects an
independent State, to stand by himself, and to be his own Lord and Master, and
a God to himself; and such a Man is properly said to love himself, for he
distinguishes himself from God, and prefers himself before him.

3dly, Such Men are properly said to be Lovers of themselves, because they love
themselves in opposition to the rest of Mankind; they gratify their Lusts, and
serve their private Interests, without any regard to the Laws of Justice or
Charity: It is their Principle to do good to themselves without ever being
concerned, what either private Men, or public Societies suffer by it: They are
the whole world to themselves, and have no body else to please or take care of,
unless they can serve their own designs by it: Such men are properly Lovers of
themselves, that is, only of themselves, for they love no body else: And this
is the sordid, narrow, selfish Spirit of Flesh and Sense, which dwells within
it Self, is its own Center, and its own Circumference; for Flesh is a narrow
Principle, can have no Pleasures nor feel any Pains but its own, and therefore
must confine its Love and Care to its self; but a Man, who has a truly great
and divine mind, who loves all Men as himself, and loves himself in conjunction
with the rest of Mankind, can by no means be called a selfish Man, or a lover
of himself, for he has an universal love to Humane Nature, which begins with
himself, but extends to all the World.

This is a plain and short account, what this vicious Self-love is, and why it
is so called.

2dly, The Second thing I proposed, was to show how dangerous and perilous
such Times must needs be, wherein this Self-love Prevails. Now those are
perilous Times, which expose Men to great Dangers and to great Troubles and
Calamities, and that with respect to their own private Fortunes, with respect
to the Public, and with respect to the State of Religion; and what a malignant
influence this vicious Self-love has upon all these great and dear Interests,
is so visible, that methinks it should need no proof; and therefore I shall at
present only give some brief Hints of it.

And I shall not here take notice how much such Self-lovers suffer from
themselves, and from their own Self-love; for though this makes themselves
^iserable, it does not make the Times dangerous; the Times may be very
prosperous, and good Men very happy, though such Sinners may reap the Fruits of
their own Works, and be filled with their own Devices; though they sacrifice
their Honor, their Estates, their Health, their Lives to Intemperance and
Lust; though Ambition heats their brains into a Distraction, and Cares, and
Disappointments break their Hearts, or Guilt disturbs their Consciences, and
fills them with Rage and furious Despair; the World is not much concerned in
this; let such Self-lovers look to it, and thank themselves for what they
suffer; but then the Times are dangerous with respect to our private and
personal Interests, when Men are in great danger from one another; when they
are never secure from private Injuries, when they know not whom to trust, nor
with whom to converse, when it is hard to find a Friend, and almost impossible
to escape an Enemy; when the greatest Virtue, Innocence, Inoffenciveness, nay
the Divinest Charity, and all the charms of an obliging Conversation, cannot
secure Men from Envy, Rapine, and Detraction, from the Venom of Tongues, or
from more malicious designs against their Lives and Fortunes; such a State as
this will make all Good Men wish as David did, O that I had wings like a Dove,
for then would I fly away and be at rest; Lo then would I wander far off, and
remain in the Wilderness, I would hasten my Escape from the windy Storm and
Tempest. 55 Psa. 6, 7, 8 Verses.

And this is the very State which Self-love puts Mankind into, when it prevails
in the World. This a late admired Philosopher calls the State of Nature,
wherein every Man is a Woolf to a Man, but in truth it is only the State of
this vicious Self-love which is the Corruption and Degeneracy of a reasonable
and sociable Nature. If Man was made for Society, it cannot be his Nature to
love no body but himself, which is a Contradiction to the Nature and End of
Societies. He must first put off Nature, if that be this Self-love, before he
can be capable of living in Society, which seems very unaccountable, that a
Creature, who was made for Society, should not be fit for Society till he
change his Nature.

For Men cannot live together in safety, while they are all acted by this
Principle; Self-love makes every Man his own Center, and the Center draws all
to it self, all that is within its sphaere of activity. Pride is Self-love,
such an esteem for our selves, as values no Man's Honor or Reputation but our
own; and this draws all Honor to it self, is not contented unless it can
outshine all others, and either by a greater brightness swallow them up, or
eclipse them by black and misty Vapors, by all the Arts of Infamy and Reproach.

Covetousness is Self-love when Men will be rich, whoever be poor, and by
whatever Arts they can do it; and this draws all riches to it self, and
snatches them from all that come within its reach: and what Injustice and
Violence, Theft, Murders, Perjuries does this occasion.

Self-love is the love of the Flesh, the love of carnal and sensual Pleasures,
which will please it self whoever be grieved and injured by it: Such brutish
Sensualists have no regard to the Honor and Peace of Families, to the Modesty
of Virgins, to the Sacred Vows of Wives, to the Stain and Infamy of Posterity;
nay, many times not to the dignity of Humane Nature; but gratify their Lusts
in contradiction to them all.

Where Self-love reigns, there is no place for Compassion, for Charity, for
Justice, for true Friendship; every thing must give way to Self; and let any
man judge whether such be not perilous Times; some such Men there are always
in the World, and great numbers of them too, and we daily feel what mischeifs
they do; but the more the numbers of them increase, the more this Self-love
prevails, the more intolerable will Humane Conversation be.

And if we allow, that Pride, Ambition, Covetousness, Sensuality, are great
Enemies to the Peace and Prosperity, to the good Order and Government of any
Nation, we must grant that Self-love, which is the impure Fountain, from whence
all these corrupt Streams flow, is very destructive to Humane Societies too; it
corrupts public Justice, loosens the reigns of Government, softens and
emasculates Men's Spirits, renders them unfit for Counsel, or for Arms; makes
them contemptible to their Neighbors, and brings down the Judgments of God
upon them.

Is any thing so destructive to any State as Divisions and Factions at home?
and was there ever any State-Faction without Self-love and private Interest at
the bottom? when great Men will rival one another, and are impatient either of
Superiors or Equals; and prosecute their Private Animosities with the Public
Danger; and when common safety requires united Hearts and Counsels, will not
adjourn their private Quarrels, nor sacrifice their private Interests and
Resentments to save a Nation.

It is wonderful to observe, that when a Kingdom is divided into Parties and
Factions, the most threatening dangers are so far from uniting them, that they
take advantage of Public Fears and Apprehensions, to get ground of their
Adversaries, though they hazard the whole by it: and what are such Factions but a
Combination of Self-lovers, who divide themselves from the Public Interest,
unless their Private Humors and Intrigues may take place; when a Party will be
the Whole, and if others will not let them be the Whole, let the Whole, perish.

This is the narrow, peevish, unsociable Spirit of Self-love, a temper, which
generous Heathens had in the greatest abhorrence; and till a more public
Spirit revive in the World, we must never expect to see easy and happy days:
The Times will be perilous, while men are such Lovers of themselves.

But how deplorable must the state of Religion needs be, when Self-love
prevails, which is such a direct contradiction to all Piety and Virtue, to the
Love of God and Men? The Apostle indeed tells us of these Lovers of themselves,
that they have a Form of Godliness, but deny the Power thereof. They make a
Show of Religious Worship, and it may be a very glorious and pompous Show too,
for this may serve their Interest, and give them Reputation with their Prince,
or with the People, but their Religion has no power upon their Lives, cannot
subdue any one Lust, as it is impossible it should, while they are acted by
Self-love.

And yet it is much to be desired, that such Men would retain a Form of
Godliness; that they would not publicly affront Religion, nor ridicule all
that is Sacred; but it is in vain to hope for thus much from all of them. St.
Paul's perilous Times was a very Modest and a very Religious Age to ours,
wherein men seem to be ashamed to be thought Religious; and therefore if they
ever think fit to go to Church, take great care that no Man, who sees them
shall suspect, that they come thither to worship God.

But though few Men attain to such an outrageous Contempt of Religion as this,
yet all the Corruptions of Religion are more owing to Self-love than to
Innocent Mistakes. This secretly influences Men's Faith, and forms their Notions
and Opinions. This invents a Form of Godliness, and turns Religion into Show
and Pageantry; when Men bring Self-love into the Church, it quickly turns true
Religion out; it is Pride, and Ambition, or Covetousness, and a love of sensual
Pleasures which makes Men Infidels and Heretics, and occasions all the Schisms
which divide the Church. For when such Self-lovers cannot cast off all
Religion, they must fit their Religion to Self-love, to serve their Lusts, or
to give them security in the Enjoyment of them; when they cannot raise Self up
to the terms of Religion, they must bring Religion down to Self: It were easy
to give undeniable Proofs, and infinite Examples of this; but I must proceed.
--

For having shown, what this vicious Self-love is, and what Mischeifs it does
in the World, both to Men's private Fortunes, to public Societies, and to the
Church of God; it remains 3dly, To consider the Folly and Unreasonableness, as
well as Impiety of this Principle. All the Wickedness, that is committed in the
World, and most of the Miseries which Mankind suffer, are owing to Self-love;
and could we convince Men of the Folly and Unreasonableness, and Impiety of
this; it would lay the Axe to the very Root of all Wickedness, it would reform
the World, and heal all the Maladies and Distempers of it: And to do this the
more effectually I shall distinctly apply what I have to say, to the several
Notions of Self-love. --

1. Let us consider Self-love, as it signifies the love of Flesh and Sense,
when we love a part of our selves for the whole, and expect our whole entire
Happiness from the gratification of some inferior Appetites, which at first
hearing appears as absurd and impossible, as it is to make a Part the Whole.
The greatest part of Mankind in all Ages have made this Experiment, but no Man
was ever made happy by it. We see infinite Examples of miserable Sinners and
the most prosperous always find that that they want something else to make them
happy; and would Men wisely consider the nature of things, they would find,
that it is impossible it should be otherwise.

What is Happiness, but such a State of Ease and Rest and Self-enjoyment, as is
agreeable to our Natures? and can a reasonable Soul then find its complete and
perfect satisfaction in the Pleasures of sense? the perfection and the
happiness of our Natures is the same thing, and therefore that which perfects
our Natures, must perfect our Happiness. Is Sense then the perfection of a
reasonable Nature? if not, how can it be its perfect Happiness? Is not Wisdom
and Knowledge the perfection of the Understanding? is not the love of the best
and most excellent Being the perfection of the Will? and is not this the
perfection of a Reasonable Soul? and is it possible to make a Man happy, who
feels none of those divine and exalted Pleasures, which are proper to a Mind.
Well! but if the enjoyments of Sense will give a complete and entire
satisfaction, that will make the Man happy, when he has no relish of any other
Pleasures; and then we need not dispute which Pleasures are greatest in
themselves, when the Man has what he likes best, and is happy in it, which is
as much as to say, that it makes no difference whether a Man enjoy the
happiness of a Man or of a Beast; that a Beast is as happy a Creature as a Man,
a Worm as an Angel, because it has what satisfies, and wants and desires no
more. But however let us consider whether the pleasures of Sense can give
perfect ease and satisfaction to a reasonable Soul; that they do not all Men
find, and the reason why they cannot do it is very plain.

The Pleasures of Sense cannot give perfect ease and satisfaction without a
full, unconfined, and undisturbed Enjoyment, and without such an Enjoyment as
equals the Desire.

As for the first, not to take notice how apt Men are to be disturbed in their
Enjoyments from without, there is enough within the very Frame and Constitution
of a Reasonable Soul do disturb them: For they find there a Natural Sense of
the difference between Good and Evil, a Natural Modesty which makes them blush
in secret at some infamous Vices, and sours the Pleasures, and frequently
interrupts the commission of them; a natural belief of a God, who is the Judge
of the World, and the Avenger of all wickedness; a strong persuasion, that they
shall live after death, and be rewarded and punished according to their works:
I need not tell you, how uneasy such thoughts as these make the enjoyment of
all sensual pleasures, and an uneasy Happiness is a contradiction; that if God
intended Man for a Sensual Happiness, I must confess he is the worst contrived
Creature in the world, as if he were made by chance, not by a wise Creator; for
the Principles of his nature disturb and contradict the enjoyment of his
natural Happiness. Or whether you will call this Nature or Education, or what
you please, there are very few Men, with the help of all the Wit and Philosophy
of Atheists, can deliver themselves from this Belief, and from these Fears; and
much fewer do it, than pretend to do so; and therefore there are very few who
have an easy and undisturbed Enjoyment of Sensual Pleasures, that is, who are
easy and happy in them, unless to sin with Fear, with Shame, with Guilty
Remorse, with frightful Presages of judgment, be an easy and undisturbed
Enjoyment.

As for the Second it is very plain, that the Enjoyment of Sensual Pleasures
can never answer the vast and boundless Desires of Happiness in Humane Nature;
a reasonable and intelligent Being has no other bounds to its Desires of
Happiness, but the most perfect and perpetual Enjoyment, whereas Sensual
Pleasures besides all other Disappointments, must wait the Returns of Strength
and Appetite and Objects, and therefore cannot always be had, or cannot always
please. Sensual Pleasures can never be the Happiness of any Creature, which has
any higher Principle then Appetite, for Appetite is the utmost bounds of
Sensual Enjoyments; but when Knowledge serves instead of Appetite, as it must
do in Reasonable Creatures, it creates such Desires as no Appetites can answer:
This makes Sensual Men so insatiable in their Desires of Pleasure, though Bruit
Beasts know their Measures, because they misplace their Natural Desires of
Happiness, which are boundless and infinite upon Sensual Pleasures, which are
limited and confined: and what Disapointments and Distractions must this
create, when there is no proportion between the Desire and the Object, besides
those Sensible Mischiefs of it, which do not much contribute to their
Happiness. For when Desire forces an Appetite, beyond the Strength of Nature,
and the Natural End and Use of such Pleasures, it impairs their Health, weakens
their Bodies, shortens their Lives, or makes them miserable, which are the
common Rewards of Intemperance and Lust. These Beasts, who are governed by
Appetite, know nothing of; Sense is their Happiness, and Appetite is the
Measure of their Enjoyment, and Sensual Pleasures can fill and satisfy a mere
Sensual Appetite; but when knowledge is both the Reason and the Measure of our
Desires, Sensual Pleasures can never fill such Desires; for we know more than
Nature it self can enjoy, and yet when we place our highest Happiness in it,
must desire all we know; and as long as we know, which is longer than we can
enjoy: This proves that nothing can be the Happiness of a knowing and
reasonable Creature, but Intellectual Pleasures, where Knowledge is Enjoyment,
and then Enjoyment will equal Knowledge and Desire; but when Knowledge and
Enjoyment are two Things, they may be parted, and may be unequal; and such a
Creature cannot be completely happy.

2dly, All Men who believe, that there is a God, must confess, that it is very
foolish and very wicked to love our Selves in opposition to God. Is it possible
for a Reasonable Creature to be happy, who separates himself from God? the
World may much better subsist without the Sun; for God is the Life of a
Reasonable Soul, the brightest Object of our Minds, Eternal Truth and Wisdom;
there is nothing worth knowing without God; for to contemplate his Wisdom and
Goodness and Power in all Things, is that which gives a relish to all other
Knowledge. In him we live, move, and have our Being; no Wise Man would be
contented to live in a World which has not a God to govern it, nor to live any
longer in it than he can trust to, and depend on his Protection; and is it then
the way to be happy to divide our Selves from God? can any Man choose better for
himself, than God can? do we know our Selves so well as he that made us; does
not God know what Happiness he has made us for? or does he envy us the
Happiness for which he made us? Why then did he make us for such a Happiness?
so impious is it to think, that God has forbid us any thing which is our true
Happiness. So vain is it to hope, to make our selves happy in contradiction to
the Will and Laws of God. No Man thinks honorably of God, who does not
believe, that his Laws are the most infallible Methods of our Happiness, as
well as the Trial of our Subjection and Obedience; and he who does so, can
never think of making himself happy by disobeying God.

But supposing it were otherwise, is it not perfect Distraction to oppose our
selves against God? Can we make our selves happy whether he will or no? Are we
a fit Match for infinite Power? Can we resist his Almighty Arm? How easily can
he look us into Misery and Confusion? And does it not become us to submit to
him, and rather choose to obey his Will than to suffer his Vengeance? This is
the Natural State of a Creature, to live in subjection to his Maker and
Sovereign Lord, to receive Laws from him, and to give up himself without any
reserve to his Government and Disposal, and therefore this is the Natural
Method of our Happiness too.

3dly, As for the Third Notion of Self-love, to love our selves in opposition
to the Love of Men, to divide our selves from the rest of Mankind, and to carry
on a Separate Interest, to which, as far as we are able, we make all other
Interests give place. This is so hateful a Temper, that the very naming of it,
is enough to expose it. No Man dares to undertake its Defense; those who are
most guilty of it dare not own it, but disguise it with some more popular
Appearances. A great and generous Mind that is concerned for all the World,
that does all the good it can, that is ready to sacrifice his private Ease,
Satisfactions and Fortunes, nay Life it self, to serve his Country, or to
cleanse the World of Monsters, is the Darling and Favorite of Mankind; he is
loved, he is reverenced of all, as a common Friend of Humane Nature and Humane
Societies. But a Man who loves no body but himself, is a universal Enemy, and
all Men ought to have a Care of him, and all Men will despise and abhor him,
when they know him: These Self-lovers themselves, when they see their own
Picture in another Face, will spit at it; for those who love no body but
themselves, yet desire that all Men should love them, and be very tender of
their Concernments, though they value no bodies Interest and Happiness but
their own.

But though this Self-love be universally condemned, yet it is too universally
practiced, and therefore I shall briefly show, how impossible it is, that this
Self-love, which divides us from the rest of Mankind, should make us happy. The
Principles of Humane Nature, make the Exercise of it very uneasy, and that can
never be our Happiness, which is a Force and Violence to Nature.

We feel a Natural Compassion for the sufferings of Mankind, especially of
Innocent Men, who have not deserved it; and as well as any Man loves himself;
this makes it very painful to serve his own Interest by doing injury to others.

One of the first Principles of Morality, which all Men confess to be highly
reasonable, is to do to other Men, what we desire they should do to us, which
is the Fundamental Maxim both of Justice and Charity, and in other Words, is to
love all Men as our selves, and no Man can violate this Law, that is, no Man
can love himself in opposition to the rest of Mankind, without falling under
the Censures and Reproaches of his own Mind, which is no happy State.

One of the Divinest Pleasures of Humane Nature is to do good; this I take to
be the great Advantage and Glory of Riches and Power, that it makes Men Public
Patrons, and Tutelar Angels to their fellow Creatures, which is the nearest
Resemblance of the Perfection and Happiness of God, and in the Pagan World made
Gods of Men: But Self-love knows nothing of this Happiness, but destroys not
only the Sense, but the Notion of it.

But to set aside other Considerations, Mankind will not suffer a Man to make
himself Easy and Happy by Self-love: When he is known, they combine against
him, as a common Enemy, they load him with Infamy and Reproach, they strip him
of his ill-gotten Riches, and severely revenge his Injuries: this is the great
End of Humane Government, and the proper use of the Rods and Axes of Princes,
to restrain and govern Self-love, and to punish the outrages it commits. --

This is enough to satisfy us of the Folly, and Unreasonableness of this
Principle, and how impossible it is, that Self-love should make any Man happy.
I will add but one Argument more to dissuade you from it, that this Self-love
can never enter into Heaven. That is a Holy Place, a Spiritual State, wherein
nothing can enter that is Unclean; Flesh and Blood, whether a fleshly Carnal
Mind, or an Earthly Body, cannot inherit the Kingdom of God. There God is all
in all, there is Universal Love among all those blessed Inhabitants, and
therefore there can be nothing of Self. O that blessed Place, where there is
perfect Unity and Harmony of Souls, no Parties and Factions, no Emulations and
Jealousies, no Private Interests, no Rivals; where all center in God, and
embrace each other, and mingle Flames, and feel and rejoice in each others
Happiness:

To which Blessed Place, God of his infinite Mercy bring us all through our
Lord Jesus Christ: To whom, with the Father and the Holy Ghost be Honor,
Glory, and Power, now and for ever.

Amen.
SERMON XVI.
Preached at the Temple Church.
2 Cor. iv: ver. 18. While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the
things which are not seen: For the things which are seen, are temporal, but the
things which are not seen are eternal.


THIS is the Principle of that true greatness of Mind, which appeared in the
Apostles and Primitive Christians, and enabled them to do that which the Pagan
Philosophy boasted of without doing, viz. to contemn the World, and to live
above its Hopes and Fears, to bear the Miseries of Life, and to despise the
Pleasures of it, to suffer Shame and Reproach, and the loss of all Things, and
Death it self, made as terrible, as Pain could make it, not only without Fear,
but with Joy and Triumph. For which Cause says the Apostle, we faint not, but
though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day; for
our light affliction, which is but for a moment, works for us a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory: while we look not at the things which
are seen, but at the things which are not seen: for the things which are seen,
are temporal, but the things which are not seen are eternal.

By the Things which are seen, is meant, all the Good and all the Evil things
of this Life; by the things which are not seen, all the Happiness and Miseries
of the Life to come. But is not this a very strange Choice, to prefer what is
absent and unseen, before what is present and sensible? To be unconcerned about
the Happiness or Miseries of this Life, and to live upon unseen Hopes and
Fears? No sai^ (...) Apostle, We have all the reason (...) world to do so,
because seen things ^re but temporal, and unseen things are eternal: This World
will last but a little while, the Fashion of this World passes away, but the
World to come will have no end; and this makes such a difference between seen
and unseen Things, that there can be no reasonable Competition, as there is no
Comparison between them. So that in speaking to these Words, there are two
things distinctly to be considered.

1. The Reasonableness of this Principle of looking to unseen Things, or of
living by Faith, for it is Faith alone, that can give us a View of the
invisible World. And,

2. The Reasonableness of this Choice, in preferring unseen before seen Things,
because, the things which are seen are temporal, but the things which are not
seen are eternal.

1. The Reasonableness of this Christian Principle of Action, of looking at
unseen things, or living by Faith. Some unthinking Men are apt to make a Jest
of believing; if you have any natural Reasons, or sensible Demonstrations, they
will hearken to you, but Faith is below a man of Wit and Philosophy; who knows
how many Cheats and Impostors there have been in the World: But such men little
consider, how necessary Faith is in Humane Life, that they themselves in a
thousand Cases, have no other Principle to act upon in the greatest
Concernments of this Life, and that upon much less evidence than we have for
another World.

There are but three ways of knowing any thing, Sense, or Reason, or Faith,
which last extends further, and has a more universal Influence upon the
Government of our Lives, than either Sense or Reason. Our whole Conversation
with Mankind is resolved into Believing, into a Civil, Historical, or Political
Faith; all humane Commerce and Intercourse is founded on it, and there are very
few Actions of our Lives, that can be performed without it; that he who will
not believe must not live in this World. And is it not absurd and ridiculous
then to laugh at believing? when they might as well laugh Sense and Reason out
of the World, and live as well without them.

Now if we must live by Faith in this World, if we must believe, and must trust
one another, if we must depend on Men's Word, or Oath, or Friendship, or
Honesty, though we can have no natural Certainty or Demonstration of Moral
Causes, what reason can there be to banish Faith out of Religion, which is of
such absolute necessity in all the other Concernments of Life? One would think
there should be less need of Faith for this World, than for the next, which is
an invisible State, and can be certainly known only by Revelation; and if Faith
be ever reasonable, it is most reasonable where it is most necessary, where
there is no other means of knowledge.

This is enough to show you, how little those Men understand themselves, who
ridicule Faith, which is to ridicule Humane Nature and all Humane Conversation.
If we may, if we must believe, if we cannot live without believing, it must
make a man contemptible to talk against all Faith, which is an Essential part
of Humane Knowledge, and a necessary Principle of Moral Prudence.

Some Men are so afraid of being thought easy and credulous, that they run into
the other Extreme, and will believe nothing, at least nothing concerning
another World: And think Infidelity must needs be a Mark of Wit and
Understanding, because it is directly opposite to Credulity, which is a Mark of
Folly; and by the same Rule Covetousness must be a Virtue, because it is the
opposite Extreme to Prodigality. Credulity and Infidelity both argue the same
weakness of Judgment; for it is as great want of Judgment, not to believe upon
sufficient Evidence, as to believe without it; but Credulity is the most
pardonable, because it is the better natured Fault, and argues the better
Temper of Mind. A credulous Man believes too well of Mankind, and therefore is
apt to trust them too soon; or he is very religiously inclined, and that
disposes him to believe all religious Tales: But an Infidel distrusts all
Mankind, and fears or hates all Religion, and therefore will believe nothing:
That of all the Men in the World, I would least trust my self with an Infidel;
for those who distrust all Mankind, and hate God, know some Reason why they
should do it, and they must find it in themselves.

Now if Faith be a reasonable Principle of Action, if we may have such Moral
Evidence of Things, which we cannot demonstrate, as a wise and cautious Man may
and ought to rely on, and which no wise Man will contradict, or act against;
why should not the same Evidence satisfy us, with reference to another World?
If you would scorn a Man, who should reject Caesar's Commentaries, or any other
approved Writings, against the Faith of all History; Why does it not deserve as
much scorn to reject the History of the Gospel, which is the best attested
History in the World? If it be reasonable to believe, is it not very
unreasonable to demand any other Evidence than what belongs to Faith? To demand
the Evidence of Sense, or Demonstration, for pure matters of Faith? When we
have all the Evidence of Faith, all the Evidence, which a wise Man would ask
for the Proof of any thing, which he did not and cannot see; to demand more, is
to reject Faith it self, and to condemn all Mankind of Credulity, who believe
any thing. And indeed, whoever considers what kind of Objections, Infidels urge
against Christianity, will find, that they all tend either to downright
Skepticism, or to reject all the Evidence of Faith, as unfit for a wise Man to
act on, which overthrows all Humane as well as Divine Faith.

I know there are some, who think it reasonable to demand much greater Evidence
for another World, than what may satisfy a wise Man in the Affairs and
Concernments of this Life: And thanks be to God, we have greater Evidence and
Certainty of Faith for another World, than we have for most of the Concernments
of this Life, in which we must act by Faith, and Moral Evidence; as much
greater, as a Divine Faith is more certain than Human Faith: But it is not
reasonable to demand any other kind of Evidence for the next World, than the
Evidence of Faith, because we can have no other Evidence for unseen things, and
if we have the highest Evidence that Faith can give us, it is not reasonable to
ask more.

But yet, why should not that Evidence satisfy us for another World, which in
a thousand Cases satisfies us in this? What Excuse can we make for our
Infidelity, if God give us such Evidence for another World, as wise Men think
sufficient to act on in this? Their Reasons for this have so little appearance
of Sense, that they may look like Abuses, and yet they are the best, and the
only Reasons they can give.

1. That they are forced in many Cases to act upon Faith and Hope, and trust in
this World, because in many Things, they can have no better Evidence, and yet
are under a necessity of acting, and choosing one Thing or other, if they will
live in the World: But they are under no necessity of believing any Religion,
and therefore may demand such Evidence, as will force an Assent, and leave no
possibility of a Mistake or Deceit. For why should they believe any thing,
which they are not absolutely certain of, when they need not believe it unless
they will.

Now both parts of this Answer are very faulty. Wise Men do not act upon Moral
Evidence, and the Assurances of human Faith, merely because they can have no
better, but because they think this sufficient, and to be a wise and reasonable
Principle of Action; and therefore they act with great security, where they
have no other Evidence, and are under no necessity one way nor other, did they
not think it wise and safe and prudent; which shows, what the Sense of the
wisest part of Mankind is concerning the Evidence of Faith.

And yet it is much stranger, that any Man, who ever heard of another World,
and of Heaven and Hell, can think it indifferent, whether he believe it or not.
He must either believe, or disbelieve it, and the Consequence either way is of
infinite Concernment. They have a mighty Mastery over themselves, if they can
believe, and disbelieve what they will; there are such degrees of Evidence,
even of Moral Evidence, as wise men cannot resist, and I think, that makes Faith
necessary, if we believe like Men. But when we read in the Gospel, he that
believes shall be saved, and he that believes not shall be damned, this lays a
terrible necessity upon us; for if the Gospel be true, and we continue
Infidels, we must perish for ever: And if necessity will justify our believing
and acting upon reasonable Moral Evidence, though we have not the Evidence of
Sense or Natural Demonstrations, those who do not think Eternal Happiness or
Misery to be necessity enough, let them find a greater if they can.

2. Another Pretense is, that the vast difference between this World and the
next, if there be another World, requires a very different degree of Evidence.
The Things of this World are of such little Consequence, that they may better
venture, though they should be deceived: But Religion is of Eternal Importance,
and therefore it concerns them not to be too credulous in such matters.

Now though there is a vast difference between this World and the next, I
cannot bear, that Men who believe no other World, should make this difference;
for if this Life be all that they expect, no Man can ever venture more than
all, whether it be Time or Eternity; and if they will venture their temporal
All, upon the Evidence of Faith, why is it unreasonable to venture our Eternal
All upon it, when we can have, and indeed need no better Evidence. But this
very Consideration of the vast difference between Time and Eternity, turns upon
themselves, and makes it wise and reasonable to act upon much less Evidence,
than we have for the other World. For in Matters of such vast importance, as
every thing is that is Eternal, it concerns us always to be on the surest side
where we venture least, if it should happen that we are mistaken. And let any
Man consider, which is the surest side, to believe, or to disbelieve
Christianity, and a future State; If Christianity be true, and there be an
Eternal State of Rewards and Punishments in the next Life, if we disbelieve it,
we are miserable for ever; but if we do believe it, and it should not prove
true, we loose nothing by it but the transient Pleasures of Sin, and instead of
them, have all the present Ease and Satisfaction of Virtue and great Hopes; and
those who have tried both will tell you, that the Pleasures of Virtue far
exceed the Pleasures of Sin, and that the Hope and Expectation of Immortal Life
does more ravish and transport, than the Possession of this World can do.

The truth is, the Eternal Miseries of the next World are so very terrible,
that no wise Man would run the least Hazard of them, but instead of demanding a
demonstrative Certainty, that there is such a Place of Torment, would demand a
demonstrative Certainty that there is not, before he would venture. And the
Happiness of the other World so exceeds all our Imaginations, that a very
little Evidence would persuade a wise Man to venture any thing, to be happy for
ever.

The Sum of what I have said, in short is this: To despise all Faith, is to
ridicule Human Nature and Human Conversation; for God has made us such
Creatures, that three Parts of our Lives must be governed by Faith, and if
Faith be a foolish, absurd, unsafe Principle of Action, I Am sure Man is a very
wretched and contemptible Creature; for Man must live by Faith. We cannot see
each others Hearts and Thoughts, and I believe no man desires that other. Men
should see his Heart, how much soever he may desire to see theirs; and then we
cannot converse with each other, with any Pleasure and Security, without
believing. We are finite Creatures, our Lives are short, and we can be but in
one Place at a time; and if we must believe nothing, but what we our selves
see, what a narrow contemptible thing is human Knowledge; and therefore we must
allow of the Testimony of Eye and Ear Witnesses, and of credible Histories,
which is the Evidence of Faith, and furnishes us with the best, as well as with
the largest Part of our Knowledge, and with the wisest Rules and Examples of
Life. And though we may be, and often are mistaken, this only makes Men more
prudent and cautious, not Infidels: But a Divine Faith gives us a much more
infallible Assurance, than Human Faith can do; for we know, God cannot deceive
us, as Men may, and then if we have as great, nay, much greater Evidence for a
Divine Revelation, than we have for any other matters of Fact at such a
distance; we have all the Evidence of the most certain Human Faith, and the
infallible certainty of a Divine Faith.

Nay if they will but allow, which no considering Man can deny, that we have as
good Evidence for the History of the Gospel, as they have for any other
History, which they most firmly believe, it will be impossible for them to give
a wise Reason, why they do not believe the Gospel. Nay were there less Evidence
than there is, the vast Importance of it, which is no less than Eternal Life
and Death, is reason enough to a wise Man to choose the surest side, and to live
by the Faith of another World.

2. Let us now consider the Reason and the Wisdom of this Choice. We look not
at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen: for the
things which are seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen are
eternal.

The difference between Temporal and Eternal, is so demonstrative a Reason, why
we should prefer Eternal unseen things before temporal seen things; that it is
hard to add any thing to give a new Strength to it, if Men do but understand
what these Words, Time, and Eternity, signify.

Suppose you should ask any Man, whether he would choose to live threescore or
fourscore years, or to live for ever, he would certainly wonder at your
Question, and think it an Affront, since Nature teaches all Men to answer it
without the least dispute, or consideration about it. All Men love Life, and
above all things desire to live for ever; which is so strong a Passion; that I
doubt not at all; but the generality of Mankind, (supposing no other Life after
this) would rather choose to be Immortal Beggars, than Mortal Princes; or at
least would content themselves with a very mean Station in this World, and to
take their Chance, as to the Sufferings of it, rather than not to be. For Life
is sweet, and it is a pleasant thing to the Eye, to behold the Sun. And if Men,
who know no better, would be contented to take their Fortune in this World, and
to venture an Eternal Round of uncertain and changeable Scenes, and prefer this
before fourscore or a hundred Years of the greatest Prosperity and Glory; one
would think, there should be no Comparison between the most prosperous State of
this Life, and the eternal unchangeable Happiness of the next.

And yet we find by Experience, that though most Men are desirous to live as
long as they can in this World, and would submit to any Conditions, which would
make them Immortal here, they think the Case very much altered, when you
promise them Immortal Life in the next World; as is very evident from this,
that they will not submit to such a State of Discipline and Mortification to
save their Souls, as they cheerfully submit to, to save their Lives. Skin for
Skin, and all that a Man has, will he give for his Life; but they will not
part with all they have to save their Souls; nay, will venture their Souls to
get or to save an Estate, or a very little part of it. And yet (which makes it
more wonderful) there are great numbers of such Men, who profess to believe,
that there is another World, and that they must be happy or miserable for ever.
This is very unaccountable, that all Men should agree, that what is eternal
ought to be preferred before what is temporal, and yet that the Generality of
Mankind should prefer temporal Things before the Things which are Eternal. What
is to be said to these Men? Will you prove, that Eternity is to be preferred
before Time? This is lost labor, for they all own it, and have a Natural Sense
of it, which is more powerful than any other Arguments. Will you then persuade
them to prefer Eternal before Temporal Things? but by what Arguments will you
persuade, if Eternity it self cannot persuade? In such Cases where there is no
need of disputing, no need to convince Men's Reasons, I know nothing left, but
to paint and represent, to draw such lively Images and Pictures, as may move
Men's Passions, and give them a feeling Sense of the difference between Time and
Eternity. And to do this to as great Advantage as I can, I shall 1st. consider
the difference between Time and Eternity. And, 2d. The difference between
Things Temporal, and Things Eternal.

1st. The difference between Time and Eternity. You all see and feel what Time
is, it passes away swiftly, and we pass away with it; when we look back, it is
but like a Dream, or a Watch in the Night, so soon passes it away, and we are
gone. Some few Years clear the Stage of this World, and bring new busy Actors,
or idle Spectators on it; and by that time we can well turn our selves round,
we see all new Faces and new Scenes of things, and our selves hastening after,
though we should happen to stay a little behind our Company. But who can
represent Eternity? to live without end, a Duration, which it is not in the
power of Numbers to measure, and therefore no Value can be put upon it.

To form such an Image of this in your Minds, as no Words can express, make
Eternity present to you. Suppose this World to be at an End, as it will very
suddenly be with us all, and that we were at this time in an Eternal State of
Happiness or Misery; either with Lazarus in Abraham's Bosom, or with Dives in
Hell, tormented in endless Flames. Whatever the Happiness, or Misery of the
next State is, is it possible for us now to conceive, what Passions will
accompany this Thought, that whether we find our selves happy or miserable, we
shall be so for ever? What is the secure Triumph of a never fading Crown? What
is the Terror, Confusion, Amazement of a never dying Worm? Thus it will be with
us, as soon as we remove out of this World; and if the Thoughts of Eternal
Miseries, when we think seriously of them, do now astonish us; if the Hope of
Immortal Life does now transport good Men, and give them the Victory over this
present World, what will it do, when they shall see and feel, what they now
only fear or hope?

And is this so unreasonable a thing, to suppose the other World present, which
a very few Years, it may be a few Days, will make present to us? When we are so
near the Grave, can not we look a little beyond it, and by an Eye of Faith
contemplate the endless Happiness of good Men, and the endless Miseries of the
Wicked: This is what the Apostle means by looking at the things which are not
seen, to have our Eyes fixed upon the other World as if it were present; and
there is very great reason for it, for though these Eternal Things are not yet
present to us, yet Eternity is. Though we do not yet see that eternal and
unchangeable State of Happiness or Misery, yet we now know as well what
Eternity signifies, as ever we shall do; and therefore we may contemplate the
Nature of Eternity, and deeply affect our Minds with the Hope and Fear of it.

Though our Life in this World is short and perishing, yet our Souls are
immortal, and therefore we are already Immortal Creatures, and an Immortal
Creature from the first Moment of his Being is in Eternity, because he can
never wholly die, or cease to be: So that Eternity, as it signifies an endless
Duration, is as much present to us now, as ever it will be, though we are not
yet in that unchangeable State, which shall last for ever. And does it not
become an Eternal Being to think of Eternity, when, though we shall not always
be, what we now are, yet we shall always be; and a Creature which shall always
be, ought above all to look at those unseen Things which shall always be.

An Immortal Creature which must live for ever, is very little concerned in a
changeable and vanishing State; for what do threescore or fourscore years
signify, when we must live for ever? They bear no proportion to Eternity, and
therefore can challenge but a very little Share and Interest in our Thoughts;
An Immortal Creature must design nothing less than an Immortal Happiness,
because nothing less is commensurate to our Being; and for the same Reason that
we desire to be happy, we must desire to be happy as long as we are.

No time can be too soon for such Thoughts, because an Immortal Creature should
never live a Day without them: Were we to spend Eternity in an endless round of
Changes, we should be no farther concerned, than to make every State of Life as
easy and entertaining as we could: But when we know this World is the only
changeable Scene, and that we must pass from hence into an Eternal and
Unchangeable State, and that we must be either happy or miserable for ever,
according as we behave our selves in this World; not to make Eternal Happiness
the commanding and governing Design of our Lives, or to run any Hazard of it,
for the sake of present things, is such a Degeneracy of an Immortal Nature,
that such men very well deserve, if not to forfeit Immortal Being, yet to
forfeit Immortal Happiness.

But not to dissemble any difficulties, I will propose this Case as fairly as
any one can desire. No Man is so perfectly brutish, as absolutely to prefer
Time before Eternity; every man had rather live for ever; but the difficulty
is, when we may live threescore or fourscore Years in this World, (which though
it be nothing to Eternity, yet is a very long State of Temptation) to deny our
selves for so long a time, the present Pleasures and Satisfactions of Life, for
the absent and unknown, though the endless Happiness of the next Life. The
pretended Difficulties you see, are the present uneasy Restraints, which the
Practice of Virtue lays upon our sensual Inclinations, and that we must deny
our selves these present Satisfactions for the long Expectation of an absent
and unknown Happiness.

Now I shall not at present dispute the Point between Virtue and
Licentiousness, which of them contributes most to the present Ease and Pleasure
of Life: But to make you sensible, how unreasonable an Objection this is, I
will put you another Case. Suppose instead of the Promise of Heaven, God had
promised Immortal Life in this World to the practice of Virtue; that this World
should have been a Paradise to all Virtuous Men, where they should have lived
for ever; and that wicked Men should have lived a very little while, nay,
suppose the longest Period of Human Life, in this World, and then have been cut
off by some exemplary Punishment, and have perished in the Grave, what would
you think reasonable in this Case? to choose a Virtuous Immortality, or the
short and dying Pleasures of Sin? You could not pretend in this Case, that the
Rewards were absent and unknown, for they would be present and sensible, they
would be seen things, as all the Happiness of this Life is: But the
difficulties of Virtue (till we had brought our earthly Appetites and Passions
under government) would be the same that they are now: And if you would think
it reasonable to be virtuous for an earthly Immortality, (as I persuade my self
most Men would) I cannot imagine, that it should weaken the Argument, to
translate this Immortal Life from Earth to Heaven, which is so much a happier
Place than this Earth. And yet I doubt not, but were this the Case, that
Virtuous Men should be immortal in this World, and none but Sinners should die,
Sin would render Men the most contemptible and infamous Creatures, to prefer
the short Extravagancies of Vice before a Virtuous Immortality. In short, the
difference between Time and Eternity is such a Reason as no difficulties can
answer: Eternal Happiness is an abundant recompense for any temporal
sufferings, and whatever the difficulties of Virtue and Religion may be, they
must not be compared with Eternal Miseries.

2dly. As there is a vast difference between Time and Eternity, so there is as
vast a difference between Things Temporal and Things Eternal. I do not intend
at present to represent to you the Eternal Happiness or Miseries of the next
Life, as I find them described in Scripture; nor either lessen the Happiness,
or aggravate the Sufferings of this present Life; but shall keep close to my
Argument, and only consider the difference, which Time and Eternity makes
between things; and a very few Words will explain this: For it is evident, that
whatever is subject to Time, is liable to Changes, Revolutions, Intermissions;
but what is Eternal has an unchangeable Nature, and is always the same. And
what a vast difference does this make between the Happiness and Miseries of
this perishing Life, and the Eternal Happiness, and Miseries of the next?

The Happiness of this Life cannot be very valuable, because it is not constant,
the Enjoyments of it are frequently delayed, disappointed, or interrupted; and
the Miseries of it are not so very formidable, because they have their Allays
and Intermissions too, and cannot continue long in great extremity: This is the
Nature of temporal things to change and alter, which lessens the Pleasures, and
tempers the Miseries of Life: But an eternal, constant, uninterrupted
Happiness, an eternal, constant, uninterrupted Misery, a Happiness and Misery
without any end, and without any Intermission or Allay; this is perfect
Happiness and perfect Misery, infinitely more to be desired, and feared, than
what Time can alter. This represents Temporal Things as in themselves of no
great value, and gives a Natural Preference to Eternal Things: Which is the
reason of our Savior's Exhortation; Lay not up for your selves treasures on
earth, where moth and rust does corrupt, and where thieves break through and
steal; but lay up for your selves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor
rust does corrupt, and where thieves cannot break through and steal. This makes
a natural Subordination between Temporal and Eternal Things, and justifies the
Wisdom of our Choice in making to our selves friends of the mammon of
unrighteousness, that when we fail, they may receive us into ^verlasting
habitations: Or like that wise Merchant in the Gospel, who having found a
treasure hid in a field, went and fold all that he had, and bought that field.
This is sufficient to convince those Men, who believe another Life, of the
reasonableness of this Choice, to govern our Lives by the Faith and Hope of
unseen things, not to look at the Things which are seen, but at the Things
which are not seen. Bad Men themselves feel the force of this Argument, and
have no way to avoid it, but by making these unseen things more invisible than
they really are: They love these seen things so well, though they are but
temporal, that they are not willing to believe there are any such Unseen
Eternal Things, which they are convinced ought to have the Preference, if there
be any such Eternal Things: And therefore for a Conclusion, I shall briefly
reason the Case with these Men, nor directly to prove the Certainty of another
World; but to show them, how unreasonable and dangerous it is to entertain such
an Aversion, as they manifestly betray, to the Belief of it.

For can any thing be more infamous than an Aversion to the Belief of
Immortality? Is any thing more natural to Mankind, than the Desire of
Immortality? Next to the Fears of being miserable for ever, is there a more
terrible Thought than falling into nothing? And how unnatural then is it for
Men to be afraid of believing themselves immortal, and to take great Pains to
persuade themselves against all the Hopes and Inclinations of Nature, that they
shall dye like Beasts; and to appear never better pleased, than when they can
start some difficulties to weaken the Belief and Hope of another World.

True, you will say, this seems somewhat unnatural, but this is partially
represented and not the whole of the Case; the Gospel of Christ, which promises
Eternal Life to all Penitents, threatens Eternal Death too against all
impenitent Sinners; and if upon the Authority of the Gospel, we believe the
Resurrection of the Just into Immortal Life, we must believe the Resurrection
of the Wicked to Eternal Punishments; and these are such terrible things, that
it is more desirable there should be no Heaven, then that there should be a
Hell, and they had rather reject these great Hopes, than take the Hope and the
Fear together.

This no doubt is the true Reason of Men's infidelity, not that they absolutely
despise Immortal Life, the Desire of which is so natural and necessary; but
that they fear Eternal Miseries: And yet in this case it is very unnatural to
reject the Belief and Hope of Immortal Life: For the Desire of Immortality is
the first and most necessary Desire of Nature, and therefore ought to govern
all other Desires, for it is unnatural to prefer any thing before it. As fond
as Men are of their Sins, yet any Man of understanding would be ashamed to own,
that he had rather enjoy his Lusts thirty or forty Years, than be immortal. The
Design of Infidelity is not only to cure Men's Fears, but to salve their
Reputation, and to make their Vices less infamous. If there be no Life after
this, let us eat and drink for to morrow we die, seems natural and reasonable
enough, but to eat and drink, and riot away Immortality, must make a Man
infamous. Suppose God had promised Immortal Life to good Men, and threatened,
not Eternal Punishments, but Annihilation to the Wicked. When Eternal
Punishments were removed out of the way, would you have thought it reasonable
then to believe Immortality, and to live virtuously for the Hopes of
Immortality? Would you have thought it infamous then to prefer Sin and
Annihilation, before Virtue and Immortality; and is it not infamous then for
the love of Sin, to reject the Hopes of Immortality, and to hope for
Annihilation, as such Men generally do; if we think it reasonable to serve God,
that we may be immortal, and that it would be infamous not to do so, supposing
the certain Knowledge of Immortal Life; then the Threatenings of Eternal
Punishments can be no reasonable prejudice against the Belief of Immortality;
for there is no reason to reject the Hopes of Immortal Life for fear of such
Miseries, as we may escape if we please; that is, if we believe and choose
Immortal Life: No Man who does not prefer something else, or to speak plainly,
who does not prefer the short Pleasures of Sin before Immortal Life, need fear
Eternal Miseries; and therefore it is not the Fear of Eternal Miseries, which
they know they may escape, but the Contempt of Eternal Life which makes them
Infidels, and it concerns them to consider well, what the Consequences of this
are.

For 1. as I have already observed, and there needs no great Proof of it,
nothing can be more infamous, than to contradict the most noble and generous
Desires of Human Nature: To be afraid to be immortal, is to desire to be a
Beast, and to perish like a Beast; nay it is to desire what no Beast would
desire; for Self-love and Self-preservation is implanted even in the brutal
nature: And what a prodigious Degeneracy is it of Human Nature, for Men to hate
themselves and their own Being, and to wish and hope that they may perish in
the Grave. It is a vain thing to set up for the Reputation of Wit and
Philosophy in this Cause, for Human Nature is against them, and therefore the
generality of Mankind, who will always hope and desire on Natures side, will be
against them too; and Nature so abhors the Thoughts of Annihilation and
Dissolution, that all Men must despise those as very contemptible Creatures,
who can be contented to fall into nothing themselves, and abhor them for their
malicious Attempts to deprive other Men of the Hope of Immortality.

2. It is a strong Presumption against Infidelity, that it contradicts the
Hopes and Desires of Nature. Are there any other Natural Desires and Appetites
which have no Natural Objects to answer them? And why should we think, that
Nature should implant in us a Desire of Immortality, if we were not made to be
immortal: This cannot be, if we were made by a wise Being; for then all the
Desires and Appetites of Nature must be wisely made, that is, fitted to the
nature of that Being to which they belong, and then Immortal Desires can belong
only to an Immortal Nature.

3. It also ought to be well considered, that this makes Infidelity the most
inexcusable Sin, for to reject not only all Supernatural Evidence, but all the
Desires and Inclinations of Nature, will admit of no Excuse. This is an
Apostasy from Human Nature, and though the Divine Goodness has a great
tenderness for Human Infirmities, yet when Men wilfully put off Human Nature,
they have no Right to the Excuses, or to the Compassion which is due to Men.
And such Men ought to be very sure, that they are in the right, who have no
Excuse to make, if they are in the wrong.

4. And yet it is impossible to be secure against the Inclinations, Desires,
and Sentiments of Nature. It is possible with great Art and Violence, for some
time to stifle the Sense of Nature, but Nature will take some Occasion or other
to get loose, and to revive our Fears, when we have forfeited all our Hopes.

For 1. It is certain there can be demonstration against Nature. If the Natural
Desires of Immortality do not prove that we are immortal, yet they are a Bar
against all demonstration that we are not: For that would be an ill-contrived
Nature indeed, which should have Natural Desires and Appetites against
demonstration. That should have a great Passion for Immortality, when it is
demonstrable that we are not immortal. And if they cannot demonstrate, that we
are not immortal, we shall certainly hope and fear on Natures side: And what
will all the boasting Pretenses to Infidelity signify, if they cannot cure our
Natural Hopes and Fears?

2. For Natural Fears and Hopes are very Mechanical Passions, and not under the
Government of our Wills and arbitrary Opinions. They are no more to be silenced
with Wit and Sophistry, than some Natural Antipathies are, which Men may think
to reason away, but as soon as the Object of that Antipathy appears, all their
Arguments are lost, and they sweat, and tremble, and fly: And thus do Infidels
too, who please themselves, that they can reason away another World into a
Fairy Land, but yet cannot think seriously of it without trembling.

3. For whatever Baffle men put upon their Faith, yet these Hopes and Fears are
so natural, that they can never persuade themselves, that what is reported of
the other World, does not deserve to be hoped or feared. No Argument can
convince any Man, that it is not desirable to live for ever, or that it is not
the most terrible thing of all, to be miserable for ever, and then it is
impossible not to hope or fear. The Desires of a less Happiness, or the Fears
of a less Misery may be conquered; but when Men hear of Eternal Happiness and
Eternal Misery, the one the most desirable, the other the most formidable
thing to Human Nature, it makes it impossible to any thinking Man, neither to
desire nor fear.

This shows, how vain it is to struggle against Nature; for Nature will be too
strong for all our Pretenses to Wit and Philosophy; and thus all Infidels find
it is at one time or other.

5. I shall add but one thing more; since the Desire of Immortality is so
natural, consider what an Eternal Torment this must be, if we lose Immortal
Life by our Infidelity. Natural Appetites last as long as Nature does, and when
they are disappointed, especially if it be by our own fault, will torment us as
long as they last. Now besides all the positive Miseries, which our Savior
threatens against Infidels, here is a Natural Cause and Demonstration of their
Misery: The very Loss of Eternal Life must eternally torment them, because they
must eternally desire it; and these disappointed Desires will turn into Eternal
Anguish, Despair, and Self-revenge.

Would but Men seriously consider these things, how unnatural the Inclinations
to Infidelity are, and how unnatural the Aversion to the Belief of Immortality
is, and what terrible consequences they have, it would make them willing and
desirous to believe, and then they would find no want of Evidence. There would
not be so much need then of disputing against Infidelity, but we might employ
our time much better in exhorting and persuading you to the conscientious
practice of our most holy Religion, that we may obtain the End of our Faith,
even the salvation of our Souls.

Which God, etc.

SERMON XVII.
Preached at the Temple Church.
Isaiah 5. ver. 20, 21. Woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil; that
put darkness for light, and light for darkness; that put bitter for sweet, and
sweet for bitter.

Woe unto them that are wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their own sight.


IT gives great disturbance to good Men, not only to observe the general
corruption of Manners that is in the World, but the means whereby Mankind are
now corrupted: That the very Notions of Moral Good and Evil are almost lost
among us, that Men call evil good and good evil, darkness light, and light
darkness; bitter sweet and sweet bitter; and show their good will to change the
Natures as well as Names of things were that in their Power.

This may seem new and surprising to Men unaquainted with the State of former
Ages; but even upon this Account there is no new thing under the Sun. Men have
been as wicked in former Ages as they are now, and have taken the same ways to
justify their wickedness, and to harden themselves in Sin, that they do now.
As great a Degeneracy as this is of Human Nature, the Prophet assures us in my
Text, that there were such Men in his days, who called evil good and good evil,
and thus it is likely to be to the end of the World; and yet there will always
be a Succession of good Men, and the Eternal Differences of Good and Evil will
never be lost: But then good Men must endeavor by all wise Arts to preserve a
Sense of Piety and Virtue, to vindicate Religion from the Attempts of Atheists
and Infidels, and to put a stop to the growing evil: For this reason God by his
Prophet denounces a Woe against such Men; which it shall be my Business at
present to explain to you.

1. I shall explain the several Terms in my Text, what it is to call Evil Good,
and Good Evil; to put Darkness for Light, and Light for Darkness; to put Bitter
for Sweet, and Sweet for Bitter, and who those are, that are Wise in their own
Eyes, and Prudent in their own Sight.

2. I shall enquire, how Men come to judge thus perversely of Things, which is
intimated in the Order here observed: That they first call Evil Good, and then
Good Evil; first put Darkness for Light, and then Light for Darkness; first
Bitter for Sweet, and then Sweet for Bitter.

3dly, I shall consider the Woe denounced against these Men, and how
unavoidable it is.

1. To explain the Terms. And 1. What is meant by calling Evil Good, and Good
Evil. For are there any Men in the World so senseless or impudent as to affirm,
That what Mankind call Sins are Virtues, or what they call Virtues are Sins? I
never heard of such Men; and I believe there are no such Men to be found: For
there is no Fault which Atheists themselves can find with those which we call
Moral Virtues; such as Justice and Charity, Meekness, Humility, Patience,
Temperance, Chastity, and the like, but that they do not agree with their
Inclinations and Interests, and they desire to be at liberty from such
Restraints, to live as they like best: they are not pleased, that the one
should be thought essentially Good, and the other Evil; or that the one should
be thought commanded, and the other forbidden by a Divine Law, which makes them
accountable to a Superior Lord and Judge for what they do. But if you will not
call them Sins or Virtues, nor pretend a Divine Law for it, they will allow,
what we call Moral Virtues, to be good Rules of Life, and very necessary for
the prudent Government of Humane Societies, and such as Mankind ought to agree
in for their own Sakes, and for the Common Good; and that the contrary Vices
are great and public Mischiefs, which ought to be restrained and punished by
Civil Laws: They are very well contented, and think it necessary that Men
should make them Laws, but not God: For this still leaves them at liberty to
transgress these Laws, when they can do it safely, and when their Interest and
Inclinations tempt them to it. This indeed is to reject the very Notion of
Moral Good and Evil, but not in a strict Sense to call Evil Good, or Good Evil;
for they allow of no such Distinction between Good and Evil in a Moral Sense.
Though by the way I could never understand what they mean by this; for if the
Matter of these Virtues or Vices be such things as are naturally good or evil,
then the doing such things must be morally good or evil: For I know no other
Notion of Moral Good and Evil, but doing or choosing such things as have a
natural Good and Evil: If to rob our Neighbor of his Estate, to desame him, to
abuse his Wife or Daughter, be a great Injury to him, it is a great Wickedness
in us: If to defend the Injured and Oppressed, to relieve the Poor and
Fatherless, and Widows, be a great Good to them, it is a great Virtue in us.
And I know not what other Sanction Men would have for natural Laws, but the
natural Good or Evil of things: and if there be an essential and eternal
difference between natural Good and Evil, Nature has made an essential
difference between doing Good and Evil, that is, between Virtue and Vice.

But to let this pass; since these Men discard all the Moral Differences of
Good and Evil, and yet own, that what we call Virtues do a great deal of good,
and what we call Vices do great hurt and mischief, the difficulty remains, in
what Sense any Man can be charged with calling Evil Good, and Good Evil, and I
can think but of two Accounts of this Matter.

1. That they make their own Appetites, Interests, and Inclinations the only
Rule and Measure of Good and Evil; as they must necessarily do, when they allow
of no common Rule and Standard for all Mankind: For if, as these Men persuade
themselves, there be no Law either of God or Nature to distinguish between Good
and Evil, there can be no other distinction but what every Man's own Appetite
and Inclination makes for him; that is his Good, which he best likes, and that
is Evil, which he does not like. Good and Evil signify nothing more, but what
pleases or displeases him; and therefore when he feels himself highly pleased
and gratified with what the rest of Mankind think a great Evil, and really is
so, he laughs at their Ignorance and Folly, and calls and chooses it as his
Good; and when that which is really Good crosses his Interests and
Inclinations, he rejects it as a great Evil. When such Men think it their
Interest to be Unjust, or their Inclinations tempt them to be Unchaste, they
don't think such Actions Virtues, for they disown that Name; but they think
them good, that is, profitable and pleasing; nor do they think Justice,
Temperance, and Chastity to be Vices, but great Evils, as contrary to their
Gain or Pleasure, which is to call that which is morally Good, Evil, and that
which is morally Evil, Good.

2dly, Besides this, the better to excuse themselves from the Shame and
Reproach of such Actions (which will be always infamous, when they have done
and said all they can) though they dare not call Vice Virtue, nor Virtue Vice,
yet they give good Names, which are the Appendages and Properties of some
Virtues to their Vices, and bad Names to Virtue. This is so common, and so well
known, that I need not insist on it.

An easy, obliging, friendly Conversation is very charming, when it is
governed by strict Virtue: these Men let the Virtue alone, and justify their
Vices as only the Effects and Instances of good Humor and Sociableness, and of
a complying Temper, to make their Company easy, and their Conversation
pleasant and entertaining; and this they think a good Apology for all their
Lewdness, Debaucheries, and Profaneness; which may make them agreeable Company
for one another; but very unfit for the Conversation, not only of good Men, but
of prudent and cautious Sinners; but that is all one, they will have this good
Humor, and that is a good Name, which will suit any Vice which pleases
themselves and their Company. Thus to be diligent in our Business, prudent and
frugal in our Expenses, to mortify our sensual Appetites, and deny the
Cravings of Lust, and use our Bodies hardly, are very commendable things, when
they are opposed to Idleness and Luxury, and have regard to the Care of our
Families, and to make us capable of all Acts of Charity, and to subdue the
Flesh to the Spirit, and to make us more devout Worshippers of God: And
therefore a mere Earthworm, who does all this for no other end but to get or to
save his Money, though he starve himself, and his Family, and the Poor by it, and
makes himself a vile Slave all his Days, calls this fordid Covetousness by
these good Names, of Diligence, Prudence, Frugality, Temperance, Mortification,
when in Truth it is nothing but a love of Money above his Ease and Pleasure,
and adoring it as his God.

Thus on the other hand, Superstition and Hypocrisy are very ill Names; and
these at all Adventures they bestow upon Piety and Virtue, to excuse their own
Neglect and Contempt of both; as if no Man could be sincere, because there are
some Hypocrites, or as if there were no such thing as Religion, because some
Men would appear to be religious, who are not, though it is a better Argument
for Religion, that even bad Men desire to be thought religious.

Thus an affected Singularity is very offensive and nauseous to all wise Men;
and this is their Name for a sullen, inflexible Virtue, which will not do a bad
thing to please its Company, nor admit bad Men into the Privacies and
Familiarities of Conversation; as if there were no Medium between affecting
Singularity, and being wicked for Company.

This is the Art of changing Names: call any Virtue or Vice by its own Name,
such as Piety, Justice, Charity, Temperance, Chastity; or Profaneness,
Injustice, Drunkenness, Adultery; and they have nothing to say against the one,
nor for the other; for these are Names of Honor and Esteem, or of Infamy and
Reproach all the World over: But if they can find any thing in Vice, which
bears the least resemblance to what some Virtues oblige us to, they presently
give the Names of those Virtues to their Vices; and if a virtuous Man may do
any thing for wise and good Reasons, which has any Likeness or Analogy to what
bad Men do for very bad Reasons, they give the Names of those Vices to Virtue,
which is in a strict and proper Sense, to call Evil Good, and Good Evil: And
this there are too many guilty of, who are not professed Atheists or Infidels;
who think it some Excuse for their Vices, if they can find any thing good to
say of them, and an Apology for their Lukewarmness and Indifferency in
Religion, if they can charge some zealous Professors with Pharisaism and
Hypocrisy; but by whomsoever, and for what reason soever this be done, the Woe
belongs to all those who call evil good, and good evil.

2dly. What is meant by putting darkness for light, and light for darkness.
Darkness and Light very often in Scripture signify Vice and Virtue: Sin is the
work of Darkness, to walk in the Light is to live holily, as St. John tells us,
1 John 1. ver. 6, 7. if we say we have fellowship with him, (God) and walk in
darkness, live in any Sin, we lie and do not the truth; but if we walk in the
light, as he is in the light, if we are holy as God is holy, then have we
Fellowship one with another; and thus it is the same with calling Evil Good and
Good Evil.

But then Darkness signifies also Ignorance and Error, false and corrupt
Notions of God and Religion; and Light a clear and certain Knowledge,
especially in matters of Religion, what concerns the Will of God, and the way
to Heaven, as our Savior tells us, light is come into the world, but men love
darkness rather than light, John 3. 19. And thus we must understand it here:
Those Men who call Evil Good and Good Evil, who reject the moral differences of
Good and Evil, and confound the Names of Virtue and Vice, pervert all the
Principles of Knowledge, and Rules of judging between Good and Evil; they put
darkness for light, call all the arbitrary and ridiculous Principles of Atheism
and Infidelity Light, and esteem them as the most true and certain Knowledge,
though indeed they teach us nothing, but reduce us to the most perfect state of
Ignorance, by unteaching all that Mankind knew before; for if there be no God,
and no difference between Good and Evil, there is an End of all Knowledge,
which is the Light of the Mind; for the next step is to put light for darkness,
to reject all the Natural, and all the Supernatural Means of Knowledge, the
Natural Notions of our Minds, the Natural Light of Reason, and the Supernatural
Light of Revelation, as mere Ignorance and Imposture, the Cheats of Education
or of a timorous Fancy, or the Cunning of Statesmen, or the Inventions of
Priests: Such Men you know there are in the World, and this Woe belongs to them.

3dly. To put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter is a corruption, not
merely of our Judgment, but of our Natural Sensation, of our Natural Taste and
Relish of Things: Bitter signifies whatever is naturally uneasy, grievous,
offensive, as bitter things are to the Palate; that which causes Trouble,
Anguish, Remorse, as all wicked Actions naturally do; now such things as are
grievous and afflicting to all the rest of Mankind, who have any natural Sense
left, these Men call sweet, account their Pleasure and Happiness: But then what
is naturally sweet, has a Natural Easiness, Pleasure, Satisfaction, as all
good and virtuous Actions have; this they call bitter, these are the grievances
of their Life, an intolerable Yoke, which they cannot and will not bear. This
is the most degenerate State of Human Nature, which has lost all Relish of
Virtue, and all Sense of Shame and Fear and Remorse when they do Evil; their
Minds are perfectly dead and stupid, without any Rational or Spiritual
Sensations; they have nothing but their bodily Senses left, and by these alone
they judge of Sweet and Bitter; what gratifies their bodily Senses, that is
their Pleasure and Happiness, without any regard to Virtue, Modesty, or Honor;
what lays Restraints upon their sensual Inclinations, that is bitter, uneasy,
and grievous; and no wonder that there is a Woe denounced against these Men.

4ly. Woe be to them that are wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their own
sight. Where the Proph^t speaks of the same Men still; those who call evil good
and good evil, who put darkness for light and light for darkness, who put
bitter for sweet and sweet for bitter; and yet think themselves the only wise
Men in the World, though they contradict the Sense of all Mankind, the natural
uncorrupted Sense of their own Minds, the Light of Nature and the Word of God.
This is the just Character of Atheists and Infidels, who think themselves the
only Wits, the only Philosophers, and laugh at all the rest of the World as
easy, credulous, unthinking Fools, who are under the Tyranny of Custom and
popular Opinions, which exposes them to all other Cheats. They think it an
Argument of Wit and profound Thought to contradict all Mankind; for there are
but few wise Men they say in the World, and the most are usually in the wrong,
which may be allowed as to improved Knowledge, which is gained by laborious
study and observation; but the Folly lies on the other side, when Men advance
Paradoxes, which contradict the universal Sense of Nature; for in such Cases
the most are likely to be in the right, because Natural Productions are more
common than Monsters; that a wise Man will rather think and judge with the
Multitude, when they think on Natures side, than with the most famed
Philosophers against Nature: But those who affect to contradict the rest of the
World, must think themselves the only wise Men, if they think at all; that we
have no more reason to wonder at their Pride and Insolence than at their
Atheism and Infidelity.

2dly. Let us now inquire how these Men come to sink into so degenerate a
State, as one would think impossible to a reasonable Nature; and that is
intimated in that order which is observed in my Text; that they first call Evil
Good, and then Good Evil; first put Darkness for Light, and then Light for
Darkness, etc. As to consider this particularly.

1st. They begin with calling Evil Good, for no Man can begin with calling Good
Evil: Nature will have the first word, and pass the first Judgment on Things;
and Nature as corrupt as it is, till it be depraved and vitiated by evil
Customs, will call Good good, and Evil evil. Atheists and Infidels must
confess, that as wise as they think themselves now, there was a time when they
were as very fools as the rest of the World, that is, when they had the same
Opinions about Good and Evil, which the rest of Mankind still have; when they
did own a moral difference between Good and Evil, and called Good and Evil by
their right Names; and it is as certain, that the only Reason for altering
their Opinions and changing the Names of Good and Evil, was changing their
Manners; that they grew very fond of what they themselves as well as the
foolish Multitude thought and called Evil, and then they began to think and to
call it Good, and the necessary Consequence of this is to call Good Evil; and
as unwilling as they are to own this, it is demonstrable there can be no other
Reason for it.

Though these Men could prove (which they will never be able to do) that there
is no moral, essential, immutable difference between Good and Evil, between
Virtue and Vice, yet this is no reason to call Evil Good, or Good Evil; for
though they were neither Sins nor Virtues, neither forbid nor commanded by a
Divine Law, yet they themselves confess, as I observed before, that what we
call Virtues have so much Good in them, that they are the best and wisest Rules
of Society and Conversation, necessary to secure every Man's private Interest,
and the Peace and good Government of the World, and therefore fit to be
encouraged, and to be made Laws in all civilized Nations; and that what we call
Sins have so much Evil in them, that they are very destructive to Human
Societies, and deserve to be restrained and punished; and then it is certain
there never can be any reason to call Evil Good, and Good Evil, which by their
own Confession is a direct contradiction to the Nature of Things; it is to call
that Evil, which they themselves own to be a great and public Good, and that
Good which they own to be a public Mischief, which there never can be any
reason for: So that the Case is plain, it is not Reason but Lust which calls
Evil Good and Good Evil; till Lust prevails above Reason, Virtue and Vice, Good
and Evil, keep those Names which God and Nature has given them, and such Men
offer as much Force and Violence to their Natural Understanding, when they call
Evil Good and Good Evil, as they do to Natural Conscience, when they choose the
Evil, and refuse the Good. This is Answer enough to such Men, who would reason
or laugh away the distinction between Good and Evil, and ought to be a Warning
to us all, how we engage in a Course of Wickedness; for how much soever we
despise and abhor these wicked Principles, we shall soon think as these Men do,
if we grow as wicked as they are.

2dly, These Men first put Darkness for Light, and then Light for Darkness. Men
are not born stark blind, but have the Light of Reason to discern the natural
differences of Things, and to direct their Lives; and as weak and defective as
mere natural Reason is, especially in Matters of Religion and another World, it
directs us to a safer Guide: For Reason it self teaches us to believe God, who
cannot deceive us, and can it self judge of the external and visible Marks of a
Revelation; that is, can judge, when God speaks, and what we must receive, as
taught by God. This is the Light of Mankind, the Light of Reason or Revelation,
what Nature teaches, or what God reveals: And all Mankind at first both see and
own this Light; for no Man is born an Atheist or an Infidel: But bad Men, who
have corrupted their Manners, and cannot justify their Vices, nor quiet their
Consciences, if they attend either to the Light of Nature or Revelation, must
seek for other Remedies; and this makes them espouse the Principles of Atheism
and Infidelity; and these they call Light, which in Truth is a mere Egyptian
Darkness; and then they must call Light Darkness, reject and scorn both the
natural Dictates of Reason, and the supernatural Revelation of the Divine Will,
as Ignorance and Darkness.

Now, whatever Opinion Men have of their Philosophy, yet how they should learn
what neither Nature nor God teaches them, or how they should discover, that
what all the rest of the World believe, that God and Nature has taught them, is
false, is a Mystery to me: And the only Account that can be given of it, is
what our Savior gives, That light is come into the world, and men love
darkness rather than light, because their deeds are evil: And when they love
Darkness, it is no wonder that they call it Light; but they must first call
Darkness Light, before they can put out the Light, and turn it into Darkness.

Now if this be the Truth of the Case, as our own Experience, and our
Observations of other Men assure us it is, this is a sufficient Reason to
reject all the Principles of Atheism and Infidelity without disputing; for they
were not born and bred with us, as what is natural is, and therefore must be
owing to the Lusts and Vices of Men, which are the Works of Darkness, and hate
the Light; and nothing seems stranger to me, than that of all the Men in the
World, these Men should pretend to Reason, who have the least Right o^ Pretense
to it: For what Principles can they reason on, who reject the Light of Nature
and of Revelation? What is Natural Reason, but the Reason of Humane Nature? And
how shall we know what this is, but by those common Principles of Reason, which
Nature has implanted in all Mankind, and which Art, and Wit, and Vice it self,
have much ado to silence, and can never perfectly root out? and certainly that
is not Natural Reason, which contradicts all the Principles of Humane Nature;
and what is that Reason, which is not the Reason of Humane Nature? Or how is
Mankind concerned in such Reasons as can be no Rule to them, unless they put
off Humane Nature? And indeed this is the Case of these very Men; they have put
off Humane Nature, are degenerated into Bruits; and have the Reason and
Understanding of Bruits, espouse such Principles as serve no other End, but to
justify the brutal Nature; and therefore laugh at the common Sentiments and
Faith of Mankind, and pretend to Reason, only to reason Humane Nature, as well
as Revelation, out of the World. How subtly soever these Men may dispute, it
suffices me, that this is not the Original Belief of Mankind, and therefore is
not owing to God or Nature, but to Lust. No Man can call Light Darkness, till
he is in love with Darkness for the sake of the Works of Darkness.

3dly. The same may be said of putting Bitter for Sweet, and Sweet for Bitter.
Men must first reconcile themselves to Wickedness, which is naturally very
bitter, uneasy, and grievous, and shake off all sense of Shame, and Modesty,
and Fear, before they can in good earnest reproach Virtue: For till Men are
very wicked, Virtue is the great Pleasure, the truest and sweetest Pleasure of
Humane Nature.

Thirdly. Let us now consider the Woe that is denounced against these Men, and
how unavoidable it is: Woe be to them that call Evil Good, and Good Evil, etc.
What this Woe is, is not here expressed; but an indefinite Woe is very
terrible, for it includes all the Woes that God has any where in Scripture
threatened against Sinners, the Vengeance of God in this World, and the eternal
Miseries of the next. A Woe signifies a State of extreme Misery, wherein Men
shall bewail and lament themselves, without Hope or Redress; all the Miseries
that such Sinners deserve, and therefore the greatest that Humane Nature can
suffer; because this is the greatest Degeneracy of Humane Nature. And therefore
to warn you all of falling into this State, I shall briefly show you how
unavoidable this Woe is.

When Men are so in love with their Sins, that they resolve never to part with
them, they vainly think, that the only way to secure themselves, is to banish
God out of the World, and to destroy all the differences of Good and Evil, and
then they may please themselves, and live as they list, without Fear or Shame,
or any Danger of a future Account.

Now so far they are in the right, that if they could banish God out of the
World, their Work were done, and they might bid defiance to all the
Pulpit-thunder, and laugh at all the superstitious fears of Sinners. But to
persuade themselves contrary to the Sense of Nature, and the universal Belief
of Mankind that there is no God, will not banish God out of the World: And if
they should find a God, after they have persuaded themselves there is none, as
they certainly will, they will find this God a provoked and terrible Judge: For
what greater Contempt and Despite can be offered to God, than to persuade
themselves that there is no God? This is a State of open Enmity: They hate God,
and would destroy his Being, if they could; for the Reason why they persuade
themselves there is no God, is because they would have none; and those who hate
God, are hated by him, and must suffer his eternal Vengeance.

Thus, if there were no essential difference between Good and Evil, they might
choose for themselves, and call things by what Names they pleased, Evil Good,
and Good Evil; but if there be such a difference, however they have made shift
to conquer this Sense at present, if they refuse the Good, and choose the Evil,
they must lose all that Happiness, which they might expect from what is a
natural Good; that is, all the true Happiness of Humane Nature, and suffer all
those Miseries which those Evils, which are contrary to the Happiness of Humane
Nature, and destructive of it, will expose them too. For Good and Evil are not
empty Names; but Good signifies the Happiness of that Nature, whose Good it is,
and Evil its Misery: And if after all their Philosophy, there be such a
distinction of Good and Evil with respect to Humane Nature (and that is a
strange Nature which has no Good or Evil belonging to it;) to reject the Good
must deprive them of Happiness, and to choose the Evil must make them miserable.
And if there be a moral as well as natural difference between Good and Evil,
that one deserves to be rewarded, and the other punished, we must expect, that
the Righteous Judge of the World will reward and punish us according to our
Works.

If Men shut their Eyes, or put out the Light, and then call Darkness Light,
and Light Darkness, how secure soever this may make them at present, all that
they gain by it, is to go to Hell blindfold, not to see their Danger, before
they feel themselves irrecoverably miserable. If there be a distinction between
Light and Darkness, in the Moral and Spiritual, as well as in the Natural
World, as there must be, if there be any difference between true Knowledge and
Wisdom, and Ignorance and Folly: If the Office of Light be to direct us in the
way to Heaven, those blessed Regions of eternal Light, which those who wander
in Darkness can never find: If the necessary Effect of putting Darkness for
Light, be to lose the sight of the other World, both of Heaven and Hell, and
the way that leads to each; if there be still a Heaven and a Hell, as they will
certainly find there is, it will be impossible for them either to get to
Heaven, or to miss Hell; they will lose their way in the dark to Heaven, but
Darkness leads directly to Hell, whither no Man will venture to go but in the
dark. Men, who have their Eyes open, and see Hell before them, are apt to
start, and give back at such a Sight; but those who can shut their Eyes, and
put out the Light, and neither see a God nor a Judge, Heaven nor Hell, will sin
on, without fear of Hell, till they feel its Torments. There is no such
infallible way to make our selves wicked and miserable as to shut out the
Light, which would discover to us both our Shame and Danger. And let no Man
envy those, who have so blinded their Minds, that they can sin without Shame
and Fear, who does not think it a great Happiness to be eternally damned before
they know it.

But there is this further Danger in putting Darkness for Light, and Light for
Darkness, that it ordinarily seals Men up to the Day of Destruction. Men, who
thus wilfully and obstinately shut their Eyes, seldom open them again in this
World; and it is too late for them to open them in the next. Such Men do not
deserve, that God should use any extraordinary Methods to convince them, and
they have already hardened themselves against all the ordinary Means of Grace;
especially when they are arrived at that degree of assurance, to be wise in
their own eyes, and prudent in their own sight; to think all Mankind easy,
ignorant, credulous Fools, but themselves. There is no way left of dealing with
such Men, as with reasonable Creatures; neither Argument nor Authority can
prevail, while they believe themselves the only Masters and Judges of Reason,
and have judged all beforehand, and have nothing to do, but to keep their
Ground, and to reject every thing that is offered for their Conviction with
Scorn. This shows how dangerous a State these Men are in, and how little hope
there is, if they be in the wrong, that they should ever see their Mistake, and
deliver themselves out of the Snare: And certainly we ought to look well about
us, before we shut our Eyes, when there is so little hope that we shall ever
open them again.

Thus when Men put Bitter for Sweet, and Sweet for Bitter, what is Bitter will
prove Bitterness in the latter end. If a Sense of Guilt and Sin be so grievous
and tormenting, as all Men feel it is, before they have stupefied their
Consciences, and corrupted their natural Sense of things; when this unnatural
Force is taken off, when these Opiates have lost their Virtue, and Conscience
awakes again, as it will certainly do in the next World, it will awake in a
terrible fright and fury; never to fall asleep more. When Sinners are convinced
of their Wickedness, and of the Displeasure of God, and of the Danger Sin has
brought them into, Repentance it self has its Agonies and Terrors, its Remorse,
and Shame, and Fear, but not without Hope: And Repentance as it reforms our
Lives, cures our Fears, and heals the Wounds which it made. But when Men's Eyes
shall be opened in the next World, to see their Sin and their Misery; when
Repentance comes too late to procure a Pardon; when they shall repent with
eternal Anguish, Horror, Despair, and Self-Revenge, then they will find, what
an evil and bitter thing it is to sin against God, which breeds a Worm in the
Conscience, which perpetually knaws and torments, but never dies.

To conclude. Let this warn us all how we engage in a Course of Sin, which is
so apt to pervert our Judgments, to blind our Minds, and to corrupt our natural
Sense of things. Or if we should at any time be conquered by the Temptations of
the World and the Flesh, let us rather choose the Shame and the Sorrows of
Repentance, than take Sanctuary in Atheism and Infidelity, which may skin over
the Wound at present, but cannot heal it; which may give us some present Ease
and Relief, but will end in eternal Woe. Let us always preserve a great Sense
of God, and of the differences of Good and Evil, and hearken to the Dictates
and Reproofs of Natural Conscience and of the Word of God, that we may never
fall under the VVoe denounced in my Text against those who call Evil Good, and
Good Evil; who put Darkness for Light, and Light for Darkness; who put Bitter
for Sweet, and Sweet for Bitter; who are wise in their own Eyes, and prudent in
their own Sight.

To God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, be Honor, Glory and
Power, now, and for ever.

Amen.
SERMON XIX.
Preached at the Temple-Church.
Isaiah 5. ver. 20, 21. Woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil; that
put darkness for light, and light for darkness; that put bitter for sweet, and
sweet for bitter.

Woe unto them that are wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their own Sight.


I Have already explained these Words, and shown, 1. What is meant by calling
evil good, and good evil; by putting darkness for light, and light for
darkness; by putting bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter; and who those are
who are wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their own sight.

2. How Men come to judge thus perversely of things.

3. The Woe denounced against such Men, and how unavoidable it is.

But there is one which I must observe from the whole, which may be of great
use to us, viz. The natural Progress of wickedness, and what art and pains it
requires to make a finished and accomplished Sinner.

In this corrupt State of Nature our sensual Inclinations are very strong, and
the first thing we learn, is to please our Senses; and this is apt to corrupt
our Lives with all worldly and fleshly Lusts; but still while Men are conscious
to themselves in any Instances, that what they do is Evil, and deserves to be
punished both by God and Men, they are but very imperfect Beginners; they sin
with Shame, and Fear, and Remorse; and it is to be hoped at one time or other,
the terrible Rebukes of their own Consciences, and the Fears of future
Vengeance may reclaim them; if this does not put a stop to them, but they
proceed in an habitual course of Wickedness, and are resolved not to part with
their Sins, it is time for them to consider how to get rid of those tormenting
Passions of Shame and Fear.

1. And the first Step to this, is to destroy the Essential Differences of Good
and Evil, to call Evil good, and Good evil; but how hard is it to do this? For,
besides the difficulty of rooting up those natural Notions of Good and Evil,
which are so deeply imprinted on our Minds; which, if it be allowed possible,
as I believe it is not, must yet be acknowledged to be very difficult, as
difficult as it must be to change or unmake our Natures: I say, besides this,
what good did Sin ever do them, that they should call it good? Or, what hurt
did Virtue ever do them, that they should call it evil? If they would but tell
us what they mean by Good and Evil, we might come to some Resolution in this
matter: Nay, if they would but allow that the same thing cannot be both good
and evil in its own nature, we might soon decide this Controversy. There is
not any one Vice, how fond soever they may be of it themselves, but what they
will condemn in other Men as a great Evil, especially when they themselves
suffer by it; nor any one Virtue, how averse soever they are to practice it,
but what they must commend in other Men as that which does a great deal of
good, especially when they themselves receive good by it. Now can any Man
possibly persuade himself that that is evil, which at the same time he
confesses does a great deal of good: Or, that to be good, which he confesses
does great evil and mischief? Men's Lusts and Vices may persuade them to refuse
the Good, and to choose the Evil, and to think it very good for them to do so;
but it is impossible for them, how much soever they gratify themselves by it,
to think those good Actions which do great Evil and Mischief; or those evil
Actions, which do great Good to the World: to think in good earnest that they
do good when they see and know that they do hurt and Mischief; or that they do
Evil, when they do Good: And as long as this Distinction between good and evil
Actions lasts, it is impossible for them to get rid of the Notions of Good and
Evil.

But this they own, and are not much concerned about it, that in pleasing
themselves in the Gratification of their Lusts, which they call Good, they very
often grieve and injure other Men; to deny their own Profit, Pleasures and
Satisfactions; nor to grieve and afflict themselves in the exercise of very
expensive and laborious Virtues for other Men's Ease and Pleasure. All that they
mean, when they reject the Moral Differences of Good and Evil is, that what we
call Virtues, do not in their own nature deserve Praise and Reward, nor Vice
Shame and Punishment; and therefore they are at liberty to choose what they
please; and their only natural Rule is to please themselves.

I shall not dispute this Matter with them now, which one would think those who
live in human Societies, should be afraid, as well as ashamed to own, lest
Mankind should think it as much their Interest to get rid of them, as they do
to destroy all Beasts of Prey; but it seems impossible to me, that Men can
really believe this, whatever they say.

That Praise and Shame are in their own natures inseparable from Virtue and
Vice, is not only the Belief of all Men, but what all Men feel. Good Men find
the Rewards of Virtue in the Applause of their own Consciences; and the first
Revenge that Sin takes upon bad Men, is in the Lashes and Reproaches of their
own Minds. Prima est hoec ultio quod se Iudice, nemo nocens absolvitur. And
that this is the universal sense of Mankind, I think needs no other Proof, but
that it is the universal Language of Mankind. For in all Languages under Heaven
the Names of Virtue and Vice are Names of Honor and Reproach. Natural
Perfections or Defects, such as Strength and Beauty, sound Reason and Vivacity
of Wit, or Weakness, Deformity, Ignorance, Folly, or Dullness; or the external
Circumstances of Fortune, as Riches or Poverty, Nobibility of Birth, or a mean
Parentage, a mean or liberal Education, may be brought into Men's Characters;
but you can never praise or reproach to any purpose, but upon account of Virtue
or Vice: and should any Man venture to commend another for being unjust,
unchaste, or intemperate, or to reproach him for the contrary Virtues, he would
make himself ridiculous; for Mankind are unacquainted with such new Terms of
Honor and Reproach, which in their Language signify quite contrary: Nay,
these very Men, who tell you that there is no natural Shame due to Vice,
whenever they quarrel and intend to reproach each other in good earnest (which
often happens) they always make one Vice or other the Matter of their Reproach,
which proves whatever they say, that they do still believe Vice to be very
infamous; or it is a great Misfortune to them, that there is no Language in the
World for them to rail at each other in, without confuting their own
Philosophy, and blemishing the Honor and Reputation of Vice.

And how is it possible that these Men should persuade themselves that Virtue
deserves no Reward, nor Vice Punishment, when they themselves find a kind
Resentment of all good Offices that are done them, and a great Inclination to
return them, which is to reward Virtue; and when they suffer Injuries, they
have as sharp and quick a Sense of Revenge, and are as restless and impatient
to punish those Injuries, as if they thought they deserved it.

Nay, how dare they say, that Virtue deserves n^ ^eward, nor Sin Punishment,
when in so saying they reproach all the wise Governments in the World, which
make it a principal Care to punish Wickedness and reward Virtue, at least, as
far as the Peace and Security of the Government is concerned in it; and yet if
these Rewards and Punishments are not due by Nature, this is an Encroachment
upon the Rights and Liberties of Nature, which I should think as sacred and
inviolable as the Liberty of Conscience which these Men are generally so
zealous for.

Well! They will allow this too, that it is very fitting and necessary that
some Laws should be agreed on for the Preservation and good Government of Human
Societies; and that Men should submit their natural Liberties to the Restraints
of Laws for the Benefit of public Protection; but still this makes no moral
Difference between Good or Evil; nor any natural Desert of Rewards and
Punishments; but it is all owing to Human Compacts and Governments, and can
reach no farther, and therefore not to another World; and as for this World,
they are contented to take their Fortune in it, to use their natural Liberties
as much as they can, and to defen^ ^emselves against private Revenge and
public Justice as well as they can.

This is an Hypothesis, I confess, which effectually destroys all the moral
Differences of Good and Evil, and delivers Men from the Fear of God, and of the
Punishments of the next Life; but what thinking Man can persuade himself to
believe this? or can so firmly believe it, as to give him any Security and
Confidence in sinning?

There are no Records, no Symptoms of any such original Contract as this, for
Mankind to give up their natural Liberties to the Restraints of arbitrary Laws.
The general Consent of all Nations (who had no Communication with each other)
in this Distinction between Virtue and Vice, intimates no other Compact but
that of a common Nature: And not only the wisest Philosophers, but the
universal Voice of Mankind attribute these Laws to Nature, not to Human
Institutions: And it must appear strange, if these Laws had no higher Original
than Human Compacts, that Mankind for so many Ages should not know any thing of
it, but should mistake them for the Laws of Nature, as after all the
Information these Men can give the World, the generality of Mankind do to this
day.

But suppose this Distinction between Virtue and Vice, and those Laws which
command the Exercise of Virtue, and forbid Vice, were originally framed and
enacted by Men; was there no Reason in the nature of things, why they agreed
upon such Laws? Yes, they will grant that they were necessary for the Peace,
and good Order and Government of Human Societies, to secure private Men from
Injuries and Violence, and to make them helpful and beneficial to each other;
and therefore they agreed to make them Laws: But why should we think that God
and Nature has not made those Laws which have natural and necessary Reasons to
make them Laws? Can mere Human Compacts and Governments either make or change
the Reasons and Necessities of things? Can they, if they so pleased, make
Virtue Vice, or Vice Virtue, and as well consult the Happiness of Mankind, and
the good Government of the World by doing so? If not, then mere Human Compacts
can neither make nor unmake these Laws. God has made these Laws for us, by
making us such Creatures, and giving us such Natures as require such Laws, if
we will live by Nature, and attain our natural Happiness; and who then can
think that God will not as much exact from us the Observance of these Laws, as
Men do? that he will not punish the Breach of these Laws, when Human
Governments find it necessary to do so? And has God made the Restraints and
Punishment of Men's Lusts and Vices necessary, and will he not punish them
himself? especially when the Authority of Human Laws and Human Government is
very precarious without the Awe of Religion, as those Lawgivers were very
sensible; who, to give the greater Veneration to their Laws, pretended to
receive them from their Gods. It is manifest, that this very Hypothesis which
allows no other Difference between Virtue and Vice, but what Human Laws and
Human Contracts make, leaves every Man at liberty to break these Laws when he
can do it safely, or will venture the Punishment, which is the reason that
makes these Men so fond of it, and shows how necessary a divine Authority is to
enforce the Obligation of these Laws, and to secure the very being of Human
Societies.

So that those who reason according to the common Principles of Humane Nature,
can never get rid of the Notitions of moral Good and Evil, nor attribute these
Laws to any other Author but that God who made us, and fitted our Natures to
these Laws; and no Man who believes that God has given us these Laws, can
doubt whether he will punish the Breach of them. But then, if to this we add
the more certain Revelation of the Gospel, wherein the Wrath of God is revealed
from Heaven against all Unrighteousness and Ungodliness of Men, this confirms
all the Fears of Nature, and leaves no possible Hopes for Sinners, but
Repentance from dead works, and Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, that it is
impossible for Men, who know any thing of the Gospel of Christ, to sin securely
with their Eyes open; and therefore

2dly. The next step they take, is to put out their Eyes, or to put out the
Light; to put darkness for light, and light for darkness; to reject all the
common Principles of Reason, and all Divine Revelation; as Ignorance, Folly,
and Imposture; But what a Task is this? to persuade our selves that Darkness is
Light, and Light Darkness? For the common Principles of Reason which Atheists
and Infidels must reject, before they can deny the Being of God, or a Divine
Revelation, shine as clear and bright in the Mind, as the Light of the Sun does
in the Heavens; and the admired Principles of Atheism and Infidelity put out
our Eyes, leave no Distinction between things, nor any certain Rules of
judging; as to give some few Instances of this.

There is nothing lies more easy and obvious in our Minds, than the Notion of
a first Cause, which gave Being to all things else; I will not dispute this
Point now, but allege it as a first Principle, which Mankind naturally assent
to, as the most reasonable Account of the Origin of all things. Now this the
Atheist rejects: for if they should allow a First Cause, they must own a God:
for the first Cause of all things is a God: And this is the wisest Reason they
have against it, though in truth it is a great Confirmation of the natural
Notion of a First Cause; because the Belief of a God is as natural and
universal, as of a First Cause; And these two Notions, which are both so
natural to Mankind, do mutually confirm each other.

But what Account do these Men give of the Origin of all things? They either
say the World is Eternal, and always was what it now is; or that Atoms were
Eternal, and that the World that now is, was made by chance: But is this the
natural Persuasion of Mankind, that the World had no Beginning and no Cause; or
that it was made-by chance? Is any thing in the World harder to be believed
than this, which we can form no possible Notion of? Nature teaches nothing of
all this; and how then should they come to know it? when they neither saw the
World from Eternity, nor saw it made by the fortuitous Jumble of Atoms.

It is certain these Principles differ as Light and Darkness do. To ascribe all
things to a First Cause, gives a sensible Account how all things were made, and
how they came to be so wisely made, which is Knowledge and Light: But to say
that the World was Eternal without a Cause, or that* it was made by chance,
when we see all things in it so wisely made, only confounds and amazes us, and
leaves us in Darkness.

Indeed all the Principles of Atheism and Infidelity have nothing natural or
enlightening in them, but are a Force upon our Understandings, and destroy all
the true Principles of Knowledge.

It is very easy and natural to our Minds to believe that something is
Eternal; for if there ever had been nothing, there never could have been any
thing: But the Question is, which is most easy and natural to Human
Understandings to say, that all things are Eternal without a Cause, or to
assert one Eternal Being, who is the Cause of all things; and every Man may
feel the difference between these two in his own Mind: for the Notion of a
First Cause, is as easy and natural as of an Eternal Being; and that natural
Notion we have of the Relation and Dependence between Causes and Effects,
necessarily leads us to the Belief of a First Cause: for if all things were
Eternal without a Cause, it is hard to conceive how there should ever after be
any natural Relation between them of Causes and Effects; and yet destroy the
Doctrine of Causes and Effects, and there is an end of all Reason and
Discourse. But then, as we have no natural Notion of the Eternity of all
things, so all the Appearances of Nature contradict it, and will not suffer it
to lie easy in our Minds. We see every day that all Individuals are made; Men
are born every day and die; and one Generation succeeds another; and thus it is
with Beasts, and Birds, and all other Animals; with Trees, and Fruit, and Corn,
and Herbs; and is it possible for any Man to believe that any of these things
were Eternal, when we see that the Individuals of all these several kinds of
Beings are daily made: for the World consists of Individuals; and if they are
all made, the World was made. Necessary Existence is Essential to the Notion of
an Eternal Being, which has no Beginning, nor any Cause, and therefore must be
always what it is, without the least Change; that to ascribe Eternity to a
World, which is subject to perpetual Changes, is as great an Absurdity, as to
assert an Eternal Succession without a Beginning.

Thus it is very natural to think, that the Effect can have nothing but what
the Cause can give it; and therefore we may learn what the invisible Cause is,
from visible Effects; that if we see any thing wisely made, we may conclude it
had a wise Cause, and therefore nothing can more contradict the natural Sense
of our Minds, than to ascribe such a World as we now live in, which discovers
such wonderful Art in its Contrivance, to blind and undesigning Chance.

I do not dispute these Matters now, but only consider how unnatural it is to
think so; and therefore how very difficult it is for any Man in good earnest to
espouse these Atheistick Principles.

Thus as for the Principles of Infidelity, how hard is it for any Man to
persuade himself that God never revealed himself and his Will to the World any
otherwise than by the Works of Creation, when all Mankind have believed
otherwise, and are naturally inclined to believe so; and there are great
Reasons to think that God will do so, and none to think that he will not;
especially when we have such evident Proof of this in Prophecy and Miracles,
which so strongly persuade the rest of Mankind: For to deny Prophecy and
Miracles when the Matter of Fact is plain, that there have been true Prophecies
or Miracles, and no Man besides themselves, who believes a God, doubts whether
he can foretell things to come, or exercise a Sovereign Authority over Nature
when he pleases, can be called by no softer Names than Stupidity or Impudence;
and whatever they say, it is not so easy for them to believe what they say;
for Prophecy and Miracles carry such a Conviction with them of a Divine Power,
and give such Authority to the Prophet, as is not easily resisted; as is
evident from hence, that some of the wisest of these Men dare not deny the
Authority of Prophecy and Miracles, could they be assured o the Truth of them;
but they hear no Prophecies nor see any Miracles now, and may be imposed on by
fabulous Relations, should they be over credulous of such Matters.

This would have been a good Answer, had they only some idle and uncertain
Reports of such things; but it can never satisfy themselves when they have
such an Authentic History as the Bible, the Old and New Testament for the
Foundation of Faith. Can any Man persuade himself to reject the Credit and
Authority of all Histories? If he cannot, whatever he may pretend, he will find
it a very hard matter after all his Criticisms, to disbelieve the Gospel, which
is the best attested and most credible History in the World: These are the
Difficulties of being an Atheist or Infidel, without which Men can never reject
or confound the Differences of Good and Evil, that all these Principles
contradict the natural Ideas of our Minds, and destroy all the natural Rules
and Measures of Reason, that we can no more distinguish between Truth and
Falsehood, than between Good and Evil; and if it be possible ever thus to efface
the natural Notions of our Minds, yet it must be a very uneasy and difficult
Task.

3dly. And yet it is at least as difficult to put bitter for sweet, and sweet
for bitter. Men may bribe their Understandings, but our natural Passions are
not so easily stifled. When the Frame and Constitution of our Natures has
annexed Shame, and Fear, and Remorse to bad Actions, which makes them very
bitter and grievous in the Review, whatever they were in the Act; it is not
laughing at these Fears as superstitious and owing to Education, which will
cure them, no more than the Stoics Brags that Pain was no Evil, could prevent
their feeling Pain. What is painful, will make us feel it, and Atheists and
Infidels themselves, when they think they have reasoned and laughed away all
their Fears, find that besides their frequent Misgivings and Jealousies, when
any great or surprising Occasion sets them free, these Passions return on them
with such a Fury, as all their Philosophy cannot resist. Now this endangers all
again; for natural Shame, and Fear, and Remorse, will make them own an
Essential Difference between Good and Evil, when they feel it.

4thly. But let us suppose all these Difficulties conquered, they are sensible
that there is one still remaining, viz. That all the rest of Mankind are
against them. The Heathen World owned a God, and as learned Men have proved,
one Supreme God, though they corrupted both the Notion and Worship of God by
Polytheism and Idolatry; but Atheism was so infamous among them, that some
Atheistick Philosophers, such as Epicurus himself, was forced to dissemble it:
They owned a moral Difference between Good and Evil; they owned Revelation, and
instituted Religions, and had them, though not from God, yet from those evil
Spirits, whom they worshipped for Gods. The whole Jewish Nation own the
Writings of Moses and the Prophets; and the whole Christian World whom they are
most at present concerned with, own both the Old and New Testament. These are
great Authorities against them, which one would think should make Men modest,
and put them a little out of countenance, and incline them to suspect, that
they may be mistaken; but they are sensible that Modesty would undo them, that
to suspect whether they are in the right, is as fatal to them, as to know that
they are in the wrong; and therefore they have no way left, but to outface all
the World, to laugh at all the rest of Mankind as superstitious credulous
Fools; and to think themselves the only wise Men in the World, to be wise in
their own eyes, and prudent in their own Sight. This indeed perfects all the
rest; and there is no help for it; for if they will contradict all Mankind,
they must think either themselves, or all the rest of Mankind to be Fools.

Now I believe those who are at all acquainted with the Passions of Human
Nature, cannot think this is a very easy thing to despise the general Sense of
Mankind, (which at least looks more like the Sense of Nature, than the private
Opinions of some few Philosophers) or to scorn all Men for Fools and Idiots,
who ever believed a God and a Providence, the moral Differences of Good and
Evil, Revelation, Prophecy and Miracles. Nothing but absolute Demonstration can
reasonably harden a Man against such an universal Consent; and it is enough to
make any Man to suspect even Demonstration it self, to have all the World
against him: For we can never think that all Mankind should conspire to resist
Demonstration; and yet, by what I have already said, you may easily perceive
that they are far enough from demonstrating the Principles of Atheism and
Infidelity.

But besides the general Sense of Mankind, which they may despise as an
unthinking Multitude (though the less of Thought and Design, the more there
appears of Nature in such a general Consent; but I say, besides this) they
should consider how many very wise thinking Men, and great Philosophers have in
these Points thought as the Multitude do. I will not name Moses, and the
Prophets, nor Christ and his Apostles, for whom I know they have little
Reverence; but what think they of Pythagoras, and Plato, and Tully, and Seneca,
and Epictetus, and many other such Men? Were they all Fools too, and yet they
were neither Atheists, nor Infidels, and were zealous Preachers of moral Virtue.

And as for the Unthinking Multitude, as they call them, it is worth
considering, that the greatest Numbers of them are as wicked as they themselves
are, or could wish them to be, that it is sufficiently their interest to be
Atheists and Infidels too; and yet Nature is too strong for their Fears, and
they believe a God, and the Difference of Good and Evil, though they believe
and tremble, as the Devils do.

It is wonderful what should give these Men such Confidence to despise all the
World, and I can think of no other Reason for it, but that they find it
necessary, and the only way they have to be even with the World, that since all
Mankind despise them, they will despise all Mankind: But they find this a very
unequal Match, and are very uneasy under it: For the Judgment of all Mankind
is a persuasive Argument of the Sense of Nature; their despising Mankind is
only a Sign of Folly and Impudence. I shall make some few Observations on what
I have said, and so conclude.

I. I observe how the Love of Sin will corrupt Men's natural Sense and Notions
of Things, and blind and stupifie their Minds. Nothing else but this can make
an Atheist or an Infidel. That there wants no Proof of the Being of God, is
evident from the general Belief of Mankind; and there is nothing in the Notion
of a God, which should make any Man averse to the Belief of a God, but only his
Justice in punishing Sinners; and that can make no Man afraid of believing a
God, but those who resolve to live in Sin. There is no other Exception Men can
take against the Gospel of Christ, which promises Forgiveness of Sins to those
who repent of their Sins and reform their Lives; but that Repentance and
Reformation are made the Gospel Terms of Forgiveness, and Hellfire is denounced
against impenitent Sinners.

If we consider this beforehand, it may convince us how unnatural Sin is, and
how foolish Sinners are, Sin can never be reconciled to the Principles of
Nature, and Sinners are so foolish as to put out the Light of Nature, that they
may transgress the Laws of Nature, which is a very foolish Design, to put out
the Light, that we may sin, and not know it, till we feel our selves eternally
damned for it.

2dly. This may satisfy us how difficult a thing it is to sin with security,
much more difficult than to obey the Laws of God. It is a much easier thing to
conquer and subdue our sensual Lusts and Appetites, by the Arguments and
Motives of Religion, by the Fear of God, and the Rewards and Punishments of the
next Life, than it is to deliver our selves from the Notions of Good and Evil,
from the Belief of a God and of the Gospel of Christ, that if we consult our
own Ease and Satisfaction, it is much easier to be a good Man, and to be saved,
than to live in Sin without the Fears of Damnation.

3dly. I observe how vain a thing it is to be wicked upon Principles. Men of
Honor, when they know they do such things as the World accounts infamous,
think themselves in Reputation bound to justify them; but those Principles,
whereby they pretend to justify their Vices, are more infamous than their
Vices themselves; as an Atheist, or Infidel in the Opinion of the World, is a
more contemptible Creature than a common Sinner.

All Men, who are liable to Temptations themselves, have a great Compassion for
the Weakness of Human Nature; but when Men will justify their Vices, and
justify them by renouncing God and all Religion; this strikes those who
otherwise it may be, are as bad themselves with Horror and Indignation, makes
wise Men despise them, and good Men abhor them; and I wish this general
Contempt of them were more public and visible, which would either cure their
Atheism and Infidelity, or make them more modest, that they should not appear
so wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their own sight.

4thly. I observe the irrecoverable Condition of these Men, who call evil good,
and good evil; who put darkness for light, and light for darkness; who put
bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter; who are wise in their own eyes, and
prudent in their own sight: they have hardened themselves beyond the ordinary
Methods of God's Grace, and therefore must unavoidably fall under this VVo: For
when Men have wilfully put out their Eyes, and stifled all the natural Notions
of their Minds, you may as well think of converting bruit Beasts, as of
converting them. This is a miserable hopeless State: Which God of his infinite
Mercy deliver us all from, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

To whom with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be Honor, Glory and Power, now
and for ever.

Amen.
FINIS.
Books published by the Reverend Dr. Sherlock Dean of St. Paul's.
AN Answer to a Discourse, entitled Papists protesting against Protestant
Popery. 2d. Edition 4to.

An Answer to the Amicable Accommodation of the Differences between the
Representer and Answerer. 4to.

A Vindication of some Protestant Principles of Church-Unity and Catholic
Communion, from the Charge of Agreement with the Church of Rome. 4to.

A Preservative against Popery, in two Parts; with a Vindication, in answer to
the Cavils of Lewis Sabran, Jesuit. 4to.

A Discourse concerning the Nature, Unity and Communion of the Catholic
Church. First Part. 4to.

A Vindication of the Doctrine of the Holy and Ever-Blessed Trinity, and the
Incarnation of the Son of God. 3d. Edition. 4to.

The Case of Allegiance due to Sovereign Powers, stated and resolved according
to Scripture, Reason, and the Principles of the Church of England. 4to.

A Vindication of the Case of Allegiance due to Sovereign Powers. 4to.

A Practical Discourse concerning Death. 8vo. 10th. Edition.

A Practical Discourse concerning a Future Judgment. 5th Ed. 8v8.

An Apology for writing against Socinians. 4to.

A Discourse concerning the Divine Providence. 4to. 2d. Edition.

A Defense of the Dean of St. Paul's Apology for writing against Socinians. 4to.

A Defense of Dr. Sherlock's Notion of a Trinity in Unity. 4to.

A Distinction between Real and Nominal Trinitarians, examined, in answer to a
Socinian Pamphlet. 4to.

A modest Examination of the Authority and Reasons of the late Decree of the
Vice Chancellor of Oxford, and some Heads of Colleges and Halls, concerning
the Heresy of Three Distinct Infinite Minds, in the Holy and Ever-Blessed
Trinity.

The Present State of the Socinian Controversy, and the Doctrine of the
Catholic Fathers concerning a Trinity in Unity.

Printed for W. Rogers.

Books Printed for W. Rogers.
ARchbishop Tillotson's Works in Folio. 2d. Edit. Price 20s.

-- Persuasive to frequent Communion in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper.
8vo. price stitched 3d.

-- Discourse against Transubstantiation. 8vo. price stitched 3d.

-- The way to prevent the Ruin of a sinful People, in a Fast-Sermon preached
before the Lord Mayor, etc. 8vo. price stitched 3d.

-- Sermons of Stedfastness in Religion: Of Family Religion; Of Education of
Children, and the Advantage of an early Piety. 12o. price 1s. 6d.

Archbishop Sharp. The Reasonableness of believing without seeing; A Sermon
preached before the King in St. James's Chapel on Palm Sunday, March 24. 1699.

Bishop Wilkin's Fifteen Sermons. 2d. Edition. 8vo.

Bishop of Worcester's Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome truly
represented, etc. 4to.

-- Doctrine of the Trinity and Transubstantiation compared, in Two Parts. 4to.

Bishop of Norwich's Two Sermons of the Wisdom and Goodness of Providence,
before the Queen at Whitehall. 4to.

-- Sermon preached at St. Andrew's, Holborn on Gal. 6. 7.

-- Of Religious Melancholy, a Sermon preached before the Queen at Whitehall.
4th. Edition. 8vo. price 3d.

-- Of the Immortality of the Soul, preached before the King and Queen at
Whitehall. 4to.

-- Thanksgiving Sermon before the King at St. James's April 16. 96.

-- Sermon preached before the House of Lords in the Abbey-Church at
Westminster, upon Monday, Ian. 31. 1697. 4to.

Bishop of Bath and Wells on the Pentateuch, in 2 Volumes. 8vo.

-- Sermon upon the Resurrection, preached before the Right Honorable the Lord
Mayor. 4to.

-- Demonstration of the Messiah, the 2d. and 3d. Vol. 8vo.

Dr. Clagget's Sermons in two Volumes. 8vo.

Dr. Wake's Sermons and Discourses upon several Occasions. 8vo.

Dr. Pelling's Practical Discourse concerning Holiness. 8vo.

-- Discourse concerning the Existence of God.

Mr. Blackhalt's Sermon at Brentwood in Essex, October. 7. 1693. at the
Visitation of the Right Reverend Father in God Henry Lord Bishop of London.

Mr. Ellis's Necessity of serious Consideration. 8vo. pr. bound 1s. 6d.

-- Sum of Christianity. 8vo. price 3d.

-- Scripturie Catechism. price 3d.


