THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN Real and Nominal TRINITARIANS EXAMINED, And the
Doctrine of a Real Trinity Vindicated from the Charge of Tritheism.

In ANSWER To a late Socinian Pamphlet, ENTITLED, The Judgment of a
Disinterested Person, concerning the Controversy about the Blessed Trinity,
depending between Dr. S -- th, and Dr. Sherlock.

LONDON, Printed for William Rogers, at the Sun, over against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleet Street, 1696.

THE CONTENTS.
SECT. I.
Concerning Real and Nominal Trinitarians. Page 1 The late Archbishop
Tillotson and Dr. Bull owned by him to be Real Trinitarians, p. 3 Dr. Bull's
Learned Defense of the Nicene Faith asserts and proves a Real Trinity, p. 4
SECT. II.
This Author's Account of the Doctrine of the Realists and Nominalists,
concerning the Holy Trinity. p. 10 The occasion of this Distinction between
Real and Nominal Trinitarians and the Use the Socinians make of it, ibid. This
Author's Account of the Doctrine of the Realists p. 13 That there are three
Minds, Spirits, Substances, in the Trinity, not the Language of all Realists,
nor owned by any of them in his Sense, p. 14. etc. The Difference between an
individual and singular Substance, p. 16 His Representation of the Doctrine of
the Nominalists, p. 19 The only Difference between them and the Realists, not
in Three Substances and One Substance, p. 21
SECT. III.
The Authorities (as ^he calls them) of the Nominals against a Real Trinity,
examined, p. 22 What the Nicene Council meant by the Homoousion, or One
Substance of Father and Son, p. 24 Socrates's Account of the Dispute concerning
the Word Homoousios, p. 25 This Author's Mistake in making the Arian
Homoiousios signify the same Substance in Sort, or Kind, or Properties, p. 32
The third Council of Constantinople, concerning Two Natural Wills, and Two
Operations in Christ, ibid. In what Sense this Council owned but one Will in
the Trinity, p. 33 The Doctrine of the Council of Lateran, concerning the
Trinity, p. 34 In what Sense they teach that the Divine Essence, neither
begets, nor is begotten, nor proceeds, p. 37 Spanhemius's Account of some late
Disputes about the Trinity, and the Judgment of the Belgic Synods, p. 38
SECT. IV.
His three first Arguments against a Real Trinity, p. 41 All his Arguments
oppose a Trinity of subsisting Persons, ibid. One (Personal) infinite Mind or
Spirit, not the Definition of the One God, p. 43 Concerning three Wills,
Understandings, etc. in One God, p. 45 His Argument to prove, that the Second
and Third Persons in the Trinity are not Substance and Spirit, but only
Properties, or Immanent Acts, ibid. His Argument from the Council of Lions
answered, p. 46 Concerning the Eternal Generation and Procession, p. 48 In what
Sense the Son is the Wisdom of the Father, p. 52 What the Fathers meant by that
Argument for the Eternity of the Son, that God was never (...), without his
Word, p. 53 The Judgment of Cabassutius about this Argument, p. 54 Concerning
Emanatory Causes and Effects, p. 56
SECT. V.
The Fourth and Fifth Argument against a Real Trinity answered, p. 59 The
Difference between three Divine Persons, [each of which is true and perfect
God,] and three Gods, p. 63 The Charge of Tritheism founded on an Equivocal use
of those Terms, One God, and One Person, p. 67 Whether the Arguments for the
Unity of God, prove, that there is but one Person, who is God, p. 69
SECT. VI.
The Defense this Author makes for the Nominals against the Objections of the
Realists, p. 78
The End of the CONTENTS.
ERRATA.
PAge 15. Marg. for (...) r. (...) p. 49. l. 6. for or r. are. p. 63. l. 12.
dele for. p. 75. l. 25. for aclls, r. calls.

THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN REAL and NOMINAL TRINITARIANS, CONSIDERED.
SECT I.
Concerning Real and Nominal Trinitarians.
THIS Author calls himself a Presbyter of the Church of England; and by what I
have heard, I fear it is too true: I pray God preserve the Church from such
Presbyters, who Eat her Bread, and Betray her Faith.

His pretense for Writing this Pamphlet, is, The Controversy between Dr. S --
th and Dr. Sherlock, about the B. Trinity. I will say nothing of that matter,
let the Animadverter Answer it to God and his own Conscience; This Author has
said enough about it, and I wish he had but used the same Candor throughout,
and then there would have been no need of this Answer, but though it seems he was
Disinterested as to the contending Doctors, he was deeply Interested as to the
Cause of Socinianism, to which he promised no small Advantage from this Dispute.

And indeed it is too evident, what advantage our Socinian Adversaries have
made, and hope still to make of this Controversy. This has occasioned that
scandalous Distinction between Real and Nominal Trinitarians; which is such an
open abuse upon the Nominalists, that were I one of those whom he Reproaches
with that Title, I could not bear it: For the plain English of it is no more
but this; those who believe a Trinity, and those who believe no Trinity; for
Nominal Trinitarians, as opposed to Real Trinitarians, can signify nothing
more. And could this Author, and his Friends, persuade the World, That the
greatest part of our Clergy, nay, the Church of England it self, as he
pretends, are but Nominal Trinitarians, their Work were done; for a Socinian is
a much more honorable Name; and when Men agree in the Faith, it is a vain
thing to dispute about Words; And therefore this Author is equally zealous to
oppose the Realists, that is, to overthrow the Doctrine of a Real Trinity, and
to persuade the Nominalists, that though they differ in some peculiar forms of
Speech, yet there is no reason they should Quarrel, for their Faith is the
same: And this I thought a sufficient Reason to judge over again, the Judgment
of this Disinterested Person.

I shall pass over the Account he gives of the History of this Dispute, only
observing, that Dr. Sherlock did not begin it; He wrote against the Socinians,
without suspecting that he should meet with such furious and bitter Assaults
from another Quarter, and yet after such great Provocations as might move a
very tame man, he has made no return, which unbecomes a true Christian Spirit
in such Cases.

But there is one thing wherein this Author has done the Dean right, by
acquainting the world, That he has not been the first Broacher of this Heresy
(as they call it) of Three Distinct Infinite Minds and Spirits in the Unity of
the Godhead. He reckons up several others of the same mind, some who appeared
before, and some since his Vindication, as Dr. Cudworth, Dr. Bull, the late
Archbishop Tillotson, the present Bishop of Gloucester, Mr. How, Mr. I. B. Mr.
Bingham. And I could tell him of many more, as many as do sincerely believe,
That God is a Father, and has a True, Real, Subsisting Son, and Holy Spirit.

But yet he himself is sensible, and his Socinian Friends, or rather he
himself, in some former Pamphlets, has observed very material differences
between the Dean's Hypothesis, and some of these Learned Men: He neither owns
the Platonic Inequality of Dr. Cudworth, nor the Sabellian Composition and
Union of others, but asserts Three Real, Distinct, Coequal, Coeternal Persons;
not in one singular and solitary, but in one numerical Nature and Essence. But
I believe the Dean will heartily thank him for giving him the late Archbishop
and Dr. Bull, two such Names as will command Reverence, and shelter him from
the Imputation either of Novelty or Heresy, at least as to this Point: And it
is worth observing, from the example of these two great Men, at what rate some
Persons judge of Men and Doctrines. The good Archbishop, by his Trinitarian
Adversaries, is charged with Socinianism, and by his Socinian Adversaries with
Tritheism; and yet he must have very ill luck, if he could stumble upon two
such Extremes.

As for Dr. Bull, his Learned and Elaborate Defense of the Nicene Faith, was
printed at Oxford, and received with Universal Applause, as it highly deserved:
None of them to this day have charged him with the least Heresy, and I believe
will not yet venture to do it. And yet, as this Writer confesses, and as every
unprejudiced Reader must own, the Doctrine of the Defense as to this Point, is
the very same with the Dean's Hypothesis, which these very Persons have
condemned as Impious and Heretical. So true is it, Duo cum faciunt idem, non
est idem. All that this Socinian intended by bringing Dr. Bull into the Fray,
was to follow the Blow which the Animadverter and the Oxford Decree had given
to a Trinity of distinct, proper, subsisting, living, intelligent Persons,
(which is all that Dr. Bull, or the Dean assert) by their Charge of Tritheism;
which he hoped would be a sufficient Answer to that otherwise unanswerable
Book, and together with Dr. Bull, would confute all the Fathers at once, on
whose Authority he so much relies, and to whom he perpetually appeals; for no
Christian must hearken to those men, whatever their Authority be, did they
really (as they are unjustly charged) preach Three Gods; and thus he thinks he
has got rid of all Antiquity, and of the Tritheistick Trinity with it. But
still this makes well for the Dean, who will be contended to stand and fall
with the Catholic Fathers, and will never desire to be thought more Orthodox
than they.

That Dr. Bull asserts a Real, Substantial Trinity, in as high and express
Terms as ever the Dean did, is so plain throughout his Book, that it is
needless to prove it. All his Arguments suppose this Hypothesis, and are
unintelligible without it; and therefore I shall take notice but of one or two
particular Passages, whereon, as we shall presently see, Denique vocem (...)
aliquoties a priscis Ecclesiae Doctoribus, etiam qui concilium Nicaenum
antecesserunt, pro subsistentia, vel pro re singulari per se subsistente, quae
in rebus intellectu praeditis idem est quod persona, usurpari multis exemplis
constat. Bull. Defens. Fid. Ni^aen. p. 182.
this whole heavy Charge of Tritheism rests.

He tells us, That Hypostasis, both before and in, and after the Nicene
Council, was used by the Catholic Fathers for Subsistence, or a particular
thing which subsists by it self, which, in intelligent Beings, is the same with
Person: That in this sense, they taught Father and Son (...), to be two
Hypostases; and Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, to be three Hypostases. And that
upon this account Tertullian, to assert the Subsistence of the Son against
those who denied him to be a distinct Person from the Father, affirms him to be
Substantiam and rem Substantivam, Substance, and a substantial Being. And
having by many irrefragable Instances proved this use of the word to be very
Catholic, he adds, That probably this word Hypostasis would still have been
used in this sense, had not the Arians abused it to countenance their Heresy,
expounding it to a more general Notion of Essence, Nature and Substance, and
teaching, as the Catholic Fathers did, That the Father and Son were two
Hypostases; but thereby meaning, that they were of a different Nature and
Substance, Et hoc sensu sine offensione usurpari perseverasset (ut arbitror)
vox (...), nisi Ariani ipsam abusi fuissent ad propagandam haeresin suam, pro
natura and substantia in generaliori significatione accipientes, ac docentes
Patrem and Filium duas esse Hypostases, hoc est, naturas ac substantias
diversas, a se invicem discrepantes. Ibid. p. 188.
unlike to each other: And that in opposition to them it was, that the Sardican
Council taught, Father and Son to be (...), one Hypostasis; that is, as they
themselves expressly affirm, in the sense of (...), or one Nature and Essence.
We may find a great deal more to this purpose in the same place, in his
Vindication of Origin from the Objections of Huetius, who charges him with
denying the Father and Son to be of the same Essence and Substance, or (...),
because he opposes those who denied the Holy Ghost to have (...) a Substance of
his own, distinct from the Father and the Son: whereas that learned man shows,
that Origin by (...), meant no more than Hypostasis, in which sense that word
is often used among the Ancients; and therefore in opposition to those Noetian
Heretics, asserts Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, to be (...), three Hypostases,
as Hypostasis signifies Rem singularem and individuam per se subsistentem, P.
190.
quae in iis, quae vita and intellectu gaudent, idem est quod persona: A
singular and individual thing, which subsists by it self, which in Beings that
have Life and Understanding, signifies a Person: so that Three Hypostases, are
Three substantial, self-subsisting, living, intelligent Persons.

And though the Phrase, of Three Minds, Three Spirits, Three Substances, ought to
be used very cautiously, and not without great necessity, when applied to the
Holy Trinity, for fear of the Arian Notion of Three Substances, yet it is
evident how far this learned man is from thinking such Expressions to be
Impious and Heretical: He expounds* Three Hypostases to the very same Sense;
and elsewhere quotes that passage of St. Hilary concerning the Synod at
Antioch, Page 269.
as truly Catholic, where in opposition to the Sabellians, they assert the
Divine Persons in the Trinity, to be tria in substantia, or tres substantias,
three in Substance, or three Substances. Thus when Petavius accuses Methodius
for calling Father and Son, Sed haec omnia Catholicum sensum facile admittunt,
adeoque postulant -- Ad primum quod attinet, potiori jure Pater and Filius,
(...), a Methodi^ dicuntur, quam (...) five (...), ab aliis Patribus
appellantur, qui pro Catholicis tamen and Orthodoxis in hoc articulo habiti
sunt. Scilicet hae voces omnino personaliter, ut dici solet, accipiuntur ut
supra ostendimus. Bull. Defens. p. 274.
(...), two Creating and Operative Powers, he answers, That Father and Son
might with less offense, and better reason, be called Two Powers by Methodius,
than Two Natures and Substances, (...) five (...), as they are called by other
Fathers, who yet were always accounted Catholic; but such expressions as these
must be understood only personally, and then they are Orthodox: So that
according to this learned man, Two Personal Natures, Substances, and Powers,
are Catholic Expressions; and this is the very account which Dr. Sherlock in
his Defense, if he were the Author of it, gives of Three Minds, and Spirits,
that he understood it personally, for Three Divine intelligent Persons; and
therefore is as Orthodox in these very Expressions, as Dr. Bull, and those
Catholic Fathers to whom he appeals.

In another place, speaking of some Modern Divines, who allow the Son to be of
the Father, considered as a Son, Addo ego, Personam hic sine essentia concipi
non posse, nisi statueris Personam in Divinis nihil aliud esse, quam merum
(...), quod plane Sabellianum est, p. 439.
but not as God; that he receives his Person, but not his Essence or Divine
Nature of the Father; he observes that we cannot conceive the Person without
the Essence, unless by Person in the Divinity, we mean no more than the mere
mode of subsistence, which is plain Sabellianism.

So that this Writer has done Dr. Sherlock a greater kindness than he was aware
of, and as it will quickly appear, has lost his own Cause by it; if Dr. Bull
have truly represented the sense of the Fathers, as all learned and
unprejudiced men must own he has: For here are such a Cloud of Witnesses to the
Doctrine of a Real, Substantial, Subsisting Trinity, as no later Authorities,
whatever they are, can stand against.

What I have now quoted, is only what first came to hand, but there is hardly
any thing in the whole Book, but what by immediate and necessary consequence,
proves the real dictinction of proper, subsisting Persons in the Trinity; that
each Person is by himself in his own proper Person, as distinguished from the
other Two, Infinite Mind, Substance, Life, Wisdom, Power, and whatever is
contained in the Notion and Idea of God. Instead of particular Quotations for
the proof of this, I shall only Appeal to the Titles of the several Sections of
that learned Work, which I believe no man can make common sense of, without
acknowledging a Trinity of proper, substantial, subsisting Persons.

The First Section concerns the Preexistence of the Son of God, That he, who
afterward was called Jesus Christ, did subsist before his Incarnation, or
Nativity, according to the Flesh of the Blessed Virgin, in another and more
excellent Nature than that of Man; That he appeared to the Holy Men under the
Old Testament, as a kind of Anticipation of his-Incarnation; That he always
presided over, and took care of his Church, which he was to Redeem with his own
Blood; That he was present with God his Father before the foundation of the
World, and that by him all things were made. This is the Faith of Christians,
and this he proves to be the constant Doctrine of all the Catholic Fathers for
the first three hundred years, and so it continued to After-ages: Now let any
man consider, what a pretty kind of dispute this is, about the Preexistence of
the Son, if he have no proper permanent Existence of his own, but considered as
a Divine Person, is only another Name for the Father, or an immanent Act, like
the transient Thought, or transient Act of Reason in Man. For if the Son be not
a distinct Person from the Father, and as proper a subsisting Person as the
Father himself is, the Question will amount to no more but this, Whether God
the Father had a Being before Jesus Christ was Born of the Virgin, or before
the World was made? Or, Whether he had any immanent Acts of Wisdom or Reason,
before he made the World? Or, Whether he took the Name of Son upon himself,
before he made the World, or made any Creature to know him or his Name. The
Christian Fathers were Wiser men than to talk at this impertinent rate; and
therefore they did believe, that God had a Son in a true and proper Sense; a
subsisting, living, omnipotent Son, by whom he made the World; who appeared in
his own proper Person to several of the Patriarchs under the Old Testament; and
in the fullness of time, was Incarnate of the substance of the Virgin Mary. The
very Question it self necessarily supposes this to make Sense of it; much more
impossible is it to understand what the Fathers say upon this Argument, upon
the Sabellian or Socinian Hypothesis.

The Second Section concerns the Consubstantiality of the Son with the Father;
That the Son of God is not of a created or mutable Essence, but perfectly of
the same Divine unchangeable Nature with his Father, and therefore is True God
of True God. Now, What Sense can be made of this, if the Son be not as truly
and properly Substance in his own Person, as distinguished from the Person of
the Father, as the Father is in his own Person? For, How can the Son be
Consubstantial, or of the same Substance with the Father, if he be no Substance
at all? Especially since this Learned man has proved, That the Catholic
Fathers rejected the Homoousion in the Sabellian Sense, for one singular
Substance of Father and Son, and that they assert, as common Sense would teach
us, that nothing is Consubstantial to it self, but (...), one thing is
Consubstantial to another.

The Third Section concerns the Coeternal Existence of the Son with the
Father: Now for Father and Son to Coexist, necessarily supposes, that they both
Exist, and actually subsist by themselves; for two cannot Exist and Subsist
together, unless each of them actually subsist; For as the Fathers observe,
nothing can properly be said to Coexist with it self: For it can admit of no
Question, Whether any one has been, as long as he has been: And therefore,
since the Co-eternity of the Son has been a very serious Dispute between the
Catholics and the Arians, it is certain, that both of them owned Father and
Son to be two distinct Persons, which did distinctly Exist and Subsist.

The Fourth Section teaches the Subordination of the Son to the Father; that
though the Son be Coequal with the Father, as having the same Divine Nature with
the Father, without any change or diminution; yet he is Subordinate to the
Father, as receiving the Divine Nature from him: That the Father is God of
himself; the Son, God of God. Now if the Son receive the Divine Nature by an
eternal Communication from the Father, he must have it in himself, in his own
Person, and be a living, subsisting Son, true God of God; and if he be a true
proper Person, and subordinate to the Father, he must be a distinct Person, for
no Person can be subordinate to himself. These Questions Dr. Bull has
discoursed at large, with great variety of Learning, and acuracy of Judgment;
and it is a Mystery to me, how those, who pretend to admire Dr. Bull, should
quarrel with Dr. Sherlock; or that those who pay any reverence to the Catholic
Fathers, should quarrel with either of them. This Socinian, as I observed
before, was glad to draw Dr. Bull into the number of Tritheists, but by that
means he has drawn in all the Catholic Fathers too, and has now drawn together
so many Tritheists, as he will never know how to get rid of again: or to speak
more properly, he has unanswerably Confuted the Charge of Tritheism, and
discovered the Trick and Mystery of it, by charging the Catholic Faith it
self, and all the Catholic Fathers, the most zealous Patrons and Advocates of
it, with Tritheism.

SECT II.
This Author's Account of the Doctrine of the Realists and Nominalists,
concerning the Holy Trinity.
THE very Name of Socinianism is justly abhorred by all Christians, who place
all their hopes of Salvation in the Incarnation, Sacrifice, and Intercession of
the Eternal Son of God: For if Christ Jesus, who is the Savior of Mankind, be
not the Eternal Son of God in humane Nature, all those great Assurances, which
the Gospel gives us, of God's love to Sinners, in giving his own Eternal Son
for us, of the Expiation of our Sins by the Blood of the Son of God, a price of
inestimable value, and of all the Blessings which we expect, both in this world
and in the next, from the powerful intercession of a Beloved Son, and a
meritorious High Priest; I say, all these strong Consolations dwindle into no
more, than the Word and Promise of a great and extraordinary Prophet, the Death
of a Martyr, and the Intercession of a Beloved Creature, and humble Supplicant,
who has no inherent Power and Authority to save us. Our Modern Socinians are
very sensible, what an invincible prejudice this is; for few serious Christians
will be willing to part with their hopes of Heaven, or to part with greater,
infinitely greater hopes for less, or to think so meanly of their Savior, who
is the object of their Faith and Worship, as to thrust him down into the rank
and number of mere Creatures. This the Catholic Church would never endure in
the Arians, who yet attributed a most excellent Nature and Glory to Christ,
next to God himself, superior to the highest Orders of Angels, as being before
the World it self, and the Maker of it, but yet not true and perfect God, as
not having the same Nature with his Father, nor Eternally begotten by him; much
less would they ever endure the thoughts of the Photinian or Samosatenian
Heresy, that is, of Socinianism, which makes Christ but a mere man, who had no
Being before he was Born of his Virgin Mother.

This, I say, being so invincible a prejudice against them, they have of late
tried new Arts, and have taken advantage of some very unhappy Disputes, to
impose upon unwary men, and to appear abroad with new Confidence under a less
frightful Disguise.

The late Controversy about Three infinite Minds and Spirits in the Trinity,
has given them the advantage of distinguishing between Real and Nominal
Trinitarians, or such Trinitarians as believe a Trinity of Real subsisting
Persons; and those who believe only one Real Person, who is God, with a Trinity
of Names, or Offices, or immanent Acts and Powers. The Realists, they call
Trithiests, or such Heretics, as assert Three Gods. The Nominals, they think
very Orthodox, and the Church; and though the Nominals and Socinians differ in
some forms of Speech, yet they say, and I think very truly, that there is no
considerable difference in their Faith, as they state it, and seem well enough
inclined to exchange that odious name of Socinians, for the more plausible and
popular name of Nominal Trinitarians. And thus they can Dispute as heartily as
ever, and with more safety and honor, against the Faith of the Trinity, so
they do but call it a Real Trinity; and may dispute for Socinianism as
earnestly as ever, so they do but call it a Nominal Trinity.

-- En quo discordia cives.
Perduxit miseros! --
That this is the whole Artifice of this present Pamphlet, any one who reads
it, may see with half an eye; and I hope some men, if ever they can grow cool,
will consider a little better of it: I do not so much intend gravely to Dispute
with this Author, as to wash off his Paint, and bring the Controversy back
again to its right Owners, those truly opposite Parties of Trinitarians,
Sabellians and Socinians.

That those whom he calls the Real Trinitarians, are the only men who believe a
Christian Trinity, and that the Nominal Trinitarians do not believe a Trinity,
is evident in their very Names; for a Trinity, which is the object of our Faith
and Worship, is certainly a Real Trinity, if it be at all; and one would think,
that a Trinity, which is not a Real Trinity, should be no Trinity at all: The
Zeal which the Socinians express against a Real Trinity, is a good Argument,
That that is the true Christian Trinity which they and their Predecessors have
always rejected in contradiction to the Catholic Faith; and the great fondness
they express for a Nominal Trinity, is as good a proof, that it is no Trinity
at all. Such a Trinity as is reconcilable with Socinianism, as all these men
own a Nominal Trinity to be, can never be the Christian Faith, unless
Socinianism be Christianity: Which I hope, those men, whom this and some other
late Writers call Nominal Trinitarians, will not yet own; and yet if
Socinianism be a Contradiction to the Christian Faith, that must be the true
Catholic Faith of the Trinity, which most directly contradicts Socinianism in
the parting Points, and that none but a Real Trinity does: So that it is in
vain for them to hope to conceal themselves under some insignificant Names; let
them deal fairly with the world, and Dispute professedly against a Trinity; for
a Real Trinity is neither better nor worse than a Trinity; and then let them
produce their Authorities and Reasons to prove, that the Catholic Church, even
the Nicene Council it self, never believed a Trinity, and that the Faith of a
Trinity is Tritheism: This becomes men of candor and honesty, let their
Opinions be what they will; but to sneak and sculk like men who have a mind to
steal a Cause, and are as much ashamed to appear in open light, as such kind of
Traders use to be, is mean and pilfering, and unworthy of their Ancestors, who
owned themselves at Noonday, and bravely outfaced all the Authority of the
Catholic Church, and all the Reason of Mankind.

That this is the truth of the Case, and that they themselves look upon this
distinction as no more than a jest, is evident from that account this Writer
gives of the Doctrine of the Realists and Nominalists concerning the Trinity.

As to the Explication, The judgment of a disinterested person. p. 12.
the Party called Realists say, The Holy Trinity, or the Three Divine Persons,
are Three distinct infinite Substances, Three Minds, Three Spirits; they are
Three such Persons; that is, as distinct, and as really subsisting and living,
as three Angels, or three Men are. Each Person has his own peculiar individual
Substance, his own personal and proper Understanding, Will and Power of Action;
an Omnipotence, Omniscience, and all other Divine Attributes, diverse in number
from the personal Omnipotence, Omniscience, etc. of the other two Persons. In
the Creation, as also in the Government of the world, they are to be considered
as distinct Agents, not as one Creator, or one Governor; but only in this
sense, that the Father acts by the Son through the Spirit: of which the meaning
is, that the Father, in regard of his Paternal Prerogative, acts not
immediately, but by the Son and Spirit.

This Account, as far as it concerns the real Subsistence of Three distinct
infinite Persons in the Unity of the Godhead, does contain the true Catholic
Faith of the Trinity; and yet he has both imperfectly and falsely represented
the Opinion of the Realists.

1. He tells us, They say that the Holy Trinity, or the Three Divine Persons,
are Three distinct infinite Substances, Three Minds, Three Spirits. Now any one
would hence conclude, That this is the Universal Doctrine of all the Realists,
and that this Phrase of Three Substances, Minds, and Spirits, is the Parting
point between the Realists and Nominals: That all who believe a Real Trinity,
own Three Infinite Minds and Spirits; and that no man can believe a Real
Trinity, who does not own this. Now this is manifestly false, as our late
Experience proves. The greatest number of Realists (as far as I can guess) who
believe a Real Trinity, a Real subsisting Father, a Real subsisting Son, and a
Real Subsisting Holy Spirit, do yet reject those Expressions of Three Infinite
Minds and Spirits, which are liable to a very Heretical Sense, either Arianism,
or Tritheism; and therefore were very sparingly, and with great Caution used by
the Catholic Fathers, though they used Three Hypostases in the very same Sense,
and did not condemn Three Natures and Substances when personally used, as we
have seen above. And therefore the late Dispute about Three Minds, does not in
it self divide the contending Parties into Realists and Nominals, as the
Socinians too hastily conclude, and think to carry their Cause by it. Very good
Catholics may dispute such expressions, as we know they did the Homoousion it
self; for One Substance is as liable to an Heretical Sense, as Three
Substances: for that may be Sabellianism, and the other may be Arianism or
Tritheism, and both of them rightly understood may be very Orthodox; but
whether they are or no, must be judged by the Sense in which they are used; and
the Catholic Fathers, like good Christians, have easily yielded to each other
in a dispute of words, when it has appeared that the difference has been only
in words, not in the Faith. What Athanasius says upon a like occasion,
(...)Ath. decret. Syn. Nic. p. 267.
is a very good Rule to maintain Christian Peace and Unity. To corrupt the
Faith is always unlawful, though we palliate it with the most popular and
orthodox forms of speech: but a true and holy Faith does not degenerate into
Impiety and Heresy by some new improper expressions, while he who uses such
words, has a Pious and Orthodox sense.

But to proceed. Though all Realists do not agree about the use of those words,
Three Minds or Substances; yet they all do, and all must agree in what follows,
viz. They are Three such Persons, that is, as distinct, and as really
subsisting and living, as three Angels, or three Men. They are so without
doubt, if they be real proper Persons; for a Person lives and subsists, and
Three Persons must be really distinct, or they cannot be Three; that is, the
Father's Person is no more the Person of the Son, nor the Person of the Son the
Person of the Father, than Peter is John, or John is Peter; but then they do
not subsist dividely, or separately, as Peter and John do. He adds, Each Person
has his own peculiar individual Substance, his own personal and proper
Understanding, Will, and Power of Action; an Omnipotence, Omniscience, and all
other Divine Attributes, diverse in number from the Personal Omnipotence,
Omniscience, etc. of the other Two Persons. Now I except against nothing in
this, but the Phrases of peculiar and individual substance, and diverse in
number; for peculiar and individual, I would say a singular substance. for though
a singular substance in created Natures is a peculiar and individual substance
also, it is not so in the Divinity. The Catholic Fathers always distinguished
between One Substance, and One singular Substance of the Godhead. To deny One
Substance, or the Homoousion, was Arianism: To assert One singular Substance,
was Sabellianism; for One singular Substance is but One Person, which denies a
Trinity of Persons: But the Divine Nature and Substance is both (...) and
(...), One and Common, and therefore not One singular Substance, which can
never be common; and by the same Reason, a Personal Substance, though it be
singular, and appropriate to such a particular Person, and therefore as
incommunicable as the Person is, yet it is not peculiar and individual in the
common acceptance of those words, but the same One common undivided
inseparable Essence of the Divinity, subsisting distinctly and singularly in
each Person. Thus for the same Reason, I will not say, that the Personal
Omnipotence, etc. of the Father, is diverse in number from the Personal
Omnipotence of the Son, because it is the same One Omnipotence, as it is the
same One Divinity, which subsists distinctly in each Person; but we may and
must say, That the Personal Omnipotence of the Father, is not the Personal
Omnipotence of the Son, no more than the Person of the Father, is the Person of
the Son. But this disguised Socinian has taken great care in representing the
Doctrine of the Realists, to conceal their Faith of the perfect undivided Unity
and Identity of the Divine Nature in Three distinct subsisting Persons, which
yet he knows they as Sacredly profess, as they do the real distinction of
Persons, and is owned in as high terms by Dr. Sherlock himself, as by any of
his Adversaries, and is almost the only Pretense of those many Contradictions
he is charged with, by such as will not understand a perfect distinction in
perfect Unity, which yet is essential to the Catholic Faith of a Trinity in
Unity, and Unity in Trinity. But as for this Author, whether he had thought
such a Distinction and Unity reconcilable or not, yet when he undertook to
represent the Doctrine of the Realists, he ought to have represented it whole
and entire, and to have left it to the judgment of the Reader: whereas he is
very careful to observe that they say, the Three Persons in the Trinity are
Three Substances, Three Minds, and Spirits; [which yet only some of them say,]
but takes no notice that these Three distinct Persons have One undivided Nature
and Essence, which they all agree in: For this would have spoiled his
Objections of Tritheism, and what he immediately adds about Three Creators and
Governors of the World, which they never owned, any more than Three Gods; for
though there are Three who are Omnipotent, and Three who create, yet they are so
inseparably united in Nature, that they are but One Agent, One Omnipotent, and
produce but One Effect: As the Catholic Fathers concluded for this Reason,
that as the Scripture teaches us, That there is but One God, and yet that the
Father is God, the Son God, and the Holy Ghost God; so it attributes the making
and government of the world both to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and yet there
is but one and the same world which is made and governed; which proves, that
though they act as distinctly as their Persons are distinct, yet there is such
an essential Unity of Will and Power, and Operation, from the indivisible Unity
of Nature, that they are but one Agent, and produce but one and the same effect.

But still as for the main of the Charge, That every distinct Person in the
Trinity, has a personal Substance, Life, Will, Understanding, Power, of his
own, which is not the personal Substance, Life, Will, Understanding, Power, of
either of the other Persons, is what all, who believe a Real Trinity, do and
must agree in, whether they will agree to call these Three Substances, Wills,
Understandings, etc. or not. Nay, this is all that those very Persons who
assert Three Substances, Three Minds and Spirits in the Trinity, ever meant by
it. Own but each Person in his own proper Person, to be infinite Substance,
Mind, Spirit, and that neither Person is each other, and they will consent to
any other form of words, and not dispute the reason or propriety of them; all
that they contend for is a real Trinity of true, real, proper Persons; and that
they are certain cannot be, unless each Person by himself, as distinct from the
other Persons, be Substance, Mind, Spirit, Will, Understanding, Power.

This is the only Trinity which Socinus, Crellius, Slichtingius, and others of
that Party, have hitherto disputed against; and therefore certainly they did
apprehend, that the Christians in their days, even all the Divinity-Chairs of
Europe, did assert such a Trinity; and those Learned Men who opposed them, did
believe so too, or there must be very wise doings amongst them: though our Modern
Socinians have now made a discovery, that these Realists are not the true
Catholic Trinitarians, but that the Nominalists are the Church; and now they
are grown Friends with the Church, and Orthodox, beyond their own hopes; and
their business is only to defend the Church against this new Sect of Real
Trinitarians. Let it be so: but still they maintain the same Doctrine that
Socinus did, and dispute against the same Trinity which he disputed against,
and therefore these Real Trinitarians are no new upstart Sect, but their old
Adversaries, who will never be cheated by new Names into an accommodation or
comprehension with Socinians.

The plain state of the Case is this: Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are the
Christian Trinity; now the question is, whether this be a Real Trinity or not;
that is, whether the Father be an Eternal, Infinite, Living, Omniscient,
Omnipotent, subsisting Person, and did truly beget of his own Nature and
Substance, a True, Living, Omnipotent, Omniscient, subsisting Son; and in like
manner, whether the Holy Ghost proceeds from Father and Son, a True, Living,
Omnipotent, Omniscient, subsisting Spirit. This is the Doctrine of those whom
our Modern Socinians call Realists, that is, of True and Orthodox Trinitarians;
and without asserting this, whatever they teach besides, a Trinity is nothing
but a name, and therefore such men may properly be called Nominalists; so that
the Realists only are Trinitarians, the mere Nominalists, whatever they are
else, are no Trinitarians; and this new contrivance of opposing these Real
Trinitarians, is neither better nor worse than opposing the Doctrine of the
Trinity: And let but our People understand this, and we are where we were, and
then the Socinians may call themselves Nominalists, or what they please.

To proceed: He is as artificial and unsincere in his account of the
Nominalists, P. 13.
as of the Realists. We must not conceive of the Divine Persons, say the
Nominalists, as we do of created Persons. Very right! there is an unconceivable
difference between them, as all Realists acknowledge, they are perfectly
distinct, but yet inseparably One; they never did, never can subsist apart; the
same One undivided Divinity subsists whole and perfect, and yet distinctly in
each of them, and is as perfectly One in Three, as any one thing is one with it
self. And thus we allow what he adds to be a very great Truth, and wish he
himself would consider better of it: That the conception we ought to have of
their Personalities, or what they are as they are Persons, is as different from
the Personalities of any created Beings, as the Perfections of the Divinity are
paramount to Human or Angelical Perfections. This we are sensible of, and
therefore do not presently cry out of Nonsense and Contradiction, when we are
forced by Scripture and Reason to attribute such things to the Divine Nature
and Persons, as we can find no Images or Idea's of in Created Nature: for we
know that Creatures cannot be perfectly like to God, and consequently we ought
not to oppose the Idea's of Nature to Revelation. But the present question is
not, Whether Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are such Persons as created Persons,
as Angels, or men are; for it is certain there is an unconceivable difference
between them; but whether they may be called Persons in the true and proper
Notion of the word Person; for one who does really and substantially subsist,
live, will, understand, act, according to his Natural Powers: And whether there
be Three such subsisting, living, willing, understanding Persons in the
Godhead, or only One: Whether as the Father has life in himself, so the Son
has life in himself; and as the Father knows the Son, so the Son knows the
Father; and whether the Spirit of life, and the Spirit of Holiness, and Power,
and the Spirit that searches the deep things of God, be not a subsisting,
living, knowing, working Spirit; and this is the reason, why the Church calls
them Three Persons, (which the Scripture does not call them) because the Holy
Scripture distinctly Attributes life, will, knowledge, power, to these Three,
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, which is the Notion all men have of a Person when
applied to Creatures; and to talk of Three Divine Persons, who are not
subsisting, living, knowing Persons, destroys the only Reason for calling them
Persons.

But he adds, as the Doctrine of the Nominalists, That God is but One Being,
but One Substance, Mind, or Spirit, with One only will, understanding, energy,
or power of action. But is not this, in a true Catholic Sense, the Doctrine of
the Realists also, as I observed before? But this is what this disinterested
Person would be at; to distinguish the Realists and Nominalists by Three
Substances and One Substance of the Divinity: And were this the whole Truth,
the Realists would certainly be Heretics, and the Nominalists might be the
Orthodox Church: Whereas the Realists, as they own Three real subsisting living
Persons, so they as constantly profess the Homoousion, or One undivided
Substance and Nature, subsisting and acting distinctly, but indivisibly and
inseparably in Three, which is a real perfect subsisting Trinity in perfect
Unity: But the Nominalists, truly so called, as they own but One Substance in
the Divinity, so but One single Person, which is their One God, and can find a
Trinity only in a Trinity of Names, or Properties, or mere immanent Acts.

That there are many such Nominalists among us, I fear is too true; but I must
say again, that the bare dispute concerning the use of those words, Three
eternal infinite Minds and Spirits, for Three eternal infinite intelligent
Persons, no more proves those who reject such expressions, while they own each
Person by himself, to be infinite Mind and Spirit, to be mere Nominalists, than
the use of such expressions in a qualified Catholic Sense, (as the Catholic
Fathers have formerly used them, or other Terms equivalent to them) proves
those who use them to be Tritheists: And yet this is all our Author pretends to
justify this distinction between Realists and Nominalists, viz. The
Controversy depending between Dr. S -- th and Dr. Sherlock. But I cannot pass
on without making one Remark on this, That Dr. S -- th, and those who have
espoused that side of the Question, are as much concerned to vindicate
themselves from the imputation which this Author has fixed on them, of being
mere Nominalists or Sabellians, as Dr. Sherlock and his Friends are, to
vindicate themselves from Tritheism; and I confess, I think, a great deal more;
because in the heat of Dispute, or through Inadvertency, if it be not their
settled Principle and Judgment, they have given more just occasion for such a
Charge. When One and the same Person, with Three substantial Deaneries, shall
be very gravely alleged as a proper Representation of a Trinity in Unity; when
a mere mode of subsistence shall be given as a proper and adequate Definition
of a Person, as applied to the Trinity; when a large Book shall be writ on
purpose to demonstrate, Considerations concerning the Trinity.
That there is and can be but One Person in the Trinity, in the true proper
Notion, as it signifies an intelligent Person; what can the most equal and
impartial Judge make of this, but downright Sabellianism? For, whether it be
allowable to say, Three Minds and Spirits or not, I Am sure without owning Three
proper, subsisting, intelligent Persons, each of whom is in his own Person,
infinite Mind and Spirit, there can be no Real Trinity. If their Sense be more
Orthodox than their Words, I do heartily beg of them for God's sake, and the
sake of our common Faith, so to explain their Words, as to remove this scandal,
as Dr. Sherlock has done, and not to Charge a Trinity of real, subsisting,
intelligent Persons, (which is all he professes to own, or ever to have
intended) with Tritheism, till they can give us something in the room of it
more Orthodox than a Sabellian Trinity, which the Catholic Church has always
rejected with Abhorrence.

SECT III.
The Authorities of the Nominalists against a Real Trinity, briefly Examined.
THis Socinian having given such an account as it is, of the Doctrine of the
Realists and Nominalists, as disinterested as he pretends to be, he professedly
Espouses the side of the Nominalists against the Realists; that is, under a new
Name he follows his old Trade of Disputing against the Trinity; only with this
advantage, that he now pleads the Cause of the Church, of his beloved Church of
Nominalists, against these Tritheistick Heretics, the Realists: But when men
consider, who this Advocate is, it will do the Nominalists no Credit, nor any
Service to the Cause; For a Socinian, though he change his Name, will be a
Socinian still, that is, a professed Enemy to the Catholic Faith of the
Trinity, and to the Eternal God head and Incarnation of our Savior Christ; and
there is very good Reason to believe, that what he opposes is the True
Catholic Faith, and what he vindicates and defends is Heresy. What Agreement
there is between the Nominalists and Socinians, and what an easy accommodation
may be made between them, we shall hear toward the Conclusion; but this will
not satisfy our Author, that the present Orthodox Church (which to the
reproach of the Church, and to the advantage of his own Cause, he will have to
be all Nominalists, which is such an abuse as concerned Persons ought to
resent; I say, not satisfied that the present Church) is on his side; nothing
will serve him less, than to prove, that this was always the Faith of the
Catholic Church: A brave and bold Undertaking, but what his wiser
Predecessors, Socinus, Crellius, etc. would have laughed at; and which I doubt
not but he Laughs at himself, and will have cause to Laugh, if he can meet with
any Persons soft and easy enough to believe him.

He well and truly observes, Page 14.
that this Question, What has been the Doctrine of the Catholic Church in this
point, must be decided by Authorities or Witnesses, and therefore he appeals to
Authorities, and those I grant the most venerable Authorities and Witnesses
that can be had, even General Councils. I wish he would continue in this good
humor, and then I should not doubt but he would quickly change his side: But
this is contemptible Hypocrisy in a man, who despises all Authorities, not only
human, but sacred, when they contradict his own private Reasonings, to appeal
to Authority: I can easily bear with men of weak Understandings, but I hate
Knavery; for Truth needs no Tricks: and how much Socinians value Fathers and
Councils is sufficiently known.

He begins with the Nicene Council, P. 16.
which brought into the Church the term Homoousios; by which is meant, that the
Divine Persons have the same Substance, or are of One Substance: But then he
says, it is disputed between the Nominalists and Realists, in what Sense the
Council understood this One Substance; Whether the same Substance in number,
the self-same Substance? so that there is indeed, but One Divine Substance: Or
the same Substance for kind, sort, or nature, namely the same in all Essential
Properties -- So that in Truth, there are Three distinct (or numerically
different) Substances, which are the same only in nature and kind. This he
makes the Controversy between the Church (that is, his Nominalists) and the
Realists; but this is far from being the true state of the Controversy: All
whom he calls Realists, own, that Father and Son are but One and the self-same
Substance, communicated whole and undivided from Father to Son, so that the
Father is Substance, the Son Substance in his own Person, and both the same
Substance; And the like of the Holy Spirit, that as Marius Victorinus says,
They are ter una Substantia, Thrice One and the same Substance; and this is all
that those mean, who venture to say, they are Three Substances; for the Dispute
between those Realists, who say there is but one Substance of the Divine
Persons, and those who own Three, is not whether the Son be true and real
Substance in his own Person, as distinct from the Person of the Father; for all
but Sabellians agree in this; but whether considering the perfect Unity and
Identity of Nature and Substance in Three, it be Orthodox to say, Three
Substances, and not rather One Substance, and Three who subsist; which is a
more Orthodox form of speech, and less liable to exception: And thus we allow,
That the Nicene Fathers, by the Homoousion, did mean One and the self-same
Substance of Father and Son, but so that the Son is a true and proper Son, a
real subsisting Person, Substance of his Fathers Substance; God of God, Light
of Light, very God of very God, Begotten not Made, of one Substance with the
Father, by whom all things were made; which so expressly declares the Sense of
the Council, that this Author durst not so much as mention, God of God, Light
of Light, etc. which can never be reconciled with his Notion of One Substance,
which leaves no Substance, nor any real subsistence to the Son distinct from
the Father.

It is a bold stroke, and worthy of our Author, to make the Nicene Council
determine for Sabellianism, in the term Homoousios; but yet he has a little
Story, which he thinks proves it beyond exception, for which he quotes
Socrates: That Historian tells us, That there happened a great quarrel in
Egypt about the word Homoousios, Socr. H. E. l. 1. c. 23.
which he says was like fighting in the dark, without distinguishing Friends
from Enemies; for neither of them seemed to understand each other, as to those
matters for which they reproached one another: This our Author takes no notice
of, for it would not serve his purpose; it appearing from hence, that the
Accusations on both sides were causeless, and like dealing blows in the dark:
But now our Author begins. Those Fathers of the Council that were against the
term Homoousios, (but those Fathers of the Council are not in Socrates, but
only those who declined the term Homoousios; but the Fathers of the Council
served his purpose better, and therefore he makes bold with the Historian) or
of One Substance, (which the Historian has not added neither) accused such as
were for it, as Sabellians and Montanists, (but the Historian says, did suppose
that those, who received that Term, did introduce the Doctrine of Sabellius and
Montanus, that is, that this was their design in using that Term, which as he
observed before, was their mistake) calling them also blasphemous, because they
seemed to take away (by that word) the real Existence of the Son of God: While
on the other hand, they that stood for Homoousios, believed that such as were
against it, did introduce more Gods, and therefore detested them, as reviving
Paganism. Here our Author leaves off; but I shall go on with the History.

Eustathius Bishop of Antioch, accuses Eusebius Pamphili, as Adulterating the
Nicene Faith; Eusebius denies, That he in the least departed from the Nicene
Faith, and accuses Eustathius of Sabellianism: And thus they wrote against each
other as Adversaries, and yet both of them Taught, That the Son of God was a
true and proper Person, and had a real Subsistence of his own; and that there
was One God in Three Persons: that one would wonder whence it came to pass that
they could not agree.

From this Story, our Author thus Reasons. This is a deciding-testimony in the
Case. For the Realists will never be able to show, that if by Homoousios the
Council intended Three distinct Substances, Three Beings, Minds, or Spirits:
How the Fathers of the Council could be accused of Montanism and Sabellianism;
for Three intellectual infinite Substances, Three Divine Beings, Spirits or
Minds, was the Doctrine chiefly opposed by Sabellius and Montanus, as all
confess: (Then by his own Confession, his Nominalists are Sabellians, and all
those Fathers and Councils which Condemned Sabellius were Realists, and then we
have got the Nicene Council again.) And on the other hand, the Council which
contrived and defended Homoousios, could as little Censure those who were
against it as introducers of Tritheism and Paganism, if it had not been
supposed, that in opposing Homoousios, they professed to believe Three infinite
Substances in number, Three Divine Minds, and Spirits; which is the very
Doctrine of the Modern Realists.

1. Now in answer to this, I observe first, That the Historian says all this
was an angry mistake, (as angry men are very apt to mistake, and to reproach
each other with their own mistakes) but neither of these Parties were guilty of
the Heresies they were charged with; neither the one were Sabellians, nor the
other Tritheists; Now this I think proves the direct contrary to what he
concludes from it: For if those who were charged with Sabellianism for owning
the Homoousion were not Sabellians, then it is certain, that they did not
think, that the Nicene Council by the Homoousion, or One Substance, meant One
singular Substance, for that is Sabellianism: And when those who professed the
Homoousion, and were no Sabellians, charged those who rejected the Homoousion,
with Tritheism, they must believe, That the Nicene Homoousion is neither
Sabellianism nor Tritheism, but the middle between both; such a Unity and
sameness of Substance, as is neither a Sabellian singularity, nor a
Tritheistick diversity and multiplicity of Substances; that is, where Father
and Son are in their own Persons, as distinct from each other, infinite
Substance, and yet but one Substance, One of One, God of God, Light of Light.
This is the Medium which Socrates tells us they both agreed in; and therefore
wondered how they should come to differ; (...).
That the Son of God was a true and proper Person, and had a real Subsistence
of his own; and that there was One God in Three Persons.

2. But if by Homoousios the Council intended Three distinct Substances, (that
is, according to our Sense, Three, each of which is true and perfect Substance,
and yet but One Substance) How could the Fathers of the Council be accused of
Montanism or Sabellianism? Had he consulted Dr. Bull, he would have learnt the
difference between these two; but let that pass: He Phrases this, as if he
would insinuate, That the Council it self was accused of Sabellianism for this
Term; which is false. But this word Homoousios had sometimes been abused to a
Sabellian Sense, though the Council did not use it in that Sense; and some men
might still conceal their Heresy under the Covert of an Orthodox Word; For this
Reason, some who professed the Nicene Faith, yet disliked the Homoousion; and
when this Dispute had heated them, it was too natural to charge those, who from
the Authority of the Nicene Council defended the use of that word, with such
secret Heretical Senses as they thought that word chargeable with: And this is
the whole Truth of the Case, as Socrates tells us; and this is a very strange
way to prove the Sense of the Council, from the groundless accusations of angry
and jealous men.

3. But how could the Council, which contrived and defended Homoousios, censure
those who were against it, as introducers of Tritheism and Paganism, which the
Historian witnesses that it did with great earnestness? But Socrates (his
Historian) says not one word of the Council, but only of these angry.
Disputants censuring and accusing each other, and both unjustly; but he would
sain ascribe all this to the Council, because it is not Fathers, but Councils
he relies on; of which more presently.

But there may be a very good Reason given, why those who rejected the
Sabellian Unity and Singularity of the Divine Essence, might yet charge those
with Polytheism who rejected the Homoousion, or Consubstantial; and there may
be two accounts given of it. 1. That they suspected them of Arianism, in
opposition to which, the Council taught the Homoousion; one Sense of which was
Such a sameness of Nature, as is between Father and Son, which in Creatures we
call a specific sameness, in contradiction to the Arians, who taught, That the
Son was of a different Nature and Substance from the Father, as different from
God the Father, as a created and uncreated Nature differ; and this is downright
Polytheism and Paganism; for this makes the Son and Holy Spirit, how excellent
soever their Natures are, but mere Creatures: And for this Reason we know, the
Catholic Fathers charged the Arians with Pagan Polytheism and Idolatry; And
the Arians at that time were such zealous opposers of the Homoousion, even
while they concealed themselves under some other Catholic forms of Speech,
that it was too great a reason to suspect those of Arianism, who denied the
Homoousion, whatever they would seem to own besides: and when men are angry,
less reasonable suspicions than these, are thought sufficient to form an
Accusation; and this is one fair account of it: Such men were thought secret
Arians, and therefore charged with Polytheism.

2. But there was another Notion of the Homoousion, which the Catholic Fathers
thought absolutely necessary to the Unity of God, and consequently that the
denial of it would introduce three Gods, instead of three Divine subsisting
Persons in the Unity of the same Godhead: And that is, That when the Son is
said to be Homoousios, or Consubstantial with the Father, the meaning is, that
he is, (...), of the very Substance of the Father, and not of any other created
or uncreated Substance: This St. Basil is positive in, That Two, who are of the
same Substance for Kind, are not therefore Consubstantial, as Father and Son,
but are rather Brethren, unless one be of the other: But now many true
Catholics very much suspected this Term, because it seemed to imply a Division
and Separation of the Father's Substance; for, How can the Son be of the same
Substance with the Father, without a division of the Father's Substance? The
Nicene Fathers answered, That the very Name of Son, and the natural Notion of
Generation, did necessarily prove, that the Son must be of the Father's
Substance; but then the absolute purity and simplicity of the Divine Essence,
which is a perfect indivisible Monad, proves, That this eternal Generation of
the Son, cannot be by a division of Substance, as it is in human Generations;
but is whole of whole, in an ineffable and incomprehensible manner, so as no
Creature can understand; which is no great wonder, when we can understand so
little of Creature Generations, especially when Creation it self is as
perfectly unaccountable as the Eternal Generation; for we can no more
understand, how the World was Created of nothing, than how the Son was Begotten
of his Father's Substance, whole and perfect, without any division or
separation: That the whole Divine Essence is originally in the Father, and
communicated whole to the Son, subsists whole and distinctly in Both, and is
One in Both.

This is that sense of the Homoousion, which occasioned so many warm Disputes
between the Catholics themselves; for this reason, that Party which rejected
the Homoousion, accused those, who received it, of Sabellianism, because they
asserted, That there was but One and the same substance in Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, which was the Heresy of Sabellius; and the heat of Dispute would
not suffer them to see how vastly the Catholic Homoousians and Sabellians
differed, though they both asserted but One Substance: for the Sabellians
asserted but One single Substance, which is but One real subsisting Person; and
therefore made Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, but Three Names of the same Person:
But the Catholics asserted Three real subsisting Persons, who were Substance,
Substance, and Substance, and yet but One of One, the perfect same of the
perfect same: Vna substantia non unus subsistens; One substance, not one that
subsists; and therefore generally rather called them Three Subsistences, than
Three Substances; not but that they owned each Subsistence to be a Substance,
but they were in the common acceptance of the word not Three Substances, but
One Substance, really and actually subsisting Thrice, which they allowed to be
One, and One, and One, but not Three.

On the other hand, those who received the Homoousion, accused those who
rejected it, of Polytheism and Tritheism: for in truth, to deny that Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, are so of one substance, that the Son receives his whole
substance of the Father, and that the Holy Ghost receives his whole substance
of Father and Son, is to make them Three absolute, independent, self-originated
substances, which have no relation to each other; Three such as the Father is,
who is of no other but himself, and the Catholic Fathers always accused this
of Tritheism: (...), Three Fathers, was the same to them, as to say Three Gods;
and they vindicated the Doctrine of a real subsisting Trinity, against the
Sabellian and Arian Charge of Tritheism, by saying, That they did not own Three
Fathers, but only One Father, One Self-originated Divinity, which communicates
his own substance to the Son; and therefore they are not Two Gods, but God of
God.

But now these good Fathers, though they were right in the Notion of Tritheism,
and in the Nicene Notion of the Homoousion, yet they wrongfully accused those,
who rejected that term, of Tritheism; for they owned that the Son was of the
Father; that all that the Son was, he was of the Father; that he was God of
God, Light of Light, and therefore not an absolute Self-originated God, but One
God with the Father; but they did not like those terms of Consubstantial, and
One Substance, and of the Father's Substance, as having something too material
in their conception, and sounding harsh, as if the Son were part of the
Father's substance; which was objected against the Homoousion in the Nicene
Council it self, which yet disclaimed all such absurd senses, and received the
term as the most infallible Test against Arianism: But though the Authority of
the Council overruled the generality of Christians; yet some, who were truly
Catholic and Orthodox in the Faith, could not digest it; and this was the true
occasion of this dispute, and these mutual fierce accusations; and let our
Author now make the best he can of it; but instead of doing him service, he
will never be able to defend himself against it. After all, our Author was
aware of a very terrible Objection against his sense of the Nicene Homoousion,
for one single Sabellian substance and person; viz. that the Catholic Fathers
rejected and condemned this sense of it as Heresy, even Sabellianism; and it is
not probable that these Fathers should not understand the sense of the Council;
or that while they contended earnestly for the Nicene Faith, they should
condemn the true Nicene Faith for Heresy, as he owns they do.

This would have put a modest man out of countenance; P. 19.
but he takes courage, and huffs at these Fathers and private Doctors:
Particular Fathers are but particular Doctors; it is from general Councils only
we can take the Churches Doctrine. It is very provoking to see a man banter the
world at this rate, with the utmost contempt and scorn of his Readers: It is
plain how great an Admirer he is of General Councils, and what he thinks of his
Readers, whom he hopes to persuade, that the Catholic Fathers, who made up the
Council, even Athanassius himself, who had so great a part in it, did either
ignorantly mistake the sense of the Council, or wilfully pervert it; especially
when all the Ante-Nicene Fathers owned the same Faith, as he may learn from Dr.
Bull; and those Catholics, who after the Nicene Council, disputed the use of
that term Homoousios, yet agreed in the same Faith, as I have already shown.

What follows is all of a piece. He expounds the Arian Homoiousios, or of a
like Substance, to signify the same Substance in sort, or kind, or properties;
that is, specifically the same, but only differing in number, as Father and Son
have the same specific Nature, but are Two Persons: And thence concludes, that
the Nicene Homoousios which the Arians at first refused, but afterward
fraudulently subscribed in the sense of Homoiousios, must signify but One
singular solitary Substance, but one Person in the Sabellian Sense: But who
ever before heard, that the Arian Homoiousion signified a specific Sameness
and Unity of Nature? Or, that the Arians owned Father and Son to have the same
specific Nature as Adam and Abel had? The Catholic Fathers themselves, as,
Athanasius, Hilary, Basil, the two Gregory's, etc. owned such a likeness of
Nature as this, (...), to be equivalent to the Homoousion, and to be True
Catholic Doctrine; and this they asserted against the Arians: But it is in
vain to dispute with a man, who has either Ignorance or Confidence enough thus
to impose upon his Readers.

His next Appeal is to the Sixth General Council, which was the Third of
Constantinople; and when I met with this, I was not a little surprised to think
what he would make of it. This Council, as he himself tells the Story,
determined, That there were two Natural Wills, P. 21.
and two Operations in the Lord Christ; and the Reason of this was, because
they asserted Two Natures in Christ, the Divine and Human Nature; and that each
Nature has a Natural Will of its own; and therefore as there are Two Natures,
there must be Two distinct and natural Wills in Christ.

This is a plain proof of the Mystery of the Incarnation; that the Divine
Nature in the Person of the Son was Incarnate; for there could not be two
Wills, unless there were two Natures (which was the foundation of this Decree)
in Christ: And this Macarius himself in his Confession of Faith professed to own,
both in opposition to Nestorius and Eutyches. Now this Catholic Faith of the
Incarnation, which is so often and so expressly owned by this Council, is
utterly irreconcilable with this Sabellian Unity of the Divine Nature and
Substance, without running into the Patripassian Heresy, that the whole Trinity
is Incarnate: For if Christ in One Person has Two Natures, be truly and really
both God and Man, and consequently has Two distinct Wills, a Divine and Humane
Will; either as God, he must be distinct in Nature and Person from the Father
and the Holy Ghost; or if all Three Persons of the Trinity, are but one single
solitary Nature, and consequently but One true and proper Person, all Three,
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, must be Incarnate, and suffer in the Incarnation
and Sufferings of Christ, which the Catholic Church condemned as Heresy.

Well! But he tells us, That this Council owned that there is but One Will in
the Three Persons of the Trinity, and therefore consequently they can be but
one true and proper Person. This we own with the Council, That there is but one
essential Will in the Trinity, though each Person has a Personal Will: But this
he says, cannot be the meaning of the Council, because the question was
concerning Natural Wills, or Powers of willing: This is all fallacy. A Natural
Will is such a Will as belongs to that Nature, whose Will it is: As a Divine
Nature has a Divine Will, and a Humane Nature a Humane Will; the power of
willing is Personal, and signifies a Personal Will: And it is evident, the
Council speaks of the first, not of the second: And not to multiply Quotations,
I shall give but one plain proof of it. Theophanes asked Macarius and Stephen,
Whether Adam had a reasonable Soul? They answer, Yes. Then he asked them,
Whether he had a natural Will? Stephen the Monk answers, That before the Fall
he had a Divine Will, (...) and that he Willed together with God, (...):
Demetrius calls this Blasphemy; for if he was a Co-Willer, he was a Co-Creator
also with God, (...); and others said, that this made Adam, (...),
Consubstantial with God; (...); for he, who is a Co-Willer with God, is
Consubstantial also: And for this they allege the Authority of St. Cyril, who
tells us of Christ; Labb. Council. Tom. 6. p. 760.
That as he is Consubstantial, (...), so he Wills together with his Father;
(...); and gives this reason for it, (...), that one Nature has but one Will:
Now if (...) signifies one who Wills with another, then there must be two who
Will; and if these two are One Will, it cannot signify personally, but
essentially One: And if they be Consubstantial, have one Substance and one Will
in the same Sense, we know what this Council meant by One Substance, no more
one personal Substance, than one personal Will.

His next Authority is the Council of Lateran, under Pope Innocent III. and
though the Christian World is not much beholden to that Council, yet I cannot
think, as I find a great many Wise men do, that they have made any alteration
in the Substance of our Faith, whatever they have done in the form of
Expression.

That the Trinity is una summa res, One Supreme Being, Council. T. 11. P. 1. p.
143.
was the Doctrine of St. Austin, from whom Peter Lombard had it; and all the
Catholic Fathers owned the Trinity to be a most simple Monad, (which is the
same thing) when at the same time they asserted against the Sabellians, Three
real, subsisting, distinct Persons, each of which is the same whole undivided
Divinity, communicated whole and perfect from Father to Son, and from Father
and Son to the Holy Ghost, without any division or partition of Substance. And
this is the Doctrine of the Lateran Council; That this One supreme Thing, is,
(...), veraciter, truly and really, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; Three United
Persons, (...), tres simul Personae, and each of them distinct from the others;
(...); ac singulatim quaelibet earum; And therefore there is only a Trinity,
not a Quaternity in God, as Abbot Joachim had objected; And that each of these
Divine Persons is this Divine Substance, Essence, and Nature. All this
Athanasius himself would have subscribed, who yet with the other Catholic
Fathers rejected the Notion of a singular and solitary Divinity.

They add, That this one supreme Nature, Substance, Essence, (which is Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost) neither begets, nor is begotten, nor proceeds: Nor did
ever any Man in his Wits assert, That the Divine Nature and Essence, as common
to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, that is, That the whole Trinity did either
Beget, or was Begotten, or did Proceed; This belongs to Persons, not to Nature
formally considered; as they expressly teach, That the Father Begets, the Son is
Begotten, and the Holy Ghost Proceeds, so that there is a distinction of
Persons, and Unity of Nature; That the Father is alius, another, the Son
another, the Holy Ghost another; but not aliud another thing: but what the
Father is, and what the Son is, and what the Holy Ghost is, (...), they are all
perfectly the same; that according to the Catholic Faith, we may acknowledge
them to be Consubstantial; for the Father from Eternity Begetting the Son,
(...), gave his own Substance to him, as he himself witnesses. The Father who
gave them me is greater than all: Nor can it be said, that the Father gave part
of his Substance to his Son, and retained another part himself; for the
Hypostasis or Substance of the Father is indivisible, as being perfectly
simple: Nor can we say, That when the Father Begat the Son, he so communicated
his own Substance to him, as not to have it himself; for then he must cease to
be an Hypostasis, Substance, and a substantial Person himself. So that it is
evident, That the Son, when Begotten, received the Father's Substance without
any diminution of the Father; and thus Father and Son have the same Substance;
and Father and Son and Holy Ghost are, (...), one and the same supreme Nature
and Substance; which they call, (...), the Unity of Sameness and Identity: This
is true Catholic Doctrine, and the very Language of the Nicene Fathers. And if
Joachim rejected this Essential Unity of the Trinity, and asserted a mere
collective Unity, as many Christians are one Church, as the Council affirms he
did, he was very justly Condemned, and the Nicene Fathers themselves would have
Condemned him. The only thing which looks like an Innovation in this Decree,
is, That whereas the Catholic Fathers allowed of those Expressions, A Begotten
Nature, Begotten Substance, Begotten Wisdom, Begotten God; and that Substance
begets Substance, and Wisdom begets Wisdom, etc. This Council denies, That this
One supreme Divine Essence, Nature, or Substance, which is the Blessed Trinity,
does either Beget, or is Begotten, or Proceeds, which some Schoolmen think
absolutely condemns those Expressions, That Substance begets Substance; and
Wisdom Wisdom; That the Son is Deus Genitus, and Natura Genita, Begotten God
and Begotten Nature, and Begotten Wisdom; which is to condemn all the Catholic
Fathers, who used these Expressions without any scruple; nay, who thought that
the Mystery of the Divine Generation could not be secured without them. But I
confess, I am of Petavius his mind, (though I find the Learned Doctor Bull
dissent from him) that this Council never intended absolutely to condemn all
such Expressions, when Personally used; For though the Divine Nature in a
general Notion, as common to all Three Persons, neither begets, nor is
begotten; yet the Father begets the Son by a true and proper Generation, and a
true and proper Son; and therefore that Learned Jesuit tells us, That the
Lateran Council considered the Divine Nature absolutely, and in it self, Pet.
de Trin. l. 6. c. 12.
and as abstracted from the Three Persons, not as subsisting distinctly in each
Person; for so it is very Catholic to say, That the Divine Nature in the
Person of the Father begets the Divine Nature in the Person of the Son: For we
cannot understand what a Person is without its Essence and Nature; and it is
absurd to say, That the Son receives his Person from the Father, without
receiving that without which he cannot be a Person: And the reason he gives,
why they rather chose to say, that the Father begets the Son, than that Essence
begets Essence, was to avoid the ambiguity of that Expression, which might
signify the production of another Essence, as well as the generation of another
Person; whereas this Divine Generation is the communication of the same Eternal
Essence which is in the Father to the Son, Quippe essentia neque sic gignit
essentiam, ut ei absolutam existentiam tribuat, neque sic gignitur, ut existat,
sed generare, cum ad essentiam pertinet, est generando communicare, gigni est
communicari. Filius vere and proprie a Patre gignitur; essentia autem ejus non
eodem modo gigni dicitur, sed generatione accipi; vel gignere est dare
substantiam, gigni est datam accipere. P^t. Ibid.
which gives existence to a second Person, not to a second Nature: This is
indeed very subtle, but there is some sense in it; and while they acknowledge,
that the Son by an Eternal Generation receives a true Divine Nature from the
Father, and is in his own Person true God, but yet not the Father; this is the
Old Catholic Faith, how new soever the Expressions may be.

Thus I have done with his General Councils; and I hope every one sees how well
he understands Councils, or how honestly he deals with them. What concerns the
Church of England, needs no answer after what I have already said; and the
Story of Valentinus Gentilis is much to the same purpose; for he was so far
from being a Realist, that he was a downright Arian.

But that he may not think himself and his Nominalists so secure of all the
Divinity-Chairs in Europe, I will refer him to the Learned Spanhemius, to learn
how it lately fared with some of them in the United Provinces; who were
censured and condemned by various Synods, and by the public Judgment and
Authority of several Universities.

The first Proposition condemned was concerning the name of Son, Parcimus hoc
loco celebribus in Belgio Theologis, quorum scripta nuper censuerunt, and
reprobarunt dogmata variae Synodi faederatae Belgicae, sed and Academica
judicia, etiam publica Auctoritate expressa. Prior in hoc ordine suit
Franckeranus Theologus, Vir acri ingenio, dictione eleganti, cujus scripto non
uno, etiam vernaculo hae videntur (...). Prima nempe, appellationem Filii
tributam Secundae Personae S. Trinitatis, ut and Generationem ex Patre, Non
intelligendam esse proprie, ut fit ab orthodoxis, de vera aliqua Generatione,
aeterna^ll^a quidem and ineffabili, secundum quam Pater generans sit vere and
proprie Pater, and Filius genitus sit vere sic proprie Filius, modo tamen
Divinae Naturae convenienti. Nihil autem istis vocibus, Patris and Filii,
generantis and geniti, innui aliud in Scriptura S. quam; 1. Quod Secunda
Persona haebet eandem cum Prima Persona Essentiam and Naturam, illique ab
aterno coextiterit: Negato modo illo habendi per ineffabilem Generationem, and
sublata Personali illa subsistentia Patris generantis and Filii geniti hinc
vera Relatione qualis perpetuo est, praecipue in scriptis Novi Testamenti inter
Patrem and Filium: Unde vel Sabellianismi, vel Tritheismi cujusdam, oriri
possit suspicio. Nec dubia his minus, fuerit (...) Spiritus Sancti quam est
(...) Filii. 2. Quod respiciant illa ad Oeconomiam Testamenti gratiae, ad
manifestationem in carne Secundae Personae, tanquam invisibili Dei Imagine and
ad executionem Officii Mediatorii ad quod datus est a Deo Patre: Quo sensu
generare sit idem quod manifestare. Gigni idem quod manifestari, patefieri,
eitatis locis, Prove. 17. 17. 27. 1. Cant. 8. 5, etc. quae coincidunt fere cum
exceptionibus Familiae Socini ad Verba, Hodie genui te, omniumque (...) esse
videtur: quod repugnet vera illa and propria Generatio Filii ineffabilis licet,
Ideis innatis a Deo ipso inditis Menti Humanae quae sint principium omnis
assensus, omnis verae ac certae cognitionis: Nec censendum revelasse Deum
quicquam in verbo suo quod non ab homine ad Ideas istas exigi possit and
debeat, seu nihil proponere Deum in verbo suo credendum assensu certo and
fiduciali, quod non clare and distinct ab homine sana ratione uso secundum
Ideas innatas percipi possit. Spanhem. Elenchus Controversiarum, p. 670. etc.
and his Eternal Generation of the Father; that this is not to be understood
properly of a true and proper Generation, as if the Father, who begets, were a
true and proper Father; and the Son, who is begotten, a true and proper Son;
but that these Terms in Scripture only signify,

1. That the Second Person has the same Nature and Essence with the First
Person, and did coexist with him from Eternity: Denying the manner of his
having the same Nature, by an ineffable Generation, and the Personal
Subsistence of the Father, who begets, and the Son, who is begotten, and
consequently that true relation between Father, and Son, which the Scripture
constantly teaches, which gave just suspicion either of Sabellianism, or
Tritheism.

2. That all these Names (of Father and Son, begetting, and being begotten,
etc.) respect the Economy of the Covenant of Grace, the manifestation of the
Second Person in the Flesh, as in the visible Image of God, to execute the
Mediatory Office, for which purpose he was given by God the Father: In which
sense, to beget, is the same with to manifest; and to be begotten, to be
manifested: This he says is coincident with the Socinians; and resolved into
that Fundamental Error, That the true and proper generation of the Son, though
acknowledged ineffable, contradicts those natural Ideas which are imprinted in
our minds by God, and are the foundation of all Assent, and all true and
certain Knowledge: And that we must not think that God has revealed any thing
in his Word, which cannot, and ought not to be examined by men, according to
these Ideas; or that God proposes nothing in his Word to be believed with a
certain and firm assent, which a man of a sound Reason cannot clearly and
distinctly perceive, according to these Ideas. And now let our Author judge,
whose Character this is, and on which side these Belgic Synods and Chairs have
given Judgment.

SECT IV.
The Arguments of the Nominals, against a Real Trinity of proper subsisting
Persons, Examined: And the Three First Arguments, Answered.
SEcondly, Let us now briefly examine his Reasons, which he thinks so
demonstrative, that the (so much talked of) Mathematical certainty is not
superior to them: But I have heard some men brag much of Demonstration, who
have had nothing to say, that would amount to a good Probability.

Now to make my Answer plain and easy, I observe first, That all his Arguments
to prove the Realists to be guilty of Tritheism, and to assert Three Gods, are
levelled against a Trinity of distinct, real, subsisting, intelligent Persons,
as he himself owns; for those invidious terms, of Three Substances, Three Minds
and Spirits, and Wills, and Understandings, signify no more than Three, each of
which in his own proper Person, is Substance, Mind, Spirit, Will,
Understanding: So that all these Arguments are against the Catholic Faith of a
Real Trinity; that is, to prove the Doctrine of the Trinity to be Tritheism;
for that which is not a Real Trinity, is no Trinity: And therefore these
Arguments do no more concern Dr. Sherlock, and some few others, whom this
Author would fain single out from the Body of Catholic Believers, by the Name
of Realists, than all other Christians, who heartily Believe in Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, and own Christ Jesus to be the Eternal Son of God, and true and
perfect God himself.

Secondly, I observe, That all these Arguments are no farther considerable,
than as they directly oppose the Catholic Faith in its full Latitude; that is,
a Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity. The Scripture assures us, That there
is but one God, but teaches withal, That the Father is God, the Son God; and
the Holy Ghost God; We believe God concerning himself, and his own Nature and
Unity, because he best knows himself, and therefore we believe, that there is
but one God, but not that there is but One Person, who is God, for there are
Three in the Unity of the same Godhead, and each of them true and perfect God;
so that it is not enough for these Demonstrators to prove, That there is and
can be but One Eternal Divinity, or one God; for we readily own it, and as
heartily Believe it as they do; but we say withal, that this one Divinity
subsists distinctly and indivisibly, whole and perfect in Three, and that
therefore there is a Trinity in Unity: Nor is it sufficient to prove, That in
the Trinity of the Realists, there are Three, each of which is by himself true
and perfect God, and therefore that there are Three Gods; for we own such
Three, but say, that these Three are not Three Gods, but subsist inseparably in
one Undivided Divinity, and therefore that there is a Unity in Trinity. But if
they would consute either the Trinity or the Unity, they must prove, That there
are not, and cannot be, Three real subsisting Persons in One insinite undivided
Essence, and then they will effectually Confute the Scripture, and a Trinity
with it; or they must prove, That though Three such Persons should subsist
distinctly in one undivided Essence, yet they are not one and the same
Divinity, or one God; and then they will Confute not only Scripture, but common
Sense; That Three, which are One, are not One, or that One Divinity is not One
God: Having premised this, let us now consider his Arguments.

1. In the first place, P. 35.
he says, Three infinite Intellectual Substances, or Three Eternal Omnipotent
Minds or Spirits, (or which we have heard is the same thing, Three infinite
intelligent Persons) can never be but One God; because it is evident, nay
confessed, That One such Spirit, Mind, or Substance, is One (absolute and most
perfect) God. -- If the Definition is multiplied, the thing defined is also
therewith multiplied, -- Seeing then it is the definition of One God, that he is
One infinite (intellectual, spiritual) Substance, One Eternal, Omnipotent, and
Omniscient Spirit or Mind; Therefore if we multiply our definition, by saying,
Three Infinite (intellectual, spiritual) Substances, etc. we thereby multiply
the thing we pretended to Define, namely, GOD; which is to say, we affirm more
Geds, as many Gods as such Substances and Spirits.

Here our Demonstrator stumbles at the very Threshold. I grant, That an
infinite intellectual spiritual Substance, an Eternal, Omniscient, Omnipotent
Mind or Spirit, is the Definition of One, who is God, or of a Divine Person;
but I absolutely deny, That this is the Definition of One God, that he is One
Eternal, Omniscient, etc. Personal Mind or Spirit, as he fallaciously and
absurdly represents it; and in so doing, instead of proving what he undertakes,
he very modestly and humbly begs the Question. He is to prove, That Three
infinite Substances, Minds, or Spirits, are Three Gods: His Argument is,
Because One infinite Substance, Mind, or Spirit, is the Definition of One God;
and if you multiply the Definition, you multiply the thing defined, and
therefore Three infinite Substances and Minds must be Three Gods; but how does
he prove, that One infinite Substance and Mind (personally understood as we
understand it) is the Definition of One God? for this is the thing in dispute,
which certainly no Trinitarian will grant him, and therefore ought to be
proved. Those who Assert, as all Trinitarians do, That Three infinite
intelligent Persons, each of which is infinite Substance, Mind or Spirit, are
but One God, will not be so good-natured as to grant, That One infinite
Substance and Mind (or One Divine Person) is the definition of the One God;
this would not be to Dispute, but to beg the Cause on one side, and to give it
away on the other.

But this may be thought perverseness, to put men upon proving what is
self-evident: For, Is not an infinite intelligent Person, Substance, Mind,
Spirit, true and perfect God? Yes, most certainly; but it is not the Definition
of the One God, but only of a Divine Person; and the Christian Faith teaches
us, That Three such Divine Persons are but One God. The Catholic Fathers have
given us another Notion of One God, That (...) is (...), One God is One
Divinity; that is, an Eternal, Immutable, Indivisible, Omnipotent, Omniscient,
Life, Being, Essence, Nature: and the Essential, Undivided, Unity, Sameness,
Identity, of the Godhead in Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is the Unity of God:
For I take it to be more like a Demonstration, than any I expect to meet with
in this Author, That where there is but One Essential undivided Divinity, there
is but One God.

Now this I think may vindicate those obnoxious Expressions as some think them,
of Three infinite Substances, Minds and Spirits, from the Charge of Tritheism;
for since infinite Substance, Mind, and Spirit, is not the definition of One
God, but only of a Divine Person, to say, Three infinite Substances, Minds, and
Spirits, does not multiply Gods, but only Divine Persons.

2. His second Argument is against Three Wills, P. 38.
Three Understandings, Three Energies, or Principles, or Powers of Action in
One God: This he represents as monstrously absurd; when as in truth, if it be
absurd, the only absurdity is, That there should be Three Divine Persons, that
is, Three, who have a Personal Will, Understanding, Power, of their own, in the
Unity of the same Godhead: Now the absurdity of this I cannot see, nor has he
made the least offer to prove it. But the secret of all these monstrous
Absurdities, is this. He represents One God, to signify only One single
Person, who is God, and then indeed, Three Wills, Three Understandings, Three
Lives, of one single Person, is as Absurd and Monstrous as one would wish; but
before he had charged the Doctrine of a Real Trinity with such Absurdities, he
should first have proved, That One God signifies but One single Person, and
have exposed the monstrous Absurdities of Three Persons and One God, and then
we would have given him leave to have represented Three Personal Wills,
Understandings, and Lives, as absurd as he pleases; but if it be not absurd to
own Three Persons, I Am sure it is very absurd to deny, that there are Three,
who Live, and Will, and Understand, that is, in his Language, Three Wills,
Understandings, and Lives, in One God.

3. His Third Argument comes nearer the Business; for he undertakes to prove,
That the Second and Third Persons in the Trinity, the Son and the Holy Ghost,
are not Substance and Spirit, but only Properties, or immanent Acts, or
relative Subsistences in the Notion of the Nominals: And his Argument is made
up partly of Authority, and partly of his own Reasoning upon it.

His Authority is the Council of Lions in the year 1274. which Condemns those,
who presume to deny, That the Holy Spirit does eternally proceed from the
Father and the Son. -- He adds, It Is evident at first sight to any Learned man,
who is conversant in these Questions, and in the Writers, who (in several Ages)
have managed 'em, what the Fathers of this Council meant, and what they aimed
at in this Decree or Canon: For because they believed that the Divine Persons
are not Minds and Spirits, but relative Subsistences, or what is the same,
immanent Acts: Therefore they could not but believe and define, That the Second
Person is eternally generated, and therefore called the Son; That the Third is
an Eternal Spiration, and therefore called Spirit. I cannot think what to call
this, and therefore shall say nothing of it, but only beg my Reader's Pardon
for giving it an Answer.

In the first place this Council says nothing of the Eternal Generation of the
Son, and therefore this could not be what they aimed at, as he pretends. In the
next place, The Eternal Procession of the Holy Ghost was not the thing in
question, but his Eternal Procession from Father and Son, which the Latin
Church professed, and therefore added the Filioque to their Creed; but the
Greek Church had disputed and condemned it, and that was one great design of
this Council to bring the Greeks to consent to this addition: so that it was
not the Aeternaliter, but the Filioque which the Council had principal regard
to in this Decree; not the Eternal Procession, but the Procession from the
Father and the Son; so little did they think of what our Author makes their
chief design. But there is another Clause in this Decree which he has
concealed, which proves, that they thought quite otherwise; for they do not
only condemn those, who deny that the Holy Spirit proceeds Eternally from
Father and Son; but those also, who teach that he proceeds from Father and Son,
Spiritus sanctus aeternaliter ex Patre and Filio, non tanquam ex duobus
principiis, sed tanquam ex uno principio, non duabus spirationibus, sed unica
spiratione procedit.
as from two Principles, and by two Spirations, and not as from one Principle,
by one Spiration. Now had they believed the Son to be a mere immanent Act, such
an unsubsisting Reason and Wisdom as is in Man, had not this been a very wise
Dispute, Damnamus and reprobamus omnes qui negare praesumpserint. Spiritum
Sanctum aeternaliter ex Patre and Filio procedere, sive etiam temerario ausu
asserere, quod Spiritus Sanctus ex Patre and Filio, tanquam ex duobus
principiis, and non tanquam ex uno, procedat. Conc. Lugdun.
Whether this immanent Act were a Principle of Spiration, either together with
the Father, or distinct from him? But nothing is to be wondered at in an
Author, who will venture to say, That Eternal Generation, and Eternal
Procession, is not reconcilable with the real personal subsistence of the Son
and Holy Spirit, but proves them to be mere immanent Acts; and that those, who
own such an Eternal Generation and Procession, must consequently believe so:
for this is the only Argument he has to prove the Fathers of this Council to
have believed the Son and Spirit to be mere immanent Acts, because they assert
the Eternal Generation and Procession; whereas on the contrary it is evident,
that all the Catholic Fathers, who asserted the Eternal Generation and
Procession, did as strenuously assert against the Noetians and Sabellians, the
true and proper Personality of the Son and Spirit.

But let us hear how he proves, That if the Son and Spirit, The Second and
Third Persons, be distinct Substances and Spirits from the First, (that is, if
the Son in his own Person, as distinct from the Person of the Father; be
Substance and Spirit, and so of the Holy Ghost) it were heinous Nonsense to
say, they were Eternally generated, or Eternally proceed. His Argument is this:
If the Persons are Substances and Spirits, it must be said, that the Second was
completely and finally generated from all Eternity; the like also of the Third
Person, else they should be incomplete Substances, unfinisht Spirits. -- If
they are Spirits or Substances, it can never be said that one is Eternally
generated, the other does Eternally proceed: but the former was generated from
all Eternity, and the other actually and completely proceeded from all Eternity.

Now supposing the Reason of this to be unanswerable; All that it amounts to is
no more but this, That the Catholic Fathers, who attested the true and proper
Personality of the Son, and Holy Spirit, were very absurd, and guilty of
Heinous Nonsense, in saying, That the Son is Eternally generated, and the
Spirit Eternally proceeds. These are Nice Speculations, which the Arian
Controversy engaged them in; but the Nicene Fathers contented themselves to
affirm no more concerning the Eternal Generation, than that the Son was
begotten of his Father before all Worlds, God of God, Light of Light, Very God
of Very God. And this Notion of an Eternal Generation our Author has no
Objection against, and we do not think our selves bound to answer for all the
Subtilties either of the Fathers or Schools; nor to determine every Curious
Question, which Perverse and Heretical Wits can start concerning the Divine
Generation and Procession, which is above the Comprehension of Angelical Minds,
and which we know no more of, but that the Son is begotten, and the Spirit
proceeds.

And yet this Reasoning is very absurd, when applied to an Eternal and
immutable Nature. Things, which have a beginning, which are made, which are
successively and gradually perfected by Art, are incomplete and unfinished,
while they are a-making, and if they are always a-making, or always incomplete;
but a Generation or Procession, without a Beginning, and without Succession,
must always be perfect, and always the same, if it be at all; here is no new
Production, no making any thing, no transient Action; in which sense the
Catholic Fathers denied the Divine Generation to be (...), or Action, but only
an Essential (...), habitude, relation between Father and Son, who both
perfectly and eternally subsist, and co-exist with each other, but so, that the
Son is of the Father, and the Holy Spirit of Father and Son: Thus they were
without any Beginning, and thus they always are, and this is all they meant by
an Eternal Generation and Procession, and this the Immutability of the Divine
Nature forced them to own; for though external Acts and Relations make no
Change in the Divine Nature, yet what is ad intra does; and therefore could we
conceive any distinguishable moments in Eternal Duration, when God was no
Father, when he begot a Son, and when he ceased to beget, this would make an
internal Change in the Divine Nature it self, which is inconsistent with
perfect Immutability. But the Son always was and is of the Father, and this is
his Eternal Generation, and the Holy Spirit always was and is of Father and
Son, and this is his Eternal Procession, and thus the Divine Essence always was
and is the same, a Trinity in Unity, and this is the perfect Immutability of
God.

And yet his Philosophy is very absurd, when he argues from an Eternal
Generation and Procession, that therefore the Son and Holy Spirit must be
incomplete and unfinished; for this will not be granted him even in created
Nature, much less in the Divinity. They are no mean Philosophers, who tell us,
that the World may very properly be said to be perpetually created; that what
we call Preservation, or upholding all things in being, is the very same Act
and Power which at first gave Being to them; and such a permanent Act is
Creation still, though no new Production of any thing: But these Men would
scorn any one who should hence conclude, that there is no complete or finished
Substance, no really subsisting substantial World: Much more absurd is it, to
conclude this of an Eternal Generation, which produces nothing new, nothing
that ever began to be, and is the same that ever it was, without any Succession.

And he defends the Nominalists just as wisely and philosophically, as he
opposes the Realists, as if his only design were to expose both.

He says this Eternal Generation proves the Son and Holy Spirit, Page 41.
to be only immanent Acts in God, reflex Wisdom, or the Wisdom that resulteth
from Original Minds Eternal Contemplation and Knowledge of the Divine Nature
and Perfections, and the everlasting Spiration of Love that must proceed from
the Original and reflex Wisdom of the Deity. And here we have just such a
Trinity in the Godhead, as there is in every particular Man, his Mind, and the
immanent Acts of Wisdom or Reason, and Love, which all Learned Men know to be
one kind of Sabellianism.

That the Son is the Wisdom and Power of God, and that the peculiar Character
of the Holy Spirit is Love, is the language both of Scripture and Fathers; but
not as immanent Acts, but the living subsisting Wisdom of the Father, and
living subsisting Love, eternal and infinite Persons, coeternal and coequal
with the Father: But it is a new Language, unknown to Scriptures and Fathers,
to call an immanent Act of Wisdom a Son, and the Minds producing such an Act,
its generating or begetting a Son, and to call such an immanent Act in God, the
Son of God, and God; by which Rule, every Thought or Act of Reason in any Man,
is Man, and the Son of that Man whose Thought and Act it is.

And it as new Philosophy to talk of immanent Acts in God; for there can be no
immanent Acts, but where there are Powers and Faculties, which is the
Imperfection of the Creature-State, not incident to the perfect Simplicity of
the Divine Nature.

But besides this, what does he mean by the Eternal Generation and Spiration of
an immanent Act; an immanent Act (according to all the Accounts I ever met with
of it, and as every Man may feel in himself) is not an abiding, as he calls it,
but a transient Act: it has no permanent stable Nature, no Subsistence of its
own, but vanishes and dies as soon as generated, to speak in his language; which
is a necessary Reason to remove all such immanent Acts from God, in whom there
is nothing vanishing, nothing successive: but if Men will attribute immanent
Acts to God, (reflex Wisdom, as opposed to a living, subsisting, personal
Wisdom) they must speak of them according to the known Nature of such Acts, and
then an Eternal Generation of such an immanent Act, which vanishes, as soon as
generated, can signify no more, than an eternal successive Repetition (which
is a Contradiction) of the Acts of reflex Wisdom, that as one vanishes, another
succeeds; that though God has always this reflex Wisdom, yet he has not always
the same Act of reflex Wisdom, but produces it anew every moment, which he
calls an Eternal Generation: just as it is with Men who may have the same
Thought for kind some time together, but yet every moment it is new produced:
To talk of such an Eternal Son as this, and such an Eternal Generation, is
Heresy in Philosophy, and in common sense, as well as in Christianity, and it
would be loss of time to expose it.

I must no more omit than he, another surprising Argument whereby he proves,
that the Catholic Church did believe, that the second Person is the reflex
Wisdom of God, and the Third Divine Love, Page 42.
because for this reason, as he tells us, this Question has been very warmly
debated whether the Son is that Wisdom, wherewith the Father is Wise. Those
Fathers, who affirm this Question, usually allege these two Arguments; that
the Eternity of the Son cannot be otherwise proved, but by this, That he is the
Eternal Wisdom of the Father; and that otherwise we must suppose Two Wisdoms in
God, which is so absurd to a late learned Ecclesiastical Historian, that he
concludes his Dissertation concerning this Question, with these Words: The
Father neither is, nor can be actually Wise, but by the Word or Son. I.
Cabassutius Notit. Eccl. p. 120. correct. 119. let the Reader now judge of all
the rest by this.

That this Question was disputed I own: But he has assigned a very false and a
very absurd Occasion for it; for had this been the received Faith of the
Catholic Church, that the Son is only the immanent Act of reflex Wisdom in
God, what Occasion had there been for this Dispute, whether the Son is that
Wisdom by which the Father is Wise? that is, the personal Wisdom of the Father;
for who ever disputed, whether immanent Acts were Personal, or no? And
therefore this very Dispute proves, that they did not believe the Son to be a
mere immanent Act.

But though they did dispute among themselves, in what Sense Christ is called
the Wisdom of God, and the Power of God; and whether Christ be that Wisdom,
wherewith the Father is Wise, and in what Sense the Father may be said to beget
his own Wisdom; and how the Son can be said to be sapientia de sapientia,
Wisdom of Wisdom, if the Father in his proper Person be not Wisdom, but only
the Begetter of Wisdom, with many other Questions, as we see in St. Austin,
lib. VI. de Trin. Yet they never divided upon this Point, but did universally
agree, that the Father in his own proper Person is Original Mind, and Wisdom;
and that the Son in his own proper Person is begotten Wisdom, even the
Essential Wisdom of God, not that personal Wisdom wherewith the Father is Wise,
but Wisdom truly and properly begotten of Original Wisdom; Living, Subsisting
Wisdom; distinct in Person from the Father, who is Original Wisdom, but
perfectly the same one undivided Essence, and therefore not Essentially Two,
but One and the same Wisdom, which is the Wisdom of the Father: So that though
there was some Dispute about the true Signification of such Expressions, yet
here was no Division among the Catholics, who all agreed on that Side of the
Question, which directly contradicts this Author's Catholic Faith of immanent
Acts.

The true Occasion of this Dispute, as St. Austin tells us in the same Place,
was this; that some of the Fathers, I think he might have said all the Nicene
Fathers, in their Disputes with the Arians and Eunomians about the Eternal
Generation of the Son, or Word, used this Argument, that God was never (...)
without his Word, or Wisdom: not that they had no other Argument to prove the
Eternity of the Son, as this Author represents it, but that they thought this a
very good one: Now the Force of this Argument seemed to be this, that God is
always Wise; and therefore that Person, who is the Word and Wisdom of God, must
have always been with him, as Eternal as God is: And to make this a good
Argument, the necessary Consequence seemed to be, That the Person of the Son,
who is the begotten Word, and Wisdom of the Father, is the personal Wisdom of
the Father, that Wisdom wherewith the Father is Wise: And the Difficulty of
this was, how this begotten Wisdom, which is a distinct Person from the Person
of the Father, should be that Wisdom whereby the Person of the Father is Wise:
how they justified this Argument, and yet avoided such Absurdities, is too long
now to account for; those who please may consult St. Austin for it; but I hope
every one sees that both the Reason of this Question, the Nature of those
Difficulties, it was incumbered with, and their Determination of the Point, are
all direct Contradictions to what this Author alleged it for.

And now let us hear what our Author's learned Cabassutius says, but what the
World will say of him, when they hear what Cabassutius says, let other guess.

This learned Historian takes Notice of this Dispute, and gives the same
Account of it which I have now done; and vindicates that Argument of the
Catholic Fathers for the Eternity of the Son, because he is the Wisdom of the
Father, that were he not Eternal, the Father could not be always Wise, from the
Exception of St. Austin. This he does by a Distinction borrowed from Aquinas;
that those, who taught the Son to be the Wisdom of the Father, are to be
understood Veruntamen non est caduca caeterorum, quos nominavimus, Patrum
adversus Arium instantia, si debitam adhibeas distinctionem, qualem insinuat
praeclare S. Thomas 1. p. q. 37. art. 2. ut non in formali, sed in causali and
illativo, ut ita dicam, sensu sancti Patres intelligantur, quamvis enim filius,
qua silius non sit illa sapientia, qua pater est sapiens, necessario tamen cum
illa conjungitur, ab eaque oritur.
, not in a formal, but causal and illative Sense. For though the Son, as a Son,
is not that Wisdom, wherewith the Father is Wise (let out Author first observe
that) yet he is necessarily united with it, and arises from it: So that the Son
is not the personal Wisdom of the Father, but is begotten of his Father's
Wisdom, and inseparably united to it: and therefore is the Wisdom of God,
Wisdom of the Father's Wisdom and inseparable from it; which are Two, One of
One, and indivisibly and inseparably One.

But let us hear his Reason for this Sapientia quippe quae in Patre est, non
est habitus, aut facultas, aut potentia, qualis est in rebus creatis, sed est
purus and simplex Actus.
: For the Wisdom which is in the Father, is not a Habit, or Faculty, or Power,
as it is in created Beings, but a pure and simple Act. What is now become of
his immanent Act, by which he tells us Original Mind must be Wise? for if he
believes his learned Historian, Original Mind is a pure simple Act it self, and
therefore not Wise by immanent Acts of reflex Wisdom, which suppose Habits and
Faculties and Powers, and have no Place in a pure simple Act; that if the Son
be only an Immanent Act of reflex Wisdom, he will never find his second Person
in a pure and simple Act.

The Historian proceeds Porro actus omnis sapiendi, intelligendique (verbum)
necessario complectitur omnis intellectionis terminum inevitabilem, sine quo
sapiendi aut intelligendi actus ne quidem animo concipi potest. Terminus autem
est ipsum verbum Graece denominatum (...), ut advertit Cyrillus l. 4. in Joan.
c. 48. (...), nunquam enim men's erit sine verbo, quod and in l. 5. Thesauri
uberius explicat. Et S. Thomas, loco paulo ante allegato, res ait communiter
denominari non solum a suis formis, sicut album ab albedine, homo ab
humanitate: Sed etiam a termino, ut cum arbor dicitur florida a floribus quos
produxit, quamquam non sint arboris forma, sed effectus and terminus, atque ita
optime contra Arium, Patrem non fuisse actu sapientem, nec esse potuisse sine
verbo ac unigenito Filio, concludunt sancti Patres.
, Every Act of Wisdom and Understanding necessarily includes its Terminus or
Effect, and that is what we call Word, or in Greek (...), which St. Cyril very
well understood, where he tells us, that Mind is never without its Word; and
St. Thomas says, that though commonly things receive their Denomination from
their Forms, as White from Whiteness, Man from Humanity, yet sometimes they are
denominated from their Effects; as a Tree is called Florid, from the Flowers it
produces, though that be not the Form of it; and thus the Fathers rightly
concluded against Arius, that the Father neither was nor could be actually Wise
without his Word, and only begotten Son: Our Author renders it, but by the Word
or Son, directly Contradictory both to the Argument and Words of Cabassutius:
for by signifies the formal Cause, and is so intended by him, that the Father
is Wise by the Son, by that immanent Act of reflex Wisdom which he calls the
Son (though one would wonder, how Original Mind and Wisdom, should be Wise by
reflex Wisdom, which is but a secondary Wisdom, which supposes a first; and
therefore, as one would guess, could not make the first wise) but Cabassutius
only says, that the Father is not actually wise without the Son, that is, as he
explains it, without begetting that Eternal Word and Wisdom, which is the
Person of the Son. I shall make no Remarks on this, let the World judge of the
skill, or the honesty of this Author.

What he adds about Emanations, is just to the same Tune: The Eternal
Generation of the Substance of the Father, was by the Nicene Council
represented by Light of Light, and the Co-eternity of the Son with the Father
by the Co-existence of Emanatory Causes and their Effects, as of the Sun and
its Rays, which are as old as the Sun. The Author, like other Socinians,
thinking of nothing but Body, and bodily and corporeal Emanations, falls
presently a demonstrating; Let A. B. C. be three infinite Substances, Page 44.
if B. and C. (infinite Substances) emane from A. an infinite Substance also:
it is self-evident, that the two infinite Substances must exhaust, and thereby
in the end annihilate one infinite Substance.

This is a notable Demonstration as to corporeal Substances; for if the whole
flow out of it self, it is certain, it must cease to be what it was, and become
another Whole, if it be not a Contradiction, that the same Whole should flow
out of it self, and become another Whole, which in Bodies could make no other
Change in a Whole, but a Change of Place, for let a Whole emane, (if that be
not Nonsense, for a corporeal Whole to emane) and go where it will, it is it
self, and the same Whole still.

And I think it is no better Sense, to talk of exhausting an infinite
Substance; for nothing can be exhausted, but what is finite, unless what is
infinite can have an end: and an exhausting Emanation of an infinite Substance,
is no better Sense than the rest; for it necessarily supposes an infinite
Substance with divisible Parts, which may be separated from it self and from
each other, which I take to be a Contradiction to the very Notion of Infinity.
It is certain, that such Emanations, as exhaust their Subject, can be only
bodily Emanations, for Bodies only have divisible and separable Parts, that I
defy the most absurd, self-contradicting Trinitarian in the World, to put so
many Absurdities and Contradictions into one Sentence, as he has done in this:
One infinite Substance (whether corporeal or incorporeal) can never eternally
supply two infinite Substances: the two infinite Substances by continual
Emanations must needs dry up the One, that was their Fountain. To talk of an
infinite corporeal Substance (which he here supposes) is absurd and
unphilosophical, for nothing can be infinite which has Parts; for what is
infinite by Nature can never be finite; and yet if such a supposed infinite
Body were divided in the middle, (as all Bodies may be divided) this infinite
corporeal Substance would prove two finite Substances, for each of them would
have one End, where their Substance was divided: to talk of such Emanations
from incorporeal Substances (which have no divisible Parts) as can dry up an
infinite Fountain, which must be by a Partition and Division of Substances, is
another Contradiction; and to dry up an infinite Fountain, as I observed
before, is another; and to supply infinite Substances by such Emanations, which
cannot be infinite, if they want any supply, is a fourth very good one.

But allowing this Author to rejoice in such refined Speculations, I would
desire to know, who those are who attribute the Eternal Generation of the Son,
and Procession of the Holy Spirit, to such eternal, corporeal Effluxes and
Emanations, as will endanger the exhausting and drying up the infinite Fountain
of the Deity? If there be any such Men they are arrant Heretics, I assure him,
for the Catholic Fathers abhorred the thoughts of all such Emanations.

They did not indeed scruple the use of such Words, as Emanation, Probole,
Exition, and the like, whereby they signified that the Son was truly and in a
proper sense of his Father's Substance, and a real distinct Person from the
Person of the Father, but they expressly rejected all corporeal Effluxes, all
Division and Separation of the Father's Substance; and taught that the Son is
begotten whole of whole, perfect God of perfect God, by a real Communication,
but not a Transfusion of Substance, not ad extra, without, as
Creature-Generations are, but within his Father; as the Word is inseparable
from the Mind, whose Word it is. So that our Author disputes here without any
other Adversary, but his own gross Imaginations, and he may triumph securely,
and demonstrate these corporeal, exhausting, dying Emanations, out of
Countenance, and the Realists no farther concerned, than to look on, and see
the Event of the Combat, or to wish him better employed. If he would have
effectually baffled these Realists, he should have proved, that God could not
communicate his own Nature and Substance to the Son, Whole of Whole, without
such an Emanation of his Substance, as divides it from it self, and separates
one part of it from another, as it is in bodily Exhalations: This would
effectually have confuted a substantial Generation; for all Men grant, that the
Divine Substance cannot be divided, and this was the Objection of the Arians
against the (...), or the Son's being begotten of the Substance of the Father,
but the Catholic Fathers asserted a real substantial Generation, without a
Division of Substance, and taught them to distinguish between the Generation of
Body and Spirit.

And whoever considers, how a finite created Mind can communicate its Thoughts
to another, which when perfectly communicated, are perfectly the same, whole
and entire in both, and but one and the same Thought, though in two Minds; may
conceive, that an infinite Mind, which is a pure and simple Act, infinitely
more simple and indivisible than Thought it self, may be able to communicate
its self more perfectly, than a finite Mind can communicate its Thoughts, and
if it can, it must communicate it self whole and entire, and as indivisibly as
a Thought, and subsist distinctly, perfectly One and the same in Two.

SECT. V.
The Fourth and Fifth Arguments against a Real Trinity Answered.
IV. TO proceed, his next Argument against the Realists is this, Page. 45.
That all Explications, by which it is endeavored to show, how three infinite
(intellectual Substances) three Almighty Spirits and Minds, may be one God, are
manifestly Deficient.

Now, suppose this true, that no Man can give a perfect Account of the Unity of
the Divine Nature in Three Distinct, Infinite, Divine Persons; must we
therefore deny either the Trinity or Unity (both which, we say, are expressly
taught in Scripture) because we cannot fully comprehend so Sublime and
Venerable a Mystery? They pay greater Deference than this to the Evidence of
Sense; they will believe their Senses, where their Reason and Philosophy is at
a loss, nay, in such Matters, as if they did not see them, they think they
could demonstrate absolutely contradictious and impossible: and did Men
heartily believe the Scriptures, why should they not as absolutely submit their
Reason to the Authority of God, as to the Evidence of Sense? But let them
answer for this.

But the whole Strength of this Argument, which he manages with great Triumph
and Scorn, dwindles into the old Socinian Sophism, that one God signifies but
one only Person, who is God; and that whatever other Unity you ascribe to three
Persons, each of which is by himself true and perfect God, still they are three
Gods; for since each of these Spirits (or Persons, each of which is an infinite
Mind or Spirit) are said to be infinite, Page 46.
all-perfect, they must be said to be Gods, mutually Conscious, mutually
inexisting, and the rest; but no more one God, than they are one Spirit: and
therefore the Realists may as well pretend that by these Devices of theirs,
they have contrived three infinite Spirits into one Person, or into one Spirit,
as into one God. And that a disinterested Person (I suppose he means such as
himself) and Philosophers, and Jews and Pagans, he might have added Sabellians,
and Socinians, and Mahumatans, will call these three Gods.

Now it is no wonder that this disinterested Person thinks all our Explications
of the Unity of God insufficient, when we so vastly differ about the Notion of
one God: That we are so far from proving three Divine Persons to be one God in
his Sense, that we reject his Notion of one God, as Judaism and Heresy; and
herein we have the Authority of the Catholic Church on our side. And here I
would desire the Reader to observe, that this Argument is not merely against
that Phrase of three Minds and Spirits and Substances; but against three
Persons, each of which is in his own proper Person, Mind and Spirit and
Substance; for three such Persons, by this Authors Argument, are three Gods,
and can no more be contrived (as he profanely speaks) into one God, than into
one Personal Spirit.

But yet since he graciously owns, that one infinite Almighty Spirit, is one
God, what if we should prove these three Infinite Persons, each of which is
Mind and Spirit, to be one and the same Infinite Eternal Spirit: And yet this
has always been the Faith of the Catholic Church, St. Austin is express in it,
The Father is Spirit, and the Son Spirit, and the Holy Ghost Spirit, but not
three Spirits, but one Spirit; that is, not Personally, but Essentially One,
they are three Persons, but one Essence, essentially one Spirit: And if God be
perfect, pure, simple Essence, the Unity of Essence, is the Unity of God. This
was the Doctrine of all the Catholic Fathers, and this we must insist on till
our Modern Demonstrators speak more home to this Point, that one Divine
Essence, one Self-originated Divinity, though subsisting in three distinct
Persons, is but one God. I cannot discourse this at large now, that may be done,
if there be Occasion for it, another time, but at present I shall only give a
brief Account of the Doctrine of the Fathers, as to this Point.

They tell us, that there is but one self-originated Divinity, but one Father,
and therefore but one God; that this Eternal Unbegotten Father, begets an
Eternal Son of his own Nature and Substance, and in like Manner, that is, in
the same Nature and Substance the Holy Spirit Eternally proceeds from Father
and Son: So that there being but one Nature, one Divinity, communicated whole
and entire and perfectly the same, without Division of Substance, there is but
one Divine Nature, but one Divinity distinctly in three: not one merely as a
Species is one (though they often allude also to a Specific Unity) but one, as
one Individual, though not one Singular, Nature is one: as one which subsists
wholly, indivisibly, and perfectly in three, is one; which is one, and one, and
one, by a perfect Sameness, and Identity of Nature, and Substance, but not
three.

That these three are inseparable from each other, never did subsist a part,
never can; but are in each other, which they call the (...) and
Circumincession, which makes the Divinity one simple, indivisible Monad: And
here we may allow a Place, (and he never intended any other Place for it) to
what Dr. Sherlock calls, mutual Consciousness, which is the proper and natural
In-being of three, each of which is Mind and Spirit: which is not barely a
knowing each other by an external Communication of Thoughts and Counsels, which
is far from being an essential natural Unity; but such an inward vital
Sensation, as each Person has of himself; which after all the Noise and Clamor
about it, seems to be a very sensible Representation of the natural In-being
and Circumincession of the Divine Persons; and as natural a Demonstration of
the Unity of the Divine Essence, as self-consciousness must be acknowledged to
be of the Unity of a Person.

It is certain, without this they cannot be one Energy and Power (wherein the
Fathers also place the Unity of the Godhead) one Agent, one Creator and
Governor. But where there is such an inseparable Union, such a mutual
conscious Sensation, there can be but (...), as Greg. Nyssen speaks, One Motion
of the Divine Will, though distinctly and without Confusion in three: And this
makes them one Agent, one Essential Will, one Essential Wisdom, one Essential
Power; so that here is in the properest Sense, but one Omniscience, one
Omnipotence, one Will, etc. and therefore but one God, though Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, are each of them in their own Persons, Omnipotent, Omniscient, and
whatever belongs to the Idea of God.

All this, indeed, does not make these three Divine Persons one Person, and
therefore not one God, in the Socinian Sense of one God, which is the only
Deficiency this Author charges this Account of the Divine Unity with; and is
wisely done of him, because he knows we reject this Notion of the Divine Unity,
and therefore here he is safe; we assert that the Unity of God, is not the
Unity of a Person, but the Unity of Nature and Essence; and to confute this, he
gravely proves, that three Persons are not, and cannot be one Person: But if he
would have opposed us, he should either have shown, First, That the Account the
Catholic Fathers give (for for we pretend to give no other) of the Unity of
God, does not prove, the perfect Unity of the Divine Essence in three Persons:
or Secondly, that one undivided Divinity is not one God: or Thirdly, that the
same Eternal Essence cannot subsist whole and perfect, distinctly and
indivisibly in Three; that is, that God cannot communicate his own Nature and
Substance, without Division and Separation, to his Son, and Spirit; or that God
cannot have an Eternal Son, and an Eternal Spirit: if he can do either of
these, we will very tamely and humbly follow his Chariot; in the mean time (for
I believe this will take up some time) I will show him the Difference between
three Divine Persons, each of which is true and perfect God, and three Gods.

1. First, then one God in the Socinian Notion, is one infinite Mind and
Spirit, one Eternal Divinity, in one only Person: So one Person, and one
Divinity, that no other Person communicates with it in the same Divinity, in
the same one eternal Essence and Substance: Now according to this Notion of one
God, three Gods are three such eternal Minds, Substances, Divinities, each of
which in his own Person, has a whole, perfect, undivided Essence and Divinity,
which is not common to any other Person: So that three Gods are three absolute
Substances, Essences, Divinities, which have no Essential Relation to, or
Communication with each other. There can be no other Notion of three Gods, if
as this Author, and all the Anti-Trinitarians assert, One God is One absolute
Divinity in One Person; for then three Gods must be three absolute Divinities
in three Persons: Now every one sees, what a vast difference there is, between
three such Gods, and the Catholic Faith of a Trinity of Person, in the Unity
of the Divine Essence.

Why, you will say, is not every Person in the Trinity, by himself, in his own
Person, true and perfect God? Yes, most certainly; but he is not one absolute,
separate Divinity; he has not a Divinity so peculiarly his own, that no other
Person communicates in it; there is but One undivided Divinity in all Three,
and therefore there is a Trinity in Unity.

But is not each Person in the Trinity infinite Mind, Spirit, Substance? Nay,
do not some Realists venture to call them three Minds, Spirits, Substances? and
what are such Three, but three Gods, if One infinite Mind and Spirit, be one
God?

I answer: An infinite Mind and Spirit, is certainly true and perfect God; but
one Personal infinite Mind and Spirit is not the One God, so as to exclude all
other Persons, unless he have one absolute, separate Divinity also, so proper
and peculiar to himself, that no other Person does or can communicate in it;
for if more Persons than One can perfectly communicate in the same One
Divinity, there must be more Divine Persons than One, and each of them perfect
God, but neither of them the One God, in Exclusion of the other Persons, but
all of them the One God as the One Divinity.

This, I think, the Socinians will grant, That One Divinity is but One God, and
that One God is One absolute Divinity; and the Reason why they assert the One
God to be but One Person, is because they think it impossible, that the same
undivided Divinity should subsist distinctly and perfectly in Three; but then
before they had charged the Faith of the Trinity with Tritheism, they should
have remembered, that the Persons of the Trinity are not three such Persons, as
their One Person is, whom they call the One God: and therefore though three
such Persons, three such Minds and Substances, as their One Person, and One
Spirit is, who is the whole Divinity confined to One single Person, would be
Three Gods, this does not prove, that Three such Persons as the Catholic
Church owns in the Ever-blessed Trinity, who are all of the same One Substance,
and but One Divinity, must therefore be three Gods also.

2. Three such Persons as these, who are three Gods, our Author, and every one
else, who understands any thing of these Matters, must acknowledge to be three
self-originated Persons; for God, in the full and adequate Notion of one God,
is a self-originated Being; and those, who assert, that the One God, is but One
Person, make him a self-originated Person: now it is evident, that in this
Sense the three Persons in the Christian Trinity are not three God's, for they
are not three self-originated Persons: The Father alone is un-begotten, or
self-originated, but the Son is begotten of his Father's Substance, and the
Holy Ghost eternally proceeds from Father and Son; so that here is but one
self-originated Person, with his Eternal Son, and Eternal Spirit. And let this
Author try to make three Gods of three, two of which are not self-originated
Persons. They might more plausibly dispute against the Divinity of the Son, and
the Holy Spirit, from this Topic, that they are not self-originated Persons,
than prove them to be a second and third God, by their perfect Communication in
a self-originated Nature, which is the Person of the Father. For though a
perfect Communication of the Divine Nature makes a true Divine Person, who is
true and perfect God, yet no Person can be the One God, who is not
self-originated; and a self-originated Person, who is a Father, cannot be the
One God, so as to exclude his Son, who is of the same Nature and Substance with
him; nor the Holy Spirit, who by an Eternal Procession from Father and Son,
perfectly communicates in the same Eternal Nature.

3. Three such Persons, as in a strict and proper Notion are three Gods, must
be three separate Persons, who have not only distinct, but separate Natures,
and Substances, and have no internal Union, or Communication with each other;
and therefore are in a proper Notion three Principles, three Agents, three
Wills, three Lives, three Omnipotents, etc. who always act apart, and can
never concur as one Agent, in any one Action; cannot make and govern the same
World; have no Relation to each other, no Order, no Union, as it is impossible
three absolute, independent Divinities should: But the Catholic Faith
concerning the three Divine Persons in the Trinity, is directly contrary to
this, that as Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are but One Substance, One Divinity;
so they are so perfectly in each other, that they have but one Essential Will,
Omnipotence, Omniscience, are but one Agent, one Creator and Governor of the
World.

Let this Author, or any other Adversaries, talk what they please, of the
Absurdity, Nonsense, Contradiction, of all this, which is not our present
dispute, I stand to it, that they can never make Tritheism of it; for the three
Divine Persons in the Trinity, though each of them be by himself true and
perfect God, yet as they are owned by the Catholic Church, and as we have now
explained it, are not three such Persons, as they themselves must confess,
three Persons must be, who are three Gods.

What I have now discoursed will help us to give a plain and short Answer to
those Fallacies, whereby such disinterested Persons, as this Author, charge
the Catholic Faith of the Trinity with Tritheism; for they manifestly
equivocate both in the Notion of one God, and of one Person.

By One God, they understand one who is true and perfect God, and every one,
who is true and perfect God, is one, and now instead of all other
Demonstrations, they only desire you to number the Persons of the Trinity upon
your Fingers, and if you can but tell to three, you will infallibly find three
Gods: The Father is true and perfect God; there, say they, is One God: the Son
is true and perfect God; there are Two Gods* the Holy Ghost is true and perfect
God; there are Three Gods: quod erat demonstrandum.

But do they think that all the Catholic Fathers knew not how to find Three in
the Trinity, till they taught them to tell three upon their Fingers? and if
they found three, but yet could not find three Gods in the Trinity, they might
in Modesty have thought, that something more than Arithmetic, or telling their
Fingers, was necessary to make good this Charge, and because they either are,
or would seem to be ignorant of this, I will tell them what it is.

In that Dispute, whether there be only One God, or more Gods than One; By One
God, in the first place, all Men understand One Divinity, one Infinite,
Omnipotent, Essence and Nature; for all the Arguments relating to the Unity of
God directly prove no more than the Unity of the Divine Essence: that God is
but One Person, as well as One Divinity, (as most Men did, and as all Men might
reasonably conclude before the Revelation of a Trinity of Divine Persons in the
Essential Unity of the Godhead) is not owing to any direct and positive Proof,
but to a common Presumption: For since we have no Example in created Nature, of
more than one proper Person in one individual inseparable Nature; most Men
hence concluded, naturally enough, that one Divinity was but one Divine Person
also. But God, who understands his own Nature best, has revealed to us in
Scripture, that there are Three, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, who equally and
perfectly communicate in this One infinite and undivided Essence, and therefore
that there are Three Divine Persons, and One God. And this has occasioned a
Confusion of Terms, on which our Socinian Adversaries have grounded all their
noisie Triumphs: for now One God, and One Person, signify very differently in
the Mystery of the Trinity, from what they do in common Acceptance, and must
of necessity do so.

One God, in natural Religion, before the Revelation of this Sacred Mystery,
signified One Divinity, One infinite Nature and Essence, without any Notion of
more than One Subsistence, and One Personality; and then consequently One
Person, who is this One God, must signify One, who has this whole Divinity,
perfectly in himself, and exclusively to all other Persons. But in the
Christian Mystery; One God, signifies also One perfect undivided Divinity, but
communicable whole and perfect, and indivisibly to more than One, and actually
subsisting in three distinct Persons, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and
therefore consequently, Person also in this Mystery, signifies One, who has the
whole Divine Nature perfectly in himself, and therefore is true and perfect
God, but has not the whole Divinity incommunicably in himself, exclusively to
all other Persons, and therefore is not the one God, in the Sense of one
perfect incommunicable Divinity, peculiar to himself, and communicated to no
other Person, nor subsisting in any other. And now let any Man judge of the
mean Sophistry of our Adversaries, who from their Notion of One Person and One
God, which the Catholic Church with great Reason rejects, charge the Catholic
Faith of a real, subsisting, Trinity, with Tritheism, for they do not dispute
ad idem, but impose upon Men with an equivocal Use of Words. Three such Divine
Persons indeed, as they own, that is, each of which has a whole perfect
Divinity in himself, which no other Person communicates, or can communicate in,
must be in a proper Notion, three Gods, or three perfect, self-originated,
separate, Divinities; but this does not prove (and yet in the last Result this
is all the Proof they offer at) that three Persons, who have but one common
Divinity, though distinctly and perfectly subsisting in each of them, are
therefore three Gods; for neither of these Persons is so God, as to exclude the
others from the same Divinity, and therefore are not three Divinities, not
three self-originated divine Essences, and therefore not three Gods, according
to the natural Notion of Tritheism: God, and God, and God, who have the same
One Divinity subsisting in them all, are not Three Gods, but One God, because
One Divinity. Here it is they should attack us, and if they have any thing to
say to this Point, we are ready to join Issue with them.

Fifthly, His last Argument, which he places great Confidence in, is very
easily answered. It is this. That all the Reasons used by Philosophers, or
Divines, to prove that there is but one God, do as certainly and as clearly
prove, that there can be but one infinite and all-perfect Spirit.

All this still is nothing but the same Equivocation and Fallacy, which I have
already sufficiently answered: One infinite and all-perfect Spirit may either
signify one Person, who is infinite Mind or Spirit in his own Person, and here
we are ready to join Issue with him, that all the Arguments, which prove, that
there is but one God, do not prove that there is but one Divine Person, but
One, who is this One God: or it may signify one Divinity, which is Essentially
one infinite all-perfect Spirit, but personally three; and in this Sense we
agree with him; for we assert one undivided Essence Essentially one in three,
that is, we believe there is but one God, who is One in Nature and Three in
Persons. And this seems a pretty surprising Undertaking, to prove that the
Arguments for one God confute a Trinity of real subsisting Persons in the Unity
of the same Godhead: It is certain, before he can do this, he must make three
Gods of these three Divine Persons; for if they be but one God, the Arguments
for the Unity of God, can never confute a Trinity of Persons; and here I might
reasonably leave this Argument, till he has answered, what I have already said
in this Cause. But let us hear his Arguments against Polytheism, and see how he
applies them.

First, That created Nature has nothing needless or in vain, much less can we
suppose, that the uncreated Divine Nature has ought, that is, superfluous or
redundant -- But now, is it not a Superfluity, say they, to suppose more Gods,
when (because one is sufficient) more Gods are needless, and wholly in vain?

I do not remember, that I have met with this Argument in these Terms, in any
of the ancient Apologists for Christianity: I think, it is a very bad Argument
against the being of any thing, but much more so, when applied to the Divine
Nature.

That Nature does nothing in vain, has been allowed for a Maxim among all
Philosophers, who have acknowledged a God, or that all things are made by a
wise Cause, the necessary Consequence of which is, that nothing is made in
vain, and this is the only Proof, and the only Reason of that Maxim: but, that
created Nature has nothing needless, or in vain, is not a self-evident
Proposition, but must be proved by an induction of Particulars, and is very
hard to be proved in this way, because we understand so little of the Designs,
and Contrivance and Wisdom of Nature; that many who begin at this end of the
Question, reject a wise Cause and Maker of the World, because they think, they
discover many Defects, or many superfluities in Nature, that is, many things
which are needless or in vain: and this looks like an unfortunate Beginning
thus to mistake his Maxim.

But to allow him this: What Philosopher ever pretended to prove by this
Argument, that such things either were, or were not, as they apprehended to be
either defective, needless, or superfluous? Whether such things are, or are
not, is pure Matter of Fact, and must be proved by such Ways, as the Nature of
the Thing admits; Matters of Sense by Sense, Matters of Revelation by
Revelation: and when Men know, that such things are, and what they are, then
they judge of them, whether they be vain and needless, defective or
superfluous, or wisely made, as they begin at the right or wrong End of this
Question. Those who are persuaded, that the World was made by a wise Cause,
hence conclude, that all things are wisely made, though there are many things
which they do not understand the Reason and Philosophy of: Others presuming
upon their own Skill in Nature, pick many Quarrels with it, and find few
things, which thoroughly please them, and thence conclude that the World was
not made by a wise Cause, because they do not see the Wisdom of it.

But whatever Truth or Force, there be in this Argument, it can relate only to
created Nature, to such things as are made, and are made to serve some
particular End; for then only a thing is vain and needless, when it is made so
in whole, or in Part, as to serve no wise End: but surely we must not dispute
at this Rate concerning an eternal, uncreated, self-originated Nature, which
was not made by any Cause, and therefore has no end but it self: and yet this
his Argument, to prove two or three Gods superfluous, needless, in vain,
because one God is sufficient: sufficient for what? why, to make and govern the
World; Well! Is God then only for the Sake of Creatures? Can a Being, who was
never made, who has no Cause, no Beginning, have any End but it self? Was one
God a superfluous, needless Being, before he made the World? or was the World
from Eternity as well as God? And does not an Athiest, who can make and govern
a World without a God, conclude from this very Argument, that there is none,
because he is a superfluous and needless Being? which shows, what a dangerous
Argument this is, when proposed in such loose general Terms. God is indeed the
Maker and Governor of the World, and we can prove, that the World could not be
made and governed but by God, and that one God can make and govern the World,
and there needs no more for this Purpose, and the Unity and Harmony of the
World, that is made, proves that there is but one Maker and Governor of it,
and therefore but one God: Such Arguments as these, together with the Notion of
an absolute perfect Being, which can be but one, were urged by the ancient
Apologists, against the Pagan Politheism; but to make God a superfluous or
needless Being, any farther than he has a Respect and Relation to Creatures,
which this Argument against the plurality of Gods supposes, is very irreverent
to God, and liable to very ill Consequences. It was never used in this Sense by
any of the ancient Fathers, and the first time Petavius observes it is in
Abaelardus and Edmundus Cantuariensis: and that more cautiously expressed, and
better qualified.

Secondly, His Second Argument is much of the same Nature: Page 49.
The multiplicity of Beings, of any sort, arises only from the weakness,
imperfection, and unsufficiency (in some regard or other) of those Beings;
which is such a wise Reason for the multiplicity of Beings, as I never in my
Life before met with. The Reason why any imperfect Beings are, is because they
are made, for what is imperfect cannot be without a Cause; and what ever is made
must be imperfect, because it must have a finite and limited Nature; for an
infinite Nature is self-existent, and cannot be made: and what is finite and
limited, may be multiplied; for there is nothing in its Nature and Idea to
hinder it, if it find a Maker; and the Wise Maker of the World thought fit to
make many Creatures of the same Kind: and now he may bring in his Reasons, if
he pleases, why God made so many Creatures of the same kind, to supply
Mortality, or for mutual Help or Comfort, etc. but all these Reasons relate
only to such Beings, as are made, and have a wise Cause, and I perfectly agree
with him, that God has none of these Defects, and therefore none of these
Reasons can make it necessary that there should be more Gods than one; but then
he should have remembered, that God was not made, and therefore not made for any
End; and this would have made him thought twice before he had added. To suppose
more Gods without assigning a final Cause for such a Supposition, is to employ
our Fancy and Invention (to assign no Cause) not to exercise our Reason: it is
to amuse our selves with Conceits and Chimera's, not to Philosophize. You
imagine more Gods without giving a Reason, whether final or declaratory. You
ought to know that the proper Name for this is Whimsie.

But I want a Name for this Argument, only I think it is neither Reason nor
Philosophy, to talk of assigning a final Cause, why there is a God, either one
or more.

A final Cause is the Reason and End, for which any thing was made; but that
which was not made, could be made for no end, and therefore it is absurd to
talk of the final Cause of a necessary and eternal Being.

But though he has managed these two Arguments at such a rate, that no Man has
any reason to reverence him as an infallible Dictator, either in Philosophy or
Religion, yet we allow him, what he would have, that two Gods are more than we
have any need of, and that there is not the same Reason for more Gods than One,
that there is for a Number of Creatures, of each kind; and what then? What
then? sure that is very evident, that there can no more be three all-perfect,
all-sufficient Spirits, than three Gods: Right! not three such all-perfect,
all-sufficient Spirits, as are three Gods; but what does he think of Three,
each of which is an all-perfect, and all-sufficient Spirit, and all Three but
one Divinity, one God? But one Spirit, who is really all-sufficient and
all-perfect, is enough to all Purposes and Intents whatsoever: I grant, One
Divinity is so; but if this One Divinity essentially and necessarily subsists
in Three, in Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, each of which is an all-perfect, and
all-sufficient Spirit, and yet but one whole undivided Divinity, one
all-perfect, all-sufficient Being, these Three are not more than enough, not
redundant and superfluous in the Divinity: and therefore he should have proved,
that by the same Reason, that three absolute, independent, self-originated
Divinities are superfluous and needless; three Divine Persons, of the same one
undivided Divinity, are superfluous too. Three Divinities, three separate
self-originated Divine Essences and Natures, are superfluous; but I hope one
Divinity, one Divine Nature and Essence is not: and if three Divine Persons are
Essential to one undivided and inseparable Divinity, I hope they are not
superfluous neither: and this is the Catholic Faith: not three Gods, or three
Divinities, but three Persons in one infinite, undivided, Nature and Essence.
Three, which never did subsist, never did, never can act apart, and therefore
though three, are but one all-wise omnipotent Agent; and one omnipotent is not
more than enough.

But, none of these Imperfections which are the Reasons, why Beings of the same
Kind are multiplied, are found in any one of these all-perfect, all-sufficient
Spirits. Very true, but the same one whole perfect Divinity is found in them
all, and therefore though they are three, the Divinity is not multiplied, but
they are One God; and this is all we are to account for: those who believe but
one God, I hope, need not give a Reason, whether final or declaratory, why
there are more; but if he expects a Reason, why there are three living,
subsisting, omniscient, omnipotent, Persons in this one undivided Godhead, a
final Reason I can give none, for I have learnt to give no such Reasons of a
necessary and eternal Nature; a declaratory Reason, as he aclls it, I can give,
because our Savior has assured us, that so it is, and has given Command to his
Ministers to baptize in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost.

Thirdly, And this answers his third Argument, that the Works of Creation,
though they prove the Being of a God, yet give us not the least Intimation of
more Gods than One: We own the Argument against a Plurality of Gods; but now
for the Application: He says, this is as direct a Proof against our professing
more Infinite and Almighty mighty Spirits. Of one such Mind or Spirit, the
Works of Creation are a clear Demonstration, but they show us not the least
Footsteps or Track of more such Spirits and Minds. [Or of three such Divine
Almighty Person;] and I know not how they should, when as the Realists
themselves profess, these three are but one essential Wisdom, Power, and
Goodness, and therefore but one Maker and Governor of the World.

But he thinks, that if there were more than One such Mind or Spirit, or as we
say, infinite Person, who is an infinite and all-mighty Mind, that also would
have been made known to us, either by the Works of Creation or Providence, that
are visible to all, because all are concerned to know it. But though there were
(as we profess to believe) three such Divine Persons in the Unity of the
Godhead, yet he knows according to our Principles, the Works of Creation could
give no such Notice of any distinction of Persons in the Godhead, because the
Father makes all Things by his Word and Spirit, by an undivided and
undistinguished Wisdom and Power, and when these Divine Persons have not
distinct and separate Parts in the Creation, it is impossible, that this
visible Frame of Nature should distinguish them; and therefore this Distinction
cannot be learnt but by Revelation.

Nor consequently were all Men concerned to know this, till God thought fit to
reveal it: It was sufficient in a mere State of Nature to worship the Maker of
the World with an undistinguisht Devotion: but the Redemption of Mankind by the
Incarnation and Death of the Son of God, and by the Sanctification of the
Spirit, made the Revelation of this Mystery necessary; and though the Works of
Creation did not visibly distinguish the Divine Persons, yet the Work of
Redemption does, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, have their distinct Parts and
Offices in this Glorious Work, and such as prove each of them to be a distinct
Person, and each Person to be true and perfect God; but this Author will not
stand the Trial of Revelation: for he tells us plainly, that the Doctrine of
the Trinity (for that is all he means by three Minds and Spirits) is a Point of
so much Importance, and so general Concernment, that were it true, it must have
been found, where all other necessary Parts of Religion are registered; in the
Works of Creation, or the Methods of Providence, or the congenit Notions, which
are inseparable from our rational Natures. Here he speaks out, and we thank
him for it; he has done with all Revelation, excepting where there is the
least need of it, viz. such Matters as may be known without a Revelation; and
now he has pulled off his Disguise, it is time for all Christians to have done
with him. He has hitherto concealed himself under the Character of a
Nominalist, and according to his own Rule he ought to show us this nominal
Trinity registered in the Works of Creation, or the Methods of Providence, or
those congenite Notions, which are inseparable from our rational Natures: and
when he has done this, we will show him a Trinity of real proper subsisting
Persons.

As for what he adds, that our Savior tells us, God is (not three Spirits) but
a Spirit, it is like all the rest: Spirit there, as in many other Places,
signifies the Nature, not the Person, and therefore these are not contradictory
Propositions; God is a Spirit, and there are Three in the Unity of the
Godhead, each of which is infinite Mind and Spirit.

SECT. VI.
The Defense this Author makes for the Nominalists, against the Objections of
the Realists.
THis Author having, as he thinks, sufficiently exposed the Tritheistick
Trinity of the Realists, proceeds to vindicate the Nominalists from those
Exceptions, Page 52.
which are made against them: I need say little more to this, than to explain
that Defense he makes for them; and leave the Persons concerned to vindicate
themselves from his Vindication, which seems to me a very scandalous one.

1. The first Objection is, That the Explication (of the Nominalists) is a
barefaced yielding the long-controverted Question of the Trinity, to the
Sabellians and Samosatenians, and consequently to the Socinians, who differ in
nothing from Noetus, Sabellius, and Paul of Samosata; (they are near of Kin
indeed, but there is some difference between them.) The God of the Sabellians
and Socinians, and the God (or pretended) Verbal Trinity of the Nominals, is
perfectly the same: the latter have explained away the Trinity to the former.
The three Divine Persons of the Nominals, do all make but one Divine Person of
the Socinians and Sabellians. This is certainly true, (as he explains the
Doctrine of the Nominals, which, I hope, they can give a better account of) but
for fear some Men should not believe it, he takes great pains to prove that it
is so. Now this is a very formidable Objection: for if the Nominals have
revived Sabellianism and Socinianism, they have been condemned many hundred
Years since by all those Catholic Fathers and Councils, who condemned Noetus,
Sabellius, Photinus, Paulus Samosatenus, and such like Anti-Trinitarian
Heretics. And this justifies the Realists, and undoes all that he has hitherto
been doing; for there is no Medium between a Real and a Nominal Trinity, a
Trinity of three real, living, subsisting, Persons, and One living, subsisting
Person, with a Trinity of Names, Offices, Modes, or immanent Acts, and
therefore as far as the Authority of the Catholic Church reaches, the
Condemnation of a Sabellian and Nominal Trinity must justify a Trinity of real
subsisting Persons. And what now does he answer to this? Why he owns it, and
says the Socinians at length see it, and hope to make their Advantage of it:
That it is indeed an invidious Objection, and that is the whole strength of it:
Invidious, I confess, it is, because all sincere Christians abhor these Names,
and it would in a great measure put an end to this Controversy, were our
People satisfied, that a Nominal Trinitarian, and Socinian, perfectly agree in
renouncing the true Catholic Faith of the Trinity; though the Nominalist still
retains the Name of Trinity and Persons, which the Socinians have hitherto
rejected, but are now willing to use them for Peace sake, since they learn from
these Men, that they signify nothing, and that the Church never intended to
signify any thing real by them. This is what he tells us with great Triumph:
Our English Socinians claim in their Writings, Page 56.
that they are the Discoverers, that the Feud between the Church and them was
ill-grounded. For that, in very deed, both (the Nominals, whom he calls the
Church, and the Socinians) say the same thing: As they pretend to this Honor,
so they are sufficiently paid, in that themselves have the whole Benefit of it:
They may enjoy thereby that Peace and Tranquillity, that Ease and Security from
the Laws themselves, which they before owed to the Indulgence, or Connivence of
Princes and Magistrates.

This now is very plain dealing, and I hope will be a fair warning to all
serious Christians, how they suffer themselves to be cheated out of their Faith
by the loud, groundless Outcries of Tritheism, or imposed on by the old
Catholic Names of Trinity, and Persons, without that Catholic Sense in which
the Church always used those Words.

And I think those Persons to whom this Author affixes the Name of Nominals, if
they be not Sabellians and Socinians, (which God forbid) ought to vindicate
themselves from this heavy Imputation, and not only deny the Charge, but so
explain themselves, as to let us see, wherein their Doctrine concerning the
Trinity, differs from the old condemned Heresies of Sabellius, Photinus, and
Socinus: And I doubt not but this will produce a much happier Agreement, and
put an end to this scandalous Distinction between Real and Nominal Trinitarians.

2. But our Author is much more troubled with the second Objection: That the
Predications, or (as others speak) Attributions given in Holy Scripture, Page
57.
and by the Catholic Church to the Divine Persons, seem not well to consist,
or to be intelligible, on the Hypothesis or Explication of the Nominals.

His Instance concerns the Son or second Person in the Trinity, who is called
God, and we say he was Incarnate, and all things were made by him: In some
places an Omnipresence, in others Omnipotence and Omniscience are ascribed to
him. But how can we (with any tolerable Propriety) say, that a mere reflex
Wisdom is God, created all things, was incarnate, is omnipotent, omniscient,
omnipresent? Or how can any of these things be affirmed of, or applied to our
Savior, in regard of the Incarnate or inhabiting Logos, or reflex Wisdom? the
which also how it should be incarnate, will be another unaccountable,
unintelligible Paradox.

This is a very notable Objection; he has brought the Nominals on, let him see
how he can bring them off again.

Now, in the first place, he is not willing to own, that any such things as
these are said of Christ, and therefore tells us, We should do well to consider
the Interpretations of the Texts, wherein these things are said, or seem to be
said. And here he is at his old Trade of admiring his Critical Interpreters,
whom he prefers much before Divines; and of disparaging those Copies we have of
the Scriptures: the Mystery of which is, That some Critics give up some Texts
of Scripture, out of Wantonness and Vanity, which the Catholic Church always
thought good Proofs of the Divinity and Incarnation of our Savior; and he
thinks it a better way to judge of the sense of Scripture, by some new Critical
Pointings, or the Mistakes of some old Copies, which may furnish them with
various Readings, than by the whole Series of the Discourse, and the
Traditional Interpretations of the Catholic Church; but I shall not dispute
this Matter now.

He is certainly so far in the right, that the safest way of answering all
this, is to deny it all; and this is what he means, Page 58.
when he says, It were easy to make such an Application of this Reflection, as
would (perhaps) offend many; but would (for all that) be most true.

Now I would only ask the Nominalists, how they like this way of answering
these difficulties, by criticizing away all the Proofs of the Divinity and
Incarnation of Christ? This their pretended, but treacherous Friend, says is
the best and truest way, and he is a Man of Skill in these Matters, and seems
to be ashamed of any other Answer but this, which will unavoidably entangle him
in unaccountable and unintelligible Paradoxes. I verily persuade my self, that
many of those, whom this Author calls Nominals, abhor the Thoughts of this, and
therefore ought freely and openly to declare themselves in this Matter, and not
to suffer this bantering Socinian to impose upon the World in their Names.

But if this Answer don't please, our Author has another for them, as good to
the full: Let us, says he, distinguish the two Natures in Christ, Page 59.
his Divinity and Humanity, and rightly understand the Doctrine of the
Incarnation: This looks very promisingly; for to acknowledge two Natures in
Christ, and rightly to understand the Doctrine of the Incarnation, will
rectify all other Mistakes: Let us then hear what he has to say of this. As to
the Incarnation, every body knows, that the most Learned Interpreters, do not
limit the Incarnation to the Person of the Logos or Son: But they say, the
whole Divinity, or as St. Paul speaks, the fullness of the Godhead (was
incarnate, or) dwelt in Christ.

Who these most learned Interpreters are, I cannot tell, unless he means the
Patripassion Heretics, for all Catholic Christians believe only the
Incarnation of the Person of the Son, and that neither the Father, nor the Holy
Spirit were incarnate in the Incarnation of Christ.

But can we deny, that the whole Divinity, the fullness of the Godhead was
incarnate, or dwelt in Christ? I answer, This is mere Fallacy: for the whole
Divinity may signify either Essentially or Personally: The (...), the One
whole Divinity is Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, the same perfect Divinity,
subsisting whole and indivisible in each of them, that they are all Three but
One Divinity, or One God; and thus the whole Divinity was not incarnate in
Christ: But then, as Christ in his own Person is true and perfect God, so the
fullness of the Godhead was incarnate in him; which is all St. Paul means.

But will this Author in good earnest allow, that God was incarnate in Christ,
and that Christ was in One Person, both God and Man? Hold there a little: They
do not mean, he says, that God was so incarnate, or so dwells in the Humanity
of Christ* that he is not also every where else: and whoever said he was? But
is he so incarnate, as to be truly God-Man in One Person, as the Soul and Body
are One Man? No! no! but only thus, Christ is perfect God in respect of God in
him; because, or as God is perfect God in whatsoever Place or Person he is: God
is perfect God in the least Point of Space, no less than in never so large a
Portion of Extension: And this is all the Mystery of the Incarnation: and thus
God, the fullness of the Godhead, is as much incarnate in every Man in the
World, as he was in Christ; for God is every where, and is perfect God,
wherever he is.

Thus I have endeavored to unmask this Author, to let the World see, who they
are that make their Advantage of these Disputes: His very Expedients for Peace
show how unwilling he is to have this Controversy silenced, which should teach
all the sincere Lovers of the Catholic Faith, who heartily believe in Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, Three Persons and One God, not to lose the Faith in a
Contention about Words, nor give a handle to our Enemies, to represent our
Faith as uncertain, various, or heretical, when under different Forms of
Speech, we may, and I hope do mean the very same thing.

The Learned Bishop of Worcester, whose Discourse in Vindication of the Trinity
I have just now received, has undertaken this Charitable Work, and I hope his
Great Judgment, Learning, and Authority, may tend very much, if not to make all
Men speak and think alike, yet at least to prevent their charging each other
with such Heresies, as they all abhor, and which their Words fairly and
heartily expounded, are by no means chargeable with, as that excellent Person
thinks, neither Side is, and I wish with all my Heart, he may be in the right:
And this would soon qualify our Differences; for did it once appear, that we
all mean the same thing, the Dispute about Words would die of it self, and our
common Adversaries could no longer conceal themselves under a Disguise, but
must take their old Name of Socinians again.

FINIS.

