A DISCOURSE Concerning the Divine Providence.

By WILLIAM SHERLOCK, D. D. Dean of St. Paul's, Master of the Temple, and
Chaplain in Ordinary to Their Majesty's.

IMPRIMATUR,

Maii 9. 1693. Carolus Alston, R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris.



LONDON: Printed for William Rogers, at the Sun over against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleet street. MDCXCIV.

TO THE QUEEN's Most Excellent Majesty.
May it please Your Majesty,
TO Accept this Treatise, which, did the Composition answer the Subject, would
recommend it self to the Perusal of Princes, who are the peculiar Care, and the
great Ministers of Providence. For it is this Good Providence which is the
Security of the Royal Throne, and the most perfect Pattern of a Just, and Equal
Government, without Contempt of the meanest, or Partiality to the greatest.

That Experience YOUR MAJESTY has had of a Kind and Watchful Providence, and
that constant dependence the most Potent Monarchs have on the Divine
Protection, especially in the great Shakings and Convulsions of the World, I
hope may excuse this Dedication, as neither improper nor unseasonable. And may
the same Good Providence, which has advanced YOUR MAJESTY'S to the Throne, and
so signally preserved the King from the greatest Dangers, still preserve Your
Sacred Persons, establish Your Throne, and deliver You from all Your Enemies.
Which is the hearty and daily Prayer of,

YOUR MAJESTY'S, Most Humble, most Obedient, and most Dutiful Subject and
Servant, WILLIAM SHERLOCK.

The CONTENTS.
THE Introduction, Page 1
Chap. 1.
THE necessary Connection between the belief of a God, and of a Providence, 3
The World can be no more governed than made by chance, Ibid. An Infinite and
Eternal Mind, which sees and knows all things, must govern the Word, 5 He who
made the World, cannot be unconcerned for his Creatures, 7 No Philosophers,
except the Epicureans, who acknowledged a Deity, denied a Providence, 8 The
same Arguments, which prove the Being of a God, prove a Providence, 9 The
strength of Atheism consists in contradicting the Universal Reason of Mankind,
11
Chap. 2.
THE general Notion of Providence, and particularly concerning a preserving
Providence, 16 The Nature of Preservation, as distinguished from a governing
Providence, Ibid. The first Act of Preservation in upholding and preserving the
Being and Natures of all things, 17 The second Act of Preservation; God's
Cooperation and Concourse with Creatures in all their Actions, 21 Some
difficulties of Providence answered; as God's Concourse with Creatures in
sinful Actions, 25 Concerning the Eternity of Punishments, 28 Some Practical
Inferences, 31
Chap. 3.
COncerning God's Governing Providence, 33 God's Government of Causes, and of
Events, 34 God's Government of Natural Causes, and wherein it consists, Ib.
God's Government of Accidental Causes, or what we call Chance and Accident, 39
God's Government of Moral Causes, or Free Agents,. 47 The difference between
God's Government of Men considered as reasonable Creatures, and as Instruments
of Providence, 48 Concerning God's Government of men's Minds, their Wills and
Passions, Page 51 Concerning God's Government of men's Actions, 54 God's
Government of Good and Bad men, more particularly considered, 57 God's
Government of Events, 59 What is meant by Events in this Question, 60 Wherein
God's Government of Events consists, 61 Concerning Gods Permission, Ibid The
difference between God's Government of all Events, and Necessity and Fate, 66
That the Exercise of a particular Providence consists in the Government of all
Events, 68
Chap. 4.
COncerning the Sovereignty of Providence, 73 Concerning God's Absolute Power,
75 That true Absolute Power can do no wrong, explained at large, Ib. The
Unsearchable Wisdom of Providence, 85 Infinite Wisdom can do no wrong, 88 That
the Wisdom of Providence must be as unaccountable, as the Wisdom of the
Creation, 91 That the wise Government of the Word, requires secret and hidden
Methods of Providence, 97 That we are ignorant of a great many things, without
the knowledge of which, it is impossible to understand the reasons of
Providence, 110 In what cases the Unsearchable Wisdom of God, is a reasonable
Answer to the Difficulties of Providence, 123
Chap. 5.
THe Justice and Righteousness of Providence, 137 That the Justice of
Providence does not consist in hindering all Acts of Injustice and Violence, 138
God may do that very justly, which men cannot do without great Injustie, 139
What the Nature and Exercise of God's Justice requires, 141 What Acts of
Justice the present Government of this World requires, Page 147 The Account the
Scripture gives us of God's Justice and Righteousness, 150
Chap. 6.
THE Holiness of Providence, 161 What the Holiness of Government requires, Ib.
What the Holiness of God's Providence does not require of him, 168 God is not
the Cause and Author of Sin, 175 The Divine Prescience does not destroy the
Liberty of Human Actions, 178 God decrees no men's sins, 181 Some Texts of
Scripture considered, which seem to make God the Author of sin, 183 Concerning
God's hardening Pharaoh's heart, Ib. Some other Texts considered, which seem to
charge God with the sins of men. 200
Chap. 7.
THE Goodness of Providence, 214 Mistakes concerning the Nature of God's
Goodness, 216 The difference between Absolute Goodness and Justice, and the
Goodness and Justice of Discipline, 220 That God exercises all Acts of
Goodness, which a state of Trial and Discipline will admit, 221 Another Mistake
concerning the Nature of Good and Evil; and what Good and Evil is in a state of
Discipline, 226 Another Mistake about the Nature of Government; and what
Goodness is required in the Government of the World, 233 Two Objections against
the Goodness of Providence answered. 1. From the many Miseries which are in the
world, 238 A second Objection is, God's partial and unequal Care of his
creatures, 265
Chap. 8.
THE Wisdom of Providence, 269 The Wisdom of Providence considered in some
great Events recorded in Scripture, 270 The Destruction of the World by Noah's
Flood, Page 271 Concerning the Confusion of Languages, and the Dispersion of
Mankind over all the earth, 285 God's choosing Abraham and his Posterity, for
his peculiar People, 289 Concerning the removal of Jacob and his Family into
Egypt, 299 The Oppression of Israel in Egypt, 300 The Miracles wrought by Moses
in Egypt, 302 God's delivering the Law from Mount Sinai, 309 All that came out
of Egypt, excepting Joshua and Caleb, died in the Wilderness, 311 The frequent
Relapses of Israel into Idolatry, 313 Concerning the Captivities and
Dispersions of Israel, especially their Captivity in Babylon, 319 In what sense
Christ came in the Fullness of Time, 326 The Destruction of Jerusalem by the
Romans, 328 The Wisdom of Providence in some more common and ordinary Events,
331 That God rewards or punishes men in their Posterity, 332 God's punishing
sin with sin, 339 God's disappointing both our Hopes and Fears, 340 God's
deferring the deliverance of good men, and the punishment of the wicked, to the
utmost extremity, 341 Concerning sudden Changes and Revolutions, 343 The wise
mixture of Mercy and Judgment, 344
Chap. 9.
THE Duties we owe to Providence, 345 A particular Acknowledgment of Providence
in all Events, Ibid. Submission to the Providential Will of God, 347 Concerning
Submission to God under Afflictions and Sufferings, 348 Submission to the Will
of God with respect to our several states and conditions of life, 354
Concerning Hope and Trust in the Divine Providence, 366 Concerning the Duties
of Prayer and Thanksgiving, 378
A DISCOURSE OF THE Divine Providence.
The INTRODUCTION.
MY Chief Design in this following Treatise, is, So to Explain the Nature of
Providence, as to reconcile men to the Belief of it; and to possess them with a
Religious Awe and Reverence of the Supreme and Absolute Lord of the World. For
it is very evident, That the Mistakes about the Nature of Providence, are the
principal Objections against it; which tempt some men to deny a Providence, or
so weaken the sense of it in others, that they are very little the better for
believing it. That a Divine Providence does Govern the World, I have proved
largely enough for my present Design, in the Discourse concerning a Future
Judgment; Cap. 1. 3.
which I refer my Reader to: But that this Work might not seem to want a
Foundation, I have not wholly omitted the Proof of a Providence, but have at
least said enough to convince those of a Providence, who believe, That there is
a God; which must be supposed in a Discourse of Providence.

The Whole is divided into Nine Chapters.
I. The necessary Connection between the Belief of a God, and of a Providence.
II. The General Notion of Providence; and particularly concerning a Preserving
Providence. III. Concerning God's Governing Providence. IV. The Sovereignty of
Providence. V. The Justice of Providence. VI. The Holiness of Providence. VII.
The Goodness of Providence. VIII. The Wisdom of Providence. IX. The Duties we
owe to Providence.
The Explication of these Things will not only answer many Difficulties in
Providence, but will give us a clearer Notion of the Divine Attributes, and of
some of the principal Duties of Religion.

CHAP. I.
The necessary Connection between the Belief of a God, and of a Providence.
INstead of other Arguments to prove a Providence, I shall at present insist
only on this, That the Belief of a God infers a Providence: That if we believe
there is a God who Made the World, we must believe that the same God who Made
the World, does Govern it too.

1. For first, It is as absurd and unreasonable to think, That the World is
Governed by Chance; as to think, That it was Made by Chance; for Chance can no
more Govern, than it can Make the World.

One principal Act of Providence is to uphold all things in being, to preserve
their Natures, Powers, Operations; to make this lower World again every Year by
new Productions: For Nature seems to decay, and dye, and revive again, in
almost as wonderful a manner, and as unintelligible to us, as it was first
made. Now tho it is very absurd to say, That Chance which acts by no Rule, nor
with any Counsel or Design, can make a World, which has all the Marks and
Characters of an admirable Wisdom in its Contrivance; yet it seems more absurd
to say, That Chance can preserve, that it can uphold the things it has made,
that it can repair the decays of Nature, nay, restore it when it seems lost:
That it can not only do the same thing twice, but repeat it infinitely in new
productions: That Chance can give Laws to Nature, Casu, inquis? itane vero?
quidquam potest casu esse factum, quod omnes in se habeat numeros veritatis?
quatuor tali jacti casu venereum efficient, number etiam centum venereos, si 400
talos ejeceris, casu futuros putas? -- Sic enim se profecto res habet, ut
nunquam perfect veritatem casus imitetur. Cicero de Divinat. l. 1.
and impose a Necessity on it to act regularly and uniformly; that is, That
Chance should put an end to Chance, and introduce Necessity and Fate. Were
there not a Wise and Powerful Providence, it is Ten thousand times more likely,
that Chance should unmake and dissolve the World, than that it should at first
make it; for a World that came together by Chance, and has nothing to keep it
together but the Chance that made it, which is as uncertain and mutable as
Chance is, will quickly unmake it self. Should the Sun but change his place,
come nearer this Earth, or remove farther from it, there were an end of this
lower World* and if it were placed there by Chance, it is wonderful, that in so
many Ages, some new unlucky Chance has not removed it. And therefore the
Psalmist attributes not only the Creation but the Preservation of all things to
God. Praise him sun and moon, praise him ye stars of light: Praise him all ye
heavens, and ye waters that are above the heavens: Let them praise the name of
the Lord, for he spoke the word, and they were made; he commanded, and they
were created: He has made them fast for ever; he has given them a law, which
shall not be broken, 148. Psalm. 3, 4, 5, 6.

2dly. The same Wisdom and Power which Made the World, must Govern it too: It
is only a Creating Power that can preserve: That which owes its very Being to
Power, must depend upon the Power that made it, for it can have no principle of
Self-subsistence independent on its Cause: It is only Creating Wisdom, that
perfectly understands the Natures of all things, that sees all the springs of
Motion, that can correct the Errors of Nature, that can suspend or direct the
Influences of Natural Causes, that can govern Hearts, change men's Purposes,
inspire Wisdom and Counsel, restrain or let loose their Passions. It is only an
Infinite Mind that can take care of all the World; that can allot every
Creature its portion; that can adjust the Interests of States and Kingdoms;
that can bring Good out of Evil, and Order out of Confusion. In a word, the
Government of the world requires such Wisdom and such Power, as no Being has
but he who made it; and therefore if the World be governed, it must be governed
by the Maker of it.

3dly. If there be any such Being as we call God, a Pure, Infinite, Eternal
Mind, it is a Demonstration, That he must Govern the world.

Those who deny a Providence, will not allow, that God sees or takes notice of
what is done here below. The Epicureans, tho in Civility and Compliment to the
Superstition of mankind, rather than from a real belief and sense of a Deity,
they did own a God, nay, a great many Gods, Immortali aevo summa cum pace
fruatur.
such as they were, yet never allowed their Gods to know any thing of our
affairs, Semota a nostris rebus, sejunctaque long.
which would have disturbed their profound Ease and Rest, the sole Happiness of
the Lazy, Unactive, Epicurean Deities; and this secured them from the fear of
their Gods, who lived at a great distance from them, and knew nothing
concerning them.

And in the same manner this is represented in Scripture, That wicked men would
not believe that God saw, or heard, or took any notice of what they did; 64.
Psalm 5. They encourage themselves in an evil matter, they commune of laying
snares secretly; they say, Who shall see them. 10. Psalm 11. He has said in
his heart, God has forgotten, he hides his face, he will never see it. 94.
Psalm 7, 8, 9, 10. Yet they say, The Lord shall not see, neither shall the God
of Jacob regard it. Understand ye brutish among the people, and ye fools when
will ye be wise? He that planted the ear, shall he not hear? And he that formed
the eye, shall he not see? He that chastises the heathen, shall not he
correct? And he that teaches man knowledge, shall not he know? The Lord knows
the thoughts of man, that they are vanity. So that these men took it for
granted, That if God did see, and hear, and know what was done in the world, he
would reward men accordingly. And therefore the Providence of God is described
in Scripture by his seeing and observing the Actions of men. 31. Job 4. Does
not he see my ways, and count all my steps? 33. Psalm. 18, 19. Behold the eye of
the Lord is upon them that fear him, upon them that hope in his mercy; that is,
to protect them, and to do good to them; as it follows, to deliver their soul
from death, and to keep them alive in famine. And therefore when good men pray
for help and succor, they only beg God to see and take notice of their
condition; 1. Lam. 11. See, O Lord, and consider, for I am become vile. 64.
Isa. 9. Behold, see, we beseech thee, we are all thy people. Thus in Hezekiah
's Prayer, Incline thine ear, O Lord, and hear, open thine eyes, O Lord, and
see, and hear all the words of Senacherib, which has sent to reproach the
living God: And therefore God's seeing, is made an argument that he will reward
or punish, 10. Psalm 14. Thou have seen it, for thou beholdest mischief and
spite, to requite it with thy hand. And indeed it is not to be imagined, that a
holy and just God, who sees and observes all the good and evil that is done in
the world, should not reward the good, and punish the wicked; for there is no
other Holy and Just Being in the world, that has authority to reward and
punish, but would certainly do it. And if the Proof of a Divine Providence be
resolved into God's knowing what is done in the world, the Dispute will be soon
ended; for those who believe that there is a God, and that he is an Infinite,
Omnipresent Mind, cannot doubt whether he sees and knows all things. As the
Psalmist elegantly expresses it, 139. Psalm 1. -- 13. O Lord, thou have
searched me and known me. Thou know my down-sitting, and my uprising, thou
understandest my thought afar off? Thou compassest my path, and my lying down,
and art acquainted with all my ways. For there is not a word in my tongue, but
lo, O Lord, thou know it altogether. Thou have beset me hehind and before,
and laid thine hand upon me. Such knowledge is too wonderful for me, it is too
high, I cannot attain unto it. Whither shall I go from thy Spirit, or whither
shall I flee from thy presence? If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there, if
I make my bed in hell, behold thou art there. If I take the wings of the
morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea, even there shall thy hand
lead me, and thy right hand shall hold me: If I say, surely the darkness shall
cover me, even the night shall be light about me; yea, the darkness hides not
from thee, but the night shines as the day; the darkness and the light are
both alike to thee; for thou have possessed my reins, thou have covered me in
my mother's womb. How is it possible, that an Omnipresent Mind should be
ignorant of any thing, or that the Maker of the World should not be present
with all his Creature, or that being present, and seeing all their Actions, he
should be an idle and unconcerned Spectator?

4thly, For I think in the next place, it is past all dispute, that he who made
the World cannot be unconcerned for his Creatures. He has implanted in most
Creatures a natural care of their Offspring; and it is made an argument of want
of understanding in the Ostrich, That she leaves her Eggs in the Earth, and
warmeth them in the dust, and forgets that the foot may crush them, or that
the wild Best may break them. She is hardened against her young ones, as if
they were not hers: Her labor is in vain without fear, because God has
deprived her of wisdom, neither has he imparted to her understanding, 39. Job
15, 16, 17. And can we think then, that an infinitely wise Being, should be as
unconcerned for the World, as the Ostrich is for her Eggs?

It is certain the Maker of the World is no sluggish unactive Being; for to
make a World is a Work of infinite Wisdom and Counsel, of Divine Art and Power;
and not only to give being to that which was not, is it self an act of
excellent Goodness, but there are so many legible Characters of a Divine Bounty
and Goodness stamped upon all the Works of Nature, that we must conclude, the
World was made by an infinitely good Being; and it is impossible that a wise
and good Being, who is a pure Act, and perfect Life, can cast off the care of
his Creatures. Besides the Laws of God and Men, natural Affection will not
suffer men to forget their Children; and though God has no Superior, his own
Nature is a Law to himself.

This is sufficient to show, how necessarily the belief of a God infers a
Providence, and therefore no Philosophers, excepting Epicurus, and his Sect,
who acknowledged a Deity, Epicurum verbis reliquisse Deos, resustulisse, de
Not. Deor. l, 2.
ever denied a Providence; and Tully tells us, that he retained the name of a
God, but destroyed his Being. Quo concesso confitendum est eorum Consilio
mundum administrari, de Not. Deor. l. 2.


The Stoic in Tully concludes a Providence from the acknowledgment of a God:
And therefore tells us, that Providence signifies the Providence of God:
Providentia praecise dicitur pro Providentia Deorum. Ibid.
And those Philosophers made no scruple of calling God Providence and Fate,
Chrysippus Legis perpetuae and aeternae vim, quae quasi dux vitae, and Ministra
Officiorum sit, Jovem dicit esse, eandemque fatalem necessitatem. Ibid, l, 1.
and the Power of an Eternal and Perpetual Law. For indeed Mankind had no other
notion of a God, than that he is an Excellent and Perfect Being, Aliquam
excellentem esse and praestantem naturam, quae haec fecisset, moveret, regeret,
gubernaret. Ibid.
who made, and who governs the World. This is the notion which the
Philosophers, who acknowledged a Deity, defended against Epicurus, and other
Atheists; Imposuitis in cervicibus nostris sempiternum Dominum, quem dies and
noctes timeremus; quis enim non timeat omnia providentem, and cogitantem, and
animadvertentem, and omnia ad se pertinere putantem, curiosum, and plenum
negotii Deum. Ibid.
this is the notion of a God, which Atheists oppose, the God whom they fear, an
Eternal Lord, who observes, and takes notice of every thing, and thinks himself
concerned in all the Affairs of the World. And therefore the Dispute, Whether
there be a God or no, principally resolves it self into this, Whether this
World, and all things in it, is made and governed by Wisdom and Counsel, or by
Chance, and a blind material Necessity and Fate: which proves, that the very
notion of God includes a Providence, or else either to prove or to overthrow
the Doctrine of Providence, would neither prove, nor overthrow the Being of a
God.

This, I am sure, is very plain, That the same Arguments which prove the Being
of a God, prove a Providence: If the beauty, variery, usefulness, and wise
contrivance of the Works of Nature, prove that the World was at first made by a
wise and powerful Being; the continuance and preservation of all things, the
regular motions of the Heavens, the uniform productions of Nature, prove the
World is upheld, directed and governed by the same Omnipotent Wisdom and
Counsel. As St. Paul tells us, The invisible things of God from the creation of
the world, are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even
his eternal power and Godhead, 1 Romans 20. (...), his Dominion and Sovereignty,
or his governing Providence; this visible World does not only prove an Eternal
Power which made it, but a Sovereign Lord, who administers all the Affairs of
it. And 14. Acts 17. He proves the Being of God from his Providence;
Nevertheless he left not himself without witness in that he did good, and gave
us rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and
gladness. And 17. Acts 28. He proves, that God governs the World, and takes
care of all the Creatures that are in it, because he made it; For in him we
live, move, and have our being, as certain of your own Poets have said; for we
are also his offspring: which is very improperly alleged by St. Paul, if we
may be the Offspring of God, and yet not live, and move, and have our Being in
him; that is, if God's making the World does not necessarily prove his constant
care and governmet of it. But the Apostle knew in those days, that no man, who
confessed that God made the World, questioned his Providence, and therefore
makes no scruple to prove, that we live and subsist in God, because he made us.

This is a noble Argument to prove both the Being and Providence of God (which
cannot be separated) from the Works of Nature, and the Wise Government of the
World; It would give us a very delightful entertainment, to view all the
Curiosities and suprizing Wonders of Nature; with what beauty, art and
contrivance, particular Creatures are made, and how the several parts of this
great Machine are fitted to each other, and make a regular and uniform World;
How all particular Creatures are fitted to the use and purposes of their
several Natures, and yet are made serviceable to one another, and have as
mutual a connection and dependence, as the Wheels of a Clock. What an equal and
steady Hand governs the World, when its motions seem most excentrick and
exorbitant, and brings Good out of Evil, and Order out of Confusion, when
things are so perplexed, that it is impossible for any one, but a God, to
disentangle them.

There is no need of the subtilty of Reason and Argument in this Cause, would
but men attentively study the Works of God, and dwell in the contemplation of
Nature and Providence; for God is as visible in his Works, as the Sun is by its
Light; when all the Wonders of Nature are unfolded, and exposed particularly to
our view, it so overpowers the mind with such infinite varieties of that most
Divine Art and Wisdom, that modest men are ashamed to ascribe such things to a
blind Chance, which has no Design or Counsel.

Indeed to say, that a World full of Infinite Marks and Characters of the most
admirable Art, a World so made, that no Art could make it better, was not made
by a wise Mind, but by Chance, by a fortuitous concourse of Atoms, which
without any Design, after infinite fruitless Trials, happened into this exact,
useful, beautiful Order, that now they are in, know when they are well, and in
despite of Chance move as constantly, regularly, artificially, in all new
Productions, as the divinest and most uniform Wisdom could direct: I say, to
affirm this, is to put an end to all Disputes, by leaving no Principles of
Reason and Argumentation to dispute with.

An Atheist is the most vain Pretender to Reason in the World: The whole
strength of Atheism consists in contradicting the universal Reason of Mankind.
They have no Principles, nor can have any, and therefore they can never reason,
but only confidently deny or affirm. They can assign no Principles of Reason,
which the rest of Mankind allow to be Principles, from whence they can prove
that there is no God, and no Providence; but they only reject those Principles,
which all other men agree in, and from whence it must necessarily follow, that
there is a God and a Providence.

It will be of great use briefly to explain this, which will teach you to
reject Atheism and Atheists, without troubling your selves to dispute with
them; for they have no common Principles with the rest of Mankind to reason
upon, nor indeed any Principles of Reason at all.

A few words will suffice for this purpose. Mankind, who have been used to
thinking and reasoning, have universally agreed, That there must be something
that had no beginning, and no cause; for nothing can produce nothing; that had
there ever been a time, when there was nothing, there never could have been any
thing, unless there can be an effect without a cause, which is too absurd for
Atheists themselves to say in express words, who do not boggle much at
Absurdities; and therefore they make their Atoms, and their Vacuum, to be
eternal. It is agreed also, That whatever had a beginning, had a cause; and the
most easy and natural progress of Human Understandings is to reason from one
cause to another, till we ascend to, and center in, a first Cause. For it is as
easy and natural to believe one first Eternal Cause, as to believe an Eternal
Being; but though it is natural to believe something Eternal, it is as
unnatural to believe all things to be so; we have no notion of all things being
Eternal, though we have of an Eternal Cause; for the very reason why we are
forced to confess something Eternal, is, because there must be an Eternal Cause
of all other things; that is, because all things are not eternal: But if any
thing, which has not an eternal and unchangeable Nature, but is capable of
being made and unmade, changed and altered, as all the things of this World
are, might be without a Cause, then every thing may be without a Cause; and if
the Eternity of all things be a natural Notion, it cannot be a natural Notion
that there is a first Cause. For that very Notion supposes, that something had
a beginning, and was originally made, when it was not before, and therefore,
that all things are not eternal. For to be made in this Axiom, primarily
relates to the being of things, and is so understood by all men: And how can
such a notion of the making and giving being to any thing, be natural, if it be
a natural notion, that all things are eternal, and that nothing was made?

Hence it is, that seen and visible Effects, which have no visible Cause
adequate to the producing such Effects, are allowed by all Mankind to be a
sufficient proof of some Invisible Cause, as St. Paul tells us; and he spoke
the Language of Human Nature in it; That the invisible things of God from the
creation of the world, are clearly seen, being understood by the things that
are made, 1. Romans 20. For if that which is made, must have a Cause, if there be
no visible Cause, there must be an invisible Maker: And therefore this World,
which has no visible, must have an invisible Cause.

And as it is natural to the Reason of Mankind to conclude the Cause from the
Effect, so is it to learn the Nature of the Cause from the Nature of the
Effect; for whatever is in the Effect, must be either specifically or virtually
in the Cause; for whatever is in the Effect, which is not in the Cause, that
has no Cause, for nothing can be a cause of that, which it is not it self. And
therefore whatever has life and understanding, must be made by a living and
understanding Cause; whatever has art and skill, and wise contrivance in its
frame, as every Worm and Fly has, must have a wise designing Cause for its
Maker: And then it is certain, that this whole World was not made by chance, or
the fortuitous concourse of Atoms, but by an infinitely wise Mind. This way of
reasoning is easy and natural to our minds; all men understand it, all men feel
it: Atheists themselves allow of this kind of proof in all other cases,
excepting the proof of a God or a Providence; and therefore it is no absurd,
foolish way of reasoning, for then it must not be allowed of in any case; and
they have no reason to reject it in this case, but that they are resolved not
to believe a God and a Providence. And yet this way of reasoning from Effects
to Causes, must be good in all Cases, or in none: For the Principle is
universal, That nothing can be made without a Cause, and if any thing can be
made made without a Cause, this Principle is false, and can prove nothing. And
I challenge the wisest and subtilest Atheist of them all, to prove from any
Principle of Reason, that the most beautiful and regular House that ever he
saw, which he did not see built (for that is a proof from Sense, not from
Reason) was built by men, and is a work of Art, and that it did not either grow
out of the Earth, nor was made by the accidental meeting of the several
Materials, which without knowledge, art, or design, fell into a regular and
uniform Building. Had these men never seen a House built, I would desire to
know, how they would prove, that it is a work of Art, built by a skilful
Workman, and not made by chance; and by what medium soever they will prove
this, I will undertake to prove, that God made the World, though we did not see
him make it.

But the present Enquiry is only this, Whether this be Human Reason, the
natural Reason of Human Minds? If it be, then men, who will be contented to
reason like men, must acknowledge and assent to this Argument from Effects to
Causes, which unavoidably proves a God and a Providence; and this is all I
desire to be granted, That those who will follow the Notices and Principles of
Human Reason, must believe that God made and governs the World; for I know not
how to reason beyond Human Reason; those who do, may please themselves with it.

Those who have found out a Reason, which contradicts the natural Principles of
Reason, must reason by themselves, for Mankind cannot reason with them.

But let us consider how Atheists reason, when they have laid aside this
Principle of Reason, from Effects to Causes.

They tell us, That a most Artificial World may be made without Art, or any
wise Maker, by blind Chance, without any designing Efficient Cause: That Life,
and Sense, and Reason, may result from dead, stupid, senseless Atoms; Well! we
hear this, and bear it as patiently as we can; but how do they prove this; why,
they say, it may be, and they can go no farther: But how do they know, this may
be? Have they any such notion in their minds? have they any natural sensation
that answers these words? does Nature teach them, that any thing can be without
a Cause adequate to the Effect? that any thing can be wisely made without a
wise Cause? that one contrary can produce the other? that senseless, stupid
Matter can produce Life, Sensation and Understanding? Can they then tell me,
what it is that cannot be? I desire to know by what Rule they judge, what may
be, and what cannot be: And if they can find any cannot be more absurd and
contradictious than their may be, I will renounce Sense and Reason for ever: If
nothing can be without a Cause, according to the Reason of Mankind, this cannot
be, and therefore all that their may be's can signify, is this, That if the
Reason of Mankind deceive us, such things may be, as the most unquestionable
Principles of Reason tells us cannot be. And this is the glorious triumph of
Atheistical Reason, it can get no farther than a may be, and such a may be as
is absolutely impossible, if the Reason of Mankind be true.

Set aside the relation between Causes and Effects, and all the Arguments from
Causes to Effects, and from Effects to Causes, and there is an end of all
Knowledge; and set aside all those first Principles and Maxims of Reason, which
all men assent to at the first Proposal, the truth of which they see and feel,
and there is an end of all Reason: For there can be no reasoning without the
acknowledgment of some first Principles, which the mind has a clear, distinct,
and vigorous perception of: And if men will distrust their own minds in such
things as they have an easy, natural perception of, and prefer some Arbitrary
Notions, which seem absurd Contradictions, and impossible to the rest of
Mankind, and which they can have no Idea of beyond the sound of words; they may
be Atheists, if they please, at the expense of their Reason and Understanding;
that is, they may be Atheists, if they will not judge and reason like Men: But
if we are as certain of the Being of a God, and of a Providence, as we are,
that nothing can be without a Cause, we have all the certainty that Human
Nature is capable of.

CHAP. II.
The general Notion of Providence, and particularly concerning a Preserving
Providence.
HAving proved as largely as my present Design required, That the same God who
made the World, is the Supreme Lord and Governor of it. I proceed to consider
the Nature of Providence.

The general Notion of Providence is God's care of all the Creatures he has
made, which must consist in preserving and upholding their Beings and Natures,
and in such Acts of Government, as the good Order of the World, and the
Happiness of Mankind require; which divides Providence into Preservation and
Government, which must be carefully distinguished in order to answer some great
Difficulties in Providence.

I begin with Preserving Providence, which commences from the first instant of
the Creation; for as soon as Creatures are made, they need a Divine Power to
preserve them. For this is the strict Notion of Preservation, as distinguished
from a Governing Providence, That God upholds all things in being from falling
back into their first Nothing, and preserves their natural Virtues, Powers and
Faculties, and enables them to act, and to attain the ends of their several
Natures: Which distinguishes this Preserving Providence from those many Acts of
Preservation which belong to Government: Such as preserving the Lives of men
from unseen Accidents, and visible Dangers, nay of Beasts and of Birds too, as
our Savior assures us, That not a sparrow falls to the ground without our
Father; 18. Matthew 29.
in which sense the Psalmist tells us, 36. Psalm. 6.
That God preserves both man and beasts, supplies them with Food, and all other
things necessary to life, and preserves their Lives from violence or accident,
as long as he sees fit.

This Preservation as distinguished from Government, St. Paul expressly teaches
17. Acts 28. For in him we live, and move, and have our being. We were not only
made by him, but we live, and move, and have our being in Him; as the Apostle
to the Hebrews tells us of Christ, That he upholds all things by the word of
his power, 1. Hebr. 3.

The Schools have divided this into two distinct Acts. 1. God's upholding and
preserving the Being and Natures of all things. 2. His Cooperating with all
Creatures, and by a perpetual influx and concourse actuating their natural
Powers to perform their natural Actions; that is, That we have our being in
him, that we live, and move, and act in him, or by a new influx of power from
him.

As for the first, The preservation of all things in being, besides those Texts
of Scripture, which expressly attribute this to God, the Schools urge several
Arguments for the proof of it, which I think may be resolved into this one;
That whatever does not necessarily exist by the internal Principles of its own
Nature, must depend on its Cause, not only for its Being, but for its
Continuance and Preservation. For there is no medium between necessary
Existence, and dependence on its Cause.

The very notion of a Creature does not only include in it, its being made, but
its dependence on its Maker for its continuance in being: For whatever does not
necessarily exist, must not only be made at first, but must be upheld and
preserved in being; for it can no more preserve, than it can make it self: It
was nothing once, and what was once nothing, may be nothing again, and
therefore cannot subsist of it self, but in dependence on its Maker.

It is not with the Being and Natures of things, as it is with the Works of
Art, which though they cannot make themselves, yet when they are made, can
subsist without the Artist that made them. As a House cannot build it self, but
when it is built, it continues of it self, as long as the Materials and
Workmanship last, when the Workman has left it; for the Workman does not give
being to the Materials, but only to the Form, which subsists in the Matter, and
that in its first Cause: but whatever receives its Being from another, as all
Creatures do, has nothing to support its Being, but the Cause that made it.

This is so certain, that I should make no scruple to say, That God can no more
make an Independent Creature, which can subsist without him, than he can make
an Eternal Creature, which shall have no beginning; which is not want of Power
in God, but a repugnancy and contradiction in the Nature of Creatures. That
which once was not, can never be so made as to have no beginning; that which
has not a necessary existence, as nothing has, which once was not, cannot be
made to exist necessarily, without dependence on its Cause, because necessary
existence is not in its Nature, for then it would always have been.

Suarez has another Argument to prove the dependence of Creatures on the
perpetual influx of Power from the first Cause, which possibly some may think
only a School-subtily, but seems to me to have great weight in it; and it
proceeds upon this Supposition, (which all men must grant) That if God made the
World out of nothing, he could annihilate all things, and reduce them into
nothing again, if he so pleased: Now he says, That Annihilation is not an Act
of Power, for all positive Acts of Power must have some real and positive
effect; whereas to annihilate is to make nothing, and therefore to do nothing:
Now if to annihilate be no Act of Power, then it can be nothing else, but a
withdrawing that Power, which supported all things in being; and that proves,
That all things are upheld in being by the Divine Power, if they cannot
subsist, but fall into nothing again, when that Upholding and Preserving Power
is withdrawn.

This is a very sensible Argument, if we distinguish between what we call
destroying, and annihilating, which is apt to confound us in this matter. To
destroy, is only to change the present form and compages of things, while the
matter and substance continues the same; thus God destroyed the Old World by
Water, and will destroy this World by Fire again; which is like pulling down a
House, without destroying the Materials; and this is an Act of Power, and has a
positive effect; but to annihilate, is to reduce something to nothing, which is
to do nothing, and therefore is no Act of Power, but only a Cessation of Power.
And if not to uphold, is to annihilate, then all things subsist, as well as are
made, by the Power of God.

I shall only add, That God cannot make a Creature independent on himself,
without bestowing on it a self-subsisting Nature, or necessary existence; for
whatever does not necessarily exist by the internal Principles of its Nature,
must depend on something else to uphold it in being. Now besides, what I
observed before, That whatever necessarily exists, cannot be made, but must be
eternal. For that which exists necessarily, must always exist, without a Cause,
and without a Beginning; for nothing can begin to have a necessarily
self-subsisting Nature. I now add, That whatever necessarily is, cannot be
changed, destroyed, annihilated; for whatever necessarily is, necessarily is
what it is; which proves, That if God can annihilate whatever he has made, then
all things subsist by the Will, and Pleasure, and Power of God, not by the
internal Principles of their Natures; for whatever necessarily exists, can
never be annihilated, for that is a contradiction.

How God upholds all things in being, we no more know, than how at first he
made all things, when there was nothing; and therefore it is a vain Inquiry of
the Schools, which no man can resolve, and which serves no End in Religion,
Whether Creation and Preservation be the same, or two different Acts? Whether
Preservation be a continued Creation? or whether they be two distinct and
different Acts of Power, to Make, and to Preserve? For how can any man know
this, who neither knows, how God creates, nor how he preserves. Thus much is
certain, That to Create, is to give being to that which was not before; to
Preserve, is to continue that in being which was made before; and when any
thing is once created, it can never be new created, till it fall into nothing
again; for to create, is to make out of nothing, not to make a thing which
already is; but by what Acts of Power either of these is done, we cannot tell,
nor are we concerned to know; for what way soever this is done, we equally
depend on God, we live and subsist in him.

But there is one thing fit to be observed, That this Act of Preservation,
which consists in upholding all things in being, is fixed by a perpetual and
unchangeable Decree: That though God will dissolve this present frame of
things, and it may be, cast the World into a new Mould, yet nothing that is
made, neither Matter, nor Spirit, shall be annihilated, or reduced into nothing
again. This I think we may safely conclude from the Promises and Threatenings of
Eternal Rewards and Punishments, which supposes, that both Good and Bad men
shall live for ever, the one to be happy, the other to be miserable to
Eternity; and then we may reasonably conclude, That the World, whatever Changes
it may suffer, will continue as long the Inhabitants of it do.

This is the first Act of what we call Preserving Providence, to uphold all
things in being, in distinction, as I observed before, from those several Acts
of Preservation, which concern a Governing Providence.

A Second Act of Preserving Providence, is what the Schools call, God's
Cooperation and Concourse with Creatures in all their Actions, that we not
only live, and have our being, but that we move in God; that whatever we do, we
do by a natural Power received from God; and this is as certain, as that we
have our being in him; for if we live, we must move in him.

But then whether God's Co operation and Concourse be a different Act from his
preserving the natural Virtues and Powers of Action, is a nicer and more
intricate Speculation, and neither the thing, nor the reason of it, is easy to
be conceived. Natural Powers are Internal Principles of Action, when a Creature
acts from an inward Principle of Nature; but if these Natural Powers, while
they are preserved in their full force and vigor by God, can do nothing
themselves, without a new extrinsick, determining motion from God, then they
seem to be no Natural Powers, for they cannot act by Nature, if this be true;
the Fire don't burn by nature, for though God preserves its nature, it cannot
burn without some new cooperating Power, which is not in its nature. A man
don't reason and judge, choose and refuse by Nature; for though God preserve his
Natural Powers and Faculties of Understanding and Will, yet he can neither
understand nor will, unless he be moved, acted, determined by God: This seems
to make the whole World a mere Apparition, and empty Scene, which has nothing
real. Whatever we see done in the World, is not done by Creatures, who seem to
do it; for they are only acted like Machines, not from the Internal Principles
and Powers of Nature, but from External Motion: But God does every thing
himself by an immediate Power, even all the Contradictions and Contrarieties we
see in the World.

This is a very great difficulty, which I will not undertake to determine one
way or other; but thus much, I think, we may safely say, That if we will
attribute any thing to Creatures, if we will allow, that they ever act from a
Principle of Nature, we must confess, that God co-operates only to the natural
Power of Action, that is, That he only enables them to act according to their
Natures, without changing, influencing, determining their Natures, otherwise
than these Natural Powers would naturally act. For this is all that is
necessary to Action, when God has created the Natural Powers; and this is all
the cooperation that can belong to God, as the Maker and Preserver of all
things.

Whatever is more than this, as I acknowledge there is a great deal more that
God does, it belongs to a Governing, not to a Preserving Providence: God does a
great deal more, than merely cooperate with our Natural Powers to perform
Natural Actions, but this he does as a Governor, not merely as a Preserver:
The not distinguishing of which has occasioned great mistakes in the Doctrine
of Providence; as to show this briefly.

God has endowed all Creatures with such Natural Powers and Virtues, as may
answer the End for which they were made. He has made the Sun to shine, to
enlighten and refresh the World; the Fire to burn, the Earth to bring forth all
sorts of Herbs, and Grass, and Corn, and Fruit, the Vapors to ascend out of
the Earth to purge and fan the Air with Winds, and to fall down again in
fruitful Showers; every Herb and Flower and Tree has its peculiar Seeds to
propagate its Kind, as all living Creatures have.

Now as it had been to little purpose for God to have made a World without
upholding it in being, for Creatures can no more preserve, than they can make
themselves; so it had been to as little purpose, to have endowed all Creatures
with such Virtues and Powers, as belong to their several Natures, without such
a natural Cooperation, whatever that be, as shall enable their Natural Powers
to act, and to attain the ends of their Natures; and therefore God established
this Natural Concourse and Cooperation to actuate all the Powers of Nature, by
a perpetual Law, which is that Blessing God bestowed upon all Creatures at the
time of the Creation. For though this Blessing, to Increase, and Multiply, and
to replenish the Sea, and Air, and Earth, which preserves and invigorates the
Powers of Nature, be expressed only of living Creatures, the Fish, and Fowls,
and Beasts, and Men, yet it equally belongs to the whole Creation, as will be
easily granted; and makes Nature regular and constant in all its Motions and
Productions.

But there are other Acts belong to God's Government even of the Material
World, as I shall show you more hereafter. As to direct the Virtues and
Influences of Nature, or to suspend and restrain them: To make the Earth
fruitful or barren, the Air wholesome or Pestilential, to withhold the Dews and
Showers of Heaven, or to give the former and latter Rain in its Season, to
cause it to Rain upon one City, and not upon another, and so to temper the
Influences of Nature, as to punish the Wickedness, or to reward the Obedience
of Mankind; these are Acts of Government, and of a quite different kind from
actuating the Powers of Nature to attain their Ends, and to do what they were
made for.

Thus to consider the Rational World; God has endowed Man with the Natural
Faculties of Understanding and Will, to judge, and to choose for himself; and he
preserves these Faculties, and gives them a natural Power to act, to
understand, and will: But this natural Cooperation of God can extend no
farther than to the natural Power of acting, not to any specifical Acts; it
does not improve any man's Understanding, nor incline his Judgment, nor
determine his Choice; it makes no alteration in the Powers of Nature, but only
enables them to act according to their Natures; it is only like winding up a
Clock, which puts it into motion, but gives no new preternatural motions to it,
but leaves its motions to be guided by its own Springs and Wheels Whatever this
Cooperation of God be, which is thought necessary to actuate our Natural
Faculties, it gives no new Byas to us, but leaves us perfectly in a state of
Nature, and only enables us to do that, which we should do of our selves
without any such Cooperation of God, could we act without it.

But in the Government of Mankind God exercises a very different Power over the
minds of men. He changes the Hearts and Counsels of men, imprints new thoughts
upon their Minds, claps a new byas upon their Wills and Affections; the Hearts
of Princes are in his hands, and he turns them as Rivers of Waters. He renews
and sanctifies Good men by his Spirit; enlightens their Understandings, changes
their Wills, inspires them with Divine Affections: He gives up Bad men to the
impostures of wicked spirits, to their own affected Ignorance, Blindness,
Inconsideration, to the Obstinacy and Perverseness of their own Wills, and to
the Empire of their Lusts. Every one must perceive, that this is a very
different thing from God's cooperating with our Natural Faculties to will, and
to understand; for that makes no change in our Natural Understandings and
Wills, but only enables them to act; but this improves, and heightens, and
regulates our Faculties; enlarges our Knowledge, and rectifies our Choice, and
directs and governs our Passions; and yet these things have not been well
distinguished, which has very much obscured and perplexed the Doctrines both of
Providence and Grace, as I shall now show you.

For having thus briefly explained the difference between a Preserving and
Governing Providence, that this may not be thought a more subtle than useful
Speculation, it will be necessary to show you, of what great use this is to
answer some of the greatest Difficulties in the Doctrine of Providence.

Now as the foundation of all, I shall ask but one thing, which every man must
grant; That it becomes God to preserve the Creatures which he has made, to
uphold them in being, and to actuate their Natural Powers, as far as is
necessary to enable Creatures to perform those Natural Actions, which their
Natures are fitted and made for. If it became the Wisdom and Goodness of God to
make Creatures with such Powers and Faculties of acting, it becomes him also to
preserve their Beings, and Natures, and Powers of Action. To Make, is to give a
Being and Nature to that which was nothing; to Preserve, is only to continue
its Being, and to enable it to act according to its nature; and therefore we
must either approve or disapprove of both alike.

Let us then lay down this as an acknowledged Principle, That we must not
quarrel with the Providence of God, for any thing which is a mere Act of
Preservation, not an Act of Government. For to uphold the being, and nature,
and operations of all things, is no fault, whatever evil consequences may
attend it; and therefore those who have a mind to quarrel at Providence, must
find some fault, if they can, in God's government of Creatures, not in the Acts
of Preservation; and this easily answers some of the most difficult Objections
against Providence. As for instance.

Since no Creature can move, or act, or do any thing, without the Concourse and
Cooperation of God, some are wonderfully puzzled to give an account, why God
should cooperate with any Creature in sinful Actions. Why God should actuate
men's Understandings and Wills, and their other natural Powers and Faculties,
when he certainly knows, that if he enables them to act, they will act
wickedly; they will choose that which is wicked, and will execute their wicked
Designs: That if they have the exercise of their Natural Powers, they will
defile themselves with Adultery, and Drunkenness, and Theft, or Murder, and
all manner of Wickedness: And how can a holy God cooperate in all the
Wickedness which is committed? When men do wickedly by the Power and
Cooperation of God, without which they can do nothing, how does the Sin come
to be the man's, when the Action is God's, as done by his immediate Power?

I shall not trouble you with other Answers, which are commonly given to this
Difficulty; for what I have now discoursed, gives a plain and easy solution to
it: For all this, however it be represented, comes to no more, than God's
preserving the Natures of Creatures, and actuating their Natural Powers to
perform the Offices of Nature; and if this be such a fault, as intitles God to
all the Wickedness they commit, the original Fault is in making such Creatures;
for if it were no fault to make them, it can be no fault to preserve their
Natures. Does it become the Wisdom of God to make Creatures, who must act
dependently on himself, and to deny them the natural Powers of acting, which is
to unmake them again? And if this does not become the Wisdom of God, then it
can be no fault in God to cooperate with the natural Powers of men, even in
their sinful Actions; nor any more entitle God to their Sins, than his making
Creatures with such natural Powers: For to preserve their Natures, and to
actuate their natural Powers, is no more a cause of their Sin, than to make
such Natures, and such natural Powers.

To represent this as plainly as I can, Let us suppose that God had created Man
with a natural power to act without needing such a perpetual concourse and
cooperation to enable him to act, would this charge God with the Sins of men,
because they act, even when they sin, by a power derived from him in their
first Creation? If this makes God the Author of Sin, then God cannot make a
Creature, who is capable of sinning by the abuse of its natural Powers, without
being the Author of Sin, which is too absurd for any thinking man to say: And
yet if it does not, How does God's perpetual concourse and cooperation with
Creatures to enable them to act, and to exert their natural Powers, make God
the Author of Sin? for this is no more than a natural power to act, and it
makes no difference, whether this natural power be given once for all, as an
inherent Power in Creatures, or be supplied every minute; for both ways the
Power is the same, and equally derived from God: and if the natural power of
acting charges God with men's Sins, the Charge lies equally against a creating
and cooperating Power; if it does not, God is no more chargeable with Sin for
cooperating with men's natural Powers in every Action, than he would be, for
creating such natural Powers as could act of themselves.

God's Government of the World must be fitted to the natures of the Creatures
which he has made, without denying them the natural Powers of Action; and
therefore while he co-operates with Creatures only to act according to the
liberty of their own Natures, this is no fault in this Government, nor
contributes any thing more to the Sins of Creatures, than preserving their
Natures, which as much becomes God, as it did to make them.

Thus some think it a great blemish to Providence, that Adulterous Mixtures
prove fruitful, when increase and multiply is an established Decree from the
first Creation; and the settled Course and Order of Nature must not be reversed
by the Sins of men: They may as well object against Providence, That a man who
steals his Neighbor's Grain, and sows it in his own Land, should have a
plentiful Crop the next year from his stolen Seed. And whatever Opinion men
have concerning the origination of the Soul, Whether it be propagated ex
traduce, or did praeexist, or be immediately created by God, and infused into
prepared Matter, it makes no difference in the case; for when the Order of
Nature is settled, and the Blessing pronounced and established by the Divine
Decree, it does not unbecome God to preserve the powers of Nature to produce
their natural Effects; I am sure, there want not wise Reasons in God's
Government of the World, why it should be so, to restrain some men's Lusts, and
to shame and punish others.

Nay, I believe, whoever considers this matter well, will acknowledge, that it
goes a great way in answering the greatest Difficulty of all, viz. The Eternal
Punishments of Wicked Men in the next World.

The Objection is not against God's punishing Wicked Men in the next World; for
no body pretends, that this is unjust for God to punish the Wicked, whether in
this World, or in the next.

Nor is the Objection against the nature of these Punishments; for indeed we do
not distinctly know what they are, no more than we know what the Happiness of
Heaven is. Those Descriptions our Savior gives of them, of lakes of fire and
brimstome, blackness of darkness, the worm that never dies, and the fire that
never goes out, prove that they are very great, because these Descriptions are
intended to present to us very frightful and terrible images of the Miseries of
the Damned: But this is not the Complaint neither; for it is confessed, that
Wicked Men deserve to be very miserable.

But the Objection is against that vast disproportion between Time and
Eternity; How it is reconcilable with the Divine Justice to punish Temporal
Sins with Eternal Miseries; that when men can sin but for a very few years,
they must suffer for it for ever?

Now the difficulty of this seems in part to be owing to a mistating the case:
There is no proportion indeed between Time and Eternity; and it is therefore
difficult to conceive, that every momentary sin should in its own nature
deserve eternal punishments; but there is no difficulty to conceive, that an
immortal sinner may by some short and momentary sins sink himself into an
irrecoverable state of misery, and then he must be miserable as long as he
continues to be; and if he can never die, he must be always miserable, and may
be so, without any Injustice in God. We do not here consider the proportion
between the continuance of the sin and the punishment, between a short
transient act, and eternal punishments; for it is not the sin, but the sinner,
that is punished for his sin; and therefore we must not ask, How long
punishment a short sin deserves? but, How long the sinner deserves to be
punished? and the answer to that is easy, As long as he is a sinner: And
therefore an immortal sinner, who can never die, and will never cease to be
wicked, (which is the hopeless and irrecoverable state of Devils and damned
Spirits) must always be miserable; and it is just it should be so, if it be
just to punish sinners; and there is nothing to quarrel with God for, as to the
Eternity of Punishments, unless it be, that he does not annihilate Immortal
Spirits, when they are become incurably wicked and miserable. The Justice of
God is only concerned to punish sinners; that their punishents are eternal, is
a necessary consequence of their Immortality; and this cannot be charged on God,
unless it be a fault to make immortal creatures, and to preserve and uphold
immortal creatures in being; or to punish sinners while they deserve
punishment, that is, while they are sinners.

It may give some light to this matter, to remove the Scene into this world: We
see the punishment of sin in this world bears no proportion to the time of
committing it, but to the lasting effects of the sin. One short single act of
Lust may not only leave a lasting Reproach on men's Names, but destroy the
health and ease of their bodies, and the pleasure of their lives, for their
ever in this world; and had Man continued immortal after the fall, these
miserable effects must have continued for ever, and then there had been a
visible Eternal Punishment for a very short transient sin, and yet no man would
have blamed the Justice of God for it; which shows, That a sin, which is
quickly committed, may be eternally punished, and that very justly too, when
the effects of it are incurable, and the person immortal: And thus it is in a
great many other cases in this world, where the effects of sin last as long as
the Men last; and if this be the case of the other world, and of the miseries
and punishments of the damned, as we certainly know in a great measure it is,
that their punishments are the natural effects and consequents of their sins,
there can be no objection against the Eternity of their Punishments, but that
God does not annihilate them: And how hard soever any man may think it to be,
that a sinner should be eternally miserable, I believe no man will venture to
say, that God ought in Justice to annihilate creatures whom he has made
immortal, when by their own fault they must be eternally miserable, if they
live for ever. To preserve and uphold creatures in being, is, in it self
considered, what becomes the Wise Maker of all things; and I am sure there can
be no reason given, to prove, that God ought to annihilate sinners, to prevent
their being miserable for ever, but what will much more prove, that God ought
to have withdrawn his natural concourse from his creatures, or to have
annihilated them, to prevent their sinning; or, which is the last result of
all, as I have already observed, and the only fault, if there be one, That he
ought not to have made an Immortal Creature, who could sin, and be miserable
for ever.

I shall conclude this whole Argument with some few Inferences.

1. If Creatures must be preserved, as well as made by God, then the present
continuance and preservation of all things, is a visible Argument of the Being
of God. Some men will not believe that God made the world, because they did not
see him make it; but they see a world preserved, when there is no one thing in
the world more able to preserve, than to make it self; and who then is it that
preserves this world, and all things in it? This must be a work of Reason and
Wisdom, as well as Power; and the only reasonable Creature in this visible
world, is Man; and Man cannot preserve himself, and knows that he can preserve
nothing else; and therefore the Preservation of all things must be owing to
some Invisible Cause, whom we call GOD.

2. If we live, and move, and have our being in God, we are entirely his, and
owe all homage and obedience to him; for he did not only make us, but we have
our constant dependence on him, we live and subsist in him. Had he only made us
at first, that had given him a title to us for ever; but could we have lived
without him, when he had made us, tho it had not been a less fault, yet it had
been less foolish and absurd, to have lived without any notice or regard of
him; as some ungrateful persons deal by their Friends and Patrons, when they
have set them up in the world, and enabled them to live by themselves: but to
forget that God in whom we live, who preserves and upholds us in being every
moment, is to affront a present Benefactor, if we value being; and tho we
cannot tempt God by this to let us fall into nothing, yet we shall make it just
for him to punish us, to preserve us in being, to feel the weight of his Wrath
and Vengeance, which is infinitely worse, for happy had it been for such a man,
that he had never been born.

3. For if he not only made but upholds and preserves us in being, he must be
our Sovereign Lord and Governor; for no other has any original and absolute
interest in us; we are in his hands, and none can take us out of them, nor
touch us, but by his order. To give being and to preserve it, is the foundation
of all other acts of Government, no other Being has a Right to govern, no other
Power can govern. He alone can give Laws, can reward or punish, can govern
Nature, can direct, overruled, control all other Powers, for all things are in
his hands, and therefore he commands them all.

4. And this may convince us, how irresistible the Divine Power is; for all the
power of Creatures is derived from him, and depends on him, as Light does on
the Sun, and therefore they can have no power against him; and what distraction
then is it, to provoke that Almighty God, whom we cannot resist? Humble thy
self, Sinner, before thy Maker, thy Preserver, and thy Judge; obey his Will, to
whose Power thou must submit; let him be thy Fear and thy Dread; thy only Fear,
for thou need fear none else; all Power is his, none can resist him, none
can act without him; he sets bounds to the Raging of the Sea, to the Fury of
Princes, to the Madness of the People: Thou art safe in his hands, safe in
obedience to his Will, but thou can never escape him, never fly from him,
never defend thy self against him, for thou live in him.

5. This also proves that God must see and know all our actions, for we live
and move in him. He is always present with us, privy to our most secret
thoughts and counsels, observes all our wanderings, sees us in all our
retirements: There is no darkness, nor shadow of death, where the workers of
iniquity can hide themselves. This the Scripture in express words teaches, and
the reason of the thing speaks it; for if we cannot think, nor move, nor
subsist without God, he must be always intimately present with us; which should
possess us with a constant Awe and Reverence of his Pure and All seeing Eye.

CHAP. III.
Concerning God's Governing Providence.
NEXT to Preservation, as that signifies God's upholding all things in being,
and preserving and actuating their Natural Powers, we must consider God's
Government of the world; for God is the Supreme and Sovereign Lord of the
world, who does whatsoever pleases him both in heaven and in earth; and
therefore the Absolute Government of all things must be in his hands, or else
something might be done, which he would not have done.

This all men grant in general words, who own a Providence; but when they come
to particulars, there are so many excepted cases which they will hardly allow
God to have any thing to do in, that they seem to mean little more by God's
Government, than a general Inspection of Human Affairs, his looking on to see
the World govern it self; for three parts of four of all that is done in the
world, they resolve into bare Permission, as distinguished from an Ordering and
Disposing Providence; and then it can signify no more, than that God does not
hinder it; and if this be all, God governs the world in such cases no more than
men do: The only difference is, that God can hinder when he don't, but men
don't hinder, because they cannot; but still merely not to hinder, does not
signify to govern.

But rightly to understand this matter, the best way is, to consider how the
Scripture represents it; and because there are great variety of acts in the
government of the world, of a very different consideration, I shall distinctly
enquire into God's government of Causes, and his government of Events.

1. God's government of Causes; and we must consider three sorts of Causes, and
what the Scripture attributes to God with respect to each. 1. Natural Causes.
2dly. Accidental Causes, or what we call Chance, and Accident, and Fortune.
3dly. Moral Causes, and free Agents, or the government of mankind.

1. Natural Causes, or God's Government of the Natural World, of the Heavens,
and Earth, and Seas, and Air, and all things in them, which move and act by a
Necessity of Nature, not by Choice. Now the Scripture does not only attribute
to God all the Virtues and Powers of Nature, which belongs to Creation, and to
a Preserving Providence, but the direction and government of all their Natural
Influences, to do what God has a mind should be done. God does in some measure
govern the Moral by the Natural World; he rewards or punishes men by a wholesome
or pestilential air, by fruitful or barren seasons; he hinders or promotes
their designs, by winds and weather, by a forward or a backward Spring, and
makes Nature give Laws to men, and set bounds to their Passions and Intriegues;
to overthrow the most powerful Fleets and Armies; to defeat the wisest
Counsels, and to arbitrate the Differences of Princes, and the Fate of Men and
Kingdoms: And if God govern men by Nature, he must govern Nature too, for
necessary Causes cannot be fitted to the government of free Agents, without the
direction and management of a Divine Providence, which guides, exerts, or
suspends the Influences of Nature, with as great freedom as men act. Men do not
always deserve well or ill; and if the kind or malign Influences of Nature must
be tempered to men's deserts, to punish them when they do ill, and to reward
them when they do well, Natural Causes, which of themselves act necessarily
without Wisdom or Counsel, must be guided by a Wise Hand.

Thus reason tells us it must be, if God govern the world, and God challenges
to himself this Absolute and Sovereign Empire over Nature: God has bestowed
different Virtues and Powers on Natural Causes, and in ordinary cases makes use
of the Powers of Nature, and neither acts without them, nor against the Laws of
Nature; which makes some unthinking men resolve all into Nature, without a God
or a Providence; because, excepting the case of Miracles, which they are not
willing to believe, they see every thing else done by the Powers of Nature; and
if it were not so, God had made a World, and made Nature to no purpose, to do
every thing himself, by an immediate Power, without making use of the Powers of
Nature: But the ordinary government of Nature does not signify to act without
it, or to overruled its Powers, but to steer and guide its motions, to serve
the Wise Ends of his Providence in the government of Mankind.

For as God does not usually act without Nature, nor against its Laws, so
neither does Nature act by steady and uniform motions, without the direction of
God: But while every thing in the material world acts necessarily, and exerts
its Natural Powers, God can temper, suspend, direct its Influences, without
reversing the Laws of Nature. As for instance; Fire and Water, Wind and Rain,
Thunder and Lightning, have their Natutral Virtues and Powers, and Natural
Causes; and God produces such effects as they are made to produce by their
Natural Powers; he warms us with Fire; invigorates the earth by the benign
Influences of the Sun and Moon, and other Stars and Planets; refreshes and
moistens it with Springs and Fountains, and Rain from Heaven; fans the Air with
Winds, and purges it with Thunders and Lightnings, and the like; but then, when
and where the Rains shall fall, and the Winds shall blow, in what measure and
proportion, times and seasons, Natural Causes shall give or withhold their
Influences, this God keeps in his own Power, and can govern, without altering
the standing Laws of Nature; and this is his government of Natural Causes in
order to reward or punish men as they shall deserve. Thus God reasons with Job
concerning his Power and Providence, 38. Job 31, 32, etc. Can thou bind the
sweet influences of the Pleiades, or loose the bands of Orion? can thou bring
forth Mazzaroth in his season, or can thou guide Arcturus with his sons?
know thou the ordinances of heaven, or can thou set the dominion thereof
in the earth? can thou lift up thy voice to the clouds, that abundance of
waters may cover thee? can thou send lightnings, that they may go, and say
unto thee, here we are? This is above Human Power, but belongs to the
Government and Providence of God: Fire and hail, snow and vapor, and stormy
winds, fulfill his word, 148. Psalm. 8. Sometimes God restrains the influences of
Nature, shuts up heaven, that it shall not rain, 2 Chr. 7. 13. At other times
he calls to the clouds, that abundance of water may cover the earth. He gives
the former and the latter rain in its season, and preserves to us the
appointed weeks of harvest, 5. Jer. 24 as he promised to Israel, 11 Deuteronomy 14,
15. I will give you the rain of your land in his due season, the first rain and
the latter rain, that thou may gather in thy corn, and thy wine, and thy oil;
and I will send grass in thy fields for thy cattle, that thou may eat and be
full. He prescribes in what proportions it shall rain, 2. Joel 23, 24. Be glad
ye children of Sion, and rejoice in the Lord your God; for he has given you
the former rain moderately, and he will cause to come down for you the former
rain, and the latter rain in the first month. Nay, God appoints on what place
it shall rain. 34. Ezekiel. 26. And I will make thee, and the places round about
my hill, a blessing; and I will cause the shower to come down in his season,
there shall be showers of blessing. 4. Amos 7, 8. And also I have withholden
the rain from you, when there were yet three months to the harvest; and I
caused it to rain upon one city, and caused it not to rain upon another city:
One piece was rained upon, and the piece whereupon it rained not, withered: So
two or three cities wandered to one city to drink water, but they were not
satisfied.

It is impossible to give any tolerable account of such Texts as these, without
confessing. That God keeps the Direction and Government of all Natural Causes
in his own hands; for particular Effects, and all the Changes of Nature can
never be attributed to God, unless the Divine Wisdom and Counsel determines
Natural Causes to the producing such particular Effects. Great part of the
Happiness or Miseries of this Life is owing to the good or bad Influences of
Natural Causes, that if God take care of Mankind, he must govern Nature; and
when he promises Health and Plenty, or threatens Pestilence and Famine, how can
he make good either, if he have not reserved to himself a Sovereign Power over
Nature.

The sum is this, That all Natural Causes are under the immediate and absolute
Government of Providence; that God keeps the Springs of Nature in his own hand,
and turns them as he pleases. For mere Matter, though it be endowed with all
Natural Virtues and Powers, which necessarily produce their Natural Effects,
yet it having no wisdom and counsel of its own, cannot serve the Ends of a Free
Agent, without being guided by a Wise Hand; and we see in a thousand Instances
what an Empire Human Art has over Nature, not by changing the nature of things,
which Human Art can never do, but by such a skilful application of Causes, as
will produce such Effects, as unguided, and if I may so speak, untaught Nature
could never have produced; and if God have subjected material Nature to Human
Art, surely he has not exempted it from his own Guidance and Power.

This shows how necessary it is, that God by an immediate Providence should
govern Nature; for Natural Causes are excellent Instruments, but to make them
useful, they must be directed by a Skilful Hand; and those various Changes
which are in Nature, especially in this Sublunary World, (which we are most
acquainted with) without any certain and periodical returns, prove, that it is
not all Mechanism; for Mechanical Motions are fixed and certain, and either
always the same, or regular or uniform in their Changes.

It is of great use to us to understand this, which teaches us, what we may
expect from God, and what we must attribute to him in the government of Nature:
We must not expect in ordinary Cases, that God should reverse the Laws of
Nature for us; that if we leap into the fire, it shall not burn us; or into the
water, it shall not drown us; and by the same reason, the Providence of God is
not concerned to preserve us, when we destroy our selves by Intemperance and
Lust; for God does not work Miracles to deliver men from the evil Effects of
their own Wickedness and Folly: But all the kind Influences of Heaven which
supply our wants, and fill our hearts with food and gladness, are owing to that
good Providence which commands Nature to yield her increase; and those
disorders of Nature which afflict the world with Famines, and Pestilence, and
Earthquakes, are the effects of God's Anger and Displeasure, and are ordered by
him for the punishment of a wicked world. We must all believe this, or confess
that we mock God, when we bless him for a healthful Air, and fruitful Seasons,
or deprecate his Anger, when we see the visible Tokens of his Vengeance, in the
disorders of Nature: For did not God immediately interpose in the government of
Nature, there would be no reason to beg his Favor, or to deprecate his Anger
upon these Accounts.

2dly. Let us consider God's Government of Accidental Causes, or what we call
Chance and Accident, which has a large Empire over human Affairs; not that
Chance and Accident can do any thing properly speaking; for whatever is done,
has some proper and Natural Causes which does it; but what we call Accidental
Causes, is rather such an Accidental Concurrence of different Causes, as
produces unexpected and undesigned Effects; as when one Man by Accident loses a
purse of Gold, and another Man walking in the Fields without any such
expectation, by as great an Accident finds it. And how much of the Good or Evil
that happens to us in this World, is owing to such Undesigned, Surprising,
Accidental Events, every man must know, who has made any Observations on his
own, or other men's Lives and Fortunes. The Wise Man observed this long since,
9. Eccl. 11. I returned and saw under the Sun, that the race is not to the
swift, nor the battle to the strong, neither yet bread to the wise, nor yet
riches to men of understanding, nor yet favor to men of skill; but time and
chance happens to them all. Some unusual and casual Events change the
fortunes of men, and disappoint the most proper and natural means of Success:
What should conquer in a Race but Swiftness; or win the Battle but strength?
What should supply men's wants, and increase Riches, but Wisdom and
Understanding in Human affairs? What more likely way to gain the Favor of
Princes and People, than a dextrous and skilful Application and Address? And
yet the Preacher observed in his days, and the observation holds good still,
that it is not always thus: Time and chance, some favorable Junctures, and
unseen Accidents, are more Powerful than all Human Strength, or Art, or Skill.

Now what an ill state were Mankind in, did not a Wise and Merciful Hand Govern
what we call Chance and Fortune? How can God Govern the World, or Dispose of
men's Lives and Fortunes without Governing Chance, all unseen, unknown and
surprising Events, which disappoint the Counsels of the Wise, and in a moment
unavoidably change the whole scene of Human Affairs? Upon what little
unexpected things do the Fortunes of Men, of Families, of whole Kingdoms turn?
And unless these little unexpected things are Governed by God, some of the
greatest Changes in the World are exempted from his Care and Providence.

This is reason enough to believe, That if God Governs the World, he Governs
Chance and Fortune; that the most unexpected Events, how Casual soever they
appear to us, are foreseen, and ordered by God.

Such Events as these are the properest Objects of God's Care and Government;
because they are very great instruments of Providence; many times the greatest
things are done by them, and they are the most visible demonstration of a
Superior Wisdom and Power which Governs the World: By these means God
disappoints the Wisdom of the Wise, and defeats the Power of the Mighty;
Frustrateth the tokens of the liars, and makes diviners mad; turns wise men
backward, and makes their knowledge foolish, 44. Isai. 25. Did Strength and
Wisdom always prevail, as in a great measure they would, were it not for such
unseen disappointments, Mankind would take less notice of Providence, and would
have less reason to do it, since they would be the more absolute Masters of
their own Fortunes; a powerful combination of Sinners, managed by some crafty
Politicians would govern the World: But the uncertain turnings and changes of
Fortune keep Mankind in awe, make the most prosperous and powerful Sinners fear
an unseen Vengeance, and give security to Good men against unseen Evils, which
cannot befall them without the order and appointment of God.

That there are a great many accidental and casual Events, which happen to us
all, and which are of great consequence to the Happiness or Miseries of our
Lives, all men see and feel; that we cannot defend our selves from such unseen
Events, which we know nothing of, till we feel them, is as manifest, as that
there are such Events; and what so properly belongs to the Divine Care, as that
which we our selves can take no care of? The Heathens made Fortune a Goddess,
and attributed the government of all things to Her, (...) Whereby they only
signified, the government of Providence in all casual and fortuitous Events;
and if Providence governs any thing, it must govern Chance, which governs
almost all things else, and which none but God can govern. As far as Human
Prudence and Foresight reaches, God expects we should take care of our selves;
and if we will not, he suffers us to reap the fruits of our own Folly; but when
we cannot take care of our selves, we have reason to expect and hope, that God
will take care of us; in other Cases, Human Prudence and Industry must concur
with the Divine Providence; in Matters of Chance and Accident, Providence must
act alone, and do all it self, for we know nothing of it; so that all the
Arguments for Providence do most strongly conclude for God's government of all
Casual Events.

And the Scripture does as expressly attribute all such Events to God, as any
other Acts of Providence and Government. In the Law of Moses, when a man killed
his Neighbor by accident, God is said to deliver him into his hands; 21. Exodus
12, 13. He that smites a man, so that he die, shall be surely put to death.
And if a man lie not in wait, but God deliver him into his hands, then I will
appoint thee a place, whither he shall flee: Where God's delivering him into
his hands, is opposed to him that smites a man* so that he die; and to him
that comes presumptuously upon his neighbor to slay him, 15. verse, and
therefore signifies one who kills his Neighbor by mere Accident: As it is
explained in 19. Deuteronomy. 4, 5. And this is the case of the slayer that shall flee
thither, i. e. to the City of Refuge: Whosoever kills his neighbor ignorantly,
whom he hated not in time past: As when a man goes into the wood with his
neighbor to hew wood, and his hand fetches a stroke with the axe to cut down
the tree, and the head slippeth from the helve, and lights upon his
neighbor, that he die, he shall flee unto one of these cities, and live. What
can be more accidental than this? And yet we are assured, that this is
appointed by the Divine Providence, that God delivers the man who is killed,
into the hands of him that killed him.

Is any thing more casual than a Lot? and yet Solomon tells us, The lot is cast
into the lap, but the whole disposing thereof is of the Lord, 16. Prove. 33.
Which is not confined to the Case of Lots, but to signify to us, That nothing
is so casual and uncertain, as to be exempted from the disposal of Providence.
For what seems accidental to us, is not Chance, but Providence; is ordered and
appointed by God to bring to pass what his own Wisdom and Counsel has decreed:
As is very evident from some remarkable Instances of Providence which are
recorded in Scripture.

By how many seeming Accidents and casual Events was Joseph advanced to
Pharoah's Throne? His Dreams, whereby God foretold his Advancement, made his
Brethren envious at him, and watch some convenient opportunity to get rid of
him, and so confute his Dreams: Jacob sends Joseph to visit his Brethren in the
Fields, where they were keeping their Sheep; this gave them an opportunity to
execute their Revenge, and at first they intended to murder him; but the
Ishmaelites accidentally passing by, they sold Joseph to them, and they carried
him into Egypt, and sold him to Potiphar. Potiphar's Wife tempts him to
Uncleanness, and being denied by Joseph, she accuses him to his Lord, who cast
him into the King's Prison: Whilst he was there, the King's Butler and Baker
were cast into the same Prison, and dreamed their several Dreams, which Joseph
expounded to them, and the Event verified his Interpretation. The Butler, who
was restored to his Office, forgot Joseph, till two years after, Pharaoh
dreamed a Dream, which none of the Wisemen could interpret, and then Joseph
was sent for, and advanced to the highest place of Dignity and Power next to
Pharaoh: The years of Famine brought Ioseph's Brethren into Egypt to buy Corn,
where they bowed before him, according to his Dream; this occasioned the
removal of Jacob and his whole Family into Egypt, where Joseph placed them in
the Land of Goshen, by which means God fulfilled what he had told Abraham; Know
of a surety, That thy seed shall be a stranger in a land that is not theirs,
and shall serve them, and they shall afflict them four hundred years, 15.
Genes. 13* How casual does all this appear to us? but no man will think that
Prophesies are fulfilled by Chance, and therefore we must confess, that what
seems Chance to us, was appointed by God.

Thus God intended to deliver Israel out of Egypt by the hands of Moses: Moses
was born at a time, when the King of Egypt had commanded, That every Son that
was born to the Israelites should be cast into the River. His Mother hid him
three months, and being not able to conceal him any longer, exposed him in an
Ark of Bulrushes among the Flags by the Riverside: Pharaoh's Daughter came
down to wash her self in the River, and finds the Ark with the Child in it;
puts him to his own Mother to nurse, whereby he came to know his own Kindred
and Relations, and to be instructed in the Knowledge and Worship of the God of
Israel. Afterward Pharaoh's Daughter takes him home, and breeds him up as her
own Son, whereby he was instructed in all the Learning of Egypt, and in all the
Policies of Pharaoh's Court, which qualified him for government: When he was
forty years old, he had lived long enough in Pharaoh's Court, and God thought
fit to remove him into better Company, and to accustom him to a more severe
life; and this was done by as strange an Accident. He slew an Egyptian in
defense of an oppressed Jew, and was betrayed by his own Brethren, and forced
to fly from Pharaoh to save his own Life; till the time was come for the
Deliverance of Israel, and then God sent him back into Egypt to bring his
people out from thence with Signs and Wonders and a Mighty Hand.

Thus God had foretold Ahab by the Prophet Micaiah, that if he went up against
Ramoth-Gilead, he should perish there, and this was accomplished by a very
great Chance: For a certain man drew a bow at a venture, and smote the king
between the joints of the harness, of which he died. 1 Kings 22. 34. The Blood
which came from his Wound ran into the Chariot, and one washed the chariot in
the pool of Samaria, and the dogs licked up his blood; which was a very Casual
thing, and little thought of by him who did it, and yet fulfilled God's
threatening against Ahab: In the place where dogs licked the blood of Naboth,
shall dogs lick thy blood, even thine, 21. chapter 29. v.

I shall add but one example more of this nature, and it is a very remarkable
one; God's deliverance of the Jews in the days of Esther, from the wicked
Conspiracy of Haman: This Haman being advanced to great Power and Authority by
King Ahasuerus, took great offense at Mordecai the Jew, who refused to
reverence him as others did; and for his sake obtained a Decree from the King,
to destroy all the Jews in the Provinces of his Dominions: Mordecai sends to
Queen Esther to go to the King, and to petition him about this matter: This was
a very hazardous Attempt, it being Death by the Law for any Person, Man, or
Woman, to go to the King without being called, unless the King held out his
Golden Scepter to them: But the Queen at last, after three days fasting,
ventured her own Life to save her People, and obtained Favor in the King's
sight, who held out the Golden Scepter to her: All that she requested at that
time, was, That the King and Haman would come to the Banquet which she had
prepared; and being then asked, What her Petition was? with an assurance that
it should be granted; she begged, That the King and Haman would come the next
day also to her Banquet, and then she would declare it: Haman was much exalted
with the King's Favor, and that Queen Esther had admitted none to the Banquet
with the King, but himself; but still Mordecai, who refused to bow before him,
was a great Grievance; and by the advice of his Friends, he built a Gallows
Fifty Cubits high, and resolved that night to beg of the King, That Mordecai
might be hanged on it; and had he come in time, his Petition had been certainly
granted; but it so happened, that that very night the King could not sleep, and
he called for the Book of the Records of the Chronicles, and there they found
written, That Mordecai had discovered the Treason of two of the King's
Chamberlains against him; and finding upon enquiry, that he had never been
rewarded for it, he resolved to do him Honor, and made Haman, who was at the
door to beg that Mordecai might be hanged, his Minister in doing him Honor:
This prepared the King to grant Queen Esther's Request, and hanged Haman upon
the Gallows he had built for Mordecai, and preserved the Jews from that
Destruction he had designed against them. And thus it is almost in all the
Remarkable Passages of Providence; there is so much appearance of Chance and
Accident, which has the greatest stroke in some wonderful Events, as may
satisfy considering men, That the world is governed by a Divine Wisdom and
Counsel, and an Invisible Power, and that the immediate and visible Causes have
always the least hand in it.

For can we think otherwise, when we see as many visible marks of Wisdom, and
Goodness, and Justice, in what we call Chance, as in any other acts of
Providence? Nay, when the Wisdom of Providence is principally seen in the
government of Fortuitous Events? When we see a World wisely made, tho we did
not see it made, yet we conclude, That it was not made by Chance, but by a Wise
Being; and by the same reason, when we see Accidental Events, nay, a long
incoherent Series of Accidents, concur to the producing the most admirable
effects, we ought to conclude, That there is a Wise Invisible Hand which
governs Chance, which of it self can do nothing wisely. When the Lives and
Fortunes of Men, the Fate of Kingdoms and Empires, the Successes of War, the
Changes of Government, are so often determined and brought about by the most
visible Accidents; when Chance defeats the Wisest Counsels, and the Greatest
Power; when Good men are rewarded, and the Church of God preserved by appearing
Chances; when Bad men are punished by Chance, and the very Chance whereby they
are punished, carries the marks of their sins upon it, for which they are
punished; I say, can any man in such cases, think that all this is mere Chance?
when, how accidental soever the Means are, or appear to be, whereby such things
are done, there is no appearance at all of Chance in the Event; but the Changes
and Revolutions, the Rewards and Punishments of Chance, are all as wisely done,
as if there had been nothing of Chance and Accident in it. This is the great
security of our lives, amidst all the uncertainties of Fortune, That Chance it
self cannot hurt us, without a Divine Commission: This is a sure foundation of
Faith, and Hope, and Trust in God, how calamitous and desperate soever our
external condition seems to be, that God never wants means to help; that he has
a thousand unseen ways, a whole Army of Accidents and unexpected Events at
command, to disappoint such designs, which no visible Art or Power can
disappoint, and to save those whom no visible Power can save.

This is an undeniable Reason for a perpetual Awe and Reverence of God, and an
entire submission to him, and a devout acknowledgment of him in all our ways,
That we have no Security but in his Providence and Protection; for whatever
provision we can make against foreseen and foreknown evils, we can never
provide against Chance; that is wholly in God's hands, and no human Wit or
Strength can withstand it; which may abate the Pride and self-confidence of
men, and teach the Rich, and Great, and Mighty, a Religious Veneration of God,
who can with so much ease pull down the mighty from their seat, and advance
those of low degree.

3dly. The next thing to be explained, is God's government of Moral Causes or
Free Agents, that is, the government of men, considered as the Instruments of
Providence which God makes use of for the accomplishment of his own Wise
Counsels.

Most of the good or evil which happens to us in this world, is done by Men; if
God rewards, or if he punishes us, usually Men are his Ministers in both, to
execute his Vengeance, or to dispense his Blessings; and therefore God must
have as Absolute a Government over Mankind, of all their Thoughts, and
Passions, and Counsels, and Actions, as he has of the Powers and Influences of
Natural Causes, or else he cannot reward and punish when and as he pleases. If
men could hurt those whom God would bless and reward, or could do good to those
whom God would punish, both good and bad men might be happy or miserable in
this world, whether God would or not; our Fortunes would depend upon the
Numbers and Power of our Friends or Enemies, upon the good or bad humors and
inclinations of those among whom we live, and Providence could not help us.

Now this is the great Difficulty, How God can exercise such an Absolute
Government over Mankind, who are Free Agents, without destroying the Liberty
and Freedom of their Choice, which would destroy the nature of Virtue and Vice,
of Rewards and Punishments: The necessity of allowing this, if we will
acknowledge a Providence, and the plain Testimonies and Examples of this
Absolute and Uncontrollable Government, which we find in Scripture, have made
some men deny the Liberty of Human Actions, and represent Mankind to be as mere
Machines, as a Watch or Clock, which move as they are moved: And then they know
not how to bring Religion, and the Moral Differences of Good and Evil, and the
Natural Justice of Rewards and Punishments, into their Scheme; for nothing of
all this can be reconciled with Absolute Necessity and Fate. Others, to avoid
these Difficulties, are afraid of attributing too much to Providence, or have
such confused and perplexed Notions about it, that there are few cases wherein
they can securely depend on God.

But I think this Difficulty will be easily removed, if we distinguish between
God's government of Men, as Reasonable Creatures, and Free Agents, and his
government of them as the Instruments of Providence; the first considers them
in their own private and natural Capacity, the second in relation to the rest
of Mankind; which makes a great difference in the Reason, and in the Acts of
Government.

Man considered in his own nature, is a reasonable Creature and free Agent, and
therefore the proper government of Man, consists in giving him Laws, that he
may know the difference between good and evil, what he ought to choose, and what
to refuse, and in annexing such rewards and punishments to the observation or
to the breach of these Laws, as may reasonably invite him to obedience, and
deter him from sin; and as this degenerate state requires, in laying such
external restraints on him, and affording him such internal assistances of
Grace, as the Divine Wisdom sees proportioned to the weakness and corruption of
Human Nature: and when this is done, it becomes God to leave him to his own
choice, and to reward or punish him as he deserves; for a forced Virtue
deserves no Reward, and a necessity of sinning will reasonably excuse from
Punishment. The nature of a reasonable Creature, of Virtue and Vice, of Rewards
and Punishments, represent it as very becoming the Wisdom and Justice of God,
to leave every man to the freedom of his own choice, to do good or evil, to
deserve Rewards or Punishments, as far as he himself is only concerned in it.

But when we consider man in Society, the case is altered; for when the good or
evil of their actions extend beyond themselves, to do good or hurt to other
men, the Providence of God becomes concerned either to hinder, or to permit and
order it, as may best serve the Wise Ends of Government, as those other men who
are like to be the better or the worse for it, have deserved well or ill of
God. Tho God has made man a free Agent, yet we must not think that he has made
such a Creature as he himself cannot govern: No man doubts, but that God can
when he pleases, by an Irresistible Power, turn men's hearts, and chain up their
Passions, and alter their Counsels; the only Question is, When it is fit for
God to do this: And no man can question the fitness of it, when the good
Government of the world requires it. God makes no man good or bad, virtuous or
vicious, by a perpetual and irresistible force; for this contradicts the nature
of Virtue and Vice, which requires a Freedom and Liberty of Choice; but God may
by a secret and irresistible influence upon men's minds, even force them to do
that good, which they have no inclination to do, and restrain them from doing
that evil, which otherwise they would have done, which does not make them Good
men, but makes them the Instruments of Providence in doing good to men; and God
who is the Sovereign Lord of all Creatures, may, when he sees fit, press those
men, if I may so speak, to his Service, who would not do good upon choice. This
shows the difference between the Government of Grace, and Providence; the first
has relation to Virtue and Vice, to make men good, to change their Natures and
sinful Inclinations into habits of Virtue; and therefore admits of no greater
force than what is consistent with the freedom of Choice, and the nature of
Virtue and Vice: but the Government of Providence respects the external
Happiness or Misery, Rewards or Punishments of Men or Nations; and to this
purpose God may use what Instruments he pleases, and exercise such Authority
over Nature or Men, as is necessary to accomplish his own Wise Counsels of
Mercy or Judgment. And it was necessary to premise this distinction, because
the confounding these two, has occasioned great difficulties and mistakes both
in the Doctrine of Grace and Providence.

Let us then now more particularly consider, How God governs Mankind, so as to
make them the Instruments and Ministers of his Providence in the world. The
Methods of the Divine Wisdom are Infinite and Unsearchable, and we must not
expectfully to comprehend all the Secrets and Mysteries of God's Government,
but something we may know of this, enough to teach us to reverence God, and to
trust in him, and to vindicate his Providence from the Cavils of Ignorance and
Infidelity; which is as much as is useful for us to know: And I shall reduce
what I have to say, to Two General Heads: 1. The Government of men's Minds, of
their Wills, their Passions, and Counsels. 2. The Government of their Actions.

1. God's Government of the Minds of Men, their Wills, and Passions, and
Counsels; for these are the great Springs of Action; and as free a Principle as
the Mind of man is, it is not ungovernable; it may be governed, and that
without an Omnipotent Power, against its own Byas, and without changing its
inclinations: and what may be done, certainly God can do; and when it is
necessary to the Ends of Providence, we may conclude he will do it. Let a man
be never so much bent upon any Project, yet hope or fear, some present great
advantage, or great inconvenience, the powerful intercession of Friends, a
sudden change of circumstances, the improbability of success, the irreparable
mischief of a defeat, and a thousand other considerations, will divert him from
it; and how easy is it for God to imprint such thoughts upon men's minds with
an irresistible Vigor and Brightness; that it shall be no more in their power
to do what they had a mind to, than to resist all the Charms of Riches and
Honors, than to leap into the Fire, and to choose Misery and Ruin.

That thus it is, the Scripture assures us; 21. Prove. 1. The king's heart is in
the hand of the Lord, as the rivers of waters, he turns it whither soever he
will: And if the King's heart be in the hand of the Lord, we cannot doubt but
he has all other men's hearts in his hand also, and can turn and change them as
he pleases. Thus the Wise man tells us, A man's heart devises his ways, but
the Lord directs his steps, 16. Prove. 9. Men consult and advise what to do,
but after all, God steers and directs them which way he pleases; for tho there
are many devices in a man's heart, nevertheless the counsel of the Lord that
shall stand, 19. Prove. 21. Which made the Wise man conclude, Man's goings are of
the Lord, how then shall a man understand his own ways? 20. Prove. 24. That is,
God has such an Absolute Government of the hearts and actions of men, when his
Providence is concerned in the Event, that no man can certainly know what he
himself shall choose and do; for God can. in an instant alter his mind, and make
him steer a very different course from what he intended: as the Prophet
Jeremiah assures us; I know that the way of man is not in himself, it is not in
man that walks to direct his steps, 10. Jer 23. And Solomon tells us
something more strange than this; The preparation of the heart in man, and the
answer of the tongue, is of the Lord. 16. Prove. 1. or as the Hebrew seems to
signify, the preparation of the heart is from man; a man premeditates and
resolves what he will say; but notwithstanding that, the answer of the tongue
is of the Lord. When he comes to speak, he shall say nothing but what God
pleases: Which sayings must not be expounded to an universal sense, that it is
always thus; but that thus it is, whenever God sees fit to interpose, which he
does as often as he has any wise end to serve by it.

Thus we are told, That when a man's ways please the Lord, he makes even his
enemies to be at peace with him. 16. Prove. 7. And it is a very remarkable
Promise God makes to the Children of Israel, that when all their Males should
come Three times every Year to Worship God at Jerusalem, by which means their
Country was left without defense, exposed to the Rapine of their Enemies, who
dwelt round about them, That no man should desire their land, when they go up
to appear before the Lord. 34. Exodus 24. We have many Examples of this in
Scripture, and some of those many ways whereby God does it. When Abraham
sojourned in Gerar, he said of Sarah his Wife, that she was his Sister, and
Abimelech the King of Gerar sent and took her: but God reproved Abimelech in a
dream, and tells him, that he had withheld him from Sinning, and not suffered
him to touch her. 20. Genes. 1. etc. Thus when Jacob fled from Laban with his
Wives and Children, and Laban pursued him, God appeared to Laban in a dream,
and Commanded him that he should not speak to Jacob either good or hurt. 31.
Genes. 24. Such appearances were very common in that Age, though they seem very
extraordinary to us; but God does the same thing still by strong and lively
impressions upon our minds; by suggesting and fixing such thoughts in us, as
excite or calm our Passions, as encourage us to bold and great Attempts, or
check us in our career by frightful Imaginations, and unaccountable Fears and
Terrors, or by such other Arguments as are apt to change our Purposes and
Counsels.

Sometimes God does this by a Concurrence of External Causes, which at other
times would not have been effectual; but shall certainly have their Effect when
God inforces the impression.

Thus God in a moment turned the Heart of Esau, when he came out in great Rage
against his Brother Jacob. It was an old Hatred he had conceived against him
for the loss of his Birthright and of his Blessing; and he had for many years
confirmed himself in a resolution to cut him off, the first opportunity he had
to do it: And could it be expected, that the Present which Jacob sent him,
which he could have taken, if he had pleased, without receiving it as a Gift;
and that the Submission of Jacob, when he was in his Power, should all on a
sudden make him forget all that was past, and the very Business he came for,
and turn his bloody Designs into the kindest Embraces? No! this was God's work,
the effect of that Blessing which the Angel gave to Jacob, after a whole Nights
wrestling with him in Peniel, 32. and 33. Genes. and when God pleases, the
weakest means shall change the most sullen and obstinate Resolutions.

Of the same nature with this is the Story of David and Abigail: Nabal had
highly provoked David by the churlish Answer which he sent him, and David was
resolved to take a very severe revenge on Nabal and his House; but God sent
Abigail to pacify him, who by her presence, and dutiful and submissive
Behavior and wise Counsels, diverted him from those bloody resolutions he had
taken, as David himself acknowledges: Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, which
sent thee this day to meet me, and blessed be thy advice, and blessed be thou
who have kept me this day from coming to shed blood, and from avenging my self
with my own hand, 1 Samuel 25. 32, 33.

Saul pursued David in the Wilderness to take away his Life, and God delivered
him Twice into David's hands; and the kindness David showed him in not killing
him when he was in his Power, did at last turn the Heart of Saul, that he
pursued him no more. 1 Samuel 26. 27. chapter

Thus God confounded the good Counsel of Ahitophel by the advice of Hushai,
which Absalom chose to follow; and the Text tells us this was from God, who had
purposed to defeat the good counsel of Ahitophel, to the intent that he might
bring evil upon Absalom. 2 Samuel 17. 14. Such an absolute Empire has God over
the minds of men, that he can turn them as he pleases, can lead them into new
thoughts and counsels with as great ease, as the waters of a river may be drawn
into a new Channel prepared for them.

2dly. When God does not think fit to change and alter men's Wills and Passions,
he can govern their Actions, and serve the ends of his Providence by them. When
God suffers them to pursue their own Counsels, and to do what they themselves
like best; he does that by their hands, which they little expected or intended.
The same Action may serve very different Ends; and therefore God and Men may
have very different intentions in it; and what is ill done by men, and for a
very ill End, may be ordered by God for Wise and Good purposes: Nay, the ill
Ends which men Designed, may be Disappointed; and the good, which God intended
by it, have its Effect: And this is as Absolute a Government over men's Actions,
as the ends of Providence require, when whatever men do, if they intend one
thing, and God another, the counsel of God shall stand, and what they intended
shall have no effect any farther than as it is subservient to the Divine
Counsels; as to give some plain examples of it.

Ioseph's Brethren being offended at his Dreams and at the peculiar kindness
which their Father Jacob showed him, resolved to get rid of him; but God
intended to send him into Egypt, to advance him to Pharaoh's Throne, and to
transplant Jacob and his Family thither; and therefore God would not suffer
them to slay him as they at first intended, but he suffered them to sell him to
the Ishmaelites, who carried him into Egppt: which disappointed what they aimed
at in it, never to see or hear more of him; but accomplished the Decrees and
Counsels of God. Another Example we have in the King of Assyria, who came
against Jerusalem with a powerful Army with an intention to destroy it, but God
intended no more than to Correct them for their Sins; this God suffered him to
do, but he could do no more. O Assyrian, the rod of mine anger, and the staff
in their hand is mine indignation: I will send him against a hypocritical
nation; and against the people of my wrath will I give him a charge to take the
spoil, and to take the prey, and to tread them down like the mire in the
street. Thus far God gave him Commission; that is, thus far God intended to
suffer his Rage and Pride to proceed; but this was the least of his intention:
Howbeit he thinks not so, but it is in his heart to destroy and cut off
nations, not a few: but in this God disappointed him. Wherefore it shall come
to pass, that when the Lord has performed his whole work upon mount Zion and
on Jerusalem, I will punish the fruit of the stout heart of the King of
Assyria, and the glory of his proud looks. 10. Isai. 5, 6, 7, 12.

A great many Examples might be given of this nature, but these are sufficient
to show what different Intentions God and Men have in the same actions; and how
easily God can defeat what men intend, and accomplish by them his own Wise
Counsels, which they never thought of. When God has no particular Ends of
Providence to serve by the Lusts and Passions, and evil Designs of men, he
commonly disappoints them; that when they intend evil, and imagine a
mischievous device, they are not able to perform it, 21. Psalm. 11. Or he turns
the evil upon their own heads; The heathen are sunk down in the pit that they
made, in the net which they hid, is their own foot taken; the Lord is known by
the judgment which he executes; the wicked is snared in the work of his own
hands, 9 Psalm. 15* 16. Or he doubly disappoints their malice, not only by
defeating the evil they intended, but by turning it to the great advantage of
those it was intended against; which was visible in the case of Haman, whose
malice against Mordecai, and all the Jews for his sake, did not only prove his
own ruin, but the great advancement of Mordecai, and the Glory and Triumph of
the Jewish Nation.

Having thus briefly shown, what Government God has both of the Hearts and the
Actions of men, how easily he can alter their Counsels, and manage their
Passions, make them do what good they never intended, and disappoint the evil
which they did intend, or turn it into good; this is a sufficient
Demonstration, how Absolute the Divine Providence is; for he who has such an
Absolute Government of Nature, of what we call Chance and Fortune, and of the
Wills and Actions of men, can do whatsoever pleases him. But that we may have
the clearer and more distinct apprehension of God's government of mankind, to
make them the Instruments of his Providence, I shall more particularly, but
very briefly, state this matter, both with respect to good and to bad men.

1. As for Good men, there is no difficulty in their case; for they are the
Ministers of a good and beneficent Providence; they do good out of Temper and
Inclination, and a Habit and Principle of Virtue, and out of Reverence to the
Divine Laws; and are ready to obey every extraordinary impression to excite and
determine them to such particular good offices as God thinks fit to employ them
in: And this is nothing but what is very honorable for God, and what becomes
good men; for to do good is the Glory of Human Nature, as well as of the Divine
Providence; and good men will observe the Laws of Virtue in doing good; and
while good is done by honest and virtuous means, there can be no Objection
against Providence.

2dly. But as Bad men are most difficulty governed, so the greatest difficulty
is in vindicating Providence in making use of the Ministries of Bad men; for it
is commonly thought a great blemish to Providence, when Glorious and Admirable
Designs are brought to pass by the Sins of men. Now the Foundation of this
Objection is a great mistake, as if God could not serve his own Providence by
the Sins of men, without being the Cause of men's sins; for there is no color
nor reasonable pretense of an Objection against God's making the Sins of men
serve wise and good ends, if he can do this without having any hand in men's
sins.

It is the great Glory of Providence, to bring good out of evil; and while all
the Events of Providence are Just, and Righteous, and Holy, and Wise, and such
as become a God, it is much more admirable to consider, that all this should
be, while there is so much wickedness and disorder in the world.

The true state of this matter in short is this: God never suggests any evil
designs to men; that is owing to their own wicked hearts, or to the Temptations
of other wicked men, or of wicked Spirits; but when men have formed any wicked
Designs, he sometimes, as you have heard, changes their purposes, or deters
them from putting them in execution; and when he suffers them to proceed to
action, he either shamefully disappoints them, or serves some wise and good
end, by what they wickedly do: And if Providence consists in the Care and
Government of mankind, how can God govern mankind better, than to permit bad
men to do no more hurt, than what he can turn to good. God does not govern the
world by an immediate and miraculous Power, but governs men by men, and makes
them help and defend, reward and punish one another; and therefore there is no
other ordinary way of punishing bad men (excepting the Civil Sword, which
reaches but a few Criminals) but to punish them by the Wickedness of other bad
men; and what can more become the Wisdom and Justice of Providence, than to
make bad men the Ministers and Executioners of a Divine Vengeance upon each
other, which is one great End God serves by the Sins of men. I Am sure it is for
the great good of the world, that God has the government of bad men, that they
cannot do so much hurt as they would, and that the mischief God permits them to
do, is directed to fall on such persons as either want Correction, or deserve
Punishment. For this is another thing very observable in God's government both
of the good and bad actions of men, that as in the government of Natural Causes
God directs where, and when, and in what proportion Nature shall exert its
Influences; that it shall rain upon one City, and not upon another; so God does
not only excite men to do good, but directs and determines them where to do it;
chooses out such persons as they shall do good to, and appoints what good they
shall do, and in what measures and proportions they shall do it: And he not
only sets bounds to the Lusts and Passions of bad men, but when he sees fit to
permit their wickedness, he directs where the hurt and mischief of it shall
light: We need no other proof of this, but the very Notion of Providence, which
is, God's Care of his Creatures; for that requires a particular Application of
the good or evil which men do, to such particular persons as God thinks fit to
do good to, or to afflict and punish; which is the most material and most
necessary exercise both of the Wisdom, and Justice, and Goodness of Providence.
For if God suffered men to do good or evil at random, without directing them to
fit and proper Objects, the Fortunes of particular men would depend upon as
great a Chance, as the mutable Lusts, and Passions, and Fancies of men.

The only Use I shall make of this at present, is to convince you how perfectly
we are in God's hands, and how secure we are in his Protection; what little
reason we have to be afraid of men, whatever their Power, how furious soever
their Passions are; how vain it is to trust in men, and to depend on their
favor; for they can neither do good nor hurt, but as they are directed by God;
and therefore he alone must be the Supreme Object of our Fear and Trust: If God
be for us, who can be against us? If we make him our Enemy, who can save us out
of his hands? So that we have but one thing to take care of, and we are safe:
Let us make God our Friend, and he will raise us up Friends, and Patrons, and
Protectors; will deliver us out of the hands of our Enemies, or make our
Enemies to be at peace with us.

Secondly, Having thus explained God's government of Causes, let us now
consider his government of Events: And I think it will be easily granted me,
That if all those Causes by which all Events are brought to pass, are governed
by God, God must also have the Absolute Government of all Events in his own
hands.

But yet the government of Causes and of Events, are of a very different
consideration; and to represent this as plainly and familiarly as I can, I
shall 1. show you, What I mean by Events, when I attribute the government of
all Events to God. 2. Wherein God's government of Events consists. 3. The
Difference between God's Absolute government of all Events, and Necessity and
Fate. 4. That the Exercise of a particular Providence consists in the
government of all Events.

1. What I mean by Events: Now every thing that is done, may in a large sense
be called an Event, and is in some degree or other, under the government of
Providence, as all the actions of men are; but when I speak of God's government
of Events, I mean only such Events as are in Scripture called God's doings, as
being ordered and appointed by him; that is to say, all the good or evil which
happens to private men, or to Kingdoms and Nations in this world. Every thing
that is done, is not God's doing; for there is a great deal of evil every day
committed, which God does not order and appoint to be done, but has expressly
forbid the doing of it; but there is no good or evil which happens to any man,
or to any Society of men, but what God orders and appoints for them; and this
is God's government of all Events. This is the proper exercise of Providence,
to allot all men their Fortunes and Conditions in the world, to dispense
Rewards and Punishments, to take care that no man shall receive either good or
evil, but from the Hand, and by the Appointment of God; this is the Subject of
all the Disputes about the Justice, and Goodness, and Wisdom of Providence; and
all the Objections against Providence, necessarily suppose that thus it is, or
thus it ought to be, if God governs the world: For unless Providence be
concerned to take care that no men be happy or miserable, but as they deserve,
which cannot be without the Absolute Government of all Events, the prosperity
of bad men, and the sufferings of the good, the many miseries that are in the
world, and the uncertain changes and turnings of Fortune, can be no Objection
against Providence: And indeed, were not this the case, Providence would be so
insignificant a Name, that it would not be worth the while to dispute for or
against it; for a Providence which neither can do us good nor hurt, or which
cannot always and in all cases do it, is worth nothing, or worth no more than
it can do good or hurt. And therefore all the good or evil, which does or can
befall Men or Kingdoms, is in Scripture attributed to Providence, and promised
or threatened by God, as men shall deserve either; such as Length of Days, or a
sudden and untimely Death; Health, or Sickness; Honor, or Disgrace; Riches, or
Poverty; Plenty, or Famine; War, or Peace; the changing Times and Seasons; the
removing Kings, and setting up Kings; and with respect to all such Events as
these, whatever the immediate Causes of them be, God is said to do whatsoever
pleases him.

2dly. But we shall better understand this, by enquiring into the Nature of
God's Government. Now God's Government of Events consists in ordering and
appointing whatever good or evil shall befall men; for according to the
Scripture, we must attribute such a Government to God, as makes all these
Events his Will and Doing; and nothing can be his Will and Doing, but what he
Wills and Orders.

Some men think it enough to say, That God permits every thing that is done,
but will by no means allow that God Wills, and Orders, and Appoints it, which
they are afraid will charge the Divine Providence with all the evil that is
done in the world; and truly so it would, did God order and appoint the evil to
be done; but tho God orders and appoints what evils every man shall suffer, he
orders and appoints no man to do the evil; he only permits some men to do
mischief, and appoints who shall suffer by it, which is the short Resolution of
this Case. To attribute the evils which some men suffer from other men's sins,
merely to Gods Permission, is to destroy the Government of Providence, for bare
Permission is not Government; and those evils which God permits, but does not
order, cannot be called his will and doing; and if this be the case of all the
evils we suffer from other men's sins, most of the evils which men suffer, befall
them without God's Will and Appointment; and yet to attribute all the evil
which men do, to God's Order and Appointment, is to destroy the Holiness of
Providence; and therefore we must necessarily distinguish between the evils men
do, and the evils they suffer; the first God Permits and Directs, the second he
Orders and Appoints. How God governs men hearts and actions, I have already
explained; and this is the place to consider God's Permission of Evil; for
Permission relates to actions. Men's own wicked hearts conceive and form wicked
designs, and they execute them by God's Permission, but no man suffers by them,
but by God's Appointment: God's Care of his creatures requires that no man
should suffer any thing, but what God orders for him; and if such sufferings be
just and righteous, how wicked soever the Causes be, it is no reproach to
Providence to order and appoint them. Suppose a man have forfeited his Life, or
Estate, or Reputation to Providence, or tho he have made no Criminal Forfeiture
of it, yet God sees fit for other Wise Reasons to remove him out of the world,
or to reduce him to Poverty and Contempt; is it any fault in Providence to
deliver such a man into the hands of Murderers, Oppressors, Slanderers, who are
very forward to execute such Decrees, when Providence takes off the restraint,
and sets them at liberty to follow their own lusts? And when there are so many
that deserve or need these or such kind of Punishments or Corrections, and such
vast numbers of bad men, who are ready every day to commit such outrages, did
not God restrain them, is it not very visible how easily God can order and
appoint such sufferings for men, without ordering or appointing any man's sins?
It requires no more than to bring those whom God appoints for suffering, into
the reach of such men, and to put them into their power, and their own malice
and wickedness will do the rest: It is like exposing Condemned Malefactors to
Wild Beasts, whose nature and inclination is to devour; and if God chains up
bad men, as we do wild beasts, that they cannot touch any one but whom God
delivers up to them, and lets them loose only to execute his own Just and
Righteous Judgment, can any thing be more Honorable to Providence, or a
greater Security to Mankind?

To form an Idea of this in our minds, let us suppose this to be the case of an
Earthly Prince, That he perfectly understood all the Deserts, and all the
Inclinations of his Subjects, and had such an invisible and insensible
Authority over them, that without giving them any directions, or letting them
know any thing of his Intentions, or offering any violence to their own
Inclinations, he could determine them to do that hurt which they had a mind to
do, to those, and to those only, whom he intended to punish; and to do the good
they are desirous to do, to those, and to those only, whom he intends to
reward; in case such a Prince took care that no man should suffer more from the
wickedness of others, than what he deserved, and the Reasons of Government
required, would any man charge such a Prince with all the Wickedness that is
committed in his Kingdom, only because he so wisely orders it, that some bad
men shall execute his Vengeance upon other bad men, and serve instead of Judge,
and Jury, and Executioners? Nay, would not every man say, That this is the most
Perfect and Absolute Form of Government in the world? Earthly Princes indeed
cannot do this, but this is the Government of God, who accomplishes his own
Wise Counsels by the Ministries of Men.

And this may satisfy us in what sense all the good and all the evil that
happens either to private Men, or to Kingdoms and Nations, is said to be God's
will, and God's doing, and what pleases him; because no Man or Nation is
rewarded or punished, but by God's order and appointment: That as many good men
as there are in the world, who are ready to do good to all they can; and as
many bad men as there are, who are ready to do all the mischief they can; none
of them can do either good or hurt to any, but to those whom God has appointed
for either; which makes God the Absolute Lord and Sovereign of the world; since
whatever men intend, all men's Fortunes and Conditions depend upon his Will.

And since God absolutely orders and appoints nothing but the Event, if the
Event be holy, just, and good, that is, if men be rewarded and punished
according to their works, as far as the Justice and Goodness of Providence is
concerned in this world, there can be no reasonable Objection against
Providence; for by what wicked means soever men be rewarded or punished, if the
Reward or Punishment by holy, just, and good, this vindicates the Holiness, and
Justice, and Goodness of Providence; of which more hereafter. Let men's
Wickedness be to themselves, for that is their own; but that the Wickedness of
men is overruled by an Invisible Hand, to accomplish Wise and Just Decrees,
that is the Glory of Providence.

And this suggests another evident Reason, why all the good or evil that befalls
men, is called God's will, and God's doings, because in a strict and proper
sense, it is not man's Will, nor man's Doings. What is done, is either what
those who did it, never intended to do; or else serves such ends, and is
ordered by God for such ends, as those who did it, never thought of; which
proves men to be only Instruments, but God the Supreme Disposer of all Events.
If we must attribute all things that are done, either to God or Men, then what
is not done by Men, must be done by God; and Men cannot be properly said to do
what they never intended; and therefore whatever is either beyond or contrary
to what Men intended, must either be attributed to Chance, or to a Divine
Providence. I observed before, what different Intentions God and men have in
the same actions; what is intended by men, is their doing; what is intended by
God, is his doing, and wholly his doing, when what God intended was not
intended by men. For this reason Joseph tells his Brethren, that it was not
they, but God, that sent him into Egypt, 45. Genesis 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. for they
thought nothing of sending him into Egypt; but this was what God intended, when
he permitted them to sell him to the Ishmaelites: This was their sin, as he
adds, 50. Genesis 20. But as for you, ye thought evil against me; but the good
that was done, was wholly God's doings; but God meant it unto good. And thus it
is in other cases; which shows us what the Scripture calls God's doings. The
punishment of sinners, and those evils he brings on them, is God's doings, but
not the sins whereby they are punished: The Punishment of David's Adultery by
the Incest of Absalom, was God's doing, but not Absalom's Incest: The sending
Joseph into Egypt, and advancing him into Pharaoh's Throne, was God's doing;
but not the Sin of his Brethren in selling him for a Slave: And thus it is
throughout the Scripture; nothing is called God's Will, or God's doing, which
has any Moral Evil in it; all wicked actions are men's own will and own doings,
which God permits for wise ends, but never orders or appoints; but the good or
evil which is done by men's sins, that is God's doing: and I hope by this time
you all know how to distinguish between God's government of men's Actions, and
his government of Events; and then we may safely attribute all Events to God's
order and appointment, without danger of charging God with the sins of men,
whereby such Events are brought to pass.

3dly. Let us now consider, What difference there is between God's Absolute
Government of all Events, and Necessity and Fate; for many men are very apt to
confound these two: If no good or evil befalls any men, but what God orders and
appoints for them, this they think sounds like Fate and Destiny; that every
man's Fortune is writ upon his Forehead; and that it is impossible for any man,
by all his Care, and Industry, and Prudence, to make his Condition better than
what God has decreed it to be in the Irreversible Rolls of Fate: And yet an
Unrelenting, Immutable Fate, is so irreconcilable with the liberty of human
actions, with the nature of good and evil, of rewards and punishments, that if
we admit of it, there is an end of all Religion, of all Virtuous Endeavors, of
all Great and Generous Attempts: it is to no purpose to pray to God, or to
trust in him, or to resist temptations, or to be diligent in our business, or
prudent and circumspect in our actions; for what will be, will be: Or if any
means be to be used, that is no matter of our choice or care, but we shall do
it as necessarily and mechanically as a Watch moves, and points to the Hour of
the Day; for Fate has by the same Necessity determined the Means and the End,
and we can do no more nor less than Fate has determined.

I shall not now trouble you with an account of the various Opinions of the
Ancient Philosophers about Fate, none of whom ever dreamt of such a terrible
Fate as some Christians have fancied, which reaches not only to this world, but
to all Eternity: What I have already discoursed, is sufficient to vindicate the
Doctrine of Providence from the least imputation of Necessity and Fate.

For 1. Though God overrules the actions of men, to do what he himself thinks
fit to be done, yet he lays no Necessity upon human actions: men will and choose
freely, pursue their own interests and inclinations, just as they would do if
there were no Providence to govern them; and while men act freely, it is
certain there can be no Absolute Fate. God indeed, as you have already heard,
sometimes hinders them from executing their wicked purposes, and permits them
to do no more hurt than what he can direct to Wise Ends; but no man is wicked,
or does wickedly, by Necessity and Fate. Tho he may be restrained from doing so
much wickedness as he would, yet all the wickedness he commits, is his own free
Choice, even when it serves such ends as he never thought of; and therefore he
is and acts like a free Agent, notwithstanding the Government of Providence.

2dly. Tho God determines all Events, all the good and evil that shall happen
to Men or Nations, yet it is no more nor no other than what they themselves
have deserved; and therefore they are under no other Fate than what they
themselves bring upon themselves by the good or bad use of their own liberty:
that is, they are under no other Fate than to be rewarded when they do well,
and to be punished when they do ill; but this is the Justice of Providence, not
the Necessity of Fate. Those who do ill, and deserve ill, and suffer ill, might
have done well, and have made themselves the Favorites of Providence; and
therefore are under no greater Necessity of Suffering ill, than they were of
Doing ill. The reason why God keeps all Events in his own hands, is not because
he has absolutely determined the Fates of all men, but that he may govern the
world wisely and justly, and reward and punish men according to their deserts,
as far as the Reasons of Providence require in this world. Now while the
liberty of human actions is secured, and the Events of Providence are not the
execution of Fatal, Absolute, and Unconditional Decrees, but acts of Government
in the Wise Administration of Justice, and dispensing Rewards and Punishments,
how Absolute soever God's Govenment be of all Events, it is not Necessity and
Fate, but a Wise, and Just, and Absolute Government. This indeed is what some
of the Wisest Heathens called Fate, and all that they meant by the Name of
Fate, That God had fixed it by an irreversible Decree, that Good men should be
rewarded, and the Wicked punished; and thus far we must all allow Fate; and
Providence is only the Minister and Executioner of these Fatal Decrees; and to
that end, God keeps the Government of all Events in his own hands. Now whether
we say, That God determines what good or evil shall befall men, at the very time
when they deserve it; or, That foreseeing what good or evil they will do, and
what they will deserve, did beforehand determine what good or evil should befall
them according to their deserts, this makes no alteration at all in the state
of the Question; for if all the good or evil that befalls men, have respect to
their deserts, this is not Fate, but a Just and Righteous Judgment.

In a word; God's Government of all Events is indeed so Absolute and
Uncontrollable, that no good or evil can befall any man, but what God pleases,
what he orders and appoints for him; and this is necessary to the good
Government of the World, and the Care of all his Creatures; but then God orders
no good or evil to befall any men, but what they deserve, and what the Wise Ends
of his Providence require; and this is not Fate, but a Wise and Just Government
of the World.

4. That the Exercise of a Particular Providence consists in the Government of
all Events.

I have often wondered at those Philosophers who acknowledged a Providence, but
would not acknowledge God's particular Care of all his Creatures. Some confined
his Providence to the Heavens, but would not extend it to this lower world; and
yet this world needs a Providence as much, and a great deal more, as being a
Scene of Change and Corruption, of furious Lusts and Passions, which need the
Restraints and Government of Providence: No Creatures need God's Care more than
the Inhabitants of this Earth; and if he take Care of any of his Creatures, one
would think he should take most Care of them who need it most.

Others, who would allow, That the Providence of God reached this lower world,
yet confined God's care to the several Kinds and Species of Beings, but would
not extend it to every Individual; as if God took care of Logical Terms, of
Genus and Species, but took no care of his own Creatures, which are all
Individuals; or as if God could take care of all his creatures, without taking
care of any particular creature; i.e. That he could take care of all his
creatures, without taking care of any one of them.

Thus they would allow God to take care of the great Affairs of Kingdoms and
Commonwealths, but to have no regard to particular Men or Families, unless they
made a great Figure in the world; as if Kingdoms and Commonwealths were not
made up of particular Men, and particular Families; or that God could take care
of the whole, without taking care of every part; or as if there were any other
reason for taking care of the whole, but to take care of those particulars who
make the whole. To talk of a General Providence, without God's Care and
Government of every Particular Creature, is manifestly unreasonable and absurd;
for whatever Reasons oblige us to own a Providence, oblige us to own a
Particular Providence.

If Creation be a Reason why God should preserve and take care of what he has
made, this is a Reason why he should take care of every creature, because there
is no creature but what he made; and if the whole world consists of
particulars, it must be taken care of in the care of particulars; for if all
particulars perish, as they may do if no care be taken to preserve them, the
whole must perish.

And there is the same reason for the Government of Mankind; for the whole is
governed in the Government of the parts; and Mankind cannot be well governed,
without the Wise Government of every particular Man.

I Am sure that the Objections against a Particular Providence are very foolish.
Some think it too much trouble to God to take care of every particular; as if
it were more trouble to him to take care of them, than it was to make them; or
as if God had made more creatures than he could take care of; as if an Infinite
Mind, and Omnipotent Power, were as much disturbed and tired with various and
perpetual Cares, as we are. Others think it below the Greatness and Majesty of
God, to take cognizance of every mean and contemptible creature, or of every
private man; as if it were more below God to take care of such creatures, than
it is to make them; as if numbers made creatures considerable to God; that tho
one man is below God's care, yet a Kingdom is worthy of his care and notice;
when the whole world to God is but as the drop of the bucket, and the small
dust of the balance.

Now it is certain there can be no particular Providence, without God's
Government of all Events; for if any good or evil happens to any man without
God's Order and Appointment, that is not Providence, whatever other name you
will give it: So that if God does take a particular care of all his creatures,
this is a demonstration that he has the Absolute Government of all Events, for
without it he cannot take Care of them; and if God have the Government of all
Events, as the Scripture assures us he has, this confirms us in the belief of a
particular Providence; for if all the Good or Evil that happens to every
particular man is appointed by God, that is proof enough that God takes Care of
every particular Man. God's Government of all particular Events, and his Care
of all Individuals, include each other in their very Natures: The Care of
particular Creatures consists in the Government of all particular Events; and
the Government of all Events, is the Exercise of a particular Providence; as
our Savior represents it 10. Matthew. 29, 30, 31. Are not two sparrows sold for
a farthing? and one of them shall not fall on the ground without your Father.
But the very hairs of your head are all numbered. Fear ye not therefore, ye are
of more value than many sparrows. Where God's particular Providence over all
his Creatures is expressed by his particular care of all Events; which extends
even to the Life of a Sparrow, and to the Hairs of our Heads.

Thus much is certain, That without this belief, That God takes a particular
Care of all his Creatures, in the Government of all Events that can happen to
them; there is no reason or pretense for most of the particular Duties of
Religious Worship. For most of the Acts of Worship consider God, not merely as
an Universal Cause, (could we form any Notion of a general Providence without
any Care of particular Creatures, or particular Events) but as our particular
Patron, Protector, and Preserver.

To fear God, and to stand in awe of his Justice; to trust and depend on him in
all Conditions; to submit patiently to his will under all Afflictions; to pray
to him for the supply of our Wants, for the relief of our Sufferings, for
Protection and Defense; to love and praise him for the Blessings we enjoy, for
peace, and plenty, and health, for friends and benefactors, and all prosperous
Successes: I say, these are not the Acts of Reasonable men, unless we believe
that God has the Supreme Disposal of all Events, and takes a particular Care of
us. For if any Good or Evil can befall us without God's particular Order and
Appointment, we have no reason to trust in God who does not always take Care of
us; we have no reason to bear our Sufferings patiently at God's hand, and in
Submission to his Will; for we know not whether our Sufferings be God's Will or
not; we have no reason to love and praise God for every Blessing and
Deliverance we receive, because we know not whether it came from God; and it is
to no purpose to pray to God for particular Blessings, if he does not concern
himself in particular Events: But if we believe that God takes a particular
Care of us all, and that no Good or Evil happens to us but as he pleases; all
these Acts or Religious Worship are both Reasonable, Necessary, and Just. But
of this more hereafter.

CHAP. IV.
Concerning the Sovereignty of Providence.
HAving in the former Chapter shown, That the Government of the Divine
Providence consists in Overruling and Disposing all Events: For the better
understanding of this, and to prevent a great many ignorant Objections against
it, besides what I have already said, it will be necessary more particularly to
explain the Nature and Essential Characters and Properties of God's Governing
Providence. And I shall begin with

1. The Sovereignty of Providence. For God being the Sovereign Lord of the
World, must Govern with a Sovereign Will, For a Sovereign Lord, is a Sovereign
and Absolute Governor. For which reason the Scripture so often resolves all
things into the sole will and pleasure of God; and in many cases will allow us
to seek for no other Cause. 4. Dan. 35.
He does according to his will in the army of heaven, and among the inhabitants
of the earth. 135. Psalm. 6.
Whatever the Lord pleased, that did he in heaven and in earth, in the seas,
and all deep places.

That the Will of God is Sovereign, and Absolute, and Unaccountable; needs no
other proof, but that his Power is Absolute, and his Wisdom Unsearchable; for
Absolute Power, makes an Absolute Will. He who has Power to do whatever he
will, can do whatever he will; and that is the definition of a Severeign and
Absolute Will. And thus the Scripture resolves the Sovereignty of God into
Power: 9. Job 4.
That none can stay his hand, or say unto him, what do thou? He is wise in
heart, and mighty in strength: who has hardened himself against him and has
prospered?

And indeed a Power which is Supreme and Absolute, which can do all things, and
which has no greater Power above it, none equal to it, has a right to
Sovereignty. For Absolute Power must be the Maker of all things, and that must
give an Absolute Right to all things; and that gives a Right to Absolute
Government, if there be any such thing as a Natural Right to Government; for if
God have a Natural Right to Govern his Creatures, he must have a Right to
Absolute Government; because the Right he has in his Creatures is Absolute and
Uncontrollable. No Creature has such an Absolute Power, and therefore no
Creature has such a Sovereign and Absolute Will neither: For how Powerful
soever any man is, God is more Powerful than he, and can call him to an
account; and no Power, no Will which can be Checked, and Controlled, and called
to an Account, is perfectly Absolute.

And as Absolute Power makes the Divine Providence Absolute and Unaccountable,
so does perfect and unerring Wisdom; but for a very different reason: Absolute
Power has no Superior Power to give Laws to it, and to call it to an Account:
Perfect and Unerring Wisdom, has no Superior Wisdom to take an Account, or to
Judge of its Actions; nothing can Judge of Wisdom, but Wisdom; and an Inferior
cannot comprehend a Superior Wisdom; especially when there is such a vast
disproportion as there is between a Finite and an Infinite Understanding; which
must of necessity in a thousand instances make the judgments of God
unsearchable, and his ways past finding out: It neither becomes the Infinite
Wisdom of God in all cases to give an account of his Actions, nor the Modesty
of Creatures to demand it; as Elihu tells Job, Why do thou strive against
him? for he gives not account of any of his matters. 33. Job 13.

But both these are thought very grievous by some men. They are terribly afraid
of an Absolute Power which can do what it pleases, and justify whatever it does
by an Absolute and Unaccountable Will. Others are very uneasy that God does
any thing without giving them the reasons why he does it; and to be revenged of
Providence, they will allow nothing to be Wisely and Justly done, which they
cannot comprehend: every Event which they cannot account for, they make an
Objection against Providence; and thus they may easily object themselves into
Atheism or Infidelity; for they can never want such Objections, while infinite
and unsearchable Wisdom Governs the World.

Here then I shall lay the Foundation of all, in justifying the Sovereignty of
Providence, which will justify every thing else: And I shall distinctly
consider God's Sovereign and Absolute Power, and his Unsearchable and
Unaccountable Wisdom.

1. Absolute Power; and the very naming Absolute Power puts an end to the
dispute about the extent of God's Dominion over his Creatures: For Absolute
Power has no limits, and can have none; and therefore Absolute Dominion extends
to all that Absolute Power can do. This is what Mankind are afraid of, who
judge of God's Absolute Power by the Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government of
some Absolute Monarchs: But true Absolute Power can do no wrong, cannot injure
and oppress its Creatures; but will do good and judge righteously, defend the
Innocent, and punish the Wicked. If I can make it appear, that this is the
essential Character of Absolute Power, it will make us infinitely secure in the
Divine Providence; for all men must grant that the Power of God is Absolute;
and if this Absolute Power Governs the World, the World must be very well and
justly Governed, if Absolute Power can do nothing but what is Just and Good.
Now this is the Natural Notion which all Mankind have of Supreme and Absolute
Power, which is the Supreme and Natural Lord and Judge of the World. Thus
Abraham reasoned with God, and therein spoke the sense of Mankind; Shall not
the judge of all the earth do right? 18. Genes. 25. If Absolute Power could do
wrong, there were no certain redress of those wrongs and injuries, which
Inferior Powers do; for the last Appeal must be to the Greatest and most
Absolute Power; and if that will not certainly rectify the injuries of Inferior
Powers, but instead of that may do wrong it self, we cannot certainly promise
our selves ever to have right done us.

This shows how necessary it is, That Absolute Will and Power should be
Absolute Rectitude and Justice, if there be any such thing as Justice in
Nature. For Absolute Power is by Nature the last and Supreme Judge; and the
Natural Judge of Right and Wrong, must be Natural Justice and Rectitude; or
else Natural Justice is a mere Speculative Notion, which can never be reduced
to Practice. For there never can be exact and perfect Justice in the World,
unless there be a Judge who is exact and perfect Justice: And if Absolute Will
and Power be not that Judge, there can be none; for Absolute Power, if it be
not Absolutely and perfectly Just, can do Wrong, whoever else Judges Right.

But besides this, it is demonstrable a priori, that Absolute Power, must be
Absolute Rectitude and Justice.

1. Because all infinite Perfections, how different soever they are in our
Conceptions of them, are but one infinite Being, which is Absolutely Perfect;
and therefore in a Being Absolutely Perfect, one Absolute Perfection can never
be divided or separated from any other Absolute Perfection; and therefore
Absolute Power can never be separated from Absolute Justice: For to say any
Being is Absolutely Perfect, (which is the most Natural Notion of God) and yet
that it wants any Absolute Perfection, is a Contradiction: Absolute Will and
Absolute Government, is the most Perfect Will and most Perfect Government; and
that is the most Perfect Justice and Goodness, if Justice and Goodness be any
Perfections.

We must not judge of the Absolute Will and Absolute Government of God, by what
we call Absolute Power in men; which is the foundation of all the Mistakes
about God's Government: We find men apt to abuse their Power, the more Absolute
it is, into Tyranny and Oppression; and this makes some afraid, that God's
Absolute Will and Power may use his Creatures very hardly also; but the case is
very different, as different as the Absolute Power of Men is from the Absolute
Power of God.

What we call Absolute Power in men, is not Absolute Power; that is, it is not
perfect Power, it is not a Power which can do all things, for there are
Infinite things, which the most Absolute Prince has not Power to do; and that
is not Absolute Perfect Power, which cannot do all things. Absolute Government
among men, signifies only an Uncontrollable Liberty to do all that it will and
can do: A Will which is under no Human Restraints, which may will whatever it
pleases, and do whatever it wills, as far as it can, but has not Power to do
all that it would. Now such an Absolute Will as this, which has not all Power,
may be very wild and extravagant, and far from willing always what is right and
just; for such a Will as this is no Perfection; and therefore as it is
separated from a truly Absolute Power, so it may be separated from Rectitude
and Justice. Nay, such a Will is not truly Absolute, no more than its Power;
because there is a Will, as there is a Power, above it; and no Will is
Absolute, which has a superior Will to control it, and to give Laws to it; and
yet God is higher than the highest, to whose Sovereign Will the most Absolute
Princes are accountable, and therefore are not Absolute themselves. Now reason
tells us, That a Will which has a Superior Will and Law, is not it self
unerring Rectitude and Justice, and therefore may deviate from what is right
and just, as experience tells us such Absolute Wills very often do; and when
the Will can choose wrong, the Power, which is the Minister of such an erring
Will, must do wrong also. But now reason tells us, that the Supreme Will must
be the Supreme Law, that is, Perfect and Absolute Justice, and therefore can no
more will any thing that is unjust, than Justice it self can be unjust; and if
this Absolute and Sovereign Will be Absolute Power, Absolute Power must be
perfectly Just and Good, as being inseparable from Perfect Justice: And
therefore the Absolute Power of God can no more do any wrong, than his Absolute
Will can choose it.

2. Nay, if we do but consider the Nature of truly Absolute Power, which can do
whatever it will, this alone may satisfy us, That God, who is this Supreme
Powerful Being, can neither will nor do any wrong: For if we consider things
well, we shall plainly see, that tho some degree of Power is required to enable
men to do wrong, yet it is always want of Power which tempts them to do wrong.

There are two visible Causes of all the Injustice that is committed in the
world, and both of them are the effects of weakness. 1. That men want Power to
do what they have a mind to do, without doing some wrong or injury to others.
2. That men are overpowered by their own passions, to do what they know they
ought not to do, and which they would not do, had they the perfect Government
of themselves.

As for the first, Is there any man in the world, who is not a perfect bruit,
who does not wish that it were lawful for him to do what he has a mind to, and
that he might have what he desires to have, without offering Violence or Injury
to any body? Would not a Thief much rather choose to find a Treasure, than to
take a Purse upon the Road? Would not an Ambitious and Aspiring Monarch rather
choose, That all Princes should resign their Crowns to him, and all Nations
become his Subjects, than to be forced to win their Crowns by his Sword, and to
make bloody Conquests with the lamentable Ravage and Spoils of flourishing
Countries? Do not men intend to supply some real or imaginary want in all the
Injuries they do? And does not this suppose weakness and want of Power, to want
any thing else? For is it possible for Absolute Power to want? So impossible is
it for Absolute Power to do any Injury.

He who is the sole Lord and Proprietor of the world, (as he is and must be
whose Power is Supreme and Absolute), He whose all Creatures are, and whose
Wisdom and Power can accomplish whatever he would have done, without doing the
least Injustice, can never be tempted to injure his own Creatures, nor can ever
want any thing which should tempt him to do an Injury; and therefore Absolute
Power must be Absolute Justice.

2dly. All the Injuries that are done, are owing to the Lusts and Passions of
men, which are the weaknesses even of Human Nature, when they are not under the
government of Reason. No man does any Injury, but to gratify some Lust or
Passion; and that is a weak and impotent mind, where Passion reigns. Reason is
the Strength and Vigor of the Mind, and a man who lives by Reason, never does
any Injury, but through mistake, which is the weakness of Reason. But now
Absolute Power is not an external adventitious thing, but is a Powerful Nature,
and a Powerful Nature is all Power, and there can be no place for the Rule and
Empire of Passion; and if it be one Passion or other which always does the
Injury, Absolute Power, which is void of Passion, can do none.

Excepting a Divine Love, (which is the true Image of the Divine Nature, and
never does any Injury, and ought not to be reckoned among the Passions), all
our other Pasons are the effects of weakness, and are Arguments of a weak,
limited, and confined Nature.

Desire and Hope prove that we want something which we cannot certainly bestow
upon our selves; Fear is a sense of danger, which argues want of Power to
defend our selves: Anger and Revenge is a resentment of some Injuries we have
received, and that argues want of Power, to suffer Injuries: Hatred and Malice
are but greater degrees of Anger and Revenge; and the greater they are, the
greater sense they argue of Fear and Danger, of Injuries either expected, or
received.

These are the Passions which do all the mischief that is done in the world;
and it is demonstrable, that Absolute Power is not capable of these injurious
Passions, can neither desire, nor hope, nor fear, can suffer no Wants nor
Injuries, nor have any sense or resentment of them; and therefore there is no
danger it should do any Injury; it is acted by calm and steady Wisdom, which is
unerring Justice too, which never did and never can do any injury. It is true,
some of these Passions are in Scripture attributed to God, such as Anger, Fury,
Hatred, Revenge; for the Scripture speaks of God after the manner of men; but
then all that this signifies is, That God will be as severe in his Judgments,
as Anger and Revenge is, tho it is not Passion in God, but a Wise, and Cool,
and Equal Justice, which punishes; which may be as severe as Anger and Revenge,
but never partial or unjust.

(3.) Nay, we may observe, That Power it self is a Great and Generous
Principle, and inspires men with Great and Noble Thoughts. Those whose Power
secures them from receiving any hurt, are never tempted to do any: Power, which
is Cruel, Insolent, Mischievous, is always conscious of its own weakness and
danger; for it is commonly weakness and fear, which makes men cruel; but a
Power which knows it self out of danger, out of the reach of envy and ill will,
is always a very generous Adversary, never insults over a prostrate Enemy; for
such great Power makes all its Enemies the objects of Pity or Scorn, and then
they cease to be the objects of Revenge. And if Power, that little Power which
men have, gives them such a Greatness of Mind as sets them above Affronts, and
Resentments, and sense of Injuries; if this be so natural to Power, that it is
always expected from men in Power, That they should have a Greatness and
Generosity of Mind proportioned to their Power; That it is a Reproach to them
when it is not so, and makes them despised, and scorned, and hated, with all
their Power; What then may we expect from the Perfect and Absolute Power of
God? We may fear his Justice, but have no reason to fear his Power; Justice
will punish sinners, but his Power will never oppress; for that is below his
Power, that is too mean and base a thing for Perfect and Absolute Power to do:
It is thought a reproach for a Great and Powerful Man to oppress, much less
then will the All-Powerful God do so.

(4.) For to observe but one thing more, it is the Glory of Power to do good,
not to do hurt, and if this be the Natural Glory of Power, it is its Natural
Perfection too, and the most Natural Exercise of it; and therefore it is that
which Perfect Power will do. Its Nature is to do good, but never to do hurt;
that if to punish were not to do good, Perfect and Absolute Power could not
punish.

If we rightly consider things, we must confess, That it is a much greater
Power to do good, than to do hurt; to save, than to destroy; to make so
excellent a Creature as man is, and to maintain and preserve him in being, than
to kill him: In most cases it requires very little Power to do hurt; every man,
how weak and inconsiderable soever he is, has a great deal of Power to do hurt;
but there are very few who can do much good; and therefore it is plain, that to
do good is the greater Power, and therefore to do good, must be essential to
the greatest Power. It is certain, that to do good is the most glorious Power,
because good is in it self a beautiful, lovely, and glorious thing, but evil is
very inglorious. All Creatures love to receive good, they feel it, they rejoice
in it, they adore and praise their Maker and great Benefactor, they live in
him, they depend on him, they fly to him to supply their wants, they take
Refuge and Sanctuary in his Power, and think themselves safe under his Wings.
And can there possibly be a more lovely Idea and Representation of Power than
this? A Power, which makes a World, and all the Creatures in it; which
contrives their Natures with all variety of Art and Wisdom, and with very
different capacities of Happiness, according to the different Excellencies and
Perfections of their Natures, and provides for them all with a bounteous Hand;
this is great and excellent Power indeed, which gives Being, and preserves it,
and provides daily for such infinite numbers and variety of Creatures as are in
the world; this is the lovely and charming Idea of a God; but an Arbitrary,
Lawless Power, which tyranizeth over Creatures, which can do what mischief it
pleases, and delights to do it, is a very terrible thing indeed, but not
glorious; it is what all Creatures must fear, and hate, and fly from, not
praise and adore. So that if we will allow the most Perfect and Absolute Power
to be the most Glorious, as we must do if we acknowledge Power to be Glorious,
then the most Absolute Power must be the most kind and beneficent thing in the
world; for this is the Glory of Power, to do good.

Thus we see in what sense Absolute Will and Power can do no wrong, because the
Will and Power of God, which is the only Absolute Will and Power, is Absolute
Rectitude and Justice, and Absolute Goodness too. Absolute Power can do no
wrong, because it can never will nor choose to do any wrong; not because Power
can make that just and right, which without such Absolute Power would have been
wrong; for no Power can make right to be wrong, nor wrong to be right. Good and
evil, just and unjust, are of an eternal and unchangeable nature, not made so
by Power, but in their Notion antecedent to Power, and the natural rule and
measure of it. The Will of God is Eternal Justice and Goodness, and therefore
his Will is the Eternal Rule of Justice and Goodness; and therefore in
propriety of speech, when we speak of God we can neither say that God wills any
thing because it is just and good, or that it is just and good because God
wills it, both which imply a distinction between the Will of God, and Justice
and Goodness, which in the Divine Nature are the same; but since the
imperfection of our understandings cannot admit one simple Notion and Idea of
an Infinite Mind, but must apprehend every thing by distinct Conceptions in
God, as we do in Creatures; it is more agreeable to the nature of things, to
make good and evil antecedent to the Will of God, and the Rule of his Will and
Choice, because this asserts the Eternal and Unchangeable Nature of Good and
Evil, and the inflexible Justice and Holiness of the Divine Will, that God
never can will any thing but what is Just and Good, and never wills any thing
for any other reason, but because it is Just and Good: Whereas to make Justice
and Goodness to depend wholly upon the Will of God, that therefore any thing is
Just and Good because God wills it, supposes that Justice and Goodness has no
stable Nature of its own, but may at any time change its Nature with the Will
of God; and it is impossible to prove, that the Will of God cannot change as the
Wills of men do, if it have no Eternal and Unchangeable Rule, or be not Eternal
and Unchangeable Justice and Goodness it self.

When we speak of God after the manner of men, our words must be expounded to
the same sense, excepting Metaphorical and Figurative Expressions, as when they
are used of men: Now we all know what a vast difference there is between these
two expressions, when used of men. Such a man always wills and chooses what is
good and just; and he makes every thing good and just by willing it; the first
supposes a certain and invariable Rule of good and evil, the second resolves
the nature of good and just into Arbitrary Will and Pleasure.

And it is the very same case, when we speak of God's Power, which is nothing
else but the execution of his Will. God's Absolute Power can do nothing but
what is just and good; but we must not therefore say, That Absolute Power makes
every thing it does, just and good; as if Power were not regulated by Justice
and Goodness, but were the Rule of it.

There is great reason curiously to distinguish in this matter, because there
are a sort of Christians who attribute such things to God, as are
irreconcilable with all the Notions we have of Justice and Goodness, and think
to silence all Objections, and to justify all, by the Sovereign Dominion and
Absolute Power of God, which can do no wrong; but if it be a wrong to Creatures
to be eternally miserable for no other reason but the Will and Pleasure of God,
I cannot but think the Absolute Decrees of Reprobation to be very unjust, and
the Execution of such Decrees to be doing wrong, how Absolute soever the Power
be that does it.

And I confess I cannot but wonder, that men who make the Glory of God the End
of all his actions, (as certainly it is, when rightly understood) should
attribute such things to God as all the rest of mankind think very inglorious.
That when the truest and greatest Glory of Absolute Power, as you have already
heard, is to do the greatest good, they should think it sufficient to justify
such actions as they have no other way to prove good and just, merely by
Absolute Power. The Glory of Absolute Power is to do what all the world
acknowledges to be good and just; and therefore Absolute Power cannot prove
those actions to be good and just, nor make it self Glorious, by doing such
actions as mankind think very infamous and unjust.

Let us then lay down this as the Foundation of all, That how Unaccountable
soever Sovereign and Absolute Will and Power is, it neither can nor will do any
wrong; for it is nothing else but Absolute and Sovereign Justice and Goodness.
We have no reason to be afraid of the Absolute Power of God, no more than we
have to be afraid of his Absolute Goodness. Absolute Power is the only security
we have against suffering wrong; for it will do no wrong it self, but will
rectify all the wrongs which are done by Inferior Powers, which none but a
Sovereign and Absolute Power can do. The firm belief of this will give great
relief and satisfaction to our minds, under all the unaccountable Passages of
Providence; for tho Absolute Power be always just and good, yet its ways are
sometimes past finding out.

Secondly, Let us now consider, How unsearchable the Wisdom of Providence is,
which does great things past finding out, yea, and wonders without number, 9.
Job 10. Which may satisfy us, how impossible it is for such ignorant creatures
as we are, to comprehend all the Wise Reasons of Providence; and how impious it
is, to reproach and censure what we do not and cannot understand.

We all know the History of Job, and the Dispute betwixt him and his three
Friends. God exercised Job with very severe and amazing Sufferings, for the
Trial of his Virtue; his Friends conclude from his great Sufferings, That tho
his life were visibly very innocent and virtuous, yet he had been a secret
Hypocrite, because God did not use to punish good men, but only the wicked in
such a manner. On the other hand, Job justifies his own Innocence, and asserts
more truly, That bad men were many times very prosperous, and good men great
sufferers in this world: He complains very tragically of his sufferings, and
that he could not understand the reason why God dealt thus with him; and this
seems to be Job's fault, that he insisted too much on his own Justification,
and instead of vindicating the Divine Providence, seems to accuse God of a
causeless and unaccountable Severity; for which Elihu so severely reproved him.
At last, God answers Job himself, as he had often desired he would; but instead
of a particular Justification of his Providence, or of giving Job the Reasons
for which he had thus afflicted him, he gives him some sensible Proofs of his
own Great and Admirable Wisdom and Power in the Works of Nature, which Job was
so far from being able to imitate, that he could not understand how they were
done: The Force of which Argument is this, That so weak and ignorant a Creature
as Man is, ought not to censure the Divine Providence, how mysterious and
unaccountable soever it be; when the very Works of Nature convince us, That God
is infinitely Wiser and more Powerful than we are: This should teach us great
Modesty and Humility, to adore the Divine Judgments, not to censure what we
cannot understand; for the Power and Wisdom of God can do great and excellent
things, above our understandings.

Vain man would be wise, 11. Job 12.
tho man be born like a wild asses colt. They are impatient to think, that God
should do any thing which they cannot understand, and yet there is not any one
thing in Nature, which they do understand: And if we cannot understand the
Mysteries of Nature, why should we expect to understand all the unsearchable
Depths and Mysteries of Providence? If the Wisdom of God be unsearchable, why
should we not allow his Wisdom in Governing the World, to be as unsearchable as
his Wisdom in Making it? For an Incomprehensible Wisdom will do
Incomprehensible Things, whatever it employs its self about; and when we know,
that if the world be governed at all, it is governed by an Infinite and
Incomprehensible Wisdom, there is no reason to wonder that there are many
Events of Providence which we cannot fathom, and much less reason to deny a
Providence, because we cannot comprehend the Reasons of all Events.

But this is a matter of such vast consequence, to silence the Skeptical Humor
of the Age, and to shame those trifling and ridiculous Pretenses to Wit and
Philosophy, in Censuring the Wisdom and Justice of Providence, that it deserves
a more particular Discourse: For could we make men confess, what all modest
considering men must blush to deny, That the Wisdom of God is unsearchable,
this would put an end to all the Disputes about Providence, and teach us humbly
to Adore and Reverence that Wisdom, which we cannot comprehend.

And to prepare my way to give such full satisfaction in this matter, as you
may securely acquiesce in, without Disputing the Reasons of Providence, or
being tempted to Deny a Providence, when you meet with any Difficulties too
hard for you, I shall show you how impossible it is that is should be
otherwise, both from the Infinite Wisdom of God, and our own great Ignorance of
things, which makes the Providence of God in many cases so much above our
understandings, that we are not capable of such knowledge.

And 1. I shall show you, What reason we have securely to acquiesce in the
unsearchable Wisdom of Providence, and to trust God beyond our own knowledge,
because we are certain that Infinite Wisdom can never err, or mistake, or do
wrong. 2. That the Wisdom of Providence must be as unsearchable and
unaccountable to us, as the Wisdom of the Creation. 3. That the wise Government
of the world requires secret and hidden Methods of Providence; and therefore at
least in this present state we ought not to expect or desire a particular
account or reason of all events. 4. That our ignorance of other matters, the
knowledge of which is absolutely necessary to understand the reasons of
Providence, makes us utterly incapable of such knowledge in this state. 5. I
shall enquire in what cases this is a reasonable answer to all Difficulties,
That the judgments of God are unsearchable, and his ways past finding out.

1. That Infinite Wisdom, how unsearchable and unaccountable soever its ways
are, can do no wrong. As I observed before, that God's Absolute Power is
Absolute Rectitude and Justice; so all men must grant, that Infinite and
Perfect Wisdom is always in the right; for to be in the wrong is Ignorance and
Mistake. If Infinite Wisdom will always judge, and choose, and act wisely, it is
then impossible that Infinite Wisdom should ever do wrong; for to do wrong, is
either not to judge, or not to choose wisely. In Scripture all kind of
Wickedness is called Folly, and Sinners Fools, and to learn Wisdom is
prescribed as the only remedy against Vice; The fear of the Lord that is
wisdom; and to depart from evil, that is understanding: And the reason and
nature of things proves it must be so; for all men who do wickedly, must either
mistake their Rule, or mistake their Interest; must either call Vice Virtue,
and Virtue Vice, or think to make themselves happy by being wicked; which is a
stupid ignorance of the nature and the natural effects and consequences of
things. Now if all Wickedness be Ignorance and Folly, Infinite and Perfect
Wisdom must be perfect Rectitude, Justice, and Goodness; it can never do any
wrong, because it can never be ignorant of what is right.

And what greater security can creatures possibly have, That in the last issue
of things they shall suffer no wrong, than to know that they are under the Care
and Government of Infinite Wisdom, that can do no wrong? Infinite Wisdom indeed
is incomprehensible to a finite mind, the methods of it may seem intricate and
perplexed to us, full of Mystery and surprising Events; and thus it must be,
while Infinite Wisdom governs the world, which is so much above the reach of
our most improved and elevated thoughts: But would not any wise man rather
choose to be governed by such a perfect and excellent Wisdom, as can never
mistake, tho it vastly exceeds his understanding, than to be governed by a
Being no wiser, or not much wiser than himself, all whose Counsels he can
fathom; and see to the end of? The more perfect and excellent the Wisdom is,
the less we can understand it, but the more safe we are under its conduct: So
absurd is it to complain that we cannot understand all the depths and secrets
of Providence, that we may as reasonably complain, That an Excellent and
Incomprehensible Wisdom takes care of the world, and of all the creatures that
are in it.

While we know our selves safe in the hands of Infinite Wisdom, let us be
contented that God should do such things as we cannot understand the reasons
of: Are we ever the less perfect and happy creatures, because we know not how
God made us, how he formed and fashioned us in the womb, and breathed into us
the breath of life? And what hurt is it to us, if God preserve and govern the
world, and take care of all the creatures in it, by as unknown and
incomprehensible a Wisdom, as that which at first gave being to us? We find our
selves wisely made, tho we know not how God made us; and in the conclusion of
all, we shall find and feel our selves very happy, if we follow God, and adhere
to him, tho we may not understand the reasons of all intermediate Events, nor
the several steps and advances of Providence to make us happy.

It is great Pride, and as contemptible Folly, to think, that if there be a God
who is infinitely wise, he should not be able to do things above our
understanding, and to do them very wisely too, tho we do not understand them:
Let men value their understandings never so highly, and think scorn that any
thing should be above their knowledge, yet it is certain, that there are Ten
thousand things both in the Works of Nature and Providence, which no man fully
understands, and yet which bear the marks and signatures of a most Divine and
Admirable Art and Wisdom; and since whether we will or no we must confess our
own ignorance, why should we not be as well contented to allow that God can do
such things as are above our understanding, as that there should be such things
done, we know not how, nor by whom? Is it not a greater Reproach to our
understandings, that blind Chance should do such things as all our Wit and
Philosophy cannot comprehend, than to attribute such Events to the Art and
Government of Infinite Wisdom? Which is most reasonable, to attribute such
works as are above our understandings, to the Infinite Wisdom of God; or to
deny that they had any wise Cause, because we cannot find out the Causes of
them, tho we can discern such Wisdom in them, as no Human Art or Wisdom can
imitate?

Indeed the Passion of Admiration, which is implanted in all men, if it be not
utterly vain, is a plain natural indication, that there is something above our
natural understandings, which we must admire, but cannot comprehend; for the
proper object of Admiration is Art and Wisdom, a Wisdom vastly greater than our
own; and therefore if this natural passion have a natural object, it is certain
there is a Wisdom greater than our own, which no human understanding can
comprehend; such a Wisdom as does great and wondrous things, and things past
finding out.

The Sum is this; Infinite Wisdom is and must be unacconntable; her ways are
unsearchable and past finding out, and therefore we must be contented in many
cases, to be ignorant of the Reasons of Providence; and we have great reason to
be so since we are so secure that Infinite Wisdom will always act wisely, and
consult the general good of the world, and the happiness of particular
creatures, tho by methods secret and incomprehensible to us: which teaches us
not to deny or censure Providence, when we do not understand the Reasons of it;
but in an entire belief of the Wisdom of God, quietly to submit to all Events,
and to adore and reverence his Judgments with an implicit Faith.

2. The better to satisfy us in a profound Veneration of the Wisdom of
Providence, even with respect to the most unaccountable Passages of it, we must
consider, That it is impossible we should be able to comprehend it: That we
cannot know more of God's Governing the World, than we do of his Making it:
That the unsearchable Wisdom of God's Works, makes the Wisdom of Providence
unsearchable also.

This is supposed in God's Answer to Job, when to make him sensible how little
he understood of the Wise Ends and Designs of Providence, he convinced him how
ignorant he was of the Works of Nature, 38, 39, 40, 41. Chapters. Who is this
that darkneth counsel by words without knowledge? Gird up now thy loins like a
man, for I will demand of thee, and answer thou me: Where wast thou when I laid
the foundations of the earth? declare if thou have understanding, who has laid
the measure thereof, if thou know? or who has stretched the line upon it?
whereupon are the foundations thereof fastened? or who has laid the corner
stone thereof? who shut up the sea with doors, when it brake forth as if it had
issued out of the womb? Have thou commanded the morning since thy days, and
caused the dayspring to know his place? Where is the way where light dwells?
and as for darkness, where is the plaee thereof? Have thou entered into the
treasures of the snow? or have thou known the treasures of the hail? has the
rain a father? and who has begotten the drops of the dew? out of whose womb
came the ice? and the hoary frost of heaven, who has gendred it? By these and
such like Questions, expressed in unimitable words, God convinces Job how
ignorant he was of the most common and familiar Works of Nature; which made it
great Presumption in so ignorant a Creature, to censure the Wisdom of
Providence. And the Force of the Argument does not only consist in this, That
the very Works of Nature convince us, that God is infinitely wiser than we are,
and can do great and excellent things which are above our understanding, and
therefore that we never ought to censure any thing that God does, because he is
so much wiser than we are, that we are not competent Judges of what he does,
which is an unanswerable Argument to teach us the most profound Reverence and
the most absolute Resignation of our selves to God: But the Force of this
Argument reaches farther, That our ignorance of the Works of Nature is both the
Cause and the Proof of our great Ignorance of the Works of Providence. For no
Being can know how to govern a world, who does not know how to make it; and he
who does not know, how to govern the world himself, is a very unfit Judge of
the Wisdom of Providence, for he can never know when the world is well and
wisely governed, because he does not know what belongs to the government of the
world.

The wise government of all creatures must be proportioned to their natures;
and therefore without understanding the Philosophy of Nature, the Springs of
Motion, the mutual dependence of Causes and Effects, what end things are made
for, and what uses they serve, we can never know what is fit to be done, nor
what can be done, or by what means it is to be done; and then can never tell
when any thing is done as it should be: We know not what the Rules, nor what
the Ends of God's Government are, which makes it impossible to judge of the
Wisdom of Government: Without understanding the Natures of things, we must of
necessity make as wild Conjectures about Providence, as a blind man does of
Light and Colors. As for instance; how is it possible to talk a wise word
about God's Government of Mankind, in what manner, and by what means he turns
their hearts, directs and influences their counsels, suggests thoughts to them,
and foresees their thoughts, and how they will determine themselves; when we
know so little of the Make and Frame of our own minds, where the spring of
thoughts is, and how we connect Propositions, and draw consequences; what the
power of the Will is, how we determine our selves in indifferent matters, where
the balance is equal? for tho we feel all these Powers in our selves, yet we
know not whence they are, nor how they act.

And yet how many intricate questions are there, relating to the Disputes of
Providence, which are wholly owing to such Nice Philosophical Speculations,
which we know nothing of, and yet which some men perplex themselves with, and
undertake very gravely to determine.

Such are the Disputes about Necessity and Fate, Prescience and
Predetermination, and the liberty of Human Actions; which as they are
differently determined, make very different and contrary Hypotheses of
Providence; and either charge God with the Sins of men, or acquit him from any
Partnership in Wickedness.

For all these questions at last resolve themselves into this, How the Mind of
man acts and determines it self? Whether it be determined from abroad, from a
necessary Train and Series of Fatal Events, or from the Decrees and
Predetermination or Foreknowledg of God? Or whether it be a self-moving Being,
and determines it self from the Principles of its own Nature, and its own free
Choice? Now unless we understood the Philosophy, or the Natural Frame and
Composition of our own Minds, it is impossible to say any thing to the purpose
in this cause, any farther than our own sense and feeling goes, and that is on
the side of liberty; for unless we are strangely imposed on, we feel our selves
free. But this may satisfy us, that as to all the Difficulties of Providence,
which can be no other way resolved, but by a knowledge of Nature, we must of
necessity be as ignorant of them, as we are of the nature of things; and
therefore our confessed ignorance of Nature, is a good Argument in all such
cases, to make us very modest in Censuring Providence.

We know enough both of the works of Nature, and of the works of Providence, to
serve all the wise ends and purposes of living; which is all that is useful for
us to know, and all that God intended we should know; but the Reasons and
Causes of things, belong only to that Wisdom which can make and govern a world.
We know as much of Providence as we do of Nature; and would men set bounds to
their Enquiries here, which is as far as Human Understandings can reach, we
should hear very few Objections against Providence.

Our ignorance of Nature, and Natural Causes, and the Natural Springs of
Motion, how things were made, and how they act, and for what ends they were
made, which in many cases we do but very imperfectly guess at, is a plain
demonstration, That we never ought to admit any Difficulties in Nature as a
sufficient Objection against the Being or the Providence of God, in bar to all
the Moral Evidence and Assurance we have of both.

We have all the Moral Evidence we can have for any thing, That God governs the
world by a Wise, and Holy, and Free Providence; That he is not the Author of
Sin; That our Wills, at least as far as Virtue and Vice is concerned, are under
no Foreign Force and Constraint, but choose, and refuse, and determine
themselves with a Natural Liberty: I say, we have undeniable evidence of this,
from the Wisdom, Justice, and Holiness of the Divine Nature, from the
difference between Virtue and Vice, and the nature of Rewards and Punishments;
these things are plain, and such as we can understand, and such as we cannot
deny with any fair appearance of Reason; but now all the Arguments against
Providence, and for Necessity and Fate, are mere Philosophical Speculations,
which men vainly pretend to, when it is demonstrable they can know nothing of
them. As for instance; Some tell us, That it is not a Wise and Free Providence
that governs the world, but that all things come to pass by a Necessary Chain
of Causes, which fatally determine the Will to Choose and Act, as these Causes
move it. Now whether there be such a necessary Chain of Causes or not, it is
certain no man can know it, who does not as perfectly understand this great
Machine of the World, and all its Motions, as an Artist does all the Wheels in
a Watch or Clock: nor can any man know how such a Chain of Causes should move
and determine the Mind of Man, without understanding the Philosophy of Human
Souls, how the Will is moved, how it is determined, or determines it self;
whether by the Constitution of its Nature it always necessarily chooses what it
chooses, or might have not chose, or have chosen any thing else: Now whatever
other men may do, I Am sure I know nothing of the Philosophy of these matters,
and therefore they don't concern me.

Others make God himself to be nothing else but Necessity and Fate, who by
Eternal and Irreversible Decrees, as necessary and essential to him as his own
Being, has determined whatever shall come to pass; but no man can pretend to
know this, without an Immediate Vision, if I may so speak, of the Naked Essence
of God: His Attributes and Moral Perfections give us no notice of such Fatal
Decrees; his Wisdom, Holiness, Justice, Goodness, contain nothing of Fate and
Necessity; and those who can see the very Essence of God to be Fate, must be
able to contemplate his Pure Essence, and to know God after another manner than
he ever yet manifested himself to Creatures, or it may be, than it is possible
for God to show himself to Creatures.

Others conclude the Fatal Necessity of all Events, from God's Prescience: for
they say, that God can foreknow things only in his own Decrees; and therefore
if God foreknows all things, all things are decreed; or however, what God
foreknows will come to pass, will certainly and necessarily come to pass, and
therefore all Events are certain and necessary, if they are all foreknown by
God. But these are Conclusions which no man can be certain of, without
pretending perfectly to understand the Nature of Prescience, or how God
foreknows things to come; for if God can foreknow what he has not decreed, and
can foreknow what does not come to pass necessarily, then the Prescience of God
does not infer a Fatality of all Events: And yet this may be, for ought we
know, unless we perfectly understand the Nature of Prescience, and how God
foreknows things to come, and then we may foreknow things our selves. The like
may be said of God's concourse with his Creatures in all their actions, from
whence they conclude, That the Will of man in all its elections is determined
by God, without whose concourse it cannot act, nor determine it self.

These are all Nice Philosophical Speculations, which creatures who are so
ignorant of the Natures of things, can know nothing of; and therefore they are
not fit to be made Arguments for or against any thing.

The Sum is this; That since we must confess our selves so very ignorant of the
Works of Nature, without the knowledge of which in Ten thousand Instances, it is
impossible to understand the Wisdom of Providence, it is unreasonable and
absured for us to demand an account of God's Providence; but we ought to be
satisfied, to leave God to Govern the World with the same Sovereign and
Unaccountable Wisdom, which at first gave Being to all things.

Thirdly, That the Wise Government of the World requires secret and hidden
Methods of Providence; and therefore at least in this state we ought not to
expect or desire a particular Account or Reason of all Events.

The Wiseman tells us, It is the glory of God to conceal a thing, 25. Prove. 2.
It is the Glory of the Divine Nature, that it is Incomprehensible by us; and it
is the Glory of the Divine Providence to be Unsearchable; and therefore many of
the Ancient Philosophers and Poets forbid too curious an Enquiry into the
Nature or Providence of God; and Sophronius gives a wise Reason for it, Because
we are all born of Mortal Parents, and therefore the perfect knowledge of an
Infinite Immortal Being, must be above us: Which is much the same Reason that
Zophar gives, Vain man would be wise, tho man be born like a wild asses colt,
11. Job 12. This is a knowledge too great for our birth, if our Natural
Capacities bear proportion to it; for God must be a very little Being himself,
could he be comprehended by such mean Creatures.

But that which I at present intend, is only to show you, That the Wise
Government of the World requires, that the Divine Counses, that the Events and
Reasons of Providence should in a great measure be concealed from us; and I
hope that is a satisfactory reason, why God should conceal them, if he cannot so
wisely govern the world without it.

I would desire those persons who are so apt to quarrel at Providence, and to
take it so very ill, that God does any thing which they don't presently
understand, to sit down and agree among themselves, How they would have God
govern the world? What it is that they would be pleased with? But let them
consider well of it beforehand, that upon second thoughts they don't find more
reason to quarrel at their own ways and methods of governing the world, than
they now have to quarrel with Providence; or that the rest of mankind do not
find more reason to quarrel with them, than they have now to quarrel with God.
As to give an Instance or two of this, by way of Essay.

Some seem to be very much discontented at the Uneveness and Uncertainty of all
Events; that all things are in a perpetual Flux and Motion; that no man knows
what a day or an hour will bring forth: The instability of Fortune, which gives
and takes away, and every day shows a new face, and opens new and surprising
Scenes, has been an old Complaint.

Well then: Would they have this rectified? Would they have all the Events of
Providence as constant, and regular, and unchangeable, as the Motions of the
Heavens, as the Returns of Day and Night, of Winter and Summer? And when they
see all things happen thus evenly and regularly, will they then promise to
believe a Providence? I mightily suspect that they will be farther from
believing a Providence then, than they are now. We see that the Regular Motions
of the Heavens, and the Uniform Productions of Nature, which so seldom vary,
that it is thought Portentous and Ominous if they do, cannot convince them,
That God governs the Heavens and the Earth, and all the Works of Nature, as far
as all their Virtues and Powers move and act uniformly, by constant and
unerring Laws: and if the regular uniformity of Nature is not thought by these
men a sufficient Proof of a Providence, I doubt a constant and uniform round of
all Events would be thought much less so. Those who now resolve all the
uncertain Changes and Revolutions that happen, into Necessity and Fate, would
have more reason to do so, did Providence always show the same face and
appearances, as the Heavens do.

But can they tell what kind of Uniformity and Stability of Providence it is,
would please them? Would they have all men's Fortunes equal? That there should
be no distinction between Rich and Poor, High and Low, Princes and Subjects,
the Honorable and the Vile? I believe few of them would like such a Levelling
Providence, which, as the state of mankind now is, would destroy the good
Government of the world, and most of the Pleasures and Conveniences of Life;
and yet without this, the Providence of God is not so uniform toward men, as
it is toward beasts; and those who fare worse than others of the same nature
with them, will still complain.

If then Providence must not deal alike by all men, do they mean by the
Uniformity and Stability of Providence, That men's Fortunes, whatever they are,
shall always be the same? That the Rich and Prosperous shall always be Rich and
Prosperous, and the Poor always Poor, and Beggars, and Slaves? Unless these
Objectors be all Rich and Happy, I doubt they will never agree to this; for the
Poor and Miserable must needs think it hard usage to be always poor, without
room for better hopes.

But such a Stability of Providence as this, would destroy the Wise and Just
Government of the World; for how should God restrain and punish Wickedness, and
reward and encourage Virtue, if the Rich must always be Rich, and the Poor
always Poor? Nay, how can the Providence of God do this, without making men
Virtuous and Vicious too, by Necessity and Fate? When Wantonness and
Prodigality, Idleness and Folly, will spend or lose an Estate; and Frugality,
Prudence and Diligence will get one. And when all men in this world must not be
equal, does it not more become the Wisdom and Justice of Providence, that men's
own Virtues and Vices shall in a great measure make the distinction, and carve
out their own Fortunes for them?

So that when men complain of the Uncertainty and Instability of Fortune, as
they call it, they complain of they know not what; and were it put to their own
choice what to have in the room of it, they would not know how to mend the
matter. The wise government of free Agents, who so often change themselves,
requires very frequent, sudden, surprising Turns of Providence, the reasons of
which must of necessity be as invisible to us, as the thoughts of men's hearts,
and their most secret intrigues and counsels; till we can make men all move
alike, as regularly and uniformly as the Heavenly Bodies do, it is an absurd
and unreasonable complaint, That Providence does not act regularly, and that
the Events of Providence are not always the same.

Another great Complaint against Providence is, That good men are not always
rewarded, nor bad men punished according to their deserts: That many bad men
are prosperous in this world, and some good men great sufferers: That all
things come alike to all; there is one event to the righteous and to the
wicked, to the good and to the clean, and to the unclean; to him that
sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not; as is the good, so is the sinner;
and he that swears, as he that fears an oath, 9. Eccl. 2. This makes the
Events of Providence very sudden, mysterious, and unaccountable; that no man
knows what course to take, to make his life easy and prosperous; for whether he
be good or wicked, he may be happy or miserable, as it happens.

As for the Objection it self, I shall consider it more hereafter; but at
present I will only ask these Objectors, Whether to remove these Difficulties
and Uncertainties of Providence, and that they may the better understand the
Reasons of all Events, they do in good earnest desire, That God would reduce
this matter to a Certainty, by punishing all bad men, and rewarding all good
men in this world, according to their deserts? If they do, I must tell them, as
Christ told the two Brethren, who desired that they might sit one on his Right
hand, and the other on his Left, in his Kingdom, Ye ask ye know not what: They
ask the most dangerous thing that could possibly befall mankind; and what they
ask, would be Ten thousand times a greater Objection against Providence, than
what they complain of. Should every Sinner be punished in this world according
to his deserts, what man is there so just and innocent as to escape the Divine
Vengeance? If thou, Lord, should mark iniquity, O Lord, who shall stand!
130. Psalm. 3. Were every Sinner punished as he deserves, I doubt there would be
no good man left to be rewarded; for where is the man that does good, and
sins not? What room does this leave for Patience and Forbearance, for the
Repentance of Sinners, for God's Pardoning-Grace and Mercy; and what a Terrible
Providence is this? How contrary to all the Notions we have of God, and his
kind and gracious Government of his Creatures?

I grant God may exercise great Patience and Long-suffering toward sinners; he
may forgive the sins of true Penitents, and yet punish sinners, and reward good
men even in this world; these things are very reconcilable in God's Government
of the world, for thus he does govern the world; but they are very
irreconcilable with such a Providence and Government as these men desire, which
requires a present and visible Punishment of every sin, as soon as committed;
and as present and visible a Reward of every good action: for unless these
Punishments and Rewards are present, all the time they are delayed, bad men may
be prosperous, and good men afflicted; which is their very Objection against
Providence; which can never be removed, but by speedy and visible Executions,
which leave no place for the Patience and Forgiveness of God, or for the
Repentance of Sinners: And is it not much more desirable, for ever to be
ignorant of the Reasons of Providence, than to have such Proofs and
Demonstrations of Providence as this?

Let me desire these unthinking Cavillers at Providence, to review their
Objection over again, and consider what is the meaning of every word in it, and
how upon second thoughts they like it themselves.

That they may have a plain and certain Reason of God's Judgments, they desire
that no man may suffer any external Calamity, but only for sin; and that every
sinner may be punished in this world according to his deserts; and then they
will believe, That there is a Providence that governs the world; tho it is
better for the world that they should continue Infidels, than be thus
convinced. Well then, who in the first place are these sinners whom they would
have punished? Do they mean every one who does a wicked action; or every
impenitent and incorrigible sinner?

If every one who at any time does any wicked action, must be punished for it,
then it is plain that no man can escape; then there is no place for Repentance
or Forgiveness, but a speedy Vengeance must pursue the sinner; and God knows,
we are all sinners, and must all be punished; and if this removes one Objection
against Providence, I Am sure it will very much increase another, from the many
evils and miseries that are in the world, which will be many more, and much
greater, if every sin must receive its just punishment.

If they mean only, That impenitent and incorrigible sinners must be punished,
then they must allow, that God may spare a sinner a great while, and then very
great sinners may be prosperous a great while, and if they repent at last, may
finally escape the Judgments of God; and then the Prosperity of Sinners can
never be an Argument against Providence, unless they can prescribe to God, just
how long and no longer, he may justly spare sinners.

It is an easy matter to complain of any thing, and to start Difficulties and
Objections, but it is impossible for the Wit of man to reduce Providence to
such a Certainty as these men desire: Tho God govern the world by never such
fixed and steady Laws, we can never see it in external Events, so as to be able
to assign a reason of all that good and evil which happens to particular men.

For would they have God reward every good man, and punish every wicked man, or
reward and punish every man for the good and evil that he does? There is a
great mixture of good or bad in most men, that for different reasons they may
deserve both Rewards and Punishments; and tho God knows when it is fit to
reward or punish such men, yet it is impossible we should; and therefore
whether they be rewarded or punished, we can give no account of it.

There is also a great mixture of good and bad in most actions; some very bad
actions may not deserve Punishment, as being the effect of Ignorance, or
Surprise, or such invincible Temptations, as Human Nature, without an
extraordinary measure of Grace, cannot conquer; and there are a great many good
actions which deserve no Reward, as being done by Chance, besides the intention
of the doer, or done from a very bad Principle, or for very bad ends: now we
only see the good or evil that is in the action, and Human Laws can punish or
reward nothing but what is seen; but I suppose you will not say that God ought
to regard nothing else but the material and visible action; and then it may be
very Wise and Just in God, neither to punish men for very bad actions, nor to
reward them for very good actions; and this is another Uncertainty of Events,
which men ignorantly complain of.

Thus some men are guilty of a great many secret sins, or do a great many good
actions, which no man knows of, but only God and their own Consciences; and
when God visibly rewards or punishes men for the secret good or evil they have
done, the reasons of such rewards or punishments must be unknown to us, because
the good or evil for which they are rewarded or punished, is unknown.

All these things make the Reasons and Events of Providence very uncertain and
unaccountable to us; and yet we see there may be very wise Reasons for them,
which we cannot understand, and which no man in his Wits would desire should be
understood.

For would you desire that every sin you commit should be immediately punished,
without any time to repent, without any hope of Mercy? Would you have God
reward and punish as Human Laws do, to consider only what is done, without
making any allowances for ignorance and surprise, or without taking any notice
of the Principles or Ends of our actions? Would you have a Casement into every
man's breast, or have all their secret Sins or Virtues written upon their
Foreheads, that every man may be as perfectly known to all the world, as he is
to himself? If you do not desire this, you must be contented to be ignorant of
the Reasons of Providence, of those good and evil Events which happen to men;
why God punishes one man, and spares or rewards another; why he does not punish
those whom we judge to deserve Punishment, nor reward those whom we think
worthy of a Reward. God has wise Reasons for all this, but we cannot understand
them; and it is happy for us all that they are not understood.

This shows how absurd it is for us to demand a Reason, and to complain, that
we cannot give a Reason of all the Events of Providence: And I shall only
observe this by the way, That if men would in other cases take the same course
that I have done in this, they would quickly perceive how vain and senseless
all their Objections against Providence are: That is, Whatever they object
against Providence, let them turn the other side of it, and try whether that
would be better: Let them consider how they would have what they call the
Defects and Blemishes of Providence, rectified; and whether it would be more
for the wise and happy Government of the World, if it were so. I dare challenge
the greatest Pretenders to Wit and Reason, to give any one Instance of this
nature, to name any one thing which they quarrel at, which they know how to
mend: And if the world be so wisely ordered already, that those who complain
most, cannot tell how any thing could be better done, it is Ridiculous and
Impudent to find fault; which are no hard words in such a Cause as this.

But this is not all I intend, merely to show, That this is an Unreasonable
Objection against Providence, That the Events of it are many times very
uncertain, hidden, and mysterious, and such as we cannot give the particular
Reasons of; but likewise to satisfy you, That the Wise Government of Mankind
requires it should be so; and to represent to you, The great and excellent
Advantages of it.

Now I suppose you will all grant, That what is most for the Glory of God, for
the advancement of true Piety, and the Restraints of Wickedness, is the Wisest
way of Governing the World. And if you will grant this, I doubt not but I shall
presently satisfy you, That the Wise Government of the World requires secret
and hidden Methods of Providence, such uncertain and surprising Events, as at
least we can give no account of, till it comes to its last and concluding Issue.

1. For what is there that excites in us a greater Admiration of God, than to
see great and glorious things brought to pass by a long and winding Labyrinth
of surprising and perplexed Events, which we know nothing of, nor whither they
tend, till we see where they end? Mankind never greatly admire what is plain
and obvious, and every man's thought, because there is nothing in it which
shows any extraordinary Contrivance: But when unexpected Events are brought to
pass by unsuspected means, and yet designed and directed by a steady and
unerring Counsel; When great things are done by such means, as have no Natural
Causality to produce such Effects, and therefore can give no notice nor the
least suspicion of what is a-doing; When our very Fears are turned into
Triumphs, and that which seemed to threaten us with some great evils, is made
the Instrument of some great and surprising Blessings; When bad men are
ensnared in their own Counsels, and fall into the Pit which they have dug
for others; When God turns their Curses into Blessings, and saves good men by
the Ministry of those who intended their Ruin: These, I say, and such like
Events, of which there are numerous Instances both in Sacred and Profane
Story, and which our own observation may furnish us with fresh Examples of,
justly give us great and admiring thoughts of the Divine Wisdom; a Wisdom which
is to be reverenced and feared, as well as praised; for who would not fear that
God, who is wise in heart, as well as mighty in strength? Who has resisted his
will, and prospered?

2dly. The uncertain Events of Providence, That good and evil is promiscuously
dispensed; That God does not always visibly reward the good, nor punish the
wicked, tho he signally rewards some good men, and as remarkably punishes some
wicked men is the Wisest Method of Governing Mankind. That some good men are
visibly rewarded in this world, is a just Encouragement to good men to expect
the Protection and the Blessing of God in doing good: That some bad men are
made Examples of a Just and Terrible Vengeance, is a Warning to all bad men to
reverence the Judgments of God, and to stand in awe of him; and that some bad
men are spared, nay, are externally happy, is a good reason for men to repent,
and to hope for Pardon and Forgiveness from so Patient and Merciful a God.

The essential difference between good and evil, the Hopes and Fears of Natural
Conscience, the Promises and Threatenings of Scripture, and the
Scripture-Examples of those Miraculous Deliverances which God has wrought for
his People, and the Miraculous Destruction he has brought upon their Enemies,
are a plain proof, That even the external Prosperity of good men, is a Mark of
God's Favor to them; and the external Sufferings and Calamities of bad men,
the effects of his Anger and Vengeance: And then, tho all good men are not so
visibly rewarded in this world, nor all bad men punished, yet since no good men
are excepted from God's Promises, nor any bad men from his Threatenings, the
rewards of some good men is a reason for all good men to hope; and the
Judgments executed upon some bad men, is a reason for all bad men to fear.

And this is better accommodated to the Nature of Man, who is a Free Agent,
than if God should visibly punish all bad men, and reward all good men in this
world, because it offers less Force and Violence to men, and leaves them more
to the government of their own free choice. Should God make such a visible
difference between all good and bad men in this world, that all good men should
be prosperous and happy, and all bad men miserable, there would be no more
choice left to men, Whether they would be good or bad; than, Whether they would
spend their lives in Health or Sickness, in Riches or Poverty, in Honor or
Disgrace; but where the Event is not certain, there is room left for wise
Consideration, for Hopes and Fears, which are the Natural Springs of a Free
Choice.

And besides this; That all good men are not rewarded, nor all bad men punished
in this world, gives us a truer understanding of the nature of present things,
and reasonable expectations of greater Rewards and Punishments hereafter. We
should be too apt to think, that the enjoyments of this life were the best and
greatest things, and the peculiar Marks of God's Favor, did none but good men
share in them; and were they the portion of all good men, we should grow very
fond of this world, and little think of another, or of exercising such Divine
Virtues as are fitted to that state: Nay, we should want the best Moral
Argument for another Life, That all good men are not rewarded, nor all bad men
punished in this world, which gives a reasonable expectation of another life.

But when we see bad men prosperous, as well as the good, and good men suffer
as hard things as any bad men do; this convinces us, That neither the Blessings
nor the Sufferings of this life are the Final Rewards or Punishments of good or
bad men: That God has greater Blessings reserved for good men, and greater
Miseries for the wicked; which is a greater Incitement to a Divine and Heavenly
Virtue, and a greater Restraint to Wickedness, than any present Rewards or
Punishments can be. So that this Uncertainty of Events which some men complain
of, and which we can seldom give a reasonable account of, when we come to
particular cases and particular persons, is so far from being a Defect in
Providence, that it is the wisest Method of Governing Mankind, both considered
as a Free Agent, and as an Immortal Creature, who must live in another world,
when he removes out of this.

3dly. This Uncertainty of all Events, is the trial and exercise of many
admirable Graces and Virtues, which there would be no place for, with respect
to this world, were the Events and Reasons of Providence known and certain:
Such as Faith, and Hope, and Trust, and Dependence on God, which there would be
little use of in this world, were all good men immediately rewarded; for they
all respect absent, unseen, unknown Events. Difficulties and Sufferings, which
in Scripture are called Temptations, are the trials of Virtue: When we serve
God without any prospect of a present reward; and trust in him, and depend on
him, when we are forsaken of all other hopes; when we say with Job, Tho he slay
me, yet will I trust in him; or with the Prophet Habakkuk, 3. 17, 18. Although the
fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the vines, the labor of
the olive shall fail, and the field shall yield no meat, the flock shall be cut
off from the fold, and there shall be no herd in the stalls, yet I will rejoice
in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation. And yet if we knew in all
cases the particular Reasons of Providence, and what the end and conclusion of
them would be, they would be no trials of our Faith, and Submission to God: The
Faith and Patience of Job was wonderful, but the greatest difficulty in all he
suffered was, that he could not possibly understand what God meant and
intended, in bringing all those Calamities on him; but had he known, that this
was only a trial of his Patience and Virtue, and that God would reward these
sufferings with a very long and prosperous Life, with a new increase of
Children, and new additions of Riches and Honor, this had been no difficulty,
no trial, any more than the smart of his present sufferings; but Job knew
nothing of all this, and therefore did great Glory to God, and made himself an
admirable Example of Faith and Patience to the world; and God made him as great
an Example of the Rewards of Faith and Patience. Were the Events of Providence
as constant, regular, and certain, and the Reasons of all Events as known and
visible as some men would have them, and complain that they are not, there
would be no exercise of some of the greatest Virtues of the Christian Life,
which do most Honor to God, and are the greatest Ornaments and Perfections of
Human Nature: Which evidently proves, That the Uncertainty and Obscurity of the
Events of Providence, that we know not what shall be, nor in many cases the
Reasons of what we see, is necessary to the Wise Government of Mankind, and
therefore is no Defect, but the Beauty and Perfection of Providence.

Fourthly, We are necessarily ignorant of a great many things, without the
knowledge of which it is impossible for us to understand the Reasons of
Providence; and therefore we ought no more to complain that we are ignorant of
the Reasons of Providence, than we do of our ignorance of other matters,
without the knowledge of which the Reasons of Providence cannot be known; as to
name some few of them:

1. We are very ignorant of Men, as I observed before: We know not their
hearts, and thoughts, and counsels, we see little of their private
Conversation, we cannot look into their Closets and secret Retirements; and
unless we knew better what men are, it is impossible we should understand the
Reasons of God's Providence toward them. Now tho as to external appearances,
there is some truth in this Objection, That bad men are oftentimes very
prosperous, and good men afflicted in this world; yet I doubt not but when this
Objection is applied to the Prosperity or Affliction of particular men, where
it is once applied right, it is a hundred times applied wrong; especially as to
the sufferings of good men: For we very often take those for good men, who are
not so, and who many times pluck off their disguise themselves, and convince
the world, that they are not so; and yet if any misfortune or adversity befall
such men before they are known, we are apt to wonder that God should afflict
such good men as they are, and think it a great difficulty in Providence; when
they themselves know that they deserve all that they suffer, and a great deal
more.

Nay, I believe there is not a good man in the world, who knows himself, and
impartially observes his own thoughts, and passions, and actions, but knows a
reason why God at any time afflicts him; knows how he has deserved it, and how
he wants it, and can justify the greatest severities of Providence toward
himself: I am sure, all the good men in Scripture do so, excepting Job; they
frequently confess and bewail their sins, and acknowledge the Justice and Mercy
of God in what they suffer; and as for Job, all that he insists on, is to
justify his own Uprightness and Integrity, that he was no secret Hypocrite, as
his Friends uncharitably accused him; that he knew nothing so bad of himself,
as to deserve such amazing Sufferings as God had brought on him: And indeed,
Job's Case was very peculiar; and it appeared in the conclusion, that God did
not punish him for some unknown wickedness, but to exercise his Faith and
Patience, and to make him a Glorious and Triumphant Example of a firm adherence
to God under the severest Trials.

Now when there is no good man in the world, who upon his own account can
charge God with afflicting him beyond what his sins deserve, or the state of
his Soul requires, we have reason to think, that there is very little truth in
this Objection; that did we know other good men as well as we know our selves,
we should as well understand the reason why God afflicts them, as why he
afflicts us; and if there be a wise and just reason for the sufferings of good
men, whatever their sufferings are, they can be no Objection against Providence.

And it is very often seen, that some men are thought wicked, as wrongfully and
ignorantly as others are thought good: It is a very little matter that will
give men a bad Character in a Censorious World; a different Opinion in
Religion, or some external Modes of Worship; nay, different Interests, and
State-Factions; nay, some private Quarrels and Animosities, will make some men
paint each other as black as Hell can make them, and then quarrel with Heaven
if it does not revenge their Quarrels, and execute that Vengeance which they
doom each other to.

And as for others, who with more reason are thought bad men, as guilty of
known Immoralities, yet they may have a great deal of good in them, many
Generous Qualities and Social Virtues, which may make them very useful men in a
Commonwealth; and they may do so much good, as in the opinion of mankind may
deserve some Temporal Rewards, as may deserve Public Trusts and Public
Honors; and it is very hard to reproach Providence with the Prosperity of such
men, which we our selves think well bestowed, notwithstanding their other
Vices: And other bad men may have some secret and latent Principles of Virtue,
which deserve to be cherished; and when this is, God alone knows; but if we
knew it, we should have no reason to quarrel with the Kindness and Patience of
God to such men, which is intended to lead them to Repentance. And as for
profligate sinners who are at open defiance with God, it is seldom seen but
that some remarkable Vengeance at one time or other overtakes them, and
vindicates the Justice of Providence in their Confusion. So easy were it to
justify the Providence of God, both toward good and bad men, did we
sufficiently know men. And our ignorance of men makes it a very foolish and
absurd Objection; for if instead of answering it, we should deny the truth of
the Objection, they have no way to prove it. Should we assert, That all good
men are rewarded, and all bad men punished, who deserve to be rewarded or
punished in this world, they have no way to disprove this, but by plain matter
of Fact; by showing some good men afflicted, who deserve a reward, and some bad
men prosperous, who deserve to be punished: Now this they can never do, without
pretending to know what is in man, to see their Inside, to be acquainted with
all their Secrets; in a word, to know Men as God knows them: For tho some men
are afflicted, whom we think good men, and it may be are so, and some bad men
are prosperous, yet there may be such a mixture of evil and good in these good
and bad men, which we cannot see, as may make it very wise and just in God to
afflict these good men, and to prosper the wicked; and since we cannot possibly
know these things, it becomes us to be very modest in censuring Providence.

2dly. We are in most cases very ignorant also of the Counsels and Designs of
Providence: We seldom know in any measure, what God is a doing in the world;
and then it is impossible for us to understand the admirable Wisdom of all
those intermediate Events, which tend to unknown ends. In the best-contrived
Plot there will always be some Scenes full of nothing but Mystery and
Confusion, till the End explains them, and then we admire the Skill and Art of
the Poet.

Now the great Obscurities and Difficulties of Providence are in such
intermediate Events, before we know what God intends by them. As to give an
Instance or two of it.

Had we heard no more of Joseph, but that he was sold by his Brethren into
Egypt, and there falsely accused by a Wanton Mistress, and cast into Prison, we
should have thought that God had dealt very hardly with him; but when we
understand that all this was the way to Pharaoh's Throne, there is no man but
would be contented to be a Joseph.

Thus the Story of Job's Afflictions strikes Terror and Astonishment into all
that hear them: Job himself knew not what account to give of his Sufferings,
and his Friends gave a very bad one, by falsely and uncharitably accusing Job of
some unknown Wickedness, to vindicate God's Severity toward him; and we should
have been as much puzzled with it to this day, had we not been acquainted with
the Reason of Job's Sufferings, and with that long and great Prosperity
wherewith God rewarded his Faith and Patience; and now no man thinks the
Sufferings of Job any Difficulty in Providence, much less any Objection against
it.

Thus it is with reference to single men; when we see only a Scene or two of
their lives, we may meet with such prosperous or adverse Events, as we cannot
account for; but could we see from the beginning to the end, in most cases the
Divine Providence would justify it self.

But then the hidden and Mysterious Designs of Providence relating to Churches
and Kingdoms, which comprehend so many great and wonderful Revolutions; the
Translations of Empires; the removing the Gospel from one Country, and
planting Churches in others, where there were none before; the Increase and
Flourishing State of Religion in one Age, and its great Declension and almost
total Eclypse in another; those surprising Changes which may be observed in the
Genius, Tempers, and Inclinations of Princes and People in several Ages; the
unaccountable Beginnings of War, and the as unaccountable Successes, and
unaccountable End of it; the long Prosperity of Persecuting Tyrants, and their
sudden Fall; These, and such like Events, must needs be very obscure and
unknown to us, who know not what God aims at in all this, nor what Designs he
is carrying on.

The Designs of Providence many times reach from one Age to another, nay, do
not come to perfection in many Ages, and yet have all a mutual dependence and
relation to each other, and are subservient to some last great End. The
Prophesies of Daniel, and the Revelations of St. John, as Mysterious Books as
they are, and as difficult as it is to apply the several parts of them to their
particular Events; yet thus much is plain in them, That there is a long Series
and Chain of Events, which reach from Age to Age, with Infinite Turnings and
Variety of Wisdom, directed by a steady and unerring Counsel, to some Unknown,
but Glorious Conclusion. And when the Divine Counsels are so deep and
mysterious, and so far out of our sight; when we see so little a part of what
God does, and know not what end God aims at in it, how impossible is it, that
we should understand the reason of particular Events? Had we a certain and
particular History of what God has already done, and could we certainly
understand the Prophesies of what is still to be done in every Age, and in all
succeeding Ages; that we could have one View of Providence from the Beginning
to the End, we should be more competent Judges of the Wisdom, Beauty, and
Justice of Providence; but when our Accounts of what is past are so imperfect
and uncertain, and our Knowledge of what is to come much more imperfect than of
what is past; when we know so little of our own Age, of our own Country, of
our own Neighborhood, it is as impossible to understand the Reasons of
Providence, as it is to understand the wise Contrivance and Design of a Comedy,
by reading one Act, or it may be but one Scene of that Act.

This is certain, that we can never understand the Reasons of Providence,
without understanding the Counsels of God, and for what end every thing is
designed; for every thing is well or ill contrived, as it serves the end for
which it is intended; and therefore we may as reasonably pretend to understand
all the secret Counsels of God, as all the Reasons of Providence: This very
Reason St. Paul gives, why the Providence of God is so unsearchable, 11. Romans
33, 34. O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God; how
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out! For who has
known the mind of the Lord, or who has been his Counselor?

3dly. We are very ignorant also of the state of the other world, and while we
are so, it is impossible we should be able thoroughly to comprehend the Reason
of God's Providence in this world.

It is a vain thing to talk of Providence, without taking the other world into
the account. Were there no other life after this, it were not worth the while
to dispute, Whether there be a Providence, or not; for whether there be or be
not a Providence, things are as they are; and if Death put an end to us, it is
of no great consequence which is truest. The only reason why some men so
zealously dispute against a Providence, is because they are unwilling to
believe that there is a God, or another world; and the reason why we so
zealously contend for a Providence, is to support our selves against all cross
Events, with the Care and Protection of a Wise and Good God at present, and
with the Hopes of a more Blessed and Happy Life hereafter. So that in truth
this Dispute is not so much intended against Providence, as against the Being
of God, and another Life; and therefore both these must be taken into the
account, when they make their Objections against Providence, or all their
Arguments signify nothing: As for Instance,

It is not enough for them to say, and to prove too, That there are such
Difficulties in Providence (for the Difficulties of Providence are their great
Objection) as no man can give a reasonable account of; but that there are such
Difficulties as Infinite Wisdom it self cannot account for; for tho there may
be many Difficulties which we cannot particularly answer (as all wise men
acknowledge that there are), yet unless they can positively prove, That
Infinite Wisdom it self cannot answer these Difficulties, the world may still
be governed by an Infinitely Wise Being; and it is demonstrable, that they can
never prove this; for nothing less than Infinite Wisdom, can tell what Infinite
Wisdom knows, and what Difficulties it can answer: Which shows how vain all
these Arguments against Providence are, which at last resolve themselves into
the Ignorance of Human Understandings: That there is no Providence, because we
see such things done in the world, which, for ought we know, Infinite Wisdom
can give very wise Reasons for, but we cannot.

Thus to come to the business in hand: It is not enough to prove, That there
are such Difficulties in Providence, as we can give no account of, if there be
no other life after this: but they must positively prove, That there are such
Difficulties as the next world can give no account of.

All men must acknowledge this to be very reasonable; for if there be another
life after this, it is evident, that the Reasons of Providence must in many
cases be wholly fetched from the other world. If we must live in another world
when we remove out of this, then this life is but one short Scene of
Providence, and the government of Mankind in this world, is chiefly in order to
the next; and then the Reasons of God's government also must relate to the next
world: And if we must judge of the Providence of God by its relation to the
next world, it will give a general Answer to all the Difficulties of
Providence, and give us a satisfactory Reason why we must not expect to
understand all the particular Passages of Providence in this world.

The general Answer is this, That all the seeming Irregularities of Providence
in this world, will be rectified in the next; and when we see this done, we
shall then see the Wisdom of what we now call the Irregular and Eccentrick
Motions of Providence. It is certain this may be so, and no man can prove it
cannot be so; and if we had no other Evidence for it, the reason and nature of
things, upon the supposition of the other world, makes it highly probable that
it will be so.

All men who believe another world, believe also that good men shall be greatly
rewarded, and the wicked punished in the next life; and we Christians are
assured that it shall be so, by the express Revelations of Scripture; that good
men shall be eternally rewarded in Heaven, and bad men eternally punished in
Hellfire: And it is wonderful to me, that any Christians who profess to
believe this, should puzzle themselves about the Difficulties of Providence;
for what Difficulties are there, which Eternal Happiness and Eternal Miseries
will not answer?

The great Prosperity of bad men, especially when they openly defy God and
Religion, and oppress all within their power, and persecute the true Disciples
of Christ, and do all the mischief they can in the world; and the Poverty and
Disgrace, Persecutions and Sufferings of good men, are thought great
Difficulties in Providence; but could these Objectors but look into the next
world, and see Dives tormented in Flames, and hear him beg only for a Drop of
Water to cool his Tongue; could they see Lazarus in Abraham's Bosom, no longer
begging an Alms, but entertained with all the Delights of Paradise: Could they
see the Punishments of Tyrants, Persecutors, and Oppressors, and the Glorious
Crowns of Martyrs, would they then any longer complain of Providence? Would
they think God too kind to bad men, or too hard and severe to the good?

If the final Rewards and Punishments of good and bad men are reserved for the
next world, there is no difficulty at all in the Prosperity of some bad men,
and the Afflictions of the good in this world; for they are not intended so
much for Rewards and Punishments, as for Methods of Discipline and Government;
that the Justice of God is not so much concerned in it, as the Wisdom of
Providence; which we who know not what belongs to the government of the world,
are very unfit judges of. This leaves room for God, as his own Infinite Wisdom
shall direct, to exercise great Patience and Long-suffering toward bad men, to
make them the Ministers and Executioners of his Vengeance upon a wicked world,
or to lead them to Repentance; and to correct the sins and follies of good men,
to rectify the temper of their minds, to govern their passions, to exercise and
improve their Graces and Virtues; in a word, to make bad men good, and to make
good men better: and to serve the wise ends of his Government and Providence by
both.

So that the belief of another world, gives a general Answer to all the
Difficulties of Providence; and it does not become a Christian to call any
thing a Difficulty in Providence, which the other world will answer. That there
are such Difficulties as we can give no account of without another life, we all
acknowledge, and know that it must be so; for if this life have a relation to
the next, the Reasons of Providence in many cases must of necessity be fetched
from the next world; and therefore when an Atheist disputes with a Christian
against Providence, if he will say any thing to the purpose, he must dispute
against Providence, upon the supposition of another life, and prove that the
Eternal Rewards and Punishments of the next world, cannot vindicate the Wisdom
and Justice of Providence in this. This is the true state of the Controversy;
and bring them to this Issue, and they will find little to say, which will give
any trouble to a wise man to answer.

But after all, we must confess, That we know so little of the other world,
that it is impossible for us to give a particular reason of every passage of
Providence, which relates to the next world.

I say, which relate to the next world, which are the greatest difficulties of
all to good men. The belief of another life will answer all the Difficulties of
Providence which concern this life; but those Difficulties which concern the
state of the other world, it cannot answer; but then there is a plain reason
why we cannot answer such Difficulties, viz. Because we do not know enough of
the state of the other world, to say any thing to them; and therefore we ought
not to trouble our selves about them here, but to stay till we come into the
next world; and then it is very probable they will be no Difficulties.

I shall instance in one very great one, and that is the state of Religion in
this world; which is no Objection against Providence with respect to this life,
but the whole Difficulty of it relates to the next life. That since all men
have Immortal Souls, and must be happy or miserable for ever, God should for so
many Ages suffer the whole World, excepting the Jews, to live in Ignorance, and
in Pagan Idolatry and Superstition: That Christ came so late into the world to
reveal the True God, and to publish the Gospel to them; and that so great a
part of the World still are Pagans and Mahometans; nay, that so little a part
of the Christian World retain the True Faith and Worship of Christ: This is Ten
thousand times a greater Difficulty than any present evils and calamities,
because the consequences of it reach to Eternity.

But then the whole Difficulty is no more than this, That we know not what the
condition of such men is in the other world, who lived in invincible ignorance
of the True God, and of our Savior Jesus Christ in this. This we confess we do
not know, but believe so well of God, that we are verily persuaded, could we
see what their state is in the other world, we should see no reason to quarrel
with the Justice or Goodness of God upon their account. And have we any reason
then to quarrel with God, only because we know not how he deals with the
ignorant Heathens in the next world? If we knew how God dealt with these men,
and knew that he dealt hardly by them, as far as we could judge, this would be
a difficulty; but what Difficulty is there in knowing nothing of the matter?
For if we know nothing of it, we ought to say and judge nothing of it neither.
Men must be very much inclined to quarrel with God, who will raise Objections
from what they confess they know nothing of; and yet I cannot guess how they
should know any thing of the state of ignorant Heathens in the next world,
since the Scripture says nothing of it; and yet this can be known only by
Revelation, for we cannot look into the other world.

The plain truth of the case is this: Some men, without any Authority of
Scripture, confidently affirm, That ignorant Heathens shall suffer the same
Condemnation which Christ has threatened aginst wilful Infidels, and wicked
Christians; and then it may well be thought a great Difficulty, That God should
as severely punish men for not knowing Christ, when he was never preached to
them, and they had no other possible way of knowing him, as he will punish
those who have had the Gospel of Christ preached to them, but refused to
believe in him, or have professed the Faith of Christ, but lived very wickedly.
This, I confess, is a great Difficulty, but it is a Difficulty of their own
making; and I should think it much more safe for our selves, and much more
honorable for God, to confess our Ignorance of such matters as we have no
possible way to know, and to refer all such unknown Cases to the Wisdom,
Justice, and Goodness of God, than to pretend to know what we cannot know, and
from thence to raise such Objections as we cannot answer.

Whatever Difficulties immediately relate to the state of the other world, we
must be contented should remain Difficulties till we go thither; for we know so
little in particular about the other world, that it is impossible we should be
able either to satisfy our selves or others in such matters; but these are not
properly Difficulties in Providence; for they do not so much concern the
government of this world, as of the next.

Thus I have at large shown, not only, That the Absolute Power of God makes him
Unaccountable, as the Sovereign Lord of the World; but, That his Infinite
Wisdom is above the comprehension of our Narrow Understandings; he is not bound
to give any account of all the Wise Designs of his Providence, and we are not
capable of receiving it.

This indeed is so plain at the first hearing, to all men who believe God to be
Infinitely Wise, and are sensible of their own Ignorance, that I should have
been ashamed to have insisted so long on it, did not all men know, who know any
thing of this Dispute, That most of the Objections against Providence, are
owing wholly to this cause, That men will not allow God to do what they cannot
understand: And the best way I could take to teach these men more Modesty in
censuring Providence, was to show them particularly, That if God govern the
world wisely, there are a thousand things which they must of necessity be
ignorant of, and then it can be no Objection against the Wisdom, Justice, and
Goodness of God in governing the world, that they cannot in many cases give a
satisfactory account of the Particular Reasons of Providence.

Fifthly, Let us now enquire in what cases this is a reasonable Answer to all
the Difficulties of Providence, That God gives no account of his matters; That
the judgments of God are unsearchable, and his ways past finding out. And there
is great reason for this Enquiry, that no man may presume to attribute any
thing to God, which can never be reconciled with the common Notions of Good and
Evil, Just and Unjust, upon this pretense, That the Ways and Judgments of God
are unsearchable and unaccountable, and that we ought not to demand a reason of
them.

That there are such men in the world, is sufficiently known to those who
understand any thing of some modern Controversies in Religion. I need instance
at present only in the Doctrine of Eternal and Absolute Election and
Reprobation, on which a great many other such like unaccountable Doctrines
depend: That God created the far greatest part of mankind on purpose to make
them eternally miserable; or at least, as others state it, That he Ordered and
Decreed, or which is the same thing, effectually Permitted the Sin and Fall of
Adam, that he might glorify his Mercy in choosing some few out of the corrupted
Mass of Mankind to be Vessels of Glory, and to glorify his Justice in the
Eternal Punishment of all others, even of Reprobated Infants, as involved in
the Guilt of Adam's sin. Now thus far, I confess, they are in the right, that
these are very unaccountable Doctrines; for to make creatures on purpose to
make them miserable, is contrary to all the Notions we have of Just and Good.

But tho we readily confess, That the Ways and Judgments of God are
unsearchable, yet men must not think upon this pretense to attribute what they
please to God, how absurd, unreasonable, unjust, soever it be, and then shelter
themselves against all Objections, by resolving all into the Unaccountable Will
and Pleasure of God; for God has no such Unaccountable Will as this is, to do
such things as manifestly contradict all the Notions which mankind have of good
and evil.

We find in Scripture, That God abhors all such Imputations as these, as
infinitely injurious to him; and appeals to the common Notions of what is Just
and Equal, to justify the general Rules of his Providence. The whole 18th.
Chapter of Ezekiel, is a plain proof of this; where God complains of that
Proverb, as reflecting upon the Justice and Equity of his Providence; V. 2.
The fathers have eaten sour grapes* and the childrens teeth are set on edge:
That is, that the Children are punished for the sins of their Fathers. How
unreasonable an Imputation this is, God proves from that Equal Right which he
has in Parents and Children, V. 4.
which will not admit of such Partiality: Behold, all souls are mine; as the
soul of the father, so also the soul of the son is mine; the soul that sins,
it shall dye: And declares this to be the general Rule of his Providence, That
a good man who does what is just and right, shall surely live; That if he beget
a wicked son, his son shall surely dye; and if this wicked son beget a just and
righteous son, he shall live: V. 20.
The son shall not bear the iniquity of the father, neither shall the father
bear the iniquity of the son; the righteousness of the righteous shall be upon
him, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him. That if the wicked man
turn from his wickedness, he shall live, and if the righteous man turn from his
righteousness, he shall dye; and appeals to them to judge, whether this be not
equal: Yet ye say, V. 25, 29.
The way of the Lord is not equal; Hear now, O house of Israel, are not my ways
equal? are not your ways unequal?

This plainly proves, That all the administrations of Providence are very just
and equal; and that to attribute any thing to God which contradicts the common
Notions of Justice and Righteousness, is a very great Reproach to him, and is
thought so by God himself: And therefore when the Prophet Jeremiah complained
of the Prosperity of bad men, as a great difficulty in Providence, he lays this
down in the first place as an unshaken Principle, That God is very Just and
Righteous: Righteous art thou, O Lord, when I plead with thee, yet let me talk
with thee of thy judgments; wherefore does the way of the wicked prosper?
wherefore are all they happy that deal very treacherously? 12. Jer. 1.

This very Complaint, That there are great Difficulties in Providence; That the
ways and judgments of God are unsearchable, and past finding out; is a plain
proof, that all mankind expect from God, that he should govern the world with
great Justice and Equity; for otherwise, (tho such a Providence it self would
be a great Difficulty) there could be no Difficulties in Providence, if God
were not by the Holiness and Justice of his own Nature obliged to observe the
Eternal and Immutable Laws of Justice and Righteousness in governing the world:
For upon this supposition, What could the unaccountable Difficulties of
Providence be? Is it that we observe such Events as we know not how to
reconcile with the common Rules of Justice? And what then? This is no
Difficulty, nor unaccountable, if God observes no Rules of Justice in his
Government; if he act by such an unaccountable Will as has no Law or Rule; by
such a Will as regards not what we call right and just, but makes every thing
just it wills.

The Difficulty and Unsearchableness of Providence, consists not in the Rules
of Providence, but in the Events; not in reconciling the Rules of Providence to
the common Notions of Justice and Righteousness, but in reconciling some Events
to the acknowledged Justice and Righteousness of God's Government. This is the
Atheists Objection against God's governing the world, because they think that
the world is not justly and wisely governed; and tho we can vindicate the
Providence of God, notwithstanding a great many difficult and unaccountable
Events which the Atheists object, yet we can never vindicate the Providence of
God against Unjust and Arbitrary Rules of Government, which the reason of all
mankind conclude to be arbitrary and unjust: As for Instance:

Tho we see good men afflicted, and wicked men prosperous, and it may be can
give no particular account why this good man is afflicted, and such a wicked
man prosperous, yet we can vindicate the Wisdom and Justice of Providence
notwithstanding this; and the Unsearchable Wisdom of God, is a good answer to
it: But should any man turn this into a Rule of Providence, That by the
Sovereign and Unaccountable Will of God some good men shall be finally
miserable, and some bad men shall be finally happy, this we can never
vindicate, because it contradicts the common Notions of Justice and
Righteousness: And tho we cannot always judge of the Righteousness and Justice
of a particular Event, yet we can judge of the Rules and abstracted Notions of
Justice and Righteousness.

Thus God had often threatened the Jews, That he would visit on them not only
their own sins, but the iniquities of their Fathers; which in some cases may be
very wise and just; of which more hereafter; but when by an ignorant or
spiteful mistake, they turned this into an unjust Proverb, which all men
acknowledged to be unjust, God declared his Abhorrence of it; What mean ye,
that ye use this proverb concerning the land of Israel, 18. Ezekiel. 2.
saying, The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the childrens teeth are set
on edge? As if Children who had never eaten sour Grapes themselves, should
have their teeth set on edge by their Fathers eating them; that is, that those
who had not deserved to be punished for their own sins, should yet be punished
for their Fathers sins: This appears manifestly unjust, and God himself rejects
it, as a Reproach to his Providence: And how difficult soever some passages of
Providence may be, we must own no Rules of Providence which are manifestly
unjust.

Thus it is too certain, that much the greatest part of mankind will be finally
miserable; and this is very reconcilable to the Justice of God, if the greatest
part of mankind are very wicked, and deserve to be miserable: But to say, That
God created the greatest part of mankind, nay, that he created any one man
under the Absolute Decree of Reprobation; that he made them to make them
miserable, can never be justified by the Unaccountable Will and Pleasure of
God, because it is notoriously unjust, if mankind are competent Judges of what
is just and unjust.

The Sum is this: That the Providence of God is Unsearchable, Incomprehensible,
Unaccountable, is no reason to attribute any thing to God, which when reduced
into abstracted Notions and general Rules of action, is notoriously unjust; but
the true use of it is to reverence the Judgments of God, and not to charge any
particular Events of Providence with Injustice, merely because we do not
understand the reasons of them. The general Notions and Rules of Justice are
not unaccountable things, for we understand very well what they are; for
Justice is the same thing in God and Men; but the unsearchable Wisdom of God
can do a great many things wisely and justly, which our narrow minds cannot
comprehend the Wisdom and Justice of. Now this makes Infinite Wisdom a
sufficient reason why we should acquiesce in the Wisdom and Justice of
Providence, notwithstanding such Events as we cannot understand the reasons of:
But an Unaccountable Will, which acts by no Rules of Justice, as far as we can
understand what Justice means, can give no reasonable satisfaction to any man;
for it is no reason to be satisfied with Providence, That God does such things
by a Sovereign and Arbitrary Will, as the reason of mankind condemns as unjust;
for this does not answer our Complaints, but justifies them.

This is all the Atheist endeavors to prove, and all that he desires should be
granted him, to confute the belief of a God and a Providence. That God does
such things as we can give no satisfactory account of, does him little service,
because the Unsearchable Wisdom of God answers such Difficulties; but if we
will grant him, That God acts by such Rules, as all men who judge impartially,
according to the natural notions and the natural sense which we have of
Justice, must think unjust; this is what he would have; and he will give us
leave to talk as much as we please, of the Arbitrary and Sovereign Will of God,
but he will believe no such God; for this is not the Natural Notion of a God,
to be Arbitrary, but to be Good and Just: And to say that God is Good and Just,
but not Good and Just as men understand Goodness and Justice, is to say that we
have no Natural Notion of the Goodness and Justice of God, and then we can have
no Natural Notion of a God: For if the Natural Notion of a God is, That he is
Just and Good; it seems hard to think, that we should have a Natural Notion of
a Good and Just God, without having any Natural Notion what his Justice and
Goodness is; but instead of that, should have such Natural Notions of Justice
and Goodness, as (if we believe what some men say of God) can never be
reconciled with his being Just and Good.

This then must be laid down as a standing Rule, That we must never attribute
any thing to God, which contradicts the Natural Notions which we have of
Justice and Goodness* under a pretense, That God is unaccountable, and his ways
and judgments unsearchable; for it is not the Will of God, which is always
directed by Goodness and Justice, that is unaccountable, but his Wisdom; not
the standing Rules of his Providence, which are nothing else but perfect and
unerring Justice and Goodness, but the application of particular Events to
these Rules: And having premised this by way of Caution, I come now more
particularly to consider in what Cases this is a reasonable Answer to all the
Difficulties of Providence.

1. Now in the first place I observe in general, That the Unsearchableness of
the Divine Wisdom in governing the world, is a reasonable Answer to all
difficulties which have no intrinsic or essential evil in them. Whatever we
see done in the world, if it be possible to imagine any Cases or Circumstances
wherein such a thing may be wisely and justly done, we have reason to believe
that the Infinite Wisdom of God had wise and just reasons for doing it, tho we
know not what they are. For is it not great perverseness to charge God with
doing such things unjustly, as it is possible might be done for wise and just
Reasons? And yet I challenge all the Atheists in the world, to name me any one
thing which ever God did, that could not possibly, in no Cases or Circumstances
whatsoever, be wisely and justly done.

The Difficulties of Providence do not consist merely in external Events; for
all external Events may be good or evil, just or unjust, with respect to their
different Circumstances of Time, or Place, or Person, and the like: And
therefore when we see any thing happen, which as far as we apprehend the case,
seems a difficulty in Providence, if altering the Case would answer the
difficulty, it is only supposing that God sees the Case to be otherwise than we
apprehend it to be, and the Difficulty vanishes: and is not this very easy and
natural to suppose, that God may know the Case better than we do? And is it not
much more reasonable to suppose, that we mistake the Case; than to charge the
Divine Providence with doing any thing hard or unjust?

But to make you sensible of this, I shall explain it a little more
particularly. Most of the Objections against Providence, relate to the good or
evil that happens to private Men, or to Public Societies, to Kingdoms and
Commonwealths; such as the Length or Shortness of our Lives, Health or
Sickness, Poverty or Riches, Honor or Disgrace, Famine, Sword, and Pestilence;
or the contrary Blessings of Plenty, Peace, and a wholesome Air; the Changes and
Revolutions of States and Empires; the removing Kings, and setting up Kings:
Now what of all this is there, that God can never wisely and justly do? May not
God have very wise and just Reasons for lengthening some men's Lives, and for
shortening others? For making men Rich or Poor, Honorable or Vile? For
translating Kingdoms and Empires? For sending Peace or War, Plenty or Famine?
And if all these things can be wisely and justly done, how can the doing of any
of these things be an Objection against Providence? Yes, you will say, such good
or evil Events may be wrong applied to persons who do not deserve them, and
then they become unjust; and so you apprehend they many times are; and this is
the Difficulty of Providence: But now if there be no iniquity in the Events
themselves, when there are wise and just reasons for them, why should we not
rather conclude, That there are wise Reasons for them, when they are ordered
and appointed by God? Are not the Natural Notions we have of the Divine
Justice, a sufficient reason to believe, that God never does any thing but what
is just? And is not his unsearchable Wisdom, which sees such things as we
cannot see, a sufficient reason to confess, That God may have wise and just
Reasons for what he does, tho we know them not? This is enough to satisfy all
the Friends of Providence, and to silence its Enemies: For if all those Events
which they think hard or unjust, may be very wise and just, as the Natural
Justice of God is reason to believe they are, and as the unsearchable Wisdom of
God proves they may be, tho we do not see the Wisdom and Justice of them; then
it is certain, That what may be wise and just, can be no Argument against the
Wisdom and Justice of Providence: And when we have so many Reasons to believe a
Providence, such a may be is a reasonable answer to all such Difficulties as
are themselves no more than may bees.

2dly. The unsearchable Wisdom of God is a reasonable satisfaction, as to all
Prerogative Acts which we must seek for no other reason of, but the good Will
and Pleasure of God; I call those Prerogative Acts, which are the exercise of a
Free and Sovereign Will, within the bounds of Just and Good. The Divine Nature,
as Infinite as it is, confines it self within the bounds of Justice and
Goodness; and the Prerogative of God, as the Absolute and Sovereign Lord,
cannot transgress these bounds: but there are a great many acts of Sovereignty
relating to the free exercise of Justice and Goodness, which are under the
necessary direction of no Law, but are only the free and unaccountable Choice
of a Sovereign Will: As in Scripture God is sometimes said to do such things
according to his Will, according to the good Pleasure of his Will, according to
his good Pleasure; which always relates to such Prerogative Acts, and signifies
to us, That we must seek no farther for the Reasons of such things, than the
Sovereign Will of God; as a Sovereign Prince, while he keeps within the Legal
Exercise of his Prerogative, needs give no other account of it, but that it is
his Will and Pleasure.

But there are some men, who will not be so civil to God, as they are to a
Sovereign Prince, to take his sole Will and good Pleasure, for a satisfactory
reason of any thing; but quarrel about these Prerogative Acts, and ask a great
many foolish Questions, and make a great many impertinent Objections, even
against the exercise of a Free and Sovereign Goodness.

Now in truth this is to deny God the Rights of a Sovereign, to demand a Reason
of him beyond his own Will, for the Acts of pure Sovereignty: but yet I will
grant these men, That tho in all such Cases we must ask no other reason, but
the mere Will of God, yet God never does any thing for mere Will and Pleasure,
in the sense that some men do, but has always wise and hidden Reasons, which we
cannot comprehend: And tho they will not allow the unsearchable Wisdom of God a
just satisfaction to other Objections, yet methinks where they ought to demand
no other reason but the Will of God, it should abundantly satisfy them to know,
That tho this Will of God is Sovereign and Unaccountable, it is always guided
by Infinite and Infallible Wisdom.

That you may the better understand this, I shall give you some Instances of
it, in the Prerogative Acts of Goodness and Justice. Goodness indeed is
essential to the Notion of a God, but yet there are some Sovereign Acts of
Goodness which no creature could challenge from God, which God might not have
done, and yet have been very good; and why God exercises such Free and
Prerogative Acts of Goodness, must be resolved wholly into the good Pleasure of
his own Will. This is the account the Scripture gives us, of that Mysterious
Goodness, in the Redemption of the World by our Lord Jesus Christ; which is
therefore every where in Scripture called Grace, and Free Grace, and the Love
of God, and the Will of God; as Christ tells us, 5. John 30. 6. 38.
That he came not to do his own will, but the will of him that sent him. And
the whole Economy of our Redemption, 1. Ephesians. 11.
is called the purpose of him who works all things according to the counsel
of his own will: And thus is every part of our Redemption; 1. James 18.
as our New Birth; Of his own will he has begotten us: The Gifts of the Holy
Ghost were bestowed upon the Apostles according to his own will. 2 Hebr. 4.
God works in us both to will and to do of his good pleasure: 2 Phil. 13.
All which signifies no more but this, That these are such Prerogative Acts of
Goodness, as we must seek for no other reason of, but the Sovereign Will and
good Pleasure of God.

Now in such Sovereign Acts of Goodness as these, the time, and manner, and
other circumstances, and the rules and methods of administration, are all
perfectly free and voluntary, where God has not bound up himself by Covenant
and Promise; and therefore we must satisfy our selves, that God has very wise
Reasons for what he does, but must not critically examine, whether every thing
be done in the best manner that we can think on; which would put an end to a
great many foolish Enquiries, with which men perplex themselves, and disparage
the Mysteries of our Salvation: As, Why God sent Christ into the world, for the
Salvation of Mankind? Whether there was no other possible way to save sinners;
or whether this were absolutely the best? Why God sent Christ so late into the
world, in the last days, when it grew near its end, and so many Generations of
men had perished in ignorance and wickedness, before his Appearance? Why so
great a part of the world to this day have never heard of Christ? And a great
many other such like Questions as these: To all which it is sufficient to
reply, That our Redemption by Christ is an act of Sovereign Grace, and
therefore we must enquire no farther than the Will of God. Had God never sent
Christ into the world, nor preached the Gospel to any one Nation, we should
have had no reason to complain; for he did not owe such a Savior to sinners;
and therefore we have less reason to complain of the time of his coming into
the world, and that his Gospel is not universally received by mankind.
Sovereign Grace is free and unaccountable, and we need not doubt but that such
stupendous Goodness is administered by as unsearchable Wisdom; and it is
reasonable for us to acquiesce in the belief of God's unerring Wisdom,
especially in such cases where we have no right to enquire beyond his Will.
When we receive all from God without his owing us any thing, it is a good
answer St. Paul gives, Who has first given unto him, 11. Rom 35, 36.
and it shall be recompensed to him again; for of him, and through him, and to
him, are all things; to whom be glory for ever. Amen.

Thus the Divine Justice requires, that God should punish obstinate and
incorrigible sinners; but then he executes Justice with a Free and Sovereign
Authority; that is, he is not confined to time, and place, and manner of
punishing sinners, as the Inferior Ministers of Justice are; but when men have
made themselves vessels of wrath fitted for destruction, then God may punish
sooner or later, publicly or privately, and in what manner he pleases, without
giving any other reason for it, but his own Will. God has more reasons of
punishing Sinners in this world, than merely to take Vengeance of their sins;
and therefore he punishes them in such a manner as may best serve the ends of
his Providence, as may most advance his own Name and Glory, and do most good in
the world. Thus God tells Pharaoh, For this cause have I raised thee up; that
is, either advanced thee to the Throne, or preserved thy Life thus long in the
midst of all the Plagues I have brought upon thy Land, for to show in thee my
power, and that my name may be declared throughout all the earth; 9. Exodus 16.
that is, to take such a remarkable Vengeance on thee, as may make all the
earth confess my Glory.

Would men but allow God the Authority of a Sovereign, who can Spare, and
Reprieve, nay, Pardon in this world, without the imputation of Injustice, it
would answer all the Cavilling Objections against Providence, which relate to
the Punishments of bad men. God might then be allowed to execute speedy
Vengeance upon some sinners, and to delay the Punishment of others, and to
suffer them to be prosperous for a great while, without giving any other reason
for it, than his own Will and Pleasure. God has always wise Reasons for these
things, tho we do not always know them; but if the Sovereignty of God will
justify all this, without any other reason, much more ought we to be satisfied
with what God does, when we know that he executes Judgment, and restrains and
punishes Wickedness, and governs bad men, with unsearchable Wisdom.

3dly. That the ways of God are unsearchable, is a reasonable Answer to all
Difficulties which concern such matters as we must confess to be above our
understanding: I have already given you a great many Instances of this nature,
which I need not repeat; and indeed he must be a very ignorant man, who is not
sensible that there is a Knowledge which is too wonderful for him, which the
Light of Nature cannot discover, and which God has not thought fit to reveal:
And is it not reasonable in all such cases to say, That the Ways and Judgments
of God are above our knowledge; and to be contented to be ignorant of what we
cannot know? This I am sure is the only Remedy that is left us, and the only
way to rid our minds of such perplexing Difficulties, as are owing to our own
unavoidable Ignorance of things.

This is sufficient to show you, That the Providence of God, not only as our
Absolute Lord, but as the Infinitely Wise Governor of the World, is and must be
Unaccountable; and that this is a very reasonable answer to the Difficulties of
Providence; and the true use of all is, not to strive with God, not to quarrel
at his Providence, but to reverence his Unsearchable Judgments; to bear
whatever he lays on us, with Patience and Submission, and to compose our minds
to a firm Trust and Dependence on him, in the most cross and threatening Events.

It is thought a great piece of Wit, to be able to start some New Objections
against Providence, and to find a great many Faults in God's Government of the
world: But besides the great Irreverence to God, did such men believe a God, it
is a certain proof of the most despicable Ignorance, That they are ignorant to
such a degree, as not to know they are ignorant; for if they did, they would
not dare to Judge and Censure Infinite Wisdom.

CHAP. V.
The Justice and Righteousness of Providence.
THE next Enquiry is, Concerning the Justice of the Divine Providence. Justice
and Righteousness is essential to the Notion of a God; and therefore if God
govern the world, he must govern it righteously; and this is the great and
formidable Objection against Providence, That the world is not governed with
Justice and Righteousness: And could this be evidently and convincingly proved,
I would allow the Conclusion, That then God does not govern the world. But I
challenge any man who understands what the Justice of God's Government is, to
charge the Divine Providence with any one plain and notorious Act of Injustice;
for the truth is, the ground of all these Objections, is an ignorance of the
Nature of God's Government, and of the Justice of Providence; and when this is
truly stated, all such Objections will need no Answer.

Justice is commonly divided into Commutative and Distributive Justice; the
first respects men's Rights and Properties; the second their Deserts; the first
consists in giving every man what is his own by some Natural or Acquired
Rights; the second consists in rewarding or punishing men, as the nature and
quality of their actions deserve. And upon both these accounts some men impeach
the Divine Providence.

1. Because it is too manifest, that there is a great deal of Injustice done in
the world; that a great many men are deprived of their Rights and Properties by
Fraud, Injustice, or open Violence; and therefore the world is not justly and
righteously governed; which they think in the last issue must reflect upon the
Justice and Righteousness of Providence; if God be the Supreme and Sovereign
Lord of the world. 2dly. That Rewards and Punishments are not justly and
equally distributed; that some bad men are greatly rewarded, and some good men
greatly punished; which is not reconcilable with the Distributive Justice of
Providenc. Now the plainest and shortest way of answering these and all such
like Objections, is to consider, Wherein the Justice of Providence consists,
and what Justice requires of God in the government of this lower world: For if
God may govern the world very righteously, without doing what some men think
Justice requires him to do, and without hindering what they think Justice
requires him to hinder, this is a sufficient Vindication of the Justice of
Providence, whatever other Objections they may make against it: And I shall
state this as plainly and briefly as I can.

1. First then, I suppose I may take it for granted, That the Justice of
Providence does not consist in hindering all Acts of Injustice and Violence.
There may be great Violence and Injustice committed in the world, and yet God
may govern the world with great Righteousness: Which is no more than to say,
That men may be very wicked and unjust, and yet God be very Just. As for God's
permitting so much evil to be committed, that is a greater Objection against
the Holiness than against the Justice of Providence, and shall be particularly
considered under that Head; but the Justice of Providence does not consist in
hindering men from sinning, but in punishing them when they do. Were it unjust
in God to suffer men to do any Injustice, it would be but a very imperfect kind
of Justice to punish them for it; for upon this supposition, the Justice of
punishing sin would be founded in the Injustice of permitting it; and God must
be first Unjust in permitting Injustice, before he can be Just in punishing it.
Which shows how absurd it would be, to charge the Providence of God with
Injustice, because there are so many unjust men, who do many unjust things.

2. For God may do that very justly, which men cannot do without great
injustice; and therefore men may be very unjust, and God very just: As for
instance; God may very justly take away any man's Estate, when no man can do it
without Injustce; and the Case is the same with respect to Honor, and Power,
and Life it self; for God is the Supreme Lord and Proprietor of the World; we
are all his, and all that we have is his: We may have a Right to our Lives and
Liberties, Estates, Honors, and Power, against all Human Claims; but we have
no Right against God: He may give Riches, and Honors, and Power, to whom he
pleases, and take them away again when he sees fit, without being chargeable
with any Injustice; for what he gives, and what he takes away, is his own; and
may not he do what he will with his own?

There can be no Commutative Justice in a strict and proper sense, where there
is no Right but on one side; for he who has no Right, can suffer no Wrong; and
he in whom the whole Right is, can do no Wrong in giving or taking away what is
his own: And therefore Legal Rights and Properties, which are the Foundation of
Commutative Justice, can be no Objection against Providence, for no Creature
has any Legal Property against God. The Justice of Providence does not relate
to the Rights of Creatures, but to the Moral and Eternal Reasons of things; it
does not consist in defending every man in his Legal Rights, which is the
Justice of Human Governments, but in rewarding or punishing men according as
they deserve, or as may best serve the wise ends of God's Government in this
world.

There seems to me to be no occasion for that Dispute de Iure Dei in Creaturas,
what Right God has in Creatures; for there is no doubt but God has an Absolute,
Unlimited, Uncontrollable Right in all his Creatures; they and all they have
are his, and at his Absolute Disposal; tho it does not hence follow, that God
may without any Injustice make Creatures on purpose to make them miserable: for
tho Creatures have no Natural Rights against God, yet the Justice and Goodness
of the Divine Nature gives them a Moral Right to such usage as they shall
deserve: as for instance, That an innocent Creature should not be miserable,
and that those who deserve well, should not be ill used. But these Moral Rights
concern Distributive Justice, and result from the Goodness and Justice of the
Divine Nature and Government, not from the Natural Rights of Creatures. We are
absolutely at the Will and Disposal of God, as Slaves and Vassals are at the
Will of their Lord; but our security is, That God can will nothing but what is
wise, and just, and good.

3dly. From hence it evidently follows, That in our Disputes about the Justice
of Providence, we must confine our enquiries to Distributive Justice; that is,
we must not barely consider what men have, or what they lose, or what they
suffer, nor what the immediate and visible Causes of all this are, whether just
or unjust; but we must consider what proportion there is between their
Condition, and their Moral Deserts; or whether they enjoy or suffer any thing
which will not serve the wise and just ends of God's Government. If men are put
into such a condition, as they have neither deserved, nor can make any good use
of, or which does not make them Instruments of the Divine Providence to serve
some wise and good ends, by what means soever they come into such a condition,
it reflects upon the Wisdom and Justice of God, who has the Supreme Disposal of
all Events, and by a Sovereign Authority allots all men their several Portions
and Stations in the world: But let men's Condition be what it will, whether they
be Rich or Poor, Happy or Miserable, advanced or ruined by Injustice,
Oppression, and Violence, if this be what they deserved, what they are fit for,
what the wise Government of the world requires, it can be no blemish to
Providence, which directs and governs all things with Wisdom and Justice.

So that it is no Objection against the Justice of Providence, to say, That
there are a great many miserable people in the world, and a great deal of
Injustice daily committed in it; unless you can prove, That any of these
miserable people ought not for wise and just reasons to suffer such Miseries;
or that any suffer by Injustice what they ought not to suffer: For if
notwithstanding all the Miseries that are in the world, and all the Wickedness
that is committed in it, no man suffers any thing but what he deserves, or what
God may wisely and justly inflict on him, this abundantly vindicates the Wisdom
and Justice of Providence.

4thly. But for the better understanding of this, we must consider more
particularly the Nature of God's Justice, and what Acts of Justice the
Government of this world requires; and how it differs from the Justice of Human
Governments; the confounding of which, has occasioned most of the Objections
against the Justice of Providence.

1. To consider the Nature and Exercise of God's Justice: for tho the general
Notion of Justice be the same, whether we speak of the Justice of God or Men;
yet the particular Acts of Justice vary, as they do even among men, according
as their Rights and Authority differ. Justice signifies to give to every man
what is his own, and to take nothing from any man, but what is our own; to
serve our selves of other men, and to reward or punish them, as their Actions
deserve, and as our Authority will justify. So that the particular expressions
of Justice and Righteousness, as exercised by different persons, differ as much
as the Circumstances of men's Fortune and Conditions, Relations, Authority, and
Power, differ: For when two men do the same thing, it may be done very justly
by one, and very unjustly by the other, because one may have a Right and
Authority to do it, and the other have none; as a Prince or Judge may very
justly execute a Criminal, and confiscate his Estate, which a private man
cannot justly do.

Now if the difference between a private man and a Magistrate, between a Prince
and a Subject, makes such a vast difference in the particular Acts and Exercise
of Justice and Righteousness, as they respect such different states, that vast
disproportion which is between God and Creatures, must make a much greater
difference; that tho the General Notion of Justice and Righteousness is the
same both with respect to God and Men; yet God may do that very justly, which
men cannot justly do; as a Prince may exercise some Acts of Justice, which a
private man must not do.

I shall at present only instance in God's Absolute Dominion and Sovereignty,
and show you in some plain Cases, what a vast difference this makes between the
Justice of God, and the Justice of Men. Now God's Absolute Dominion gives him
Right and Authority to do whatever is consistent with Wisdom and Goodness: For
Absolute Dominion is Absolute Authority, and Absolute Authority makes every
thing just, which is wise and good. A Limited Authority has a Rule, and must
not do what is wise and good, against its Rule of Right: No man must take away
that which is another, and which he has no Authority to take away, whatever
wise and good ends he can serve by it. Tho it were never so apparent, that it
would be a great kindness to the man himself, to take away great part of his
Estate, which he uses ill to oppress his Neighbors, and to make himself a
Beast; tho he does not deserve the Estate he has, nay, deserves to lose it; tho
we could bestow it upon men who deserve and would use it better, or could
employ it to excellent uses, for the Service of God, and of his Church, or for
the relief of the Poor: All these wise and good Purposes, would justify no man
who invades another's Rights without a just Authority: But had any Prince such
an Absolute Authority over the Estates of all his Subjects, that he could give
or take them away as he pleased, then such Reasons as these would justify the
exercise of such a Sovereign Will and Power in transferring Estates and
Properties, and all men would allow it to be very just and righteous. Now this
is the Case with respect to God, as I observed before; for he is the sole Lord
and Proprietor of the world; and therefore no other bounds can be set to the
just exercise of his Authority, but to do what is wise and good: He may give or
take away any man's Estate, or Honor, or Power, whenever he can serve any
wise, or just, or good ends by it; for they are all but several Trusts; we are
but God's Stewards, and must give an Account of our Stewardship: and if we do
not use our Riches and Honors well, or when he has no longer any use of us, he
has as Absolute Authority to lay us aside, as a Lord has to change his Steward,
when he pleases.

Thus God is the Absolute Lord of all men: we are all his Creatures, and are in
his hands, as Clay in the hands of a Potter; and therefore he may deal with us
as he pleases, and may serve the ends of his own Glory and Providence of us, as
far as his own Wisdom and Goodness will direct. Thus for instance; we think it
very unjust in Human Governments to punish a virtuous and innocent man, to
strip him of his Estate or Honors, to afflict his body, to expose him to
public scorn, and confine him to a noisome Prison, and at last to take away his
life with exquisite Pains and Torments: But the Sovereign Authority of God
extends to all this, when he can serve his own Glory, and the wise ends of his
Grace and Providence by it, without doing any real injury to his Creatures. The
Wisdom of God requires, that there should be very great and excellent Reasons
for doing this; and the Goodness of God requires, that such good men should be
greatly supported under their sufferings, and greatly rewarded for them; but
then the Sovereignty of God gives him Authority to use the Services of his
Creatures, in doing or suffering his Will.

This was the Case of Job, whom God exercised with great sufferings, to make
him an eminent Example of Faith and Patience; but we know what was the end of
Job, and how greatly God rewarded his Sufferings; tho Job himself, while he was
under these sufferings, knew not what other account to give of them, but to
resolve all into the Sovereign Will and Pleasure of God. The Lord gave, and the
Lord has taken away, and blessed be the name of the Lord. And, Shall we
receive good at the hands of God, and shall we not receive evil? Which indeed
is Answer enough to all such Cases, while we have an implicate Faith in the
Wisdom and Goodness of Providence.

Thus God dealt with Joseph, made him the Instrument of transplanting his
Father and all his Family into Egypt; and rewarded his sufferings, by advancing
him to Pharaoh's Throne.

Nay, thus God dealt with Christ himself, who, as man, was Perfect and
Innocent, who did no evil, neither was any guile found in his mouth; who went
about doing good, and was obedient to his Father's Will in all things; and yet
him God delivered into the hands of sinners, to suffer an ignominious and
painful Death, for the Redemption of the world. And the Sovereignty of God will
justify the greatest Sufferings of the most innocent men, when they serve such
admirable Ends, and are so greatly rewarded.

And thus God has dealt with some of the best men that ever lived in the world:
Witness the Sufferings of Prophets, and of other good men under the Old
Testament, and of the Apostles and Martyrs of Christ, who have trod in the
steps of their Lord, who have suffered with him, that they might be glorified
together. I know not what the Sovereignty of God signifies, if he may not serve
the wise ends of his Grace and Providence, even by the Sufferings of his
Creatures, when such Sufferings, how uneasy and grievous soever they are at
present, shall turn to their much greater good; when they shall be so greatly
rewarded, that good men themselves shall think the reward an abundant
recompense for their sufferings, and glory in those very sufferings which will
have so great a reward.

Thus let us consider God as the Supreme and Absolute Judge of the World: Now a
Sovereign and Absolute Judge must do that which is just, but he is tied up by
no Rules or Formalities of Law, as Inferior Ministers of Justice are; if he
reward the good, and punish the wicked, he may do it at what time and in what
manner he pleases: He is under no rule but his own Sovereign Will and Wisdom.
When men have deserved Punishment, he may spare them as long, or execute
Vengeance on them as soon as he sees fit; for he is the Absolute Judge of time,
and place, and other circumstances of executing Judgment. This Prerogative all
Sovereign Princes challenge; and it is indeed an inseparable Right of
Sovereignty.

So that it is no reasonable Objection against the Justice of Providence, That
God does not immediately reward all great and virtuous actions, nor immediately
punish wickedness, for a Sovereign Justice is under no obligation to do this:
All that we can expect from the Divine Justice is, That good men shall be
rewarded, and the wicked punished; and that whenever God does reward or punish,
good men shall have no reason to complain, that their reward was delayed; nor
bad men to glory in the long delays of punishment; but the greatness of the
Rewards or Punishments shall recompense for all delays; for then God is just in
rewarding good men, and punishing the wicked, how long soever he delay either.
Sovereign Justice is not confined to time; and when the Sufferings of good men,
who deserve a Reward, and the Prosperity of bad men who deserve Punishment, and
the delays of both are taken into the account, God is very Just and Righteous,
how long soever he delay to reward or punish.

From what I have now discoursed concerning the Sovereignty of the Divine
Justice, you may easily observe, That all the Objections against the Justice of
Providence, have no other Foundation, but our Ignorance of the Nature of God's
Justice; we measure the Justice of Providence by the Rules of Justice among
men, without considering that God is the Sovereign Lord of the world, and
therefore has a Right and Authority superior to men, and therefore a superior
Justice too.

It is unjust for men to deprive one another of their Just and Legal Lights,
and therefore they think this a Reflection on the Justice of Providence too,
when men suffer wrongfully; but no man has any Right against God, who is the
sole Proprietor of the world; and therefore he may give, and he may take away,
he may set up and pull down, and do whatsoever pleases him, both in Heaven and
in Earth.

It is unjust for men to afflict and oppress the innocent and virtuous, or to
encourage and prosper the wicked; and therefore they complain against
Providence too, when good men suffer, and the wicked are prosperous; but God
has an Absolute Right to the services of all his Creatures, both of good and
bad men; and if he can serve the Wise Ends of his Grace and Providence, by the
Sufferings of good men, or by the Prosperity of the wicked; and when he has no
farther use of their services, rewards or punishes them according as they
deserve; the Sovereignty of God will justify the present Sufferings of good
men, and Prosperity of the wicked; and their final Rewards and Punishments will
vindicate his Justice.

2dly. But for a fuller Vindication of the Justice of Providence, we must
consider the Nature of God's Government of this lower world, and what Acts of
Justice the present Government of the world requires. The Justice of Government
must be proportioned to the Nature and Ends of Government; for all acts of
Justice are not proper at all times* and it is no Reproach to the Justice of
Providence, if God do not exercise such acts of Justice as are not proper for
the present state of the world; for Justice is Rectitude; and what is not right
and fit in such a state of things, is not just.

The great Objection against the Justice of Providence is, That all good men
are not rewarded, nor all bad men punished according to their deserts in this
world: But this is no Objection against the Divine Justice, to those who
believe that there is another world, where all good men shall be rewarded, and
all wicked men punished; for if all good and bad men shall be finally rewarded
and punished according to their works, this is a sufficient Vindication of the
Justice of God.

And as for the Justice of Providence, tho every good man is not rewarded, nor
every bad man punished in this world, this is no reasonable Objection, if the
state of this world will not admit of such a strict and exact Justice. Now not
to take notice at present of what is commonly said upon this occasion, and what
I have formerly discoursed more largely, That this world is not the place of
Judgment, but a state of Trial, Probation, and Discipline; where good men many
times suffer, not so much in Punishment of their sins, as to exercise their
Faith and Patience, and to brighten their Virtues, and to prepare them for
greater Rewards; and bad men are prosperons, to lead them to Repentance, or to
make them Instruments of the Divine Providence, in chastising the Wickedness of
other men, or the more remarkable Examples of the Divine Justice and Vengeance
in their final ruin.

I say, not to take notice of these things now, I shall only observe, That the
Justice of Providence is nothing else but the Justice of Government, which in
the nature of the thing must be distinguished from the Justice of the final
Judgment.

Now to govern the world, does not signify to destroy it, but to uphold and
preserve it, and to continue a succession of men in it, and to keep it in as
good order, as the present state of things will admit. The Providence of God,
is that Provident Care which he takes of all his Creatures, while he thinks fit
to preserve this present Frame of the World; but to destroy the World, is not
properly an Act of Providence, but of Judgment; and yet if we consider the
corrupt and degenerate state of the world, did the Justice of Providence
require God to punish all bad men according to their deserts, he must destroy
far the greatest part of mankind in every Age. This earth would soon be little
better than a desolate Wilderness, if none but good men were suffered to live
in it: But this kind of Justice God has renounced ever since the Universal
Deluge. He then indeed exercised such a terrible Justice and Vengeance, as some
men think can be the only proof of a Providence; he destroyed the whole World
by Water, excepting Noah and his Sons, whom he preserved in the Ark; but he
promised that he would never do so again, notwithstanding the great Wickedness
of mankind. The Lord said in his heart, I will not again curse the ground any
more for man's sake; for the imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth:
neither will I again smite any more every living thing, as I have done. While
the earth remains, seed-time, and harvest, and cold, and heat, and summer,
and winter, and day, and night, shall not cease, 8. Genesis 21, 22. So that God
will no more destroy the world, nor all the wicked Inhabitants of it, till the
day of Judgment; and then it is certain all wicked men cannot be punished
according to their deserts in this world.

The Justice of Providence then does not consist in rooting all bad men out of
the world, or in making them all miserable in it, or in rewarding all good men
with Temporal Felicity; which considering the present state of the world,
cannot be done without constant Miracles, and the visible interposition of a
Divine Power; for when bad men are so much the greater numbers, they will have
the greatest share and interest in this world: But the Care of Providence is to
govern bad men, and to protect the good; to restrain and govern the Lusts and
Passions of bad men, to make them the Instruments and Executioners of his just
Vengeance on one another; and to make some of them in every Age notorious
Examples of his Justice, to keep the world in awe, and to awaken in them a due
sense and reverence of the Divine Power; and to correct and chastise the
Miscarriages of good men, and to exercise their Graces and Virtues. The Justice
of Providence consists in this, Not that all good men shall be prosperous in
this world, and all bad men miserable; but that notwithstanding all the
Wickedness that is in the world, the world is kept in tolerable order, and is a
tolerable place to live in; and that bad men are as often punished, and good
men as often rewarded, as the government of this world requires; that no man
suffers any thing but what he deserves, and what God sees good for him, if he
will make a wise use of it; and that how prosperous soever bad men are, there
are few of them go out of the world, without some Marks and Tokens of a Divine
Vengeance, tho not always so remarkable, as to be observed by the world.

The Sum is this; God is very Just in his Government of the World; but the
Government of the World does not require the same Acts of Justice that the
final Judgment of Mankind does: And if we do but consider the Nature of the
Divine Justice, which is the Justice of a Sovereign and Absolute Lord, and the
difference between the Justice of Providence, and of the final Judgment, that
is, between God's Governing and Judging the World, we shall easily answer all
the Objections against the Justice of Providence.

This I take to be a full and true Account of the Justice of Providence, and to
agree very exactly with the actual Administration of Providence: For it is
manifest, that all good men are not rewarded, nor all wicked men punished in
this world; that a Righteous Cause is sometimes oppressed; and that Oppression
and Injustice is very often prosperous; which must needs appear a great
Difficulty to those who make no difference between the Justice of God and Men;
who think that the Justice of Providence is as much concerned to defend all
men's Rights and Properties, as the Justice of a Prince is. This makes them
quarrel against Providence, when they are hardly and unjustly used by men, and
so blinds their minds, that they see not the true Reasons why God afflicts
them, and neither reverence his Judgments, nor make a wise use of them.

The Reasons of this seem very plain; the only Question is, How it agrees with
that account which the Scripture gives us of God's Justice and Righteousness?
For the Righteousness of God is represented in Scripture, by loving
Righteousness, and favoring a Righteous Cause. Thus 11. Psalm 7. The righteous
Lord loves righteousness, and his countenance does behold the upright. And the
Psalmist very often encourages himself to expect the Divine Favor and
Protection, from his own Innocence and Integrity, and the Righteousness of his
Cause: 35. Psalm. 19. Let not them that are mine enemies wrongfully, rejoice
over me; neither let them wink with the eye, that hate me without a cause. Stir
up thy self, and awake to my judgment, even to my cause, my God, and my Lord.
Judge me, O God, according to thy righteousness, and let them not rejoice over
me. Let them be ashamed and brought to confusion together, that rejoice at my
hurt. Let them be clothed with shame and dishonor, that magnify themselves
against me. Let them shout for joy, and be glad, that favor my righteous
cause; yea, let them say continually, Let the Lord be magnified, which has
pleasure in the prosperity of his servant. 23, 24, 26, 27. v. The Lord shall
judge the people: Judge me, O Lord, according to my righteousness, and
according to mine integrity that is in me. Oh let the wickedness of the wicked
come to an end, but establish the just; for the righteous Lord tries the heart
and reins. God judges the righteous, and God is angry with the wicked every
day. If he turn not, he will whet his sword; he has bent his bow, and made it
ready: And concludes, I will praise the Lord according to his righteousness,
and will sing praises to the name of the Lord most high; 7. Psalm. 8, etc. Where
the Righteousness of the Lord, for which the Psalmist praises him, is his
Judging and Defending a Righteous Cause. Thus in 9. Psalm 8, 9, 10. He shall
judge the world in righteousness, he shall minister judgment to the people in
uprightness. The Lord also will be a refuge to the oppressed, a refuge in time
of trouble. And they that know thy name. will put their trust in thee; for
thou, Lord, have not forsaken them that seek thee. It were easy to multiply
Texts to this purpose, where God is expressly declared to be an irreconcilable
Enemy to all Injustice and Violence, the Protector of the Widow, the
Fatherless, and Oppressed, and of all just and righteons men: But those
conclude a great deal too much, who would prove from such Texts as these, That
no Righteous Man, nor Righteous Cause, shall ever be oppressed: That good men
shall always be prosperous, and the wicked always miserable; for it is evident,
that this was not the state of the world when these Psalms were penned; and
therefore this could not possibly be the meaning of them.

How many Complaints does the Psalmist make against his Enemies, those who were
wrongfully his Enemies? 69. Psalm 4. That his Enemies were lively and strong;
and they that hated him wrongfully were multiplied, 38. Psalm 19. How
passionately does he pray for Protection against his Enemies? How long will thou forget me, O Lord, for ever? how long will thou hide thy face from me? how
long shall I take counsel in my soul, having sorrow in my heart daily? how long
shall mine enemy be exalted over me? 13. Psalm 1, 2. The 37th. Psalm is a plain
proof, that wicked men were very prosperous in those days, tho they are
threatened with final destruction. And to the same purpose the 73d. Psalm gives
us a large description of the Prosperity and Pride of bad men, many of whom
spend their lives, and end their days prosperously: I was envious at the
foolish, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked: For there are no bands in
their death, but their strength is firm. They are not in trouble as other men,
neither are they plagued as other men. -- Behold these are the ungodly, who
prosper in the world, they increase in riches. The Prosperity of bad men, and
the Miseries and Afflictions of the good, were in those days a great Difficulty
in Providence, and were so to the Psalmist himself; and therefore it is
certain, that whatever he says of the Righteousness of God, and his care of
Righteous men, and his abhorrence of all Wickedness and Injustice, cannot
signify, That God will always defend men in their just Rights; that he will
always prosper a Righteous Cause, and Righteous Men, for this was against plain
matter of fact; and we cannot suppose the Psalmist so inconsistent with
himself, as in the same breath to compalin that wicked men were prosperous, and
good men afflicted; and to affirm, That the Just and Righteous Judge of the
World would always punish Unjust Oppressors, and protect the Innocent: Nay,
indeed the very nature of the thing proves the contrary; for there can be no
Unjust Oppressors, if no body can be oppressed in their just Rights; and
therefore it is certain the Divine Providence does at least for a time suffer
some men to be very prosperous in their Oppressions, and does not always defend
a just and innocent Cause; for if he did, there could be no innocent oppressed
man to be relieved, nor any Oppressor to be punished. And if it be consistent
with the Justice and Righteousness of Providence to permit such things for some
time, we must conclude, that it is at the discretion of Providence, how long
good men shall be oppressed, and the Oppressor go unpunished.

The plain account then of this matter, as it is represented in Scripture, is
this:

1. That as God is infinitely Just and Righteous himself, so he loves Justice
and Righteousness among men; he loves Righteousness and Righteous Men, and
hates all Injustice, Violence and Injuries; for the Righteous Lord must love
Righteousness, and hate Iniquity: and therefore, though the Divine Justice is
Superior to all Human Rights, and his Authority Absolute and Sovereign, to
dispose of all his Creatures, and of all they have, as his own Wisdom directs,
yet men cannot invade each other's Rights without Injustice; and when Rights
and Properties are settled by Human Laws, it is the Rule of Righteousness to us,
to give to every man that which is his own; and it is the Justice of Government
to punish those who invade another's Rights; and this is that Justice which the
Righteous Lord loves in men, and the violation of which he hates.

So that the Justice of the Divine Nature makes God love Righteousness and
Justice, and hate all Injustice and Oppression; and the Justice of Providence
requires that God should punish Injustice and Violence, and protect the Just
and Innocent, as far as the nature and ends of God's Government of the World
requires; and this the Scripture everywhere declares, that God will do: That he
is angry with the wicked every day; That he is a refuge and sanctuary, and
strong tower and rock of defense to Just and Righteous men. Not that every
particular bad man, who does unjust things, shall be immediately punished for
his Unjustice; nor that every man, who has a just and righteous Cause, shall be
protected from the violence and injustice of the Wicked; for the Experience of
all the World proves, that this never was done, and therefore this cannot be
the meaning of the Promises and Threatenings of Scripture: But there is enough
meant by it to vindicate the Justice of Providence in this World, to be a
support to good men, and a terror to the wicked.

1. For first, it signifies, That in the ordinary course of Providence, where
there is nothing but the justice or injustice of the Cause to be considered,
God will favor a just and righteous Cause. There may be other wise Reasons,
why God may suffer a just Cause to be oppressed, and Injustice to be
prosperous; and we ought to believe, that there are always wise Reasons for it,
when God does suffer this, because we certainly know, that God is no favourer
of Injustice: but he who has a just Cause, may for other Reasons deserve to be
punished, and then God may justly punish him by unjust Oppressors; and thus
Injustice may be prosperous, and Justice oppressed; but where the other sins
and demerits of the man do not forfeit God's protection of a just Cause, the
Divine Providence will make a visible distinction between just and unjust.

2dly, And therefore no man can promise himself the Divine Protection, but only
when his Cause is just and right. Which is the reason, why the Psalmist, as you
have already heard, so often pleads his own innocence and integrity, and the
righteousness of his Cause, to move God to save and defend him. For God has
promised his protection upon no other terms; and whenever Injustice prospers,
it is not in favor to the unjust man, or his unjust Cause, but in punishment
to others, whom God thinks fit to correct and chastise by such injustice. Tho
wickedness may prosper for a while, there is no way to obtain the Divine Favor
and Protection, but by doing good; for a Righteous God can have no favor for
an unjust Cause; and therefore if we believe that God governs the World, we
must expect his protection only in the ways of Righteousness, and this will
give us a secure hope and dependence on God, That we shall not be ashamed,
while we have respect unto all his commandments.

3dly, And for the same Reason, though Injustice may prosper for a time, no
unjust man can be secure from a Divine Vengeance; God does not always punish
bad men as soon as they deserve it; but sometimes he does, and he is always
angry with them, and therefore they are always in danger. God is angry with the
wicked every day; if he turn not, he will whet his sword, he has bent his bow,
and made it ready, he has also prepared for him the instruments of death, he
has ordained his arrows against the persecutors, 7. Psalm 11, 12, 13.

4thly, And therefore though every particular good man be not rewarded, nor
every bad man punished in this World, yet the Divine Providence furnishes us
with numerous Examples of Justice, both in the protection and defense of good
men, and in the punishment of the wicked. This is so notoriously known, that no
man can deny it, That besides the ordinary Miseries and Calamities of Sinners,
which are the natural and necessary effects and rewards of their Sins, and make
them the scorn, and the pity of Mankind, God does very often execute very
remarkable Judgments upon remarkable Sinners, which bear the evident Tokens and
Characters of a Divine Vengeance on them, and does appear as wonderfully for
the preservation of just and good men in a Righteous Cause. Both Sacred and
Profane Story, and our own observation may furnish us with many Examples of
both kinds, which are sufficient to vindicate the Justice of Providence, and
the truth of those Promises and Threatenings which are made in Scripture.

2dly, The better to understand that Account the Scripture gives us of the
Justice of Providence, I observe, That the protection and defense of Providence
is never promised in Scripture merely to a just and righteous Cause, but only
to just, and righteous, and good men. This is not commonly observed; and yet as
soon as it is named, it is so evident, that it needs no proof; and the
consequence of it is very considerable.

We cannot indeed separate a just and righteous Man from a righteous Cause; for
as far as he is engaged in an unjust Cause, he is an unjust Man: but if the
Divine Protection be promised to the righteous Man, not to the righteous Cause,
then a righteous Cause may be oppressed, when the man has no right to God's
Protection, without any impeachment either of the Righteousness or Justice of
God: Which shows the difference, as I observed before, between the Justice of
Providence, and the Justice of Human Governments. The Justice of Human
Governments considers men's Rights, the Justice of Providence considers their
moral Deserts. Human Justice defends bad men in their just Rights, the Divine
Justice, which is supreme and absolute, has no regard to Human Rights, when the
men deserve to be punished. For God challenges to himself such an absolute
right and propriety in all things, as to give or take them away when he
pleases. And therefore he threatens Israel by the Prophet Hosea, that since
they had served Baal with the Corn, and Wine, and Oil, and Silver, and Gold,
which he gave them, Therefore will I return and take away my corn in the time
thereof, and my wine in the season thereof, and will recover my wool, and my
flax, given to cover her nakedness, 2. Hos. 8, 9.

The 26. Levit. contains the Promises and Threatenings to Israel; and the
Condition of both is, their keeping or transgressing his Laws, and Statutes,
and Commandments; if they observed his Laws, he would bestow all good things on
them; if they transgressed his Laws, he would take them all away, without any
regard to their Rights or Properties. Among other Judgments, he threatens them
to deliver them into the hands of their Enemies, who should oppress them in
their own Land, or carry them captive into strange Countries. This destroyed
all their Rights and Properties at once; and yet I suppose no man will say,
that the Philistines, or Moabites, or Aramites, had any right to invade Canaan,
and to bring Israel under their Yoke: and Nebuchadnezzar had no better right
than they, when he destroyed the Temple and City of Jerusalem, and carried the
Jews captive to Babylon; but God was very just and righteous in this, though he
did not defend them in their just Rights, because they had deserved such
punishments. And thus throughout the Book of Psalms, the protection of the
Divine Providence is promised only to good and righteous men, to those who love
God, who fear, and reverence, and worship, and put their trust in him; that if
men be not thus qualified, whatever their Cause is, they have no right to the
Protection of Providence. And this is the Justice of Providence, not to secure
Human Rights, but to protect and defend good men, and to punish the wicked.

3dly, We may observe also in Scripture, That notwithstanding the Justice of
Providence, and God's love to Righteousness, and to righteous Men, he still by
a Sovereign Authority reserves to himself a liberty to correct and chastise
good men, and to exercise their Graces and Virtues, and to serve the ends of
his own Glory by their Sufferings. We must distinguish between Acts of
Discipline and Justice, which have very different ends and measures, as the
Correction of a Child differs from the Execution of a Malefactor. For whom the
Lord loves, he chasteneth; and scourges every son whom he receives. He
corrects us for our profit, that we may be partakers of his holiness, 7. Heb.
7, 8, 9. Very good men may fall into such great sins, as may deserve a severe
correction, not only to give them a greater abhorrence of their sins, and make
them more watchful for the future, but to be an Example to others; and in such
cases Repentance it self, though it will obtain their pardon, will not excuse
them from Temporal Punishments, as we see in the Example of David, when he had
been guilty of Adultery and Murder; upon his repentance God declared his
pardon by the Prophet Nathan, but would not remit his punishment, which was not
so much an act of Justice and Vengeance, as of necessary Discipline. And these
are generally the many Afflictions of the Righteous, out of which the Psalmist
tells us, God will at last deliver them; whereas the Punishments of the Wicked,
when God, after a long patience, awakes to judgment, are usually for their
final ruin and destruction.

Thus good men may have many secret failings and miscarriages, known to none
but God and themselves, which may deserve severe corrections; which sometimes
are made an argument against the Justice of Providence, when the correction is
visible, but the causes for which they are corrected, unknown.

Other good men suffer for the trial of their faith, which is more precious
than of gold which perishes; and are trained up by great severities to
heroical degrees of Virtue. All this is very reconcilable with God's love of
Righteousness, and righteous Men, for it is the effect of this Love: And thus
good Men for a time may visibly suffer as much as the wicked, which occasions
such Complaints, that all things fall alike to all; but such Corrections as
these are not properly Acts of Justice, but of Discipline; not so much for the
punishment of Good men, as to make them better; not the effects of Anger, but
of Love.

4thly, We may observe in Scripture also, That God exercises a Sovereign
Authority in exercising his Judgments upon Wicked men. He does not always
punish them as soon as they deserve punishment, but sometimes waits patiently
for their return; sometimes uses them as the Instruments of his Justice to
punish other Bad men, or to correct the Miscarriages, and to exercise the
Graces and Virtues of Good men; and when he has finished what he had to do by
them, reserves them for a more public and glorious Execution, to be the
Triumphs of his just Vengeance, and standing Examples to the World, which we
know was the case of Pharaoh, and the King of Assyria, of Antiochus, and some
great Persecutors of the Christian Faith.

Thus have I shown you, wherein the Justice of Providence consists, both from
the nature of the Divine Justice, and the Ends of God's Government in this
World, and from the Account the Scripture gives us of it; which will enable us
to answer all the Objections against the Justice of Providence.

I shall observe but one thing more, That it is evident from this Discourse,
that we must not judge of the goodness of any Cause by external and visible
Success; much less make the oppression of a just Cause any argument against the
Justice of Providence. For Justice does not oblige God always to favor a just
Cause, when those who have a just Cause deserve to be punished. God may justly
punish Bad men by unjust Oppressors, for he is the Sovereign Lord of the World,
and can dispose of his Creatures as his own Absolute Authority, and
Unsearchable Wisdom shall direct.

CHAP. VI.
The Holiness of Providence.
THE next Enquiry is concerning the Holiness of Providence. For God is a Holy
Being, as Holiness is opposed to all Impurity and Wickedness; and such as God's
Nature is, such his Government must be; and therefore the Psalmist, 145. Psalm
17. assures us, That the Lord is not only righteous in all his ways; which
signifies the Justice of Providence, which I have already discoursed of; but he
is holy in all his works, as he tells us more at large, 5. Psalm. 4, 5, 6, For
thou art not a God that has pleasure in wickedness, neither shall evil dwell
with thee: The foolish shall not stand in thy sight; thou hate all workers of
iniquity: thou shall destroy them that speak leasing; the Lord will abhor the
bloody and deceitful man. And yet there want not Objections, and such as some
men think inexplicable difficulties, against the Holiness of Providence. And
therefore my design at present is to set this in as clear a light as I can; and
to that end I shall enquire

1. What the Holiness of God requires of him in the Government of the world.

2. What it does not require of him. And

3. What is Inconsistent and Irreconcilable with the Holiness of Providence.

And if God Governs the World, as his Essential Holiness requires, that he
should Govern it; if what men ignorantly Object against Providence be no just
impeachment of his Holiness; and if nothing be justly chargeable on Providence,
which is inconsistent and irreconcilable with the Holiness of the Divine
Nature; I suppose I need then add no more to vindicate the Holiness of
Providence.

1. Now as for the first, the case seems very plain, That the Holiness of a
Governor, in the Government of Reasonable Creatures and Free Agents, can
require no more of him, than to command every thing that is Holy, and to forbid
all kinds and degrees of Wickedness, and to encourage the practice of Virtue,
and to discourage all Wicked practices, as much as the Wisdom of Government,
and the freedom of human Actions will allow.

That God does all this, wherein the Holiness of Government consists, I know no
man that denies: As wicked as Mankind is, it is not for want of holy, and just,
and good Laws; The law of the Lord is an undefiled law, converting the soul;
the testimony of the Lord is sure, and gives wisdom unto the simple: the
statutes of the Lord are right, and rejoice the heart; the commandment of the
Lord is pure, and gives light unto the eyes. The fear of the Lord is clean and
endures for ever; the judgments of the Lord are true, and righteous
altogether. 19. Psalm. 7, 8, 9. The great complaint is, That the Laws of God are
too Holy for the Corrupt state of this World, and most men think to excuse
their Wickedness by the degeneracy of human Nature, and the too great Purity
and Perfection of the Divine Laws, which they have no Ability to perform.

Now the Holiness of God's Laws are an undeniable Argument of the Holiness of
his Providence and Government, whether we consider these Laws as a copy of his
Nature, or a declaration of his Will; much more if we consider them both as his
Nature, and his Will, as all Moral Laws, which have an eternal and necessary
Goodness in them are; for the Divine Nature and Will, must be the rule and
measure of his Providence and Government, unless he Govern the World contrary
to his own Nature and Will. Nay, Laws themselves are not only the Rule of
Obdience to Subjects, but of Government to the Prince; and it is universally
acknowledged to be as great a miscarriage in a Prince, not to Govern by his own
Laws, as it is in Subjects not to obey them. Princes may be guilty of such
miscarriages, but God cannot; and therefore the Laws he gives to us, are the
Rules of his own Providence; and then the Holiness of his Laws prove, that his
Government and Providence must be very Holy.

And indeed we have very visible and sensible proofs of this in that care he
takes to encourage the Practice of Virtue, and to discourage Wickedness. This
he has done by those great Promises which he has made to the Observation of his
Laws, and by those terrible Threatenings which he has denounced against the
breach of them, both in this World and in the World to come: But this is not
what I mean, for men can despise both Promises and Threatenings if they do not
see the Execution of them; and the Promises and Threatenings of the other World,
which are much the most considerable, are out of sight, and do not so much
affect Bad men; and that which is most proper for us to consider here, is how
the external Administrations of Providence encourage Virtue, and discourage
Wickedness and Vice.

Now those who believe that all the Miseries that are in the World are the
effects or rewards of Sin, as all men must do, who believe the Scripture; nay
as all men must do, who believe that a Just and Good God governs the World,
must confess that the Divine Providence has done abundantly enough to
discourage Wickedness: For it is visible enough how many Miseries there are in
the World: So many, and so great, as are commonly thought a reproach to
Providence; but if they be the just recompense of Sin, they are only an
Argument of the Justice and Holiness of Providence.

If we believe the Scripture, Mortality and Death, and consequently all those
Infirmities and Decays of Nature, all those Pains and Sicknesses and Diseases,
which are not the effect of our own Sins, or which we do not inherit from our
more immediate Parents, as an entail of their Sins, are owing to the Sin of
Adam which brought Death upon himself and all his Posterity; and such a curse
upon the earth, as has entailed Labor and Sorrow on us.

As for many other Miseries and Calamities of life, they are visibly owing to
our own, or to other men's Sins; Such as Want and Poverty, Infamy and Reproach,
Seditions and Tumults, violent Changes and Revolutions of Government, and all
the Miseries and Desolations of War. Take a survey in your thoughts of all the
several sorts of Miseries, which are in the World, and tell me what place they
could find here, by what possible means they could enter into the World, were
Sin banished out of it? What Miseries could disturb Human life, were all men
Just, and Honest, and Charitable, did they love one another as themselves?
Perfect Virtue is not only an innocent and harmless, but a very beneficial
thing; it does no hurt, but all the good it can, both to it self and others;
and when there is nothing to hurt us, neither within, nor without, we can
suffer no hurt.

And is not this a sufficient proof of the Holiness of Providence, that God has
so ordered the nature of things, and the circumstances of our life in this
World, that if men will be Wicked, they shall be Miserable? Can any thing in
this World more discourage men from Sin, or make them more zealous to reform
themselves and the rest of Mankind, than so many daily and sensible proofs,
that there is no expectation of a secure state of rest and happiness, while
either they themselves, or other men, with whom they must of necessity
converse, or have something to do, are Wicked.

For you must remember, that I am not now a vindicating the Justice, but the
Holiness of Providence; and therefore it is no Objection against what I have
now said, That many times virtuous and innocent men suffer very greatly by the
Violence and Injustice of the wicked: Tho this may be an Objection against the
Justice of Providence, which I have already accounted for, yet it is no
Objection against the Holiness of Providence, but a great justification of it;
for the more effectual care God has taken to give all mankind an abhorrence of
all Wickedness both in themselves and others, the more undeniable proof it is,
of the Holiness of God's Government; and this is more effectually done by the
evils which we suffer from other men's wickedness, than from our own. Men who
are very favorable to their own Vices when they feel the Pleasures and
Advantages of them, learn to hate, to condemn, to punish them, by feeling what
they suffer from other men's sins: When they lose their own Estates by Injustice
and Violence, or their Good Names by Reproaches and Defamations, or are injured
in the Chastity of their Wives and Daughters by other men's Lusts; this gives
them a truer sense of the evil of Injustice, Defamation, and Lust, and makes
them condemn these Vices in themselves, how well soever they love them. This is
the foundation of Human Government, which keeps Mankind in order, and lays
great Restraints upon men's Lusts; for did not all Mankind suffer by one
another's sins, I doubt neither good nor bad men would be so zealously
concerned to punish and suppress Vice; and therefore the Divine Providence
could not have taken a more effectual course to discourage Wickedness, than to
make all Mankind sensible of the evil of sin, by making them all at one time or
other feel the evil of sin, in what they suffer by their own or other men's
sins. For were all men convinced (and it is strange that their own sense and
feeling will not convince them), that all the evils and miseries of life are
owing to sin, and that it is impossible to be happy without reforming
themselves and others as far as they can, what more powerful Argument could
Providence offer to us to reform the world?

There are another sort of Calamities, and very terrible ones too, which those
who believe a Providence, can attribute to nothing else but the just Judgment
and Vengeance of God upon a wicked world: Such as Plague, and Pestilence, and
Famine, Deluges, and Earthquakes, which destroy Cities and Countries; and more
ordinary Accidents, when they act in such an extraordinary manner, as if they
were directed and guided by an unseen hand.

A great many such Instances are recorded in Scripture, and expressly ascribed
to the Judgment of God: God has threatened such Judgments in Scripture, and
therefore when we see them executed, we must conclude, That they are inflicted
by God, as the just Punishment of Sin. Nay, those very evils and miseries which
we suffer by other men's sins, are in Scripture attributed to God, who has the
Supreme Disposal of all Events.

For, as I observed before, it is not sufficient proof, that these Judgments
are not ordered by God, that we can find some immediate Causes for them; that
some of them are owing to Natural Causes, others to Men, others to some
surprising and unusual, or, it may be, usual Accidents; for whoever believes a
Divine Providence, does not therefore believe that God does every thing
immediately by his own Power, without the Ministry of any Second Causes, either
Natural, or Free Agents, or what we call Accidents; but he is only obliged to
believe, That God governs all Second Causes to produce such Effects as he sees
fit; That all Nature moves at God's Command; That fire and hail, snow and
vapors, wind and storm, fulfill his word, 148. Psalm. 8. v. That both good and
bad men are under his Government, and the Ministers of his Providence; and that
what seems perfect Chance to us, is directed by his Wisdom and Counsel; and
then whatever evils we suffer, and whatever the immediate Causes of them be, we
must ascribe them all to God; especially when the same kind of Judgments, which
had the same kind of immediate Causes, are attributed to God in Scripture, it
is reason enough for us, whenever such Judgments befall us, to ascribe them to
the Providence of God.

But I need not dispute here, Whether all those Evils and Calamities which
befall sinners, are ordered and appointed by God; for till they can prove a
priori, by direct and positive Arguments, That there is no God nor a
Providence, (which none of our Modern Atheists pretend to do) while they
dispute only by way of Objection, they must prove, that things are not so
ordered as they ought to have been ordered, did God govern the world; and if we
can prove that they are, their Objection is answered. Now with respect to my
present Argument, to vindicate the Holiness of Providence, it is plain beyond
all contradiction, that things are so ordered for the discouragement of
Wickedness, and the encouragement of Virtue, as if they had been so ordered on
purpose by the greatest Wisdom, and the most perfect Holiness; and therefore we
have reason to believe, that they were so ordered by a Wise and a Holy
Providence.

As far then as to command and encourage all Holiness and Virtue, and to forbid
and discourage all Wickedness and Vice, is a Proof of the Holiness of
Providence, I hope I have sufficiently cleared this Point; and I must desire
you to observe, That these are direct and positive Proofs, such as every man
may understand, and cannot avoid the evidence of, and therefore are not to be
shaken by every Difficulty objected against them: For our knowledge is so
imperfect, that there is nothing almost which we so certainly know, but is
liable to such Objections as we cannot easily and satisfactorily answer; but
one plain positive Proof is a better Reason to believe any thing, than a
hundred Objections against it, are not to believe it; because since it is
confessed on all hands, that our knowledge is very imperfect, it is no reason to
disbelieve what we do know, and what we are as certain of, as we can be of any
thing, because there are some things relating to the same subject, which we do
not know; and therefore unless the Objection be as positive and evident as the
proof is (and I am sure, there are no such Objections against the Holiness of
Providence) we may very reasonably acknowledge that there are some difficulties
which we do not understand, and yet may very reasonably believe on as we did.

2dly. Let us now consider, What the Holiness of God's Providence and
Government does not require of him: And I shall name but one thing which some
men make a great Objection against Providence, viz. That there is so much Sin
and Wickedness daily committed in the World. Now if the being of Sin in the
World, or if the Wickedness of men, were irreconcilable with the Holiness of
Providence, this were an unanswerable Objection against it; for it cannot be
denied, but that Mankind are very wicked. But what consequence is there in
this, that God cannot be Holy, nor his Providence Holy, because Men are wicked?
We may as well prove that there is no God, because there is a Devil. Such
conceits as these tempted some ancient Heretics, to assert Two Principles, a
Good and a Bad God, because they thought, that if there were but one God, and
he very good, there could be no such thing as evil in the World.

But would any man think this a good Argument against the Holiness of a Prince
and his Government, that he has many Wicked Subjects? and how then do the Sins
of men come to be an Argument against the Holiness of Providence?

To state this in a few words; When we speak of God's permitting Sin, we either
mean the internal, or the external Acts of Sin.

1. The internal Act of sin; which is nothing else but the choice of the Will:
When men choose that which is wicked, and fully resolve and purpose, as they
have opportunity, to do it. This is the sin, this makes us guilty before God,
who knows our hearts, though Human Laws can take no cognizance of it; as our
Savior tells us, He that looks upon a woman to lust after her, has
committed adultery with her already in his heart. He who intends, and resolves
it, and wants nothing but an opportunity to commit adultery, is an Adulterer.

If God then must not permit sin, he must not suffer men to will and to choose
any thing that is wicked, for this is the sin; herein the immorality of the Act
consists. Consider then what the meaning of this is, that God must not leave
men to the liberty of their own choice, but must always overruled their minds
by an irresistible Power to choose that which is good, and to refuse the evil.
But will any one say, that this is to govern men like men? Is this the natural
government of free Agents, to take away their liberty, and freedom of choice?
Does government signify destroying the nature of those Creatures which are to
be governed? does this become God, to make a free Agent, and to govern him by
necessity and force?

This, I confess, is a certain way to keep Sin out of the world, but it thrusts
Holiness out of the world too; for where there is no liberty of choice, there
can be neither moral good, nor evil; and this would be a more reasonable
objection against the Holiness of Providence, that it banishes Holiness out of
the world.

I grant, that God governs the minds of men as well as their external Actions;
directs and influences their Counsels, suggests wise thoughts to them, excites
good men to great and virtuous Actions, and lays invisible restraints upon the
Lusts and Passions of Bad men; turns their Hearts, changes their Counsels, and
diverts them from ill-laid Designs, especially when they have no external
restraints on them, and the pursuing such Counsels would be very hurtful to the
world, or to the Church of God; nay, I deny not, but in such cases God may by
an irresistible power and influence govern the minds of men, not to make them
good, but to make them the instruments of Providence in doing such good, as
they have no inclination to do; and to chain up their Passions, that they may
not do that hurt which they intended to do; as I have shown at large above.

And I see nothing in this, Chap. 3.
which unbecomes the Wise and Sovereign Lord of the world; sometimes by an
immediate power to govern the minds, as well as the bodies of men, that they
shall no more be able to will and choose, than they are to do, what they
themselves please. For though God has made man a reasonable Creature, and free
Agent, he has not wholly put him out of his own power, but that when he sees
fit, he can lay invisible restraints upon him, or clap a counter bias upon his
mind, which shall lead him contrary to the natural tendency of his own Will and
Lusts: Thus it is in the natural World; though God has endowed all Creatures
with natural Virtues and Qualities, and in the ordinary course of his
Providence suffers them to produce their natural effects, yet he has reserved
to himself a Sovereign Authority over Nature, to reverse its Laws, or suspend
its influences by an immediate and supernatural Power; and I see no reason, why
God may not do this in the moral, as well as in the natural world, when the
good government of the world requires it.

But though God may thus sometimes by a Supernatural Power influence the minds
of men, and chain up their Lusts and Passions, yet this is not the natural
government of mankind, considered as free Agents; and it would no more become
God always to overruled men's Wills in this manner, than it would always to
overpower Nature, and to govern the natural world, not by its natural Virtues
and Powers, but by constant Miracles.

And if the ordinary and natural government of mankind, considered as
reasonable and free Agents, requires that God should leave men to the liberty
and freedom of their own choice, which is the only thing that can be judged,
and that is capable of Rewards and Punishments; then it is no reasonable
objection against the Holiness of Providence, that God permits men to choose
wickedly, that he does not always by an Irresistible and Sovereign Power hinder
the internal acts of Sin. Especially when we consider, that God gives men all
those internal assistances of his Grace, and lays all those internal restraints
upon their Lusts and Passions, which are consistent with the liberty of Human
Actions. Though we know not in what manner the Holy Spirit works upon the minds
of men, yet this we know, if we believe the Gospel of our Savior, That God
works in us both to will, and to do, of his own good pleasure: That he gives
his holy spirit to those who ask him, to be a principle of a spiritual life in
them: And Bad men themselves, if they will but confess what they feel, must
tell you, what strugglings they find in their own minds, before they can yield
to the temptations of sin: How in some cases, especially at their first
entrance upon a sinful course of life, natural modesty, in others natural pity
and compassion, in others a natural greatness and generosity of mind, gives
check to them; how at first they blush at the thoughts of any wickedness, and
are reproached by their own Consciences for it; how they tremble at the
thoughts of a future Judgment, or some present Vengeance to overtake them; and
can never sin securely, till they have laughed away the thoughts of God, and of
another world. Such care God has taken to make Sin uneasy to the minds of men,
and to reconcile them to the love of Virtue; and if after all, they will be
wicked (as free Agents may be, if they will) this can be no blemish to the
Holiness of Providence; because it is no fault of Providence to leave free
Agents to the freedom of their own choice.

2dly, As for the external Acts of Sin, it must be confessed, that God permits
a great deal of wickedness to be actually committed; such as Thefts, Murders,
Adulteries, Perjuries, and the like. Now this requires a different
consideration; for in Human Governments, this is thought a great miscarriage,
to suffer any wickedness to be actually committed, which we can hinder the
commission of. No man would be thought innocent, much less a Prince, who should
see a man murdered, a Virgin deflowered, a Robbery, or any other Villainies
committed, without interposing to hinder the commission of such wickedness,
when it was in his power to do it; and how then can we vindicate the Holiness
of Providence, which sees and observes, and could easily hinder the commission
of such wickedness, as it daily permits? Now rightly to understand this matter,
we must consider,

1. That God cannot always by an immediate Power hinder the actual commission
of sin, without a perpetual violation of the order of Nature, and therefore
this does not properly belong to an ordinary Providence, which is the
government of all Creatures according to their Natures. We know indeed, That
when Jeroboam in great anger stretched out his hand against the Prophet, who
cried against the Altar at Bethel, his hand immediately dried up, so that he
could not pull it in again; 1 Kings 13. 4. And that when Vzziah would have
usurped the Priests Office to burn Incense, he was immediately smitten with
Leprosy, 2 Chronicles. 26. 19. And there is no other way but this, for God by an
immediate power to hinder the actual commission of sin, to take away men's
lives, or their natural powers of acting, which may be of great use sometimes,
when God sees fit to work Miracles, but ought to be as rare as Miracles are;
for such a way as this of hindering sin would quickly put an end to the world,
or to the commerce and conversation of it, and is properly to judge the world,
not to govern it.

2dly, And therefore though God does take care to prevent a great deal of
wickedness, which men intend and resolve to commit, and watch for opportunities
of committing; yet he does it not by an immediate Supernatural Power, but in
Human ways; and for this reason commands us, not only to do no wickedness our
selves, but by our Advice, and Counsels, and Reproofs, Authority and Power, to
hinder other men from doing wickedly; and this is one way whereby God hinders
the actual commission of many sins, by obliging us to hinder the commission of
them as much as we can: Which shows, how men are obliged to hinder the
commission of those sins, which God is not obliged by an immediate and
Supernatural Power to hinder.

3dly, To be sure, for God to permit the actual commission of sin, can be no
greater blemish to the Holiness of Providence, than to permit men to conceive
sin in their hearts; for therein the moral evil consists, when the Will chooses
and consents to it: The external Action may be a Natural, Political, or
Oeconomical Evil, but the moral Evil is in the Will and Choice. And therefore
the permitting or hindering the external commission of sin, does not so properly
concern the Holiness, as the Justice and Goodness of Providence; for to hinder
the actual commission of sin, does not prevent the guilt of sin, for the man
has the guilt of those sins, which he would, but could not commit; but it
hinders that mischief which the actual commission of sin would have done to
other men by murdering their persons, or defiling their Wives, or robbing them
of their Estates and good Names.

4thly. And therefore there may be wise reasons for God to permit the external
commission of many Sins, as acts of Judgment and Vengeance on other Sinners, or
as Acts of Correction and Discipline on Good men. For since God very rarely
Punishes Bad men, or Corrects Good men by an immediate Power; and yet
Punishments or Corrections are the proper Exercise of Providence; it cannot
unbecome God to make the Sins of some, the Corrections and Punishment of
others; that it is so, is so visible, that I need not prove it: For few men
suffer any great Evils, but from other men's Sins: And if God take care as most
certainly he does, to direct the evil which men's Sins do, to light upon those
who deserve to suffer by them; it is a mighty vindication of the Wisdom and
Justice of Providence, and a sufficient reason why God should permit the
external Commission of Sin.

5thly. Especially considering how many Wise and Good ends God can serve by
permitting Sin; as to render Sin it self infamous and hateful by the great
mischief it does in the World; to expose the Sinner himself to shame and
punishment; which both deters other men from Sin, and contributes very much to
reform the Sinner: Nay, many times God brings about great and excellent designs
by the Sins of men, both for the advancement of his own Glory, and the good of
Mankind, of which many instances may be given, were it needful; which is no
excuse for men's Sins, nor any reason why God should order and overruled men by
his Providence to commit such Sins, but is a very justifiable reason, why God
should permit the actual commission of Sin, when he can bring good out of evil,
and serve the Wise ends of his Providence by it.

6thly. And therefore lastly, God does hinder the actual commission of Sin, as
often as he sees fit to hinder the evil and mischief, which such Sins will do,
as I have already observed; sometimes he very remarkably disappoints wicked
Designs from taking effect, as it was in the case of Haman and Mordecai, when
the Jews were devoted to destruction: And we have as many instances of this
nature, as we have discoveries of Plots and Treasons against the Lives of
Princes, and the Peace of Church and State; or private designs against the
Lives and Fortunes of private men; and how much unknown Wickedness the Divine
Providence every day prevents, we cannot tell; but all the Wickedness Mankind
would commit, but cannot, must be attributed to the restraints and prevention of
Providence; and then I doubt not but every Bad man can give a great many
instances of such disappointments which he himself has met with; that as much
Evil as there is committed in the World, yet considering the great Wickedness
and Degeneracy of Mankind, we have reason to believe, That God hinders a
hundred times more than he permits: And considering the Wisdom and Justice of
Providence, it becomes us to think, That God never permits the actual
commission of any Sin, but he Orders it for some Wise and Good ends. And this I
hope is sufficient to vindicate the Holiness of Providence, notwithstanding so
much Wickedness, as is daily committed.

3dly. The Divine Providence is not justly chargeable with any thing, that is
utterly inconsistent and irreconcilable with the Holiness of Government.

Now since the permission of Sin is very reconcilable with the Holiness of
Providence, there can be no other reasonable Objection against it, unless we
could prove by plain and undeniable evidence, that God is the Cause and Author
of Sin; and this indeed would prove, that God does not Govern the World with
Holiness, if he had any proper efficiency in the Sins of men: That is, did God
tempt men to Sin, or by any secret influences and impulses incline, and even
compel them to Sin.

But the least thought and imagination of this is a very great Blasphemy, and
the greater and more unpardonable Blasphemy, because there is no temptation to
suspect any such thing of God. There is no way of knowing this, but either by
our own Sense and Experience, or by Reason, or by Revelation.

As for our own Sense and Experience, this can prove nothing: For no man finds
any other force or impulse, but from his own lusts and sinful inclinations;
Every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust and enticed. 1.
James 14. Those who charge God with inclining men's hearts to Wickedness, yet
confess, that this is done by such secret influences, as no man can distinguish
from the workings of his own mind; which is plainly to confess, that they
cannot tell by their own sense and feeling, that they are thus moved and
inclined by God; but only charge their Sins on God to excuse themselves. Every
man feels what it is that tempts him, his love of Riches, of Pleasures, or
Honors; and that the temptation and impulse is weaker or stronger, in
proportion to his fondness and passion for these tempting Objects; but yet he
feels himself at liberty to choose and determine himself, and finds a Principle
within him, which resists and opposes his compliance with the temptation, as
contrary to the Will and Law of God, and the dictates of right Reason, and that
for which God will Punish him. And is there any reason for men to charge their
Sins upon God, when the only thing that gives check to them, and makes Sin
uneasy, is the conviction of their own Consciences; that it is what God has
forbid, and what he will punish. This I think is no evidence of God's tempting
and inclining men to Sin, that he has imprinted on our minds such a natural
sense of his abhorrence of all Evil, and such a natural awe and dread of his
Justice that while we preserve this sense strong and vigorous, no temptation
can fasten on us.

If we appeal to Reason, the Reason of all Mankind proves, That God does not,
and cannot, tempt, incline, and overruled men to choose or to act any
Wickedness; for this is a direct contradiction to the Holiness and Purity of
his Nature, and the Justice of his Providence. All mankind believe God to be
perfect Holiness, which is essential to the very notion of a God; and Reason
tells us, that such a Pure and Holy Being cannot be the Author of Sin; nor were
it possible to vindicate the Justice of Providence in the punishment of sin,
did men sin by Divine Impulses, or by Necessity and Fate.

And the Scripture teaches this in express words, Let no man say, when he is
tempted, I am tempted of God: For God cannot be tempted with evil, neither
tempts he any man, 1. James 13. And all the Laws, and Promises, and
Threatenings, Exhortations, Reproofs, and passionate Expostulations, which we
meet with in Scripture, if they mean any thing sincere, do necessarily suppose,
that men sin freely; and that God is so far from inclining and tempting men to
sin, that he does all that becomes a Wise and Holy Being to restrain and deter
them from it.

Now when we have such direct and positive Proofs, that God is not, and cannot
be, the Author of Sin; it is certain, that we can have no direct and positive
Proof that he is, nor is any such Proof pretended; and then some remote and
uncertain Consequences, which are owing to our Ignorance, or confused and
imperfect notions of things, or to some obscure Expressions of Scripture, are
not, and ought not to be thought sufficient to disprove a direct and positive
Evidence; no more than the difficulties about the nature of motion, are a just
reason to deny that there is any motion, when we daily see and feel our selves
and the whole world move. And yet such kind of Difficulties as these, is all
that is pretended to charge the Providence of God with the Sins of men; the
most material of which I intend at this time to examine.

1. One, and that the most plausible pretense to destroy the Liberty of Human
Actions, and to charge the Sins of men upon God, is his Praescience and
Foreknowledge of all Future Events. That God does foreknow things to come, is
generally acknowledged by Heathens, Jews and Christians; and Prophesy is a
plain demonstration of it; for he that can foretell things to come, must
foreknow them.

Now from hence they thus argue, What is certainly fore-known, must certainly
be; and what is thus certain, is necessary: and therefore if all future Events
are certain, as being certainly foreknown; then all things, even all the Sins
of men, are owing to Necessity and Fate: And then God, who is the Author of
this Necessity and Fate, must be the Cause and Author of men's Sins too.

Now in answer to this I readily grant, That nothing can be certainly
fore-known, but what will certainly be; but then I deny, that nothing will
certainly be, but what has a necessary Cause. For we see ten thousand effects
of free or contingent Causes, which certainly are, though they might never have
been; for whatever is, certainly is; and whatever certainly is now, was
certainly, though not necessarily, future a thousand years ago. That man
understands very little, who knows not the difference between the necessity,
and the certainty of an Event. No Event is necessary, but that which has a
necessary Cause, as the rising and sitting of the Sun; but every Event is
certain, which will certainly be, though it be produced by a Cause which acts
freely; and might do otherwise, if it pleased, as all the free Actions of men
are; some of which, though done with the greatest freedom, may be as certain,
and as certainly known, as the rising of the Sun. Now if that which is done
freely, may be certain; and that which is certain, may be certainly known; then
the certainty of God's Foreknowledge only proves the certainty, but not the
necessity of the Event: And then God may foreknow all Events, and yet lay no
necessity on mankind to do any thing that is wicked.

In the nature of the thing, foreknowledge lays no greater necessity upon that
which is fore-known, than knowledge does upon that which is known; for
foreknowledge is nothing but knowledge; and knowledge is not the cause of the
thing which is known, much less the necessary cause of it. We certainly know at
what time the Sun will rise and sit every day in the year, but our knowledge is
not the cause of the Sun's rising or sitting: Nay, in many cases, in proportion
to our knowledge of men, we may with great certainty foretell what they will do,
and how they will behave themselves in such or such circumstances; and did we
perfectly know them, we should rarely, if ever mistake; for though men act
freely, they do not act arbitrarily, but there is always some bias upon their
minds, which inclines and draws them; and the more confirmed habits men have of
Virtue or Vice, the more certainly and steadily they act, and the more
certainly we may know them, without making them either virtuous or vicious.

Now could we certainly know what all men would do, before they do it, yet it
is evident, that this would neither make, nor prove them to be necessary
Agents. And therefore, though the perfection of the Divine Knowledge is such,
as to know our thoughts afar off, before we think them, yet this does not make
us think such Thoughts, nor do such Actions.

How God can foreknow things to come, even such Events as depend upon the most
free and contingent Causes, we cannot tell; but it is not incredible that
Infinite Knowledge should do this, when Wise men, whose Knowledge is so very
imperfect, can with such great probability, almost to the degree of certainty,
foresee many Events, which depend also upon free and contingent Causes: And if
we will allow, that God's Praescience is owing to the perfection of his
Knowledge, then it is certain, that it neither makes, nor proves any fatal
necessity of Events. If we say indeed, as some men do, that God foreknows all
things, because he has absolutely decreed whatever shall come to pass, this I
grant does infer a fatal necessity; and yet in this case, it is not God's
Foreknowledge, but his Decree, which creates the necessity: All things, upon
this Supposition, are necessary, not because God foreknows them, but because by
his unalterable Decrees he has made them necessary; he foreknows, because they
are necessary, but does not make them necessary by foreknowing them; but if
this were the truth of the case, God's Praescience, considered only as
fore-knowing, would be no greater perfection of knowledge, than men have, who
can certainly foreknow what they certainly intend to do, and it seems God can
do no more. But thus much we learn from these men's Confession, That
Foreknowledge, in its own nature, lays no necessity upon Human Actions; that if
God can foreknow, what he has not absolutely and peremptorily decreed, how
certain soever such Events may be, his Foreknowledge does not make them
necessary. And therefore we cannot prove the necessity of all Events from God's
Foreknowledge, till we have first proved, that God can foreknow nothing but
what is necessary: That is in truth, That there is no such Perfection as
Praescience belonging to the Divine Nature; for to foreknow things in a Decree,
or only in necessary Causes, is no more that perfection of Knowledge, which we
call Praescience, than it is Praescience in us, to know what we intend to do to
morrow, or that the Sun will rise to morrow. But that God's Foreknowledge is
not owing to a necessity of the Event, and therefore cannot prove any such
necessity, is evident from hence, That the Scripture, which attributes this
Foreknowledge to God, does also assert the liberty of Human Actions, charges
men's Sins and final Ruin on themselves, sets before them Life and Death,
Blessing and Cursing, as I observed before: Now how difficult soever it may be
to reconcile Praescience and Liberty, it is certain, that Necessity and Liberty
can never be reconciled; and therefore if men act freely, they do not act
necessarily; and if God does foreknow what men will do, and yet men act freely,
then it is certain that God foreknows what men will freely do: That is, That
Foreknowledge is not owing to the necessity, but to the perfection of
Knowledge: And this is enough to satisfy all Christians, who cannot reason
nicely about these matters, that this Argument from Praescience to prove the
necessity of Human Actions, and consequently to charge men's Sins upon God, must
be fallacious and deceitful, because the Scripture teaches the Foreknowledge
of God, and yet charges the guilt of men's Sins upon themselves: And if we
believe the Scripture, we must believe both these; and then we must confess,
that Praescience does not destroy Liberty.

2dly, Another Objection against the Holiness of Providence, is this; That God
does not only foreknow, but decrees such Events, as are brought to pass by the
Sins of men; and therefore at least in such Cases, he must decree men's Sins
too. We have a famous Example of this in the Crucifixion of our Savior: Never
was there a more wicked Action committed, and yet St. Peter tells the Jews,
that this was the effect of God's Counsel and Decrees. Him, being delivered by
the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, ye have taken, and by wicked
hands have crucified and slain, 2. Acts 23.

But if we consider the words carefully, this very Text will answer the
Objection. For what does St. Peter say was done by the determinate counsel and
foreknowledge of God? Did they take him, and by wicked hands crucify and slay
him by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God? This is not said; but
he was delivered, that is, put into their power, by the determinate counsel and
foreknowledge of God, and then they took him, and with wicked hands slew him:
And then we must observe, that here are two distinct Acts of God relating to
this Event; The determinate counsel, and the foreknowledge of God. The Will or
Counsel of God, which he had fore-ordain'd, and praedetermined, the (...) was,
that Christ should die an Expiatory Sacrifice for the Sins of the world, which
was a work of such stupendous Wisdom, Goodness, Holiness and Justice, that
nothing could more become God, than such Counsels and Decrees. But then by his
Infinite Praescience and Foreknowledge he saw by what means this would be done,
if he thought fit to permit it; viz. by the Treachery of Judas, by the Malice
of the Scribes and Pharisees, and by the Compliance of the Roman Powers; and
this he determined to permit, and to deliver him up into their hands; the
certain effect of which would be, that they would take him, and with wicked
hands crucify him, and slay him. So that though God did decree, that Christ
should die, yet he did not decree, that Judas should betray him, or that the
Scribes and Pharisees, and Pontius Pilate should condemn and crucify him; but
this he foresaw, and this he decreed to permit, and to accomplish his own Wise
Counsels for the Salvation of mankind by such Wicked Instruments; and there is
nothing in all this unworthy of God, or unbecoming the Holiness of his
Providence. And thus it is with reference to all other Events, which are
decreed by God; He never decrees any thing but what is holy and good; and
though he many times accomplishes his Wise Decrees by the Wickedness and Sins
of men, yet he never decrees their Sins; but by his foresight and wonderful
Wisdom, so disposes and orders things, as to make their Sins, which they freely
and resolvedly commit, and which nothing but an irresistible Power could hinder
them from committing, serve the Wise and Gracious ends of his Providence. This
is Wisdom too wonderful for us; but thus we know it may be, and thus the
Scripture assure us it is.

3dly. Another pretense for charging God with the Sins of men, is from some
obscure expressions of Scripture; which, when expounded to a strict literal
sense, as some men expound them, seem to attribute to God some kind of
Causality and Efficiency in the Sins of men.

But unless we will make the Scripture contradict it self, it is certain, that
those few Texts, which seem to make God the Author of Sin, are misunderstood:
Because not only some few particular Texts, but all the natural Notions we have
of God, the very nature and design of Religion, and three parts of the Bible,
either directly, or by necessary consequence, prove the contrary. And supposing
then, that we could give no tolerable account of such Texts, is it not more
reasonable to conclude, that it is only our ignorance of the Eastern Language
and Phrase, which makes them obscure and difficult to us, than to expound them
to such a sense, as contradicts all the rest of the Bible?

But I do not intend this for an Answer, or as some will call it an Evasion,
but shall consider these Texts particularly. And the first place relates to
God's hardening Pharaoh's heart, that he should not let the People of Israel
go, notwithstanding all the signs and wonders which Moses wrought in Egypt: 4.
Exodus 21. Where God expressly tells Moses, that he would harden Pharaoh's heart;
and in the Story it self, it is several times expressed, that God did harden
Pharaoh's heart; and he who hardens the heart, seems to be the efficient Cause
of all those Sins, which such a hard heart commits.

Now rightly to understand this, which has given so much trouble to Divines,
there are many things to be considered.

Hardness of heart is a Metaphorical expression, and signifies such a firmness
and obstinacy of temper or resolution, as will yield to no motives or
persuasions, that will no more receive any impressions, than a hard and
impenetrable Rock. And therefore to harden the heart, is to give it such a
stiffness and obstinacy, as will not yield. But then there are several ways of
hardening men's hearts, and some of them very Innocent and Holy, as well as
Just; and before we charge the Divine Providence upon this account, we must
know in what way God hardens: immediately to infuse into men's hearts an
unrelenting hardness and obstinacy in a sinful course, is inconsistent with the
Holiness of Providence, and would in the most proper sense make God the Author
of Sin; but though God says, he would harden Pharaoh; he does not say, that he
would infuse hardness into Pharaoh's heart.

For we may observe, That men who have first hardened themselves, take the most
innocent occasions to grow harder; nay, are hardened by such usage, as would
either break or soften other men: And those who treat them in such a manner, as
their wicked hearts abuse to harden themselves, may be said to harden them; as
in common speech, we charge those with undoing and hardening their Children and
Servants, who have spoiled them by too much indulgence, or by too great
severity; and this is the account that Origin gives of it. And indeed when men
are said to harden themselves, as Pharaoh is often said to harden his own
heart, and yet God is said to harden them; there can be no other account given
of it but this, that men take occasion from what God does; take occasion, where
no occasion was given, to harden themselves, as St. Paul observes the Jews did
from God's patience and long-suffering, 2. Rom* 4, 5. Or despisest thou the
riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and long suffering; not knowing that
the goodness of God leads thee to repentance; i.e. should lead thee to
repentance, not harden thee in Sin, though it have another effect through thy
own wickedness. But after thy hardness and impenitent heart, growest more hard
and impenitent by God's forbearance, and treasurest up unto thy self wrath
against the day of wrath and the revelation of the righteous judgment of God.
And thus God hardened Pharaoh, or thus Pharaoh took occasion to harden himself,
from those Judgments which ought to have softened him; and God foreseeing that
this would be the effect of it, says, I will harden Pharaoh's heart; not, I
will infuse hardness into him, but, I will do such things as I certainly know
his hard and wicked heart will improve into new occasions, and new degrees of
hardness. For it is no reason either for God or men to forbear doing what
Wisdom, and Justice, and Goodness direct to be done, because hardened Sinners
will harden themselves the more by it. And that this is the truth of the case
appears from the whole Story.

That which hardened Pharaoh, and made him so resolved not to part with Israel,
was the great advantage he made of their Service and Bondage, which made him
impatient to think of sending away a people, which were so useful to him. To
conquer this obstinate humor God sends Moses to deliver Israel with a mighty
arm, and outstretched hand. Moses wrought such mighty Wonders, and inflicted
such miraculous and terrible Judgments on Egypt, as any one would have thought
the most proper means, not to have hardened, but to have broken and subdued the
most hardened hearts; but this had a contrary effect upon a hardened Pharaoh,
and it is visible what it was that hardened him.

Some of these Signs and Wonders were imitated by the Magicians, as turning
their Rods into Serpents, and Water into Blood, and bringing Frogs upon the
Land; and upon this he hardened his heart; though the Plague of Frogs was so
grievous, that it made him somewhat relent, and promise to let the People go,
and Sacrifice unto the Lord, if the Frogs might be removed; but then God's
goodness in removing this Plague hardened him, as it is expressly observed, That
when Pharaoh saw there was respite, he hardened his heart, 8. Exodus 15. And
thus it was in the succeeding Judgments; while any judgment was upon him, he
yielded, and promised fair to let the people go; that had any one of those
Judgments continued on him till he had parted with Israel, he had certainly
sent them away long before; but when he saw one Judgment removed after another,
he thought there would be an end of them at last, and it were better to endure
a while than to part with Israel; and thus God hardened his heart, and he
hardened his own heart; till the Death of all the Firstborn put him, and his
Servants, and all the People into such a terrible fright, that they were glad
to get rid of Israel to save their own Lives.

And to complete all, God still hardened Pharaoh's heart to pursue after
Israel, that he might overthrow him and all his Host in the Red Sea: And for
that end, God led the people about through the way of the wilderness of the red
sea, that Pharaoh might say, They are entangled in the land, the wilderness
has shut them in: and it was told the king of Egypt, that the people fled: and
the heart of Pharaoh and of his servants was turned against the people; and
they said, Why have we done this, that we have let Israel go from serving us?
14. Exodus 2, 3, 4, 5. The report of their flying, and the apprehension of their
being entangled in the Wilderness, made Pharaoh and his Servants quickly forget
what they had suffered in Egypt, and think of nothing but the loss of the
Service of Israel, which hardened them to a new pursuit, and was ordered by God
to that end, that he might be honored upon Pharaoh, and upon all his Host.
This is the account the Scripture gives us of God's hardening Pharaoh's heart,
which contains nothing that unbecomes a Wise and a Holy Being. For though it
can never become a Holy God to infuse hardness into men's hearts; yet when men
have hardened themselves, and will abuse all the Wise methods of Providence to
harden themselves, and are now ripe for destruction, it very much becomes a
Just and Righteous God, to exercise them with such Providence as he knows will
still harden them, till they make themselves such infamous examples of
Wickedness, as may deserve a more glorious and exemplary Vengeance: Which is
another thing to be considered in the case of Pharaoh, and very necessary to
the full understanding this difficult case of God's hardening men's hearts.

God had peremptorily decreed, not only to deliver Israel, but to punish Egypt,
both King and People for the cruel oppression of Israel. And therefore he might
without any more solemnity have destroyed Pharaoh, his People, and Land, and
have carried Israel out of Egypt with a mighty hand: But when they had deserved
to be Punished and Destroyed, and God had resolved to Punish them, the manner
of their Punishment was at the free disposal of the Divine Wisdom; and
therefore he chose to Punish them in such a way, as might make the Glory and
Power of the God of Israel known to the World. And this is the very account
which God himself gives, why he took such a course with Pharaoh, as he foresaw
would harden and confirm him in his resolutions of not parting with Israel,
when he could have forced him at the expense of fewer Miracles to have sent
them away, if he had so pleased. I will harden Pharaoh's heart, and multiply my
signs and wonders in the land of Egypt. But Pharaoh shall not hearken unto you,
that I may lay my hand upon Egypt, and bring forth mine armies, and my people
the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt by great judgments. And the
Egyptians shall know that I am the Lord, when I stretch forth my hand upon
Egypt, and bring out the children of Israel from among them, 7. Exodus 3, 4, 5.
The same thing he tells Pharaoh. I will at this time send all my plagues upon
thy heart, and upon thy servants, and upon thy people, that thou may know,
that there is none like me in all the earth. For now I will stretch out my
hand, that I may smite thee and thy people with pestilence, and thou shall be
cut off from the earth. And in very deed for this cause have I raised thee up,
have all this time preserved thee, and not cut thee off, for to show in thee my
power, and that my name may be declared throughout all the earth, 9. Exodus 14,
15, 16. And this reason God gives why he hardened Pharaoh's heart to pursue
Israel, I will be honored upon Pharaoh and upon all his host, that the
Egyptians may know, that I am the Lord, 14. Exodus 4. This is diligently to be
observed to vindicate the Holiness and Justice of Providence. For though God
infuses no hardness into men's hearts, yet if he exercise them with such
Providence, as he foresees will harden them, and does this with an intention
and design to harden them; this signifies his Will to harden them, and such a
moral Efficiency in using hardening Providence, as will as certainly harden
them, as if he had infused hardness into them. And this makes little
difference, whether God hardens men by external Providence, or by an internal
Operation on their minds; when he intends such Providence to harden them, and
knows that they will effectually do it.

Now I readily grant, that tho God infused no hardness into Pharaoh's heart,
nor did any thing which unbecomes a holy God to do; yet he did intend to harden
him, and did intend to harden him on purpose to multiply his Judgments on
Egypt, and to destroy him and all his Host in the Red Sea; for this is so
plainly expressed, that we cannot deny it. Nay, I readily grant, that the
Providence of God would be justly chargeable with men's Sins, did he without any
respect to the merit and desert of the Persons, by such insensible methods
betray them into sin, with an intention to harden them: For what man is there
of such a firm and constant virtue, as to be able to resist all Temptations,
which a long series of Providence, chosen and directed for that purpose by a
Divine Wisdom, could bring him into?

But yet when men have sinned themselves into such a hardened state, as to
deserve to be destroyed; and when God is so far provoked by their Sins, as to
resolve to destroy them, it becomes the Wisdom, and the Justice of God, without
any impeachment of his Holiness, to harden men by external Events and
Appearances; not in Sin, which can never become a Holy God, but in such ruinous
Courses as their own wicked hearts betray them to, and as will bring inevitable
ruin on them. And this is the true resolution on this Case;

1. That God never hardens any men till they have deserved, and he is resolved
to destroy them.

2. That then he does not harden them in Sin, but in such Ruinous Counsels as
their own Sins betray them to.

3. That all this is done, not by the natural, or moral efficacy, but by their
own wicked abuse of the Divine Providence.

4. To complete all, When God has thus determined to destroy any Person, or
People, he many times inflicts on them a penal blindness and infatuation, not
to see the things which concern their peace.

These four Particulars contain a full and easy account of this perplexed
Doctrine of God's hardening men's hearts; and therefore I shall speak
distinctly, but briefly to them.

1. That God never hardens men, till they have deserved, and he is resolved, to
destroy them. This must be laid as the foundation of all; for by what means
soever God hardens men, how innocent soever they may appear, if he intends to
harden them, not because they deserve, and he has determined to destroy them,
but only that they may deserve to be destroyed, and that he may with some fair
appearance of Justice destroy them; it would be impossible to satisfy equal and
impartial Judges of the Justice and Holiness of Providence: But if men have
hardened themselves in Sin beyond all the ordinary methods of recovery, and
have so provoked a good and merciful God, that he gives them over to ruin and
destruction; then by what means soever they are hardened, which are not
directly sinful, there can be no just reason to question either the Justice, or
Goodness, or Holiness of God, upon this account. For when men have sinned to
that degree, as to deserve immediate destruction, and to provoke God to pass a
final Sentence on them; God may either immediately destroy them, or keep them
in that hardened state, like condemned Malefactors reserved in Chains, for a
more public and solemn Execution. And this is all that is meant by God's
hardening men, and this all mankind must allow to be just and holy.

This was the case of Pharaoh and the Egyptians, who had so grievously
oppressed Israel, that God was resolved to punish them for it: And therefore he
sent Moses to inflict a great many Miraculous Judgments on them, not intending
thereby to convince Pharaoh, who had hardened himself against the power of
Miracles to convince him, and whom he had resolved to destroy; but only to lay
Egypt waste, and to take a signal Vengeance upon that Cruel Persecutor, by
overthrowing him and his Host in the Red Sea: And therefore he so ordered the
execution of these Judgments, that the hardened heart of Pharaoh should grow
more hardened by them.

Thus when God had determined to cut off Ahab, as his grievous Sins had long
before deserved, he intended to harden him to go up to Ramoth Gilead, and fall
there; and for that purpose suffered a lying Spirit to enter into his Prophets
to encourage the King in that Fatal Expedition; and as God had foretold, they
did prevail against Micaiah the Prophet of the Lord, who plainly told him, that
he should fall in it, 1 Kings 22.

Thus when God was so provoked with the Sins of Judah, that he had resolved to
deliver them into the hands of the Chaldaeans, who should destroy their City
and Temple, and carry them captive to Babylon, he pronounced this hardening
Sentence on them, Go, and tell this people, Hear ye indeed, but understand not;
and see ye indeed, but perceive not. Make the heart of this people fat, and
make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes; lest they see with their eyes, and
hear with their ears, and understand with their hearts, and convert, and be
healed. What this means, ye shall hear more hereafter; all that I observe at
present, is, That this Sentence was not pronounced against them, till God had
resolved to carry them into captivity, and to lay their City and Country
desolate, as the Prophet tells us in the next Verse. Then, said I, Lord, how
long? And he answered, until the cities be wasted without Inhabitants, and the
houses without man, and the land be utterly desolate, 6. Isaiah 9, 10, 11.

And this was the state of the Jews in our Savior's days, when God had
determined the final destruction of the Jewish Nation, their City, Temple and
Polity, for their great Sin in crucifying their Messiah, as Christ tells us,
23. Matthew. 37, 38, 39. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Thou that killest the Prophets,
and stonest them that are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy
children together, even as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye
would not? Behold your house is left unto you desolate. For I say unto you, ye
shall not see me henceforth, till ye shall say, blessed is he that comes in
the name of the Lord, 19. Luke 41, 42, 43, 44. And when he came near he beheld
the city, and wept over it; saying, If thou had known, even thou, in this thy
day, the things which belong unto thy peace, but now they are hid from thine
eyes. For the days shall come upon thee, that thine enemies shall cast a trench
about thee, and compass thee round, and keep thee in on every side; and shall
lay thee even with the ground, and thy children within thee; and they shall not
leave in thee one stone upon another: Because thou know not the time of thy
visitation.

Now with respect to this final Sentence which God had pronounced against them,
though he delayed the execution of it for forty years, St. Paul applies to them
the Case of a hardened Pharaoh, whom God spared also a great while, as he did
them, though he had determined to destroy him by a signal overthrow; to show
his power, and that his name might be declared throughout all the earth. And
there was no reason to quarrel with God, though he delayed to destroy them for
some years after he had determined to destroy them, to make them also a more
remarkable Example of a just Vengeance, and more glorious Power. What if God
willing to show his wrath, and to make his power known, endures with much
long-suffering the vessels of wrath fitted for destruction? That is, delays for
many years the Execution of those whom he has decreed to destroy for their
great sins, by an irreversible Sentence: For such only are the vessels of wrath
fitted to destruction, 9. Romans 17, 22. And for the same reason he applies to
them the Prophesy of Isaiah, concerning the judicial blindness and deafness of
the Jewish Nation, when God had determined to deliver them into the hands of
the King of Babylon, which was a Prophesy of them also, and received its full
accomplishment in the final destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans, 28. Acts
26, 27. So that it is plain from all these Examples, (and I know no Example in
all the Scripture to the contrary) that God never hardens men, till he has
first determined to punish or to destroy them: And I shall only add; That this
hardening, which is the effect of God's Decree to punish, or to destroy,
relates only to some Temporal Evils and Calamities which God intends to bring
on them, not to the Eternal Miseries of the next world. God is never said to
harden any men, that he may eternally damn them, that is wholly owing to their
own hard and impenitent hearts; but God does sometimes harden men, in order to
take a more exemplary Vengeance on them in this world, which serves the wise
Ends of Providence, and makes his Power and Glory known.

2dly, This will more evidently appear, if we consider, That God is never said
to harden any men in sin, but he only hardens and confirms them in such Ruinous
Counsels as will bring that destruction on them, which God has ordained and
determined for them. They harden themselves in sin, and make it wise and just
for God to punish or destroy them; and when God resolves to do so, then
sometimes he hardens them in such Courses as will bring a Terrible Vengeance on
them.

I need instance only in the Case of Pharaoh, which is the most express Text we
have for God's hardening men. Now what did God harden Pharaoh in? Did he harden
him against believing Moses, and those Miracles which he wrought in the Name,
and by the Power of the God of Israel? No such matter; there is no such thing
said; but he hardened him not to let the People go.

Pharaoh hardened himself against believing Moses, and the Miracles he wrought,
against owning and submitting to the Power and Sovereign Authority of the God
of Israel; though when he felt the Judgments inflicted on him, they were so
uneasy, as to make him relent, and to promise to send Israel away: But his
great concernment was, how to keep Israel, and to get rid of these Plagues; and
his firm Resolution was never to part with Israel, as long as he had any hopes
that he might keep them safely. Now though it was indeed a very great evil to
disbelieve Moses, and to disobey God's Command, attested and confirmed by
Miracles; yet separated from this, it was no moral evil not to part with
Israel, who had now been the Subjects of Egypt for above Two hundred years And
therefore when the Dispute was not about believing and obeying God and Moses,
which Pharaoh had no regard to, but only whether he should let Israel go to
avoid these Plagues which he suffered for their sake; though God did not harden
him in his infidelity and disobedience, yet he did harden him against parting
with Israel; that is, he hardened him not in sin, for the infidelity and
disobedience, which was the only sinfulness of it, was wholly his own; but he
hardened him in the most Ruinous Counsel he could possibly have taken, which
would bring new Plagues on Egypt, and end in his own final Ruin.

This was the case of Ahab, God did resolve to send him to Ramoth Gilead to
fall there, and suffered a lying Spirit to enter into the Mouths of his
Prophets, and to harden him in that expedition, against the Prophetic
Threatenings of Micaiah; that all things considered, it may be said, that God
persuaded, and that God hardened Ahab to go to Ramoth Gilead. Now suppose this,
yet it is not to harden him in Sin; for it was no Sin to go to Fight against
Ramoth Gilead; but it was only to harden him in a dangerous attempt, and which
God intended should be fatal to him.

A great many Instances of this nature may be given, where God hardens men in
such courses as shall, and are intended by God to prove either a very sore
punishment to them, or their utter Ruin; but there is no one instance can be
given of Gods persuading, or tempting, or hardening men in any thing, which is
in its own nature evil. And were this well considered, it would answer and
shame a great many ignorant Objections against Providence.

3dly, But we must farther observe, That when God does thus harden men in
Ruinous Counsels, on purpose to punish or destroy them, he does nothing which
has either any natural or moral efficacy to harden them; but by their own
wickedness they abuse the Providence of God to harden themselves. This I have
particularly shown in the Case of Pharaoh: Those Signs and Wonders which God
wrought in Egypt, and that undeniable Proof that they were sent by God, in that
they were inflicted and removed at the word of Moses, and the Goodness of God
in removing one Judgment after another at his request, would have convinced and
softened other men, but hardened him.

St. Paul tell us, That the natural end and use of God's Patience and
Long-suffering is to lead us to repentance; and therefore when it hardens some
men in sinful and destructive Courses, as we too often see it does, there is no
reason to charge this on the Patience of God, but on the Wickedness of men.

God permitted a lying Spirit to enter into Ahab's Prophets to persuade him to
go against Ramoth-Gilead; and though God might very justly have left him in the
hands of those False Prophets of his own making and choosing, yet he sends his
own Prophet Micaiah, whom all Israel knew to be the Lord's Prophet, to assure
him, That if he went against Ramoth-Gilead, he should perish there. And
therefore God did not deceive Ahab, but he deceived himself, by preferring the
Prophets of Baal before the Lord's Prophet, which was owing to his own wicked
Idolatrous heart.

God never deceives or hardens any men by the external Events and Appearances
of Providence, but those, whose own lusts and wicked hearts deceive and harden
them.

There is always enough, even in those Providence, which men abuse to harden
themselves, to have reclaimed and softened them, if they would have made a wise
use of it. And when men have sinned themselves into such a hardened state as to
forfeit the protection of Providence; God may do what is wise, and just, and
holy, though he knows, that they will abuse it to their own ruin, and intends
to bring ruin on them by it. And it is a glorious vindication of the Wisdom,
and Goodness, and Holiness of God, when all the world shall see, that such men's
ruin is wholly owing to themselves, to their wicked abuse of all those wise and
gracious Methods, which would have reclaimed and saved them, if they would have
been reclaimed, and saved.

4thly, To understand the full and comprehensive notion of God's hardening men,
we must observe farther, That when God has been so far provoked, as to resolve
the final destruction of any Person, or People, he many times inflicts on them
a judicial blindness and infatuation, which betrays them to such foolish
Counsels, as must inevitably prove their ruin. That God many times does this,
the Scripture witnesses, He leads counselors away spoiled, and makes the
judges fools. He removes away the speech of the trusty (in whose Counsel men
used to confide) and takes away the understanding of the aged. He takes away
the heart of the chief of the people of the earth, and causes them to wander
in a wilderness, where there is no way. That is, entangles and perplexes their
Counsels. They grope in the dark without light, and he makes them to stagger
like a drunken man: To reel from one Resolution to another, in great
uncertainty what to do; 12. Job 17, 20, 24, 25. Thus 19. Isaiah 11, 12, 13, 14.
Surely the princes of Zoan are fools, the counsel of the wise counselors of
Pharaoh is become brutish. How say ye unto Pharaoh, I am the son of the wise,
the son of ancient kings? Where are they? where are thy wise men? and let them
tell thee now, and let them know what the Lord of Host has purposed upon
Egypt. The princes of Zoan are become fools, the princes of Noph are deceived;
they have also seduced Egypt, even they that are the stay of the tribes
thereof. The Lord has mingled a perverse spirit in the midst thereof, and they
have caused Egypt to err in every work thereof, as a drunken man staggereth in
his vomit.

We have a plain Example of this in Absalom, whom God resolved to punish for
his Rebellion against David, his King and Father; David had prayed, that God
would turn the counsel of Ahitophel into foolishness; and accordingly God so
ordered it, as to defeat the good Counsel of Ahitophel by the Advice of Hushai.
And the reason of it is given; For the Lord had appointed to defeat the good
counsel of Ahitophel, to the intent that the Lord might bring evil upon
Absalom, 2 Samuel 17. 14.

This makes men as hard as they are blind; they mistake their true interest,
flatter themselves with vain hopes, run themselves into the most apparent and
inevitable dangers, without seeing them themselves, though every body else sees
them: And something of this nature we must own in Pharaoh's Case: For without
such an infatuation, it is impossible to conceive, that he should have
persisted so long in his Resolution not to part with Israel, though it were to
the utter ruin and desolation of his Country; much less, that he should have
pursued them into the Red Sea, whose fluid Walls threatened him with immediate
destruction.

And this I take to be that blindness which God threatens against Judah, 6.
Isaiah 9, 10. Go and tell this people, Hear ye indeed, but understand not; and
see ye indeed, but perceive not. Make the heart of this people fat, and make
their ears heavy, and shut their eyes; lest they see with their eyes, and hear
with their ears, and understand with their hearts, and convert, and be healed.
For here is a double blindness taken notice of in the Text; one which they
brought upon themselves, another which God threatens to inflict on them. They
did hear, but not understand; they did see, but not perceive: that is, They
stopped their own ears, and shut their own eyes, against all the Adomonitions and
Reproofs of God's Prophets: For thus our Savior expounds it, as their own act,
and wilful voluntary blindness. 13. Matthew. 14, 15. And in them is fulfilled the
prophesy of Isaiah; (for a Prophesy it was, as it concerned the Jews in our
Savior's days, though it was a description of the actual deafness and
blindness of the Jews in the Prophet's days) which says, By hearing ye shall
hear, and shall not understand; and seeing ye shall see, and shall not
perceive. For this peoples heart is waxed gross, and their ears are dull of
hearing, and their eyes have they closed, lest at any time they should see with
their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and
should be converted, and I should heal them. And thus St. Paul represents it,
28. Acts 26, 27.

This is their sinful blindness and deafness, which is wholly owing to
themselves, and for the punishment of which God threatens them with a penal and
judicial blindness. For when God commands the Prophet to make their heart fat,
and their ears heavy, and to shut their eyes, it can signify nothing else but
his passping a final Decree and Sentence of Blindness and Deafness on them: Not
such a Blindness, as should betray them to, and harden them in sin; God may
leave men in such a state of Blindness, when they have wilfully blinded and
hardened themselves, but he never inflicts it: But such a Blindness, as would
betray them into that ruin and destruction whcih God had so justly decreed for
them: For this Blindness and Deafness which was inflicted on them in the
Prophet's days, was in order to their Captivity in Babylon, and the destruciton
of their City and Temple by the Chaldaeans; that in our Savior's days was in
order to their final destruction by the Romans; and our Savior tells us what
kind of Blindness was inflicted on them; that the things belonging to their
peace, which would preserve their Nation from being destroyed, were now hid
from their eyes, 19. Luke 42 And the Story verifies this: For certainly never
was there a greater infatuation upon any People, than upon the Jews at both
times; who forced both the Chaldaeans and Romans to destroy them, whether they
would or no; and when they intended no such thing. And many Examples there are
of such a judicial Blindness and Infatuation in every Age of the world: There
are seldom any great and remarkable Calamities, which befall any persons,
especially Nations, but Bystanders see, how they undo themselves by their own
stupid wilfulness and folly: As has been long since observed. Quos perdere vult
Jupiter, Prius dementat. That God first blinds and infatuates those, whom he
intends to destroy. And this is what the Scripture means by hardening men's
hearts, and blinding their eyes, as I hope appears from what I have now
discoursed; and no man has any reason to quarrel either with the Justice or
Holiness of God upon this account. But we have all great reason to take warning
by these Examples, lest we provoke God so long by our sins, by our own wilful
blindness and hardness, that he inflict this judicial Blindness on us, that he
shut our eyes not to see the things that belong to our peace; whcih we have so
many sad symptoms of already among us, that it is time to take warning. Nothing
can be more just, than for God to harden those men to their own ruin, who
harden themselves against his fear: So to blind those, who will not see, nor
regard their Duty, as to mistake their Interest too. And the only way to
prevent such a judicial Hardness and Infatuation, is to reverence God, to have
respect to all his Commandments; in the first place to take care of our Duty,
and then to commit our ways unto the Lord, in a secure dependence on his
Providence.

There are several other Texts of Scripture alleged to this purpose, to charge
God with the sins of men; but they will receive a shorter Answer. As,

2dly, Those Texts which ascribe what is done by the sins of men to God's
doing. But the Answer to this is plain; for God can and does bring to pass a
great many wise and holy Designs by the sins of men, without being the Author
of their sins; and it is only the Event which is attributed to God, not the
Sin, whereby such Events are brought to pass. This will appear at the first
view by considering some of these Texts.

Ioseph's Brethren sold him to the Ishmaelites, who carried him into Egypt,
where God advanced him to Pharaoh's Throne. Joseph tells his Brethren, That
though they sold him, it was God that sent him before them into Egypt to
preserve their lives: So now it was not you that sent me hither, but God, 45.
Genesis 5, 7, 8. Joseph does not say, That it was from God that his Brethren sold
him; this was their own Act, and all the wickedness of it was their own; but it
was God who sent him into Egypt, which his Brethren never thought of, nor
intended, their only concern being to get rid of him; and when God did that,
which they never intended to do, that may well be said to be God's doings, who
permitted their wickedness, and made use of it to accomplish his own wise
Counsels: as he tells his Brethren; As for you, ye thought evil against me, but
God meant it unto good, to bring to pass, as it is this day, to save much
people alive, 50. Genesis 20.

When Job was plundered by the Sabaeans, and Chaldaeans, he attributes it to
God. The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, 1. Job 21. And so must all
men say, who believe a Providence, that all the good or evil that happens to us
in this world, whoever be the immediate Instruments of it, is ordered and
disposed by God; but Job does not therefore attribute the wickedness of the
Sabaeans and the Chaldaeans to God: as if God could not govern and overruled
the wickedness of Men, and Devils, without being the Author of their wickdness.

When David had committed that great sin, in defiling Vriah 's Wife, and
contriving his murder; God threatens him by the Prophet Nathan: I will raise
up evil against thee out of thine own house, and I will take thy wives before
thine eyes, and give them unto thy neighbor, and he shall lie with thy wives
in the sight of this sun: For thou did it secretly, but I will do this thing
before all Israel, and before the sun, 2 Samuel 12. 11, 12. which we know Absalom
accordingly did by the Advice of Ahitophel, 16. chap. 20, etc.

Now that God did inflict this punishment upon David, is plain from the Text;
but that he either instigated Ahitophel to give this Counsel, or Absalom to
take it, is not said: And if God could inflict this punishment on David without
having any hand in the sin, it is no reflection on the Holiness of Providence.
All that God expressly says he would do in the case, was to put David's Wives
into Absalom's power; I will take thy wives before thine eyes, and give them
unto thy neighbor; and then foretells what the effect of this would be, and
what he intended to permit for his punishment; He shall lie with thy wives in
the sight of this sun. There was no evil in so ordering the matter, that when
David fled, he should leave his Wives behind him, which put them into Absalom's
power; and then God foresaw what Counsel Ahitophel would give, and how ready
Absalom would be to take it, unless he hindered it, which he decreed not to do
in punishment of David's Adultary. And thus to order the permission for such an
end, though it has nothing of the guilt of the sin, yet entitles God to the
event, considered as a punishment; upon which account, God may be said to do
this before all Israel, and before the sun.

Thus when Shimei cursed David as he fled from Jerusalem; David takes notice of
God's hand in it; and would no suffer Abishai to cut him off: Let him Curse,
because the Lord has said unto him, curse David, 2 Samuel 16. 10. But evey one
sees, that this must be a figurative expression, for it is not true in the
literal sense; God never commanded Shimei to curse David, nor did David believe
in a literal sense that he did; for then he would not have imputed the guilt of
it to him: Whereas we know, though he had sworn to Shimei at his return, when
he came to meet him, that he would not put him to death, yet he left it in his
dying Charge to Solomon, not to hold him guiltless, 1 Kings 2. 8, 9. But when
David said, The Lord has bidden him curse; all that he meant by it, or could
mean by it, is no more but this, That the sad Calamity which the Providence of
God had brought on him by the Rebellion of his Son Absalom, had given free
scope to Shimei's old and inveterate hatred of him, and as effectually let
loose his reviling Tongue, as if God had in express words commanded him to
curse David: And therefore he patiently submits to this, as part of his
punishment, and a very inconsiderable part, when compared with the Rebellion of
his Son Absalom, which gave this confidence to Shimei to curse his King. Behold
my son, which came forth of my bowels, seeks my life; how much more now may
this Benjamite do it? 10. v. This is no more than what David elsewhere
complains of, That God had made him the song of the Drunkards: For Bad men will
take all the advantages which the Providence of God gives them, to reproach and
scorn, and persecute the Good; there needs no other command for this, but a
fair opportunity to do it.

Some object God's giving power to Satan, first over the Goods, and then over
the Body of Job, excepting his life: And God's permitting a lying Spirit to
enter into Ahab's Prophets to persuade him to go up to Ramoth-Gilead: But
wherein the Objection lies, I cannot tell; for, I suppose, they will not say,
That God by permitting the Devil to hurt, and to deceive, made him a malicious
and lying Spirit. Those are very unreasonable Objectors, who will not allow God
to make use of the Ministry of wicked Spirits to wise and good ends, without
charging him with their sins too.

But God himself tell us, That when a Prophet is deceived, he has deceived
him; now how is it reconcilable with the Holiness of his Nature or Providence
to deceive? 14. Ezekiel. 9. And if the prophet be deceived, when he has spoken a
thing, I the Lord have deceived that prophet, and I will stretch out my hand
upon him, and will destroy him from the midst of my people Israel.

Now to this it is commonly answered, That God permits a Lying Spirit to
possess such Prophets, as he did in the Case of Ahab; for he only speaks here
of the Prophets of Baal such Prophets, as he would cut off for their Lying
Prophesies; and how does it unbecome God to give up the Worshippers of Evil
Spirits, their Priests and Prophets, to be inspired and deceived by them? No
true Worshipper of God was under any temptation to be deceived by them, because
they were not the Prophets of God; and God had always his own Prophets among
them, to warn them against such lying Prophesies: Nay, it was the fault of
these Prophets, that they were deceived themselves; for they did know, that
they did not receive their Prophesies from the Lord, but from the Heathen
Idols, or that they were their own Inventions; and when they chose to worship
strange gods, and to consult their Oracles, or to divine out of their own
hearts, they chose to be deceived; and therefore God threatens, They shall bear
the punishment of their iniquity; the punishment of the prophet shall be even
as the punishment of him that seeks unto him 10. v. We have a large account
of these Prophets, and severe Judgments denounced against them. 13. Ezekiel. who
are said to prophesy out of their own hearts, and to follow their own spirits,
when they had seen nothing; to see a vain vision, and speak a lying divination;
and sometimes to attribute it to God too, they say, The Lord says it, albeit I
have not spoken.

Now this Character the Prophet Ezekiel gives of these Lying Prophets, inclines
me to a very different sense of these words, which seems plain and easy: Not
that God deceived them to prophesy Lies, but that God deceived them in the
event: They deceived themselves into vain visions; either by giving themselves
over to Idolatry, which betrayed them to the delusions of wicked Spirits, or by
heating their Imaginations into Enthusiastic Frensies, and prophesying their
own Hopes and Politic Guesses, which is called, prophesying out of their own
hearts, and following their own spirits; and then God deceived all their Hopes
and Expectations, by bringing those evils on them, which they with great
assurance and confidence said, should never come. And the words plainly favor
this sense: God does not say, If a prophet be deceived to speak a thing, I the
Lord have deceived him: But if a prophet be deceived, when he has spoken a
thing; that is, if the event does not answer his Prediction* I have deceived
him, or confuted his vain Lying Prophesy: And how would God deceive him? that
immediately follows, I will stretch out my hand upon him, and will destroy him
from the midst of my people Israel; and they shall bear the punishment of their
iniquity, both Prophets and People. This did effectually deceive them, as being
a terrible confutation of their Prophesies, and what God expressly threatened:
Because they have seduced my people, saying, peace, and there was no peace, 13.
Ezekiel. 8, 9, 10. This is what God attributes to himself, as his peculiar
Prerogative and Glory, That it is He that frustrateth the tokens of the seers,
and makes diviners mad; by deceiving them in the events of things, and
confuting their Prophesies by his Judgments. 44. Isaiah 25. as he expressly
threatened against these lying Prophets, and Diviners, 3. Micah 5, 6, 7. which
is a plain Comment upon this Text.

As for what is objected about David's numbering the People, it is hardly worth
naming, ^ Sam. 24. ^. it is said, The anger of the Lord was kindled against
Israel, and he moved David against them, to say, Go, number the people. But in
1 Chronicles. 21. 1. it is expressly said, That Satan stood up against Israel, and
provoked David to number Israel. From whence we learn in what sense this is
attributed to God, when Satan was the immediate Tempter; only because God, in
anger against Israel, suffered Satan to tempt David to number them.

But that is more considerable, that is objected from St. Paul concerning the
Heathens, whom God delivered up to all manner of Wickedness in punishment of
their Idolatry. They changed the glory of the incorruptible God into an image
made like to corruptible man, and to birds* and four-footed beasts, and
creeping things; wherefore God also gave them up to uncleanness, through the
lusts of their own hearts, to dishonor their own bodies between themselves --
And for this cause God gave them up to vile affections -- And even as they did
not like to retain God in their knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate
mind, to do those things which are not convenient, being filled with all
unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, covetousness, etc. Now is not this a
Reflection on the Holiness of God, that because Men are guilty of one Sin, he
delivers them up to all other Sins? For can a Holy God punish Sin with Sin? Can
he who hates all Wickedness, contribute any thing to make Men more wicked than
otherwise they would be?

But in answer to this, we need only consider, what is meant by God's giving
them up to all uncleanness, and to a reprobate mind; which signifies no
positive Act of God, but only his leaving them in the Power and Management of
those Evil Spirits whom they idolatrously worshipped: For most of these Vices,
to which God is said to give them up, were the necessary Effects of their
Idolatry; were the sacred Rites and Mysteries of their Religious Worship; and
if they would worship such Gods, they must worship them, as they would be
worshipped: And this corrupted the Lives and Manners of Men, and destroyed all
the Notions of Good and Evil, and then they were prepared for any Wickedness,
which their own vicious Inclinations, and the Circumstances of their Condition
and Fortune, or those wicked Spirits could tempt them to. This very Account we
find in the Book of Wisdom, 14. Wisdom 22, etc.
where we have such another Catalogue of Vices, as the Apostle here gives us,
charged upon their Idolatry, as the natural Effects of it.

Now if Men will worship such Gods, as delight in Uncleanness and Impurity, and
all manner of Wickedness, and who will be worshipped with the most infamous
Vices, to the utmost Reproach and Contempt of Human Nature, there is no
avoiding it, but that their Religion must corrupt their Lives; they give
themselves up to the Worship of Evil Spirits, and God leaves them in their
Hands; for who should have the Government of them, but the gods they worship?
They reproach the Divine Nature by vile and sensible Representations, and God
gives them up to vile Affections, to dishonor their own Natures: They corrupt
the natural Notions they have of God, and God gives them up to a Reprobate
mind, not to distinguish between Good and Evil.

The Devil had erected a Kingdom of Darkness in the World, and God thought fit
for some time to permit it, till he sent his own Son to destroy the Works of
the Devil; and those who gave themselves up to Idolatry, became his Slaves and
Vassals, for he is the Prince of the Power of the Air, the Spirit that rules
in the Children of Disobedience; And this is God's giving them up to vile
Affections, his casting them out of his Protection, when they had first
renounced him, and giving them up to the Power of wicked Spirits, to whom they
had given themselves.

So that here is no other Objection against the Holiness of God, but that there
is a Devil, who is a very impure Spirit, and affects Divine Honor to be the
god of this World; and that God suffers him to govern those who worship him,
and to seduce them into all the Wickedness of a Diabolical Nature: And yet that
barbarous Tyranny, which the Devil exercised over his Votaries; that impure,
flagitious Worship, which he instituted, and that Excess of Wickedness,
wherewith he corrupted the Lives of Men, was the most effectual way to convince
Mankind, what sort of gods they worshipped; and did make the wiser Heathens
ashamed of their gods, and of their Worship; and as Learning and Civility
increased, they reformed their Worship, and allegoriz'd away their gods, which
disposed them for the more ready Reception of that Holy Religion, which the Son
of God preached to the World. Wickedness is its own Punishment, and many times
proves its own Cure; and God could not have inflicted a more Just Punishment
upon the Idolatrous World, than to deliver them up to the Tyranny of those
wicked Spirits whom they worshipped; and there was not a more likely way to
convince men of their fatal Error, than those inhuman and impious Rites of
Worship, and that Excess of Wickedness which their Idolatry betrayed them to,
which was enough to make Human Nature start and fly back.

The like objection is made from the Antichristian State; the appearance of the
Man of sin, whose coming is after the working of satan, with all power, and
signs, and lying wonders, and with all deceivableness of unrighteousness in
them that perish, because they received not the love of the truth, that they
might be saved: And for this cause God shall send them strong delusions, that
they should believe a lie: That they all might be damned, who believed not the
truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 9. 10, 11, 12.

Now what can be more just than this, for God to suffer the Devil to blind
those men who will not see? To deceive those with signs and lying wonders, and
all deceivableness of unrighteousness; who do not love the trath, but have
pleasure in unrighteousness; who endeavor to deceive themselves, and desire to
be deceived? For this is all that is meant, by sending them strong delusions to
believe a lie; that God suffers the Man of sin to erect his Kingdom after the
working of Satan, with all power, and signs, and lying wonders. When men are in
love with their Sins, and therefore do not love the Truth, because it discovers
and reproves their Sins, they are out of the protection of Gods Grace, and are
delivered up to the Cheats and Impostures of Crafty Men, or of Wicked Spirits.
This is the rule and method of God's Grace; he forces truth on no man; but
those who love the truth, shall find it. Those who cry after knowledge, and
lift up their voice for understanding; who seek her as silver, and search for
her as for hid treasures; they shall understand the fear of the Lord, and find
the knowledge of God, 2. Prove. 2, 3, 4, 5. But if men wilfully shut their own
eyes against the light, God suffers the God of this world to blind them; as St.
Paul teaches, 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4. But if our gospel be hid, it is hid to them that
are lost; in whom the god of this world has blinded the minds of them which
belive not, lest the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is the image
of God, should shine unto them. Which should make us all afraid of prejudice,
and the love of this world, which bar up the mind against truth, and by degrees
betray us to a judicial blindness.

There are some other Texts, which do indeed attribute the supreme Disposal of
all Human Actions to God, but without charging his Providence with men's sins.
16. Prove. 9. A man's heart devises his ways, but the Lord directs his steps.
19. 21. There are many devices in a man's heart, nevertheless the counsel of the
Lord, that shall stand. 20. 24. Man's goings are of the Lord, how then can a man
understand his own ways? The meaning of which is, that men advise, and
deliberate, and choose freely, what they intend to do, but when they come to
action, they can do nothing, they can bring nothing to pass, but what God will:
God can change their Counsels, or can disappoint them when they are ripe for
action, or can make what they do, serve quite another end than what they
intended. Now this only proves what I have already observed, That the Issues
and Events of all things are in God's hands, as they must be, if he governs the
World: Men may choose what they please, but they shall do only what God sees
fit, and what he orders for wise ends. God does not act immediately, but makes
use of Natural causes, or of the Ministries of men, both good and bad men: Men
choose and act freely, and pursue their own Designs and Imaginations, and
therefore the moral Good or Evil of the action is their own; and God does as
freely with unsearchable Wisdom overrule all Events, which are therefore God's
doing as well as men's, being directed by him to serve the wise ends of
Providence, in rewarding or punishing Men or Nations as they deserve.

Thus I have, as briefly as I could, examined most of those Texts, which have
been thought to attribute to God some kind of Causality and Efficiency in the
Sins of Men; and I hope have made it appear, that there is no such thing
intended in them; And for the conclusion of this Argument concerning the
Holiness of Providence, I shall only add some few Practical Inferences by way
of Application.

1. Not to attribute our own, or other Men's sins to God. Let no man say, when
he is tempted, I am tempted of God; for God cannot be tempted with evil,
neither tempts he any man. But every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of
his own lust, and enticed, 1. James 13, 14. This is absolutely necessary to be
observed; for without it there is an end of all Religion. If God can influence
men's Minds to wicked Purposes and Counsels, it is impossible he should hate
Wickedness, or be so Holy as many Holy men are, who would no more incline or
tempt other men to sin, than they would sin themselves: And who will hate sin,
or think that God will love him ever the less for being a Sinner, who believes
this? If God want the Sins of Men to accomplish his own Counsels, they must
either be very unholy Counsels, which cannot be accomplished without the Sins
of Men, or he must be a weak or unskilful Being, which is downright Blasphemy;
for a wise and powerful Being can do whatever is Wise and Holy without the Sins
of Men. It is excellent Wisdom indeed, when men do and will Sin, for God to
accomplish his own wise and gracious Counsels by their Sins; but to incline, or
tempt, or overruled, or determine men to sin, on purpose to serve himself by
their Sins, this would be a just Impeachment both of his Holiness, his Wisdom,
and his Power; and a God, who is neither Holy, Wise, nor Powerful, would be no
very fit Object of Religious worship.

To say that God decrees the Sins of men for his own Glory, to magnify his
Mercy and Justice, in saving some few, and in condemning the greatest part of
Mankind to eternal Miseries, is so senseless a Representation both of the Glory,
of the Mercy, and of the Justice of God, as destroys the very Notion of all.

For if Man be a mere Machine, who moves as he is moved, how can he deserve
either Well or Ill? Necessity destroys the very Notion of Virtue or Vice, both
which suppose a free Choice and Election; and if there be no Virtue nor Vice,
there can be no Rewards nor Punishments; and then there is no place neither for
Justice nor Mercy; and then God can neither glorify his Mercy, nor his Justice,
in forgiving Sins, or in punishing the Sinner.

How can any man, who believes that he is overruled by God to do all the Evil
he does, ever be a true Penitent, or heartily beg God's Pardon, or reverence
his Judgments, or endeavor to do better? All Religion is founded in this
Persuasion, That God hates every thing that is wicked; for if there be no
Essential difference between Good and Evil, there is no pretense for Religion;
and if God makes none, there is none; and if he can be the Author of what is
Evil, as well as of what is Good, he makes no difference between them.

2dly. The Holiness of Providence teaches us never to do any Evil to serve
Providence, under pretext of doing some great Good by it, which we think may be
acceptable to God. God never needs the Sins of men, and can never approve them,
whatever good ends they are intended to serve. God indeed does many times bring
Good out of Evil, but he allows no Man to do evil, that good may come: This St.
Paul rejects with the greatest abhorrence, and tells us, that such men's
Damnation is just, 3. Romans 8. for it is the greatest contradiction in the
World, to do evil in order to do good; for how can a Man, who can for any
reason be persuaded to do evil, be a hearty and zealous lover of Goodness? It
is certain, that he who does any evil, does not heartily love that goodness to
which the evil he does is opposed; and he who does not heartily love all
goodness, is a hearty lover of none: There is no reconciling good and evil, no
more than you can reconcile contradictions; a good man will love and do that
which is good, and an evil man will do that which is evil; and though the
Divine Wisdom can bring good out of evil, yet evil is not, and cannot be the
natural cause of good, no more than Darkness can be the cause of Light; and
therefore a Good Design can never justify a Bad Action: For that Bad Actions
should do good, is contrary to the nature of Bad Actions; and whatever men may
intend, I Am sure no man can alter the nature of things, and therefore can never
justify himself in doing evil that good may come.

It is certain, a Wise and Holy God requires no such thing of us; and though he
very often brings about great and admirable Designs by men's Sins, yet no man
knows how to do it, nor knows when God will do it; nor did ever any man, who
ventured upon sin in order to do some greater good, ever do the good he
intended, though many times he runs himself into more and greater sins than
ever he intended.

Nay, I dare boldly say, That no man ever deliberately ventured upon a known
sin to do some greater good by it, but there was always some base worldly
Interest at the bottom, colored over with a pretense of doing good, either to
deceive the world, or sometimes to deceive their own Consciences. The Church of
Rome, among whom there are those who teach and practice this Doctrine, are an
undeniable Example of it, and we have had too many sad Examples of it nearer
home.

This seems to me one reason, why those Prophesies which concern future Ages,
are generally so obscure, that no man knows when, nor how they shall be
fulfilled, that no man may be tempted to any sin to serve Providence, and to
fulfill Prophesies. As obscure as these Prophesies are, yet we see some heated
Enthusiasts very forward to venture on any thing to fulfill Prophesies, to pull
down Antichrist, to set up the Kingdom of Christ, especially when they hope to
set up themselves with him: But God conceals Times and Seasons from us; and
though he many times fulfils Prophesies by the Sins of men, yet he allows no
man to sin to fulfill Prophesies. And therefore never lets us know when, nor by
what means Prohesies shall be fulfilled. Let us lay down this as a certain
Principle, That God needs not our Sins; and that we can never please him by
doing evil, whatever the Event be: He makes use of the Sins of men to serve his
Providence, but he will punish them for their Sins.

CHAP. VII.
The Goodness of Providence.
3. THE next Inquiry is concerning the Goodness of Providence: Though methinks
it is a more proper Subject for our devout Meditations, than for our Inquiries;
for we need not look far to seek for proofs and demonstrations of the Divine
Goodness. The earth is full of the goodness of the Lord: We see, and feel, and
taste it every day; we owe our being, our preservation, and all the comforts of
our lives to it. There is not so mean, nor so miserable a Creature in this
world, but can bear its testimony to the Divine Goodness: Nay, if you would
pardon the harshness of the expression, I would venture to say, That the
Goodness of God is one of the greatest Plagues and Torments of Hell; I mean,
the remembrance of God's Goodness, and their wicked and ungrateful abuse of it.
This is that Worm that never dies, those sharp Reflections men make on their
Ingratitude and Folly, in making themselves miserable by affronting that
Goodness which would have made them happy.

Whatever other Objections foam wanton and sporting Wits make against
Providence, one would think it impossible that any man who lives in this world,
and feels what he enjoys himself, and sees what a bountiful provision is made
for all Creatures, should question the Goodness of Providence, by which he
lives, moves, and has his being. We should think him an extraordinary
Benefactor, who did the thousandth part for us of what God does, and should not
challenge his goodness, though he did some things which we did not like, or did
not understand; but Atheism is founded in Ingratitude; and unless God humor
them, as well as do them good, he is no God for them. Nay, I cannot but observe
here, the perverse, as well as the ungrateful Temper of Atheists; when they
dispute against the Justice of Providence, then God is much too good for them;
though he give us Examples enough of his Severity against Sin, yet his Patience
and Long-suffering to some few Prosperous Sinners, is thought a sufficient
Argument, that God is not just, or that he does not govern the world: When they
dispute against the Goodness of Providence, then God is not good enough for
them: Though they see innumerable Instances of Goodness in the government of
the world, yet this is not owing to a Good God, but to Good Fortune, because
they think they see some of the careless and irregular Strokes of Chance and
Fortune intermixed with it, in the many Evils and Calamities of life. Now it is
impossible for God himself to answer these two Objections, to the satisfaction
of these men; and that, I think, is a sufficient answer to them both. For
should God vindicate his Justice to the satisfaction of these men, by punishing
in this world every sin that is committed according to its desert, there would
be very little room for the exercise of Goodness: If every man must suffer as
much as he sins, the very best men will be great Sufferers, much greater
Sufferers than any of them now are, tho their Sufferings are made another
Objection against Providence; and there will be as many formidable Examples of
Misery, as there are Atheists and Profligate Sinners, and this would be an
unanswerable Objection against the Goodness of Providence; for how good soever
God might be, if he must punish every sin, he has no opportunity to show his
Goodness: And on the other hand, should God be as good as these men would have
him, that is, that to prove himself good, he should not inflict any Evils or
Calamities on men, whatever their Sins or Provocations are; that whereas God
planted Paradise only for man in innocence, the whole world should be now a
Paradise, though there is not an innocent man in it; this would be as
unanswerable an Objection against the Justice of Providence: So that these men
have taken care always to have an Objection against Providence; for according
to their Notions of Justice and Goodness, God cannot be both; which is a
certain demonstration, that they mistake the true Notion of Justice and
Goodness; they are both great and excellent Virtues; both are essential to the
Idea of God; both are necessary to the good government of the world; and
therefore both of them must be very consistent and reconcilable with each
other, both in Notion and Practice.

I have already vindicated the Justice of God's Providence; and there is no
great difficulty in vindicating his Goodness, the Objections against which are
founded in plain and evident Mistakes, and therefore will receive an easy
Answer. And I shall first consider what the Mistakes are, and then particularly
answer the Objections.

1. As for the first, The Mistakes either relate to the nature of God's
Goodness, or to the nature of Good and Evil, or to the Goodness of Providence
and Government.

1. The Mistakes concerning God's Goodness: And the fundamental Mistake is
this, That men consider the Goodness of God absolutely, without relation to the
Nature, Quality, or Desert of the Subjects, who are to receive good. They
contemplate Goodness in its abstracted Idea and Notion; and whatever they
conceive belongs to the most Perfect Goodness, that they expect from God in the
Government of this world; and if they do not find it, they conclude, that the
world is not governed by a Good Providence. As for instance.

It is certainly an Act of the most Perfect Goodness to make all Creatures
happy; not to suffer any Miseries to enter into the world; that there be
nothing to deface the Beauty, or to disturb the Harmony of it: No lamentable
Sights, nor doleful Complaints, to move our pity, nor to terrify us with the
melancholy presages of our own Sufferings, nor to make frightful impressions on
us of a Severe and Inexorable Deity. Could they see such a world as this, they
would thankfully own the Divine Goodness, and securely rejoice in it: But this
world, wherein we live, gives us a very different prospect; we see a great many
Miserable people, and feel a great many Miseries our selves, and many times
expect and fear a great many more; and how unlike is this world, to what we
should have imagined the world to have been, had we never seen it, but only
heard of a world made and governed by Infinite and Perfect Goodness? Indeed all
the Objections against the Goodness of Providence do ultimately resolve into
this: That the world is not so happy as a Good God can make it, and therefore a
Good Providence does not govern the world; and a plain Answer to this will
enable any man to answer all the rest.

And the Answer to this is short and plain; That Infinite and Perfect Goodness
will do all the good which can be wisely done, but not all the good which men
may expect from Infinite Goodness; for the external exercise of Goodness must
not bear proportion to the Infinite Fullness of the Divine Nature, but to the
State, Condition, and Capacities of Creatures; and therefore we must not
measure the Goodness of Providence merely by External Events, which may
sometimes be very calamitous; but by that proportion such Events bear to the
State and Deserts of Mankind, or of particular men in this world. The best man
in the world does not think himself bound to do all the good he can to every
one he meets; he will make a difference between a Child and a Servant, between
a Friend and an Enemy, between a Good and a Bad man, and much more must a Good
Prince and a Good Magistrate do so; and much more must God, who is the Supreme
and Sovereign Lord of the world.

We shall better understand this, if we view Man in his several States, and
observe how the Divine Goodness suits it self to those different States.

The Divine Goodness made the World, and made Man; and hence we may take our
estimate what the Goodness of God is, and what it can, and will do, when
Goodness freely exerts it self, without any external impediment to set bounds
to it.

And if we believe the History of the Creation, the Divine Goodness displayed
it self in a most beautiful and glorious Scene; the New-made World, and the
new-created Man, were as perfect and happy, as the perfect Ideas of their
Natures in the Divine Mind. This was the World which God made; such a happy
world, as it became Perfect Goodness to make; and hence we learn what the
Goodness of God is, and what it would always do; for when the Divine Goodness
made the World, he made it what he would have it be.

But Man did not continue what God had made him: He sinned, and by Sin brought
Death and Misery into the world. And therefore, though we do not now see such a
happy state of things, we must not hence conclude, that the world is not
governed by Perfect Goodness, but that a perfect state of Ease and Happiness in
this world does neither become the Providence of God, nor is good for Sinners;
and we have reason to conclude this, not only because God made Innocent man
happy, but because he has prepared a much greater Happiness for Good men in the
next world: Which shows that the change is not in God, but in Men: He made man
happy at first, and he will make Good men perfectly happy hereafter; but though
he be always the same, as good now as he was when he at first made the world,
and as he will be, when he shall reward all Good men in the Resurrection of the
Just; yet the degenerate state of Mankind requires such a mixture of Good and
Evil, as we now see, and feel, and complain of in this world.

For it is a very different case, to see Goodness acting alone, and pursuing
its own gracious Inclinations, and to see it limited and confined by Justice,
which must be the case when Mankind are Sinners. For then Goodness cannot do
what is absolutely best, but what is best in such Cases; and when Goodness and
Justice are reconcilable, as they are in a probation State, there Wisdom must
prescribe the temperament.

Justice requires the punishment of Sinners, but Goodness is inclined to spare,
and Wisdom judges when, and in what manner, it is fit to punish, or to spare.
An Incurable Sinner is the Object of strict and rigorous Justice; a Corrigible
Sinner is the Object both of Justice and Goodness; his Sin deserves correction
and punishment; but that he is corrigible, makes him the Object of Patience and
Discipline: And this we must suppose to be the difference between the Case of
Apostate Angels, and of Fallen Man, and therefore Justice immediately seized on
those Apostate Spirits; but God in infinite goodness promised a Savior to
Mankind.

This makes the present state of Mankind in this world to be a state of Trial
and Discipline; to reclaim and reform Sinners by the various methods of Grace
and Providence; and this changes both the very Notion and Exercise of God's
Goodness and Justice in this world; for we must expect no more of either, than
what a state of Trial and Discipline will allow.

The not considering this distinction between Absolute Goodness and Justice,
and the goodness and justice of Discipline, has been the occasion of all those
Objections which have been made both against the Goodness and Justice of
Providence.

We must confess, that the World is not so happy, as Perfect, and Absolute, and
Unconfined Goodness could make it; nor are all Sinners so miserable, as Strict
and Absolute Justice could make them; but this signifies no more, than that
Heaven and Hell are not in this world, as no man ever pretended they were; and
yet Strict and Rigorous Justice, and Perfect and Absolute Goodness, wherever
they are exercised, must make Hell and Heaven. But this Life is a Middle-state
between both; and as men behave themselves here, so they shall have their
Portions, either in Heaven or Hell; and therefore the Goodness and Justice of
God in this world, is of a different nature from that Goodness or Justice which
is exercised in Heaven or Hell, proportioned to the state of Discipline and
Trial in this Life.

Goodness indeed has the predominant government, and Justice is only the
Minister of Goodness in this World, as it must be in a state of Discipline,
when Corrections as well as Favors are intended for good. To put Man into a
state of Probation and Trial, to recover that Immortality he had lost, was an
Act of great Goodness; and whatever severe Methods are used to reform Sinners,
is as great an expression of Goodness, as it is to force and to compel them to
be happy; as it is to cut off a Hand, or a Leg, to preserve Life: And if we
will but allow this World to be a state of Trial and Discipline for another
World, and wisely consider, not what pure, simple, and absolute Goodness, but
what the goodness of Discipline requires, it will give us an easy answer to all
the Objections against the Goodness of Providence.

1. As first, The Goodness of God in a state of Discipline will not admit of a
complete and perfect Happiness in this World; for that is no state of
Discipline. Good men themselves, were they as happy in this World as they could
wish, would not be very fond of another World, nor learn those mortifying and
self-denying Virtues which are necessary to prepare them for a Spiritual Life:
And Bad men would grow more in love with this World, and sin on without check
and control: The Miseries and Afflictions of this Life wean Good men from this
World, and lay great restraints upon Bad men; which justifies both the Wisdom
and Goodness of God in those many Miseries which Mankind suffer.

2. But yet the goodness of God in a state of Discipline requires, That this
World should be so tolerable a place, as to make Life desirable; his own glory
is concerned in this; for no man would believe, that the World was made, or is
governed by a good God, were there no visible and sensible Testimonies of a
kind and good Providence: But though God cursed the Earth for the Sin of man,
yet he has not defaced the Characters of his own Wisdom and Goodness, but still
the invisible things of God from the creation of the world, are clearly seen,
being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and
Godhead, 1. Romans 20. and in the most Degenerate state of Mankind, God left not
himself without a witness, giving them rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons,
filling their hearts with food and gladness. What dreadful Apprehensions would
this give Mankind of God, were this World nothing else but a Scene of Trouble
and Misery? What encouragement would this be to Sinners to repent and reform?
What hopes could they reasonably conceive of Pardon and Forgiveness, had they
no experience of God's goodness and patience toward Sinners? What place would
there be for the exercise of Moral or Christian Virtues, of Faith, and Hope,
and Trust in God, of Self-denial, and a Contempt of this World, were not this
World a very tolerably happy place, though a changeable Scene? A state of
Discipline must neither be a state of perfect Happiness, nor Misery, but an
interchangeable Scene of very agreeable Pleasures, and tolerable Evils,
sufficient to exercise the Virtues, and to correct the Vices of Mankind: And
this I take the State of this Life to be; so happy, that few men are so
miserable, as to be weary of it; and yet so intermixed with Troubles, as to
exercise the Virtues of Good men, and to correct the wicked: And this is what
becomes the Goodness of God to do for us in a state of Discipline.

3. The Goodness of God seems to require, That in such a mixed and changeable
Scene, there should be some remarkable difference made between the Good and the
Bad; for the design of Providence in a state of trial, is to encourage Virtue,
and to deter men from Sin; and therefore there ought to be such a visible
difference made, as may be sufficient, if men will wisely consider things, to
encourage good men, and to restrain the wicked.

I do not mean, that all Good men should be Happy and Prosperous, and all Bad
men Miserable, as to their external Fortune; for a state of Discipline will not
allow this: All good men cannot bear a prosperous Fortune, and some bad men may
grow better by it, or may be fit instruments of Providence; and such a visible
distinction between all good and bad men, belongs to the Day of Judgment, not
to a state of trial, and therefore we see this is not done; and bad men, who
have the least reason to complain of it, make it an objection against
Providence.

But though Providence many times seems to make little difference between good
and bad men, as to external Events, yet God very often takes care to expound
his Providence, which makes a very visible difference between them.

Natural Conscience is one of God's Interpreters of Providence, which terrifies
bad men with a sense of Guilt, when they suffer, and threatens them with a more
terrible Vengeance, but supports good men under their Sufferings with better
hopes; that bad men suffer like Malefactors, with Rage, and Fear, and Despair;
good men with Patience, and Submission, and joyful Expectations of a reward.

All the promises of Scripture are made to Good men; and all the threatenings of
it denounced against Bad men; and this expounds Providence; for this assures
good men, that all the good they receive, is the Effect of God's care and
goodness to them; and that the Evils they suffer, are either his fatherly
Correction, or the trial and exercise of their Virtues; but that the Prosperity
of Bad men is only the effect of God's Patience, or to make them Instruments of
his Providence; and that their Sufferings are the punishment of their Sins, and
the Forerunners of Future Vengeance, except they repent. And when we know
this, it makes a vast difference between the Prosperity and the Sufferings of
Good and Bad men; and because this is not always visible in external Events,
God has taken care to reveal it to us.

But God has made this very visible in most of the ordinary Calamities of life,
which are the natural effects of Sin; of Intemperance, Luxury, Lust, Pride,
Passion, Covetousness, Idleness and Prodigality; most of those Evils which Bad
men suffer, are owing to such Vices, and all these Good men escape; and
sometimes their Virtues advance them to Riches and Honors; and when they
don't, yet they make them contented and pleased: But when Wickedness makes men
great, it commonly makes them a mark for Envy, and advances them to tumble them
down.

Nay, though the Divine Providence does not always make a difference between
Good and Bad men, as to their external Fortunes, yet sometimes God makes a very
remarkable difference between them: Gives such signal Demonstrations of his
Anger against Bad men, and of his Care and Protection of the Good, that it
forces men to acknowledge; Verily there is a reward for the righteous; verily
he is a God that judges in the earth, 58. Psalm. 11. And a few such Examples as
these (though both Sacred and Profane Story furnish us with very many) are
sufficient to make as visible a distinction between the Good and the Bad, as
the Providence of God in this World requires.

4. But yet the Goodness of Providence, in a state of Discipline, will not
allow of greater Evils and Calamities than are necessary to the good government
of the World: For this is a state of Discipline and Government, not of
Judgment. Good men must suffer no more than what will increase their Virtue,
not prove a temptation to sin: The rod of the wicked must not always rest on
the lot of the righteous, lest he also put forth his hand unto iniquity. The
Sufferings of Bad men, who are in a curable state, must be only proportioned to
their cure, unless the evil of the Example requires a severer punishment to
warn other Sinners. As for hardened and incorrigible Sinners, the Goodness of
God is not concerned for them, but he may serve his Providence on them as he
pleases; either by making them the Ministers of his Justice, to execute such a
terrible Vengeance on the World, as none but such hardened Sinners would
execute; or by making them the lasting Monuments of his own Vengeance, as he
did a hardened and incorrigible Pharaoh; for this is for the great good of the
World; and a state of Discipline requires such Examples. And such Sinners are
fit to be made Examples of: And all such Severities as these are very
reconcilable with the Goodness of God in a state of Discipline.

5. The Goodness of God in a state of Discipline, not only allows, but requires
great patience, long-suffering, and goodness to Sinners: For this is necessary
to reclaim Sinners, to give them time for repentance, and to invite and
encourage them to repent by all the arts and methods of Goodness, as well as to
overawe them by Judgments and Severities. Promises are as necessary to reform
Sinners as Threatenings; for Hope is as powerful a Principle as Fear; and Love
and Goodness work more kindly upon Ingenuous minds, and melt those, whom
Judgments cannot bow, nor break. Thus a kind Parent deals with a Prodigal Son,
tries him with kindness as well as severity; and thus God deals with Sinners.
He is good to the Evil, and to the Good; and makes his Sun to shine, and his
Rain to fall upon the Just, and upon the Unjust: And this is such goodness as
is proper only for a state of Discipline.

6. The Goodness of God, even in a state of Discipline requires, that there
should be a great deal more good than evil in the world: For since Goodness
governs the World, even in this state, the Good must be predominant; that
notwithstanding all the Evils and Calamities there are, it may still be very
visible, that the World is governed by a Good God. That this is so, I think, I
need not prove, for we all see, and feel it. The Evils that are in the World
bear no proportion at all to the Good: There are some few Examples of miserable
people, but the generality of Mankind are very happy; and even these miserable
people have great allays of their Miseries; and if we take an estimate of their
whole Lives, have a much greater share of Good than Evil.

The Judgments of God are sometimes very terrible, but they come but seldom:
For a years Plague or Famine, we enjoy some Ages of Health and Plenty. And the
Ruins and Desolations of War are recompensed and forgot by a more Lasting and
Flourishing Peace. But the Goodness of God moves in a constant and uniform
round, visits all Parts and Corners of the Earth, as the Sun does with its
Light and Heat: That considering how little Mankind deserves of God in this
Corrupt and Degenerate State; how highly they provoke him every day, and how
constantly and universally he does good to them, instead of complaining of the
many Evils that are in the World, we have reason to admire the Patience and
Goodness of God to Sinners.

This I take to be a true Account of the Nature and Exercise of God's Goodness,
as it respects a State of Discipline; and so it must be considered in the
government of this World; and then all the Objections against the Goodness of
Providence vanish of themselves: Though this World be not so happy, as Perfect
and Absolute Goodness can make it, yet God abounds in all the Expressions of
Goodness, which a State of Trial and Discipline will allow, which is all that
we can reasonably expect, and all that God can wisely do for us in this State.

2dly. Especially if we consider in the next place, what the true notion of
Good and Evil is in a State of Discipline; for this is another occasion of most
Objections against the Goodness of Providence; That men consider Human Nature
absolutely, and appeal to their Senses for the Notions and Differences of Good
and Evil, without any regard to the present State of Human Nature; that is, by
Good and Evil, they mean only Natural Good and Evil; such as Pleasure or Pain,
a State of Ease and Rest, or of Trouble, and Labor, and Difficulty, Riches or
Poverty, Honor or Disgrace, and measure the Goodness of Providence by the
Natural Good or Evil that is in the World; if Mankind and particular men be
happy and prosperous, then God does good, and they will acknowledge that
Providence is good; if they be afflicted, this is very evil, and therefore an
Objection against the Goodness of Providence. But does not every man know the
difference between the good of the End, and the good of the Means? The End is
Happiness, which is the good of Nature; and therefore whatever is the
Happiness, or any part of the Happiness of Man, is the good of Nature; the good
of the End is that which is good to make men happy; and the more effectual it
is to promote our Happiness, the greater Good it is, tho it may be a great
Natural Evil; and whatever will hinder or destroy our Happiness, is a great
Evil, though it may be a great Natural Good. In all such Cases things are good
or evil with respect to their End, or to their Natural or Moral Consequences:
When we are in health, that is good Food which is pleasant and wholesome, and
will preserve health; but the same Diet may be very hurtful, and fatal, when we
are sick. Indulgence or Severity to Children is either good or evil, in
proportion to their Tempers and Inclinations, as it is apt either to corrupt
their Manners, or to train them up to Piety and Virtue. And therefore when we
speak of Discipline and Government, which is the true notion of God's
Providence in this World, we must not consider so much what is naturally good
and evil, as what the state of those is, who are the Subjects of Discipline,
and what is good for them in such a State; for how many Natural Evils soever
there are in the World, the Evils of Afflictions and Judgments, of Plague, and
Famine, and Sword, if such Severities be good for Mankind, it is as great an
argument of the Goodness of Providence to inflict them, as it is for a Parent,
or a Prince, to reclaim and reform his Children, or his Subjects, by great
Severities: And an easy and prosperous State, when the Wickedness of Mankind
require severe Restraints, is no more an Act of Kindness and Goodness, than the
fond Indulgence of Parents is to disobedient Children.

So that this takes away the very foundation of this Objection against the
Goodness of Providence. The principal Objection is, That there are a great many
Evils and Miseries in the World; we grant it; but then we say, That God is very
good in it, and that these Natural Evils, tho they are grievous, are not Evils
to us, because they are, and are intended for our good: We can neither prove,
nor disprove the Goodness of Providence merely by external Events, especially
with respect to particular men: For Prosperity is not always good for us, nor
is Affliction always for our hurt; God may make some men prosperous in his
Anger; and chastise others in great love and goodness; and this I take to be
the meaning of the Wiseman, 9. Eccl. 1, 2. No man knows either love or
hatred by all that is before them. For all things come alike to all; there is
one event to the righteous, and to the wicked; to the good, and to the clean,
and to the unclean; to him that sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not;
as is the good, so is the sinner; and he that swears, as he that fears an
oath: Which does not signify that the Divine Providence makes no difference
between Good and Bad men; for God does love Good men, and hate the Wicked; and
his Providence makes a great difference between them; though this difference is
not always visible in external Events: For when the same Event happens to both,
whether it be a Natural Good or Evil, it may be an Act of Favor to Good men,
and of Judgment to the Wicked; For external Prosperity and Adversity in a State
of Discipline, may either be good or evil; and may be good for one, when at the
same time it is evil to another; and therefore the Providence of God may make a
difference, when the external Event makes none. The Wiseman confesses, This is
an evil among all things that are done under the Sun, that there is one event
unto all: Bad men, who look no farther than external Events, make a very bad
use of it; and conclude that God makes no difference, when they see none made:
And thus the heart of the sons of men is full of evil, and madness is in their
heart while they live, and after that they go to the dead, 3. v. But those who
consider wisely, see no reason from external Events, from such a promiscuous
distribution of good and evil, either to deny a Providence, or the Goodness and
Justice of Providence; since good and evil in this State are not in the things
themselves, but in the End for which they are intended, and which they serve.

It is of great consequence rightly to understand this matter, to give us a
firm persuasion of the Goodness of God, even when he corrects and punishes, and
to cure our discontent at the Prosperity of the Wicked; and therefore I shall
briefly represent to you the State of Mankind in this World, and what is good
in such a State.

Man has sinned, and Man must die; but God has in infinite goodness to Mankind
sent his own Son into the World to save Sinners, who by death has destroyed
him who had the power of Death, that is the Devil, and has brought Life and
Immortality to light by the Gospel. This removes the Scene of Happiness from
this World to the next, and makes this present Life only a State of Probation
for Eternity: If we obey the Laws of our Savior, and imitate his Example, he
has promised to raise us again, when our dead Bodies are putrified in the
Grave, into Immortal Life; but has threatened all the Miseries of an Eternal
Death against Incorrigible Sinners; so that the greatest good that God or Man
can do for us in this World, is by all the wise methods of Discipline and
Government, to prepare us for the Happiness of the next; and to preserve us
from those Eternal Miseries, which will be the portion of Sinners. Tho there
are thousands of foolish Sinners who never consider this, yet all Mankind
agree, that that is best for us in this World, which will make us eternally
happy in the next; and that is a very great Evil which will betray us to
Eternal Miseries. There are a great many Infidels who believe neither a Heaven,
nor a Hell, but yet these very Infidels are not so void of common Sense, as to
deny, supposing there were a Heaven, and a Hell, that to be the best Condition
for us in this World, whatever it be upon other accounts, which will carry us
to Heaven, and keep us out of Hell.

Now if this be the Case, there cannot be so great Evils in this World, but
what may be good for us, and therefore may be an expression of God's Goodness
to us: For if Pain and Sickness, Poverty and Disgrace, wean us from this World,
subdue our Lusts, make us Good men, and qualify us for Eternal Rewards; though
they are great Afflictions, yet they are very good, as the way, though a rough
and difficult way, to Happiness.

That prosperity does oftentimes corrupt men's Lives and Manners, make them
proud, and sensual, regardless of God, and of Religion, and so fond of this
World, that they never care to think of another; and that Afflictions and
Adversity has many times a quite contrary effect to make men serious and
considerate, to possess them with an awe and reverence of God, to correct and
reform Bad men, and to exercise the Graces and Virtues of the Good, both the
Reason of things, and the Experience of Mankind, may satisfy us* That this is
what God designs in those Afflictions and Sufferings he brings on Mankind, the
Scripture every where assures us; and the natural conclusion from hence is,
That Afflictions are not evil, nor any Objection against the Goodness of
Providence: If they prove evil to us, it is our own fault, for God designs them
for good. As the Apostle expressly tells us, 8. Romans 28.
That all things work together for good to them that love God: And whom the
Lord loves, he chasteneth, and scourges every son whom he receives; if ye
endure chastening, God deals with you as with sons; for what son is he, whom
the father chasteneth not? but if ye be without chastisement, whereof all are
partakers, then are ye bastards, and not sons, 21. Hebr. 6, 7, 8.

This then must be our great care, to rectify our Notions of Good and Evil, to
withdraw our minds from Sense, and not to call every thing good that is
pleasant, nor every thing evil that is afflicting; this distinction the Heathen
Poet long since observed, and gives it as a Reason, and a very wise and good
Reason it is, why we should entirely give up our selves to God, and leave him
to choose our Condition for us. Nam pro jucundis aptissima quaeque dabunt Dii.
That though God will not always give us those things which are most pleasant,
he will give us what is most profitable for us. And if we judge of Good and
Evil, not by Sense, nor by external Appearances, but by that spiritual good
they do, or are intended to do us, in making us Good men here, and happy
hereafter; men may, if they so please, as reasonably quarrel with the great
Ease and Prosperity which so many enjoy, as with the Afflictions which others
suffer; for Prosperity does oftener corrupt men's Manners, and betray them to Sin
and Folly, than Afflictions do; Good men themselves can hardly bear a
prosperous State, nor resist the Temptations and Flatteries of Ease and
Pleasure; whereas Afflictions many times reform Bad men, and make Good men
better, as the Psalmist himself owns; It is good for me that I have been
afflicted; for before I was afflicted, I went astray, but since I have learned
to keep thy laws. And if both Prosperity and Adversity may be either for our
good or hurt, and when they are so, we cannot always tell, we must leave this
to God, and commit our selves to his Care and Discipline, who knows us better
than we know our selves, and knows what is best for us.

But this may seem to start a new and more difficult Objection; That if we must
not judge of Good and Evil by external and sensible Events, we can have no
sensible Proofs of the Goodness or Justice of Providence. As we cannot object
the external Evils and Calamities that are in the World against the Goodness of
Providence; so neither can we prove the Goodness of Providence from those
external and sensible Blessings which God bestows upon Mankind: So that
Religion gains nothing by this; it silences indeed the Objections against
Providence, but it also destroys the Proofs of a Good and Just Providence. The
Answer to this Objection will give us a truer notion and understanding of the
Goodness of Providence.

For though we cannot know love or hatred merely by external Events, yet this
does not destroy the natural good or evil of things, nor the Justice or
Goodness of Providence, in doing good, or in sending his Plagues and Judgments
on the World. Natural Good and Evil are the Instruments and Methods of
Discipline; Good men are encouraged and rewarded in this World by some external
and natural Blessings, and Bad men are restrained and governed by some natural
Evils; and the Goodness and Justice of God in doing good, and in punishing,
make these external Blessings and Punishments the Methods of Discipline; which
could have no efficacy in them either to encourage Good men, or to reform the
Wicked, but as they are the visible significations of God's Favor or
displeasure; and therefore such external Blessings and Punishments are evident
Proofs of the Goodness and Justice of Providence, or else they could not be the
Methods of Discipline, nor have any moral efficacy upon Mankind.

But yet when these Acts of Goodness or Justice are made the Methods of
Discipline, and not intended as the proper Rewards or Punishments of Virtue or
Vice, they are not always confined to Good or Bad men, and therefore are not
certain and visible Marks of God's Love or Hatred.

It is an Act of Goodness in God to do good to the Evil, and to the Good: To
the Good it is a mark of his Favor, and an incitement to a more perfect
Virtue; to the Evil, an expression of his Patience, and an invitation to
Repentance; but when he is good both to the Evil, and to the Good, the mere
external Event can make no difference. The external Good may be the same, and
God is good to both, and intends good to both, but yet has not equal favor to
both.

It is an Act of Justice in God to punish, and to correct Sin, and both Good
and Bad men many times feel the same Severities; to correct and chastise the
Follies, and to quicken and inflame the Devotions of Good men; and to overawe
and terrify Bad men with the sense of God's Anger, and the fears of Vengeance:
This is to be just, and to be good to both, as great Goodness and Justice as it
is to reform Bad men; and to make Good men better, tho the external Events of
Providence in such Cases make little distinction between them: We see in all
these Instances manifest Proofs both of the Justice and Goodness of God, though
Prosperity is not always a Blessing, nor Afflictions always evil. They are
always indeed in themselves Natural Goods and Evils, and therefore are the
proper Exercise of a Natural Goodness and Justice; but with respect to Moral
Ends, to that influence they have upon the direction and government of our
Lives, what is naturally good, may prove a great evil to us; and what is
naturally evil, may do us the greatest good; and then we must confess, That the
Goodness of Providence must not be measured merely by the natural good or evil
of external Events, but by such a mixture and temperament of good and evil, as
is best fitted to govern men in this World, and to make them happy in the next.

3dly. There is another Mistake about the Nature of Government, and what
Goodness is required in the Government of the World. Now the Universal Lord and
Sovereign of the World must not only take care of particular Creatures, but of
the good of the whole: And this in some Cases may make the greatest and most
terrible Acts of Severity, such as are enough to afright and astonish the
World, Acts of the greatest Goodness and Mercy too; which will vindicate the
Goodness of Providence, when God seems to be most severe, and to have forgot
all Goodness and Compassion. As to explain this in some particular Cases.

The good government of the World requires the defense and protection of
Mankind from violent and unjust Oppressions; and the most exemplary Vengeance
executed upon such private or public Oppressors, is a great Act of Goodness,
and a great deliverance to the Oppressed. 136. Psalm, the Psalmist exhorts us,
To give thanks to the Lord, for he is good, for his mercy endures for ever.
And among other Expressions of the Divine Goodness and Mercy, he mentions the
Plagues of Egypt, and the Deliverance of Israel by the overthrow of Pharaoh in
the Red Sea; To him, that smote Egypt in their firstborn; for his mercy
endures for ever. And brought out Israel from among them, for his mercy
endures for ever. With a strong hand, and with a stretched-out arm, for his
mercy endures for ever. To him which divided the Red Sea into parts, for his
mercy, etc. and made Israel to pass through the midst of it -- but over-threw
Pharaoh and his host in the Red Sea; for his mercy, etc. To him who smote great
kings -- and slew famous kings, Sihon king of the Amorites -- and Og the king
of Bashan -- and gave their land for an heritage, even for an heritage to
Israel his servant; for his mercy endures for ever.

This ought to be well considered, before we object the Evils and Calamities
which befall Bad men, against the Goodness of Providence. For there are few Bad
men who suffer any Remarkable Vengeance, but that their Sufferings are a great
kindness and deliverance to others, and it may be, to the Public, in breaking
their Power, or taking them out of the World. And in all such Cases the
Psalmist has taught us a very proper Hymn; I will sing of mercy and judgment,
unto thee, O Lord, will I sing, 101. Psalm. 1.

Thus the good government of the World requires some great and lasting Examples
of God's Justice and Vengeance against Sin: And as terrible as such Examples
are, they are a great public Good to the World.

Some few such Examples as these will serve to warn an Age, nay many succeeding
Ages and Generations of men; which prevents the more frequent Executions of
Vengeance, and justifies the Patience and Long-suffering of God to Sinners.

If such Examples in any measure reform the World, as God intends they should,
it makes this World a much happier place; for the better men are, the less
hurt, and the more good they will do; and the less evil there is committed in
the World, the less Mankind will suffer; and the greater Blessings God will
bestow on them.

And though there be a great deal of Wickedness committed in the World after
such Terrible Warnings as these, God may exercise great Patience and
Forbearance toward Sinners, without the least blemish to his Holiness or
Justice: For such Frightful Executions convince the World of God's Justice; and
when God has publicly vindicated the Honor of his Justice, he may try gentler
Methods, and glorify his Mercy and Patience toward Sinners: And thus God
punishes, that he may spare; is sometimes very terrible in his Judgments, to
prevent the necessity of striking often, that Sinners may have sufficient
warning, and that he may be good to Sinners, without encouraging them in sin.

Thus the destruction of the Old World by a Deluge of Water, when they were
past being reformed, is a warning to all Sinners as long as this World lasts,
and is a public and standing Confutation of Atheism; of such Scoffers, as say,
where is the promise of his coming? for since the fathers fell asleep, all
things continue as they were from the beginning of the creation: The constant
and regular course of Nature, without any Supernatural Changes and Revolutions,
tempts men to think that there is no God in the World, who changes Times and
Seasons; but this St. Peter tells us, is visibly confuted by the destruction of
the Old World; for this they are willingly ignorant of, that by the word of God
the heavens were of old, and the earth standing out of the water, and in the
water, whereby the world, that then was, being overflowed with water, perished:
And this is reason enough to fear and expect what God has threatened, That this
present World shall be burnt by fire. But the heavens and the earth, which are
now, by the same word are kept in store, reserved unto fire against the day of
judgment, and perdition of ungodly men, 2 Peter 3. 5, 6, 7. Such Destructions
as these can be attributed to no Natural Causes; but the same Word which made
the World, destroyed the Old World by Water, and will destroy this by Fire,
which makes it a visible Demonstration of the Power and Justice of God.

The destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah by Fire from Heaven, is not only a
general Warning to Sinners, but an Example of a Divine Vengeance against all
Uncleanness, and Unnatural Lusts. As St. Jude tells us: Even as Sodom and
Gomorrah, and the cities about them, in like manner, giving themselves over to
fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set forth for an example,
suffering the vengeance of eternal fire, v. 7.

Thus the Destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans, which was attended with the
most terrible Circumstances that we ever meet with in Story, is a lasting
Confutation of Infidelity, and a glorious Testimony to Christ, and his
Religion: So that most of the terrible Examples of God's Vengeance, how
terrible soever they were to those who suffered, are Acts of great Goodness to
the World, and therefore belong to the Goodness of Government; by some severe
Executions to protect and defend the Innocent, and reclaim other Offenders,
without the necessity of terrifying the World in every Age with such repeated
Severities.

Nay we may observe farther, That when the World is grown very corrupt and
degenerate, and such Sinners, if they be suffered to continue in it, will
certainly propagate their Atheism, Infidelity and Lewdness to all Posterity; it
is great Goodness to all succeeding Generations, to cleanse the World of its
impure Inhabitants by some great Destruction; by Sword, or Plague, or Famine,
to lessen the number of Sinners, and to possess those who escape, with a
greater awe and reverence of God's Judgments.

Nay, to observe but one thing more; Many times these terrible Shakings and
Convulsions of the World are intended by God to open some new and more glorious
Scene of Providence. Thus it was in the Four Empires which preyed upon each
other, and were at last swallowed up by the Roman Powers; though they made
great Destructions in the World, yet they carried Learning and Civility into
Barbarous Countries, that the general State of the World was much the better
for it, and Mankind the better disposed to receive the Gospel, which then began
to be preached by Christ, and his Apostles.

But this is enough to satisfy us, what little reason there is to impeach the
Goodness of Providence, upon account of those many Evils which Mankind suffer:
If we consider what the Goodness of God requires of him, and what is good for
us in a State of Discipline, and what is necessary to the good government of
the World, neither our own, nor other men's Sufferings, will tempt us to
question the Goodness of Providence.

I proceed now particularly to examine those Objections which are made against
the Goodness of Providence: Which are reduced to these two.

1. The many Miseries which are in the World.

2 God's Unequal Care of his Creatures, or the unequal distribution of Good and
Evil, both as to particular Men, and public Societies.

What I have already said contains a sufficient Answer to all this; but it will
not be amiss for our more abundant Satisfaction, to consider some things more
largely and particularly.

1. I shall begin with the many Miseries of Human Life. Now this Objection
relates either to the being of any Miseries in the World, or to the number,
nature, and quality of them.

1. As for the first; Some will not allow God to be good, while there are any
Miseries in the World: For, say they, a good God should not suffer any Miseries
to enter into the World: This I observed, and answered before; That the
Goodness of Providence must bear proportion to the Nature, Qualities, and
Deserts of Creatures; and since Man, who was created innocent and happy,
forfeited his original Happiness by Sin, we must now consider, not what
Absolute, Unconfined Goodness would do; but what becomes a State of Discipline;
what is good for Sinners, and for a Corrupt and Degenerate World; and this will
abundantly justify the Goodness of Providence in all the Evils which Mankind
suffer, as you have already heard.

But this will not satisfy some men; for their great quarrel is, That God made
such a Creature, as could sin, and be miserable; that is, That God created
Angels and Men; that he endowed them with Reason and Understanding, and a
liberty of Choice; for such Creatures as can choose, may choose wrong. But this
is not an Objection against the Goodness of Providence, but against the
goodness of the Creation; and if it proves any thing, it proves, that God ought
not to have made the World; for if Goodness would not allow him to make a
Reasonable Creature, who might make himself miserable; Wisdom would not allow
him to make a World without any Reasonable Creatures in it.

I confess, I am at a great loss to know how they would lay their Objection, so
as to bear upon the Goodness of God, and what they intend by it, when they have
done: For let us consider wherein Creating Goodness consists.

Does the goodness of a Maker require any more of him, than to make all things
according to perfect and excellent Ideas, and to make them as perfect as their
Ideas are? What is it then they find fault with in God's making Angels and Men?
Is not the Idea of a Reasonable Being, and a Free Agent, the Idea of an
Excellent and Happy Creature? Are there any greater Perfections, than
Knowledge, and Wisdom, and Understanding, and Liberty of Choice? Is there any
Happiness like the Happiness of a Reasonable Nature? Nay, is there any thing
that deserves the name of Happiness besides this? Will you call Senseless
Matter, nay, will you call Beasts happy? And is the only Idea of a Happy Nature
in the World, a reasonable Objection against Creating Goodness?

If then there be no fault to be found in the Idea of a Reasonable Creature,
was there any defect in the Workmanship? Did not God make Men and Angels as
perfect as their Ideas? and give them all the happiness which belonged to their
Natures? If he did not, this would have been a great fault in their Creation;
if he did, Creating Goodness has done all that belonged to it to do.

But I would gladly know whence they have this Notion of Creating Goodness,
that it must make no Creature which can make it self miserable? Justice is as
essential to the notion of a God, as Goodness; and yet it is impossible that
Justice should belong to the Idea of God, if it were irreconcilable with the
Divine Goodness to make such Creatures who may deserve well or ill: For Justice
respects Merit, and consists in Rewards and Punishments; and if the Goodness of
God will not suffer him to make a Creature, which shall deserve either to be
rewarded or punished; Goodness and Justice cannot both of them belong to the
Idea of a God.

But what pretense is there for any man to say, That because the Devil and his
Angels fell from their first happy State, therefore God was not good in
creating the Angelical Nature? or because so many men sin, and make themselves
miserable, therefore God is not good in creating Man? when there are so many
myriads of Blessed Angels and Saints eternally happy in the vision and fruition
of God; and those who are not so, are miserable only by their own fault. Not to
have made a Happy Nature, had been a just blemish to the Divine Goodness; to
make Happy Creatures, though they make themselves miserable, is none; no more
than it is to make a Free Agent, who alone is capable of Happiness, and who
alone can make himself miserable. None but a Reasonable Nature is capable of
any great Happiness; and to make a Reasonable Creature without liberty of
Choice, and consequently without a possibility of sinning, and being miserable,
is a contradiction: For what does Reason serve for, but to direct our Choice?
And indeed all the Pleasures of Virtue, which are the greatest Pleasures of
Human Nature, result from this Liberty, that we choose well, when we might have
chose ill; and if it becomes a Good God to make a Happy Nature, it becomes him
to make a Reasonable and Free Agent, though many such Creatures may make
themselves miserable.

But suppose we could not answer this Objection, That God has made such
Creatures, as both could, and do make themselves miserable, what is it they
intend by it? Would they prove, that God did not make the World, because he
made Angels and Men, some of whom have made themselves Devils? those who are
Saints and Angels still shall answer this Objection, when any man has
confidence enough seriously to make it. Or would they prove, That God does not
govern the World with Goodness and Justice, because he has made such Creatures,
as by the good or ill use of their Liberty, make themselves the Subjects of
both? There is no other Answer necessary to that, but only to ask, What place
there could be for a Governing Providence, were there no Creatures who could
deserve well or ill?

But this is enough in answer to an Objection, which no considering man would
seriously make: The more considerable Objection relates to the many Evils and
Miseries that are in the World; and the only Objection which, if it were true,
could have any weight in it, is, That the Miseries of this Life are so many, so
great, and so universal, that they overballance the Pleasures and Comforts of
it; that a wise man would rather choose not to be, than to live in this World.
And though the generality of Mankind are of another mind, and therefore need no
answer to this, yet they think they have the Scripture on their side. For the
Wiseman, 4. Eccl. 2, 3. tells us; Wherefore I praised the dead, which are
already dead, more than the living, which are yet alive: Yea better is he than
both they, who has not yet been, who has not seen the evil work that is done
under the sun.

This at first view looks like a very sharp Satyr upon Human Life; that it is
better to die than to live; and that not to live at all, is better than either:
And were this universally true, it were a vain thing to think of vindicating
the Goodness of Providence in the government of this World, which has nothing
good or desirable in it. That this is not the meaning of the words, we may
certainly conclude from those many Promises which are made to Good men in this
Life; and God would not promise Good men what is worth nothing.

But the Explication of this Text will contribute very much to the
understanding this whole matter; and therefore I shall,

1. Show you, That this is not universally true, nor intended to be so
understood by the Wiseman, That it is better to die, or not to be, than it is
to live.

2. Show you in what sense the Wiseman meant this, viz. with respect to the
many Miseries and Calamities, which some Ages of the World, and which some men
in all Ages are exposed to: And how this also is to be understood.

1. That this is not universally true, That it is better to die, or not to be
born, than it is to live. This, I confess, was taught by some of the Ancient
Philosophers and Poets in too general terms; That the first best thing is not
to be born; and the next, to die quickly; but no body believed them; for most
men felt it otherwise: That light is sweet, and it is a pleasant thing for the
eyes to behold the sun, 11. Eccl. 7. There is a sense indeed, wherein this may
be true. If we acknowledge, that this Life in its greatest glory and perfection
is the most imperfect state that a Reasonable Soul can live in, as most
certainly it is; then those Philosophers who did believe that the Souls of men
lived and acted before they were born into this World, and were thrust into
these Bodies in punishment for what they had done amiss in a former state, had
reason to say, That the best thing is not to be born; for upon this
Supposition, it is best for them to continue in that State of Happiness, and
not to come into this World; and if when they die, they return to their
Original State of Happiness, the next best thing for them is, to die quickly;
and it is most probable that this was their secret meaning in it. For if we
only consider the Advantages and Disadvantages of Life, in ordinary Cases Life
is very desirable; so desirable, that it makes Death the King of Terrors.

It would be a great Reproach to the Wisdom and Goodness of Providence, were
this Life so contemptible, or so calamitous a State, that it were more
desirable not to be, than to live in this World; but no man yet ever made Life
an objection against Providence, though we know they do, the Miseries and
Calamities of Life. Men may make themselves miserable without any reproach to
Providence; and most of the Miseries that are in the World, are owing to men's
own fault or folly; but had God made Life it self so contemptible or miserable
a state, as to be worse than not being, this had been an unanswerable Objection.

I Am sure we are very ungrateful to Almighty God, if we do not acknowledge that
bountiful provision which he has made for the Happiness of Mankind in this
World. For what is wanting on God's part to make Man as happy as he can be
here? We want no Sense which is useful to Life, we want no Objects to gratify
those Senses; and which is very considerable, the most useful, and necessary,
and delightful Objects, are most common, and such as Mankind pretty equally
share in. There is not such a mighty difference, as some men imagine, between
the Poor and the Rich: In pomp, and show, and opinion, there is a great deal,
but little as to the true Pleasures and Satisfactions of Life: They enjoy the
same Earth, and Air, and Heavens; hunger and thirst makes the Poor man's Meat
and Drink as pleasant and refreshing as all the Varieties which cover a Rich
man's Table; and the Labor of a Poor man is more healthful, and many times
more pleasant too, than the Ease and Softness of the Rich; to be sure much more
easy than the Cares and Solicitudes, the Pride and Ambition, Discontents, and
Envyings, and Emulations, which commonly attend an Exalted Fortune.

These indeed at best are but mean Pleasures, the Pleasures of Sense, which are
the lowest Pleasures a Reasonable Soul is capable of; but yet they are so
entertaining, that the generality of Mankind think it worth living to enjoy
them, nay most men know little of any other Pleasures but these; and as
philosophically as some may despise the Body and all it is Pleasures in words;
there are but a very few who can live above the Body, and all its Pleasures,
while they live in it. But how mean soever these Pleasures be, it is certain
they make Mankind, notwithstanding all the common allays they meet with, not
only patient of living, but desirous to live.

And yet there are more Noble and Divine Pleasures which men may enjoy in this
World; such as gratify the nobler Faculties of the Soul, the Pleasures of
Wisdom and Knowledge, of Virtue and Religion; to know and worship God, to
contemplate the Art, and Beauty, and Perfection of his Works; and to do good to
men. These indeed are Pleasures that do not make us very fond of this Body, nor
of this World; for they do not arise from the Body, nor are they confined to
this World. We have reason to hope, that when we get loose from these Bodies,
our Intellectual Faculties will be vastly improved; that we shall know God
after another manner than we now do; and discover new and brighter Glories,
which are concealed from Mortal Eyes; but yet the Pleasures of Knowledge, and
Wisdom, and Religion in this World are very great and ravishing, and therefore
we either do, or may enjoy at present such Pleasures, as make Life very
desirable: Were there no other, nor happier State after this, yet it were very
desirable to come into this World, and live as long as we can here, to enjoy
the Pleasures and Satisfactions which may be enjoyed in this Life: And though
we know there is a happier Life after this, yet there is so much to be enjoyed
in this World, as generally makes even Good men very well contented to stay
here as long as God pleases.

2dly. But still we must confess, That though men may live very happily in this
World, yet there may be such a state of things, as, if we only compare the
sensible Advantages and Disadvantages of Life, may make Death much more
desirable than life. I praised the dead, which are already dead, more than the
living, which are yet alive.

For the understanding of which we must consider, That this is one of those
Sayings which must not be strictly and Philosophically examined, nor stretched
to the utmost sense the words will bear; it has some truth, and something of
Figure and Rhetoric in it, as many of our Common and Proverbial Speeches have,
which must be expounded to a qualified sense.

We must observe then, That the design of this whole Book of Ecclesiastes is
not to put us out of conceit with Life, but to cure our vain Expectations of a
complete and perfect Happiness in this World; to convince us, that there is no
such thing to be found in mere external Enjoyments, which are nothing but
vanity and vexation of spirit. And the end of all this is, not to make us weary
of Life, but to teach us to moderate our love to present things, and to seek
for Happiness in the practice of Virtue, in the knowledge and love of God, and
in the hopes of a better Life: For this is the application of all. Let us hear
the conclusion of the whole matter; fear God, and keep his commandments, for
this is the whole of man: Not only his Duty, but his Happiness too; For God
shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be
good, or whether it be evil, 12. Eccl. 13, 14.

Among other Arguments to prove how vain it is to expect a complete Happiness
in this World, the Wiseman instances in the many Oppressions and Sufferings
which men are liable to, and which sometimes befall them, which may be so sore
and grievous, and make Life so uneasy and troublesome, as may tempt men, who
only consult their own sensible satisfaction, to prefer Death before Life: And
this seems to be all that the Wiseman means, That we may live in such a
troublesome and tempestuous state of things, that the mere* external Enjoyments
of this Life, cannot recompense the Troubles of it; for this is all that his
Design required him to prove, The vanity of all external Enjoyments. And if
ever the Case be such, That a Wiseman would choose rather to leave this World,
and to leave all these Enjoyments behind him, than to endure the Troubles and
Calamities wherewith they are attended, they are vain indeed. But this does not
prove, That a Wiseman ought to despise Life for the Troubles of it; that he
should choose to run out of the World to be eased of its Troubles; or that a
Wiseman, notwithstanding all these Troubles, cannot make himself easy and
happy in it; and consequently it does not prove, That a Wiseman in such Cases
should prefer Death before Life, though it may reasonably enough cure his
fondness for Life, and make him welcome Death, whenever God pleases to send it.
Let us then briefly consider these things. And,

1. Let us take a view of those Troubles and Disorders which may make a
Wiseman willing to part with all the external Enjoyments and Pleasures of Life
to be rid of the Troubles of it, and make him think those men happy, who are
escaped out of this World, or are not yet come into it.

King Solomon the Preacher gives us two Accounts of this; the first before, the
second immediately after this Text. In the 1st Verse he tells us; So I returned,
and considered all the oppressions that are done under the sun, and beheld the
tears of such as were oppressed, and they had no comforter; and on the side of
their oppressors there was power, but they had no comforter. And hence he
concludes, Wherefore I praised the dead, that are already dead, more than the
living, who are yet alive. Which signifies the Public Oppressions either of
the Supreme Power, or of Subordinate Magistrates: The Second relates to Private
Factions, Envyings, Emulations, which many times make Life as uneasy as the
Public Miscarriages of Government. Again, I considered all travel, and every
right work, that for this a man is envied of his neighbor: This is also
vanity, and vexation of spirit, v. 4. These two contain most of those Evils in
them, which disturb and distract Human Life; but I shall not discourse this
matter according to Rules of Art and Method, but shall beg leave to give you a
short view of such a state of things, as might make a man, who consults only
his own ease, very contented to slip out of the World, and to leave foolish
Mortals to end the scuffle as well as they can.

When a Kingdom is in a strong Convulsion, assaulted by powerful Enemies
abroad, and divided by busy and restless Factions at home; when men live in
perpetual fear and suspense, know not what to call their own, nor how long they
shall enjoy it; when some men think themselves bound in conscience to ruin
themselves, their Country, and their Religion; others will sacrifice their
Country, and consequently themselves too, to private Ambitions, Resentments,
or Revenge; and try their Fortune over again in some new Changes and
Revolutions of Government. When such public Disputes as these influence all
Inferior Societies, and as sometimes they have done, corrupt Public Justice,
dissolve the most Intimate Friendships, make Conversation uneasy or dangerous,
set every man's Sword, or which is almost as fatal, every man's Tongue against
his Brother; when no man's Fame, no man's Life is secure; but a Slandering
Tongue may blast one, and a Perjured Tongue destroy the other: When Zeal and
Faction make Characters of men, disposes of Life, of Honor, of Estates, and
Religion it self serves for little else but to inspire men with Zeal and
Faction: When we cannot live in the World without seeing, or hearing, or
feeling ten thousand Villainies that are committed in it, what should make any
man fond of Life? why should we not come to good Old Simeon's Nunc dimittis,
Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace. Such a troublesome state of
things in this World must needs make all considering men think of a better, and
as glad to get out of this, as a Mariner is to recover the Haven after a
violent Storm at Sea. Thus I say it must be, if we consider only the present
Advantages or Disadvantages of Life; for perpetual Fears and Cares, Strife and
Contention, Oppression, Injustice, Defamation, etc. destroy the Ease and
Security of Life, and the Freedom and Pleasure of Conversation, without which
all the other Pleasures of Life are very tastless.

And here I cannot but bewail the Folly and Distraction of Mankind, who are
fond of Life, and impatiently thirst after Happiness, but will not suffer
either themselves or others to live, and to be happy. Who bite and devour each
other, and by their ungoverned Passions raise such Hurricanes in the World,
that there is no Ease, or Rest, or Happiness to be found, but in a Grave, or in
a Charnel-house: Where the wicked cease from troubling, and where the weary be
at rest, where the prisoners rest together; they hear not the voice of the
oppressor, the small and great are there, and the servant is free from his
master, 3. Job 17, 18, 19.

Did men consider what it is to live, and to be happy, it would convince them,
that there is nothing in this World worth purchasing with Eternal Discontents,
Envyings, Emulations, Jealousies, Fears, with doing all the Mischiefs and
Injuries we can, and with suffering all the Injuries which others can do; nay,
indeed it is wonderful to me, that men's own sense and feeling, if they will not
be at the pains to reason the matter, does not convince them of this. To live,
is not merely to be, but to be happy; and to be happy does not signify merely
to have, but to enjoy; and to enjoy, requires an easy, serene, undisturbed
mind, which can relish what it has, and extract its true pleasure and
satisfaction. The security of Life, the easiness and freedom of Conversation,
when we fear no Spies upon our Words and Actions, no Malicious Eye, no
Slandering Tongue; when our Lives are spent in the exchange of good Offices, in
the Endearments and Caresses of Friendship, or at least in mutual Civilities
and Respects; this is to live, and to be happy. A very little of what is
external, will make such a state as this happy, which all the Power, and all
the Riches of the World cannot do; when to get, or keep it, divides the Hearts
and the Interests of men, ferments their Passions, destroys Friendships, and
all mutual Trust and Confidence, cantons and crumbles Human Societies into
Parties and Factions, and animates them with a bitter Zeal and Rage, to
reproach and vilify, supplant and undermine each other; if this be to be happy,
or the way to Happiness in this World, it is time to seek for Happiness out of
it.

2dly. And yet this is no reason for a wise and good man to despise or abhor
life, much less to force his passage out of this World. There is no difficulty
in persuading the generality of Mankind to live, notwithstanding all the
Troubles and Calamities they meet with. The love of life is natural and strong,
and reconciles men to great Miseries before they desire that death should ease
them. Self-murder is so unnatural a Sin, that it is nowadays thought reason
enough to prove any man distracted; we have too many sad Examples what a
disturbed Imagination will do, if that must pass for Natural Distraction; but
we seldom or never hear, that mere external Sufferings, how severe soever,
tempt men to kill themselves. The Stoics themselves, whose Principle it was to
break their Prison, when they found themselves uneasy, very rarely put it into
practice: Nature was too strong for their Philosophy; and though their
Philosophy allowed them to die when they pleased, Nature taught them to live as
long as they could; and we see that they seldom thought themselves miserable
enough to die.

There is no danger then of frightning men out of this World by the Troubles
and Calamities of it; that I need not concern my self with such fears; but yet,
without contradicting Solomon, to vindicate the Providence of God, and to
support and encourage Good men, I shall briefly show you, That it is very
desirable for a Good man to live on, and that a Wise and Good man may live very
happily, notwithstanding all the Troubles and Difficulties, which he may, and
sometimes must encounter in this World. For Difficulties are a glorious Scene
of Virtue, and such a Virtue as can conquer Difficulties, has its Rewards, its
Pleasures and Satisfactions even in this Life.

It is very necessary that good men should live in very bad times, not only to
reprieve a wicked World, that God may not utterly destroy it, as he once did in
the days of Noah, when all Flesh had corrupted its ways; but also to season
Human Conversation, to give check to Wickedness, and to revive the practice of
Virtue by some great and bright Examples, and to redress those Violences and
Injuries which are done under the Sun, at least to struggle and contend with a
Corrupt Age, which will put some stop to the growing Evil, and scatter such
Seeds of Virtue, as will spring up in time. It is an Argument of God's care of
the World, that Antidotes grow in the neighborhood of Poisons; that the most
Degenerate Ages have some excellent men, who seem to be made on purpose for
such a time, to stem the torrent, and to give some ease to the Miseries of
Mankind: And would it become such men, when the World so much needs them, to
get out of it, if they could? to choose the quiet and silent Retirements of
Woods and Deserts, or of the Grave, to avoid the trouble of serving God, or
doing good to Men? Great Minds cannot do this; Virtue is made for Difficulties,
and grows stronger and brighter for such Trials; it lays a mighty obligation on
Mankind to serve the Public good with labor and danger; to purchase the Ease,
and Liberty, and Security of their Country, at the price of their own Ease,
and the utmost hazard of their Lives and Fortunes; to oppose a hardened, and
laborious, and unwearied Virtue against Zeal and Faction, and not like
Issachar, to crouch between two Burdens, and cry rest is good. And it is a
mighty pleasure to a Virtuous mind to feel its own strength, to contend with
Difficulties, as far as Virtue and Prudence directs, with an unbroken mind; it
is always pleasant to do good, but yet it has the sweeter relish, the dearer we
pay for it. This is a Pleasure above all the Ease and Luxury of the World; it
not only sweetens all the Troubles of Life, but turns them into Triumphs; to
endeavor to bear up a sinking World, though he should at last be crushed in
the Ruins of it, will make the very Ruins he sinks under, an Illustrious
Monument of his Virtue: To do all that a Wise and Good man ought to do, without
regard to his own Ease, to save a Sinking Church and State, will make him fall
with pleasure, and perpetuate his Memory with Honor; for in spite of Envy and
Detraction, Virtue will always be honorable in the Grave. But I cannot enlarge
on these things, and therefore shall give you the result of all I have said in
two or three Observations.

1. That though the Troubles and Calamities, which we often meet with in this
World, do not prove Life to be a contemptible State, or worse than not being;
yet they do prove Life to be a very Imperfect State; that the mere Sensible
Pleasures and Advantages of Life, together with these great allays, are but
vanity, and vexation of spirit. Wise men see, that there can be no complete
Happiness in this World, and that it is vain to expect it; for how can this
World make us happy, which, though it has its Pleasures, has its Troubles, and
Cares, and Disappointments too; is an insecure and mutable State, exposed to
Chance and Accident, to the Lusts and Passions of men; is always chequered with
Prosperous and Adverse Events, has always a mixture of Good and Evil, and many
times the Evil is the prevailing Ingredient? And therefore though the natural
love of Life, and the many Sweets and Comforts of it reconcile very miserable
people to living, yet a wise man sees no reason to be fond of this State, much
less to dream of perfect and lasting Happiness in it.

2dly. The many Troubles we are exposed to, plainly prove, That there is no
Happiness to be had in this World, but in the practice of Virtue. It was a vain
brag of the Stoics, That Virtue alone could make a man happy; that their
Wiseman could be perfectly happy in Phalaris's Bull; for Virtue is not Meat,
and Drink, and Clothes, cannot cure Bodily Pain and Sickness, nor satisfy the
Appetites and Desires of the Body; and while a Wise man lives in a mortal Body,
he must feel the wants and pains of it; and to be in want and pain, is not
happiness. But yet thus much is certainly true, That nothing can make a man
happy in this World without the practice of Virtue; and that when we must
encounter with the Troubles and Difficulties of Life, nothing can give us any
degree of Ease and Satisfaction but the practice of Virtue. We may meet with
such Troubles as will sour all our other Enjoyments, and make them unable to
bear up our spirits, which sink under their own weight, under the disorders of
their own Passions: Are tormented with Fears, with Disappointments, with Envy,
with Rage; and when they cannot bear themselves, can bear nothing else, nor
relish their wonted Pleasures: But you have already heard, that Virtue has its
proper Pleasures in the greatest Difficulties; inspires us with prudent
Counsels to disintangle our selves; animates us with courage and bravery to
resist the Evil, or to bear it; sweetens our Labors with the satisfaction of
great and generous Actions for the Public Good; keeps our own Passions under
government, and triumphs over an adverse Fortune, by raising the mind above it.
By such helps as these a Good man may enjoy some competent measure of Ease and
Satisfaction in the worst Condition; but when such Troubles surprise a mind
unarmed and unfortified with Virtue, unable to resist, and unable to bear, we
may then with great truth and reason apply this Text to him; I praised the
dead, who are already dead, more than the living, who are yet alive. Were the
state of this World always easy and prosperous, there would be little need of
Passive Virtues, though Virtue in general is always necessary to make men
happy; but all men must be sensible how necessary Passive and Suffering Virtues
are for an inconstant, troublesome and suffering state, which is always in some
degree the state of this World; and that will convince those who will consider
it, how necessary the practice of Virtue is to make men happy.

3dly. Though the Troubles of this Life are no reason why a Good man should
hasten his escape out of this World before his time, yet they are a very good
reason to make him contented to leave this World, whenever God calls him out of
it. For though Virtue will sweeten Labors and Difficulties, yet no man would
choose always to live in a state of War. Ease and rest is very pleasant and
refreshing after labor; Though a Prince be glorious in the Field, covered with
dust and sweat, and sprinkled with the Blood of his Enemies, yet the Triumphs
of a secure and quiet Throne are greater and more desirable. And this makes the
Grave too in some degree acceptable after the toils and labors of Virtue, that
there the weary are at rest; especially since this Rest is not a state of
insensibility; for all the Labors and Difficulties of a Virtuous Life are
infinitely to be preferred before the ease and rest of knowing, and feeling,
and being sensible of nothing, which is the rest of a Stone, and of things
without life, not the rest of a Man. But they rest from their labors, and
their works follow them; they rest in a peaceful and secure enjoyment of
Endless Happiness; they rest from all the Labors of Virtue, and enjoy its
Rewards.

This is a sufficient justification of Providence with respect to the present
Evils and Calamities of Life; for it is what exactly becomes the Goodness of
Providence in this World; such a mixed State of Good and Evil, as may wean us
from the tempting Vanities of this Life, and convince us, that there is no
perfect Happiness to be found here, which is necessary to raise our hearts
above this World, and to set our Affections upon things above, which is an
Eternal State of perfect Ease and Rest: And since Religion and Virtue is
necessary to our Future Happiness, nothing can be better for us than such a
state of things as shall make Virtue necessary to our present Happiness; and
since we must leave this World, and Death is the King of Terrors, whatever
reconciles us to Death, and makes it easy, may be reckoned one of the greatest
pleasures and securities of Human Life.

Secondly, In answer to this Objection against the Goodness of Providence from
those many Evils and Calamities that are in the World, we must consider, That
most of the Evils of Human Life are owing to men's own wickedness and folly, and
it is very unreasonable to make those Evils an Objection against Providence,
which men wilfully bring upon themselves. Thus the Wiseman long since stated
this Question, The foolishness of man perverteth his ways, and his heart
fretteth against the Lord, 19. Prove. 3. Men make themselves miserable, and then
reproach the Divine Providence with their Miseries: And therefore I shall
briefly show you, that Mankind undo themselves; and that the Evils which men
bring upon themselves, are no reasonable Objection against the Goodness of
Providence.

1. The first is a very proper Subject for a Satyr against the Folly and
Wickedness of Mankind, but needs no proof. If we take a survey of the many
Miseries of Human Life, and resolve them into their immediate and natural
Causes, we shall find, that most men take great care to leave very little for
God to do in the punishment of Wickedness in this World.

There are but two visible Causes of all the Miseries that are in the World;
either the Disorders of Nature, or the Wickedness of Men: By the Disorders of
Nature, I mean unseasonable Weather, Earthquakes, excessive Heat or Cold, great
Droughts, or immoderate Rains, Thunders, Lightnings, Storms and Tempests, which
occasion Famines and Plagues, great Sickness, or a great Mortality; these may
very reasonably be attributed to the more immediate Hand of God, who directs
and governs Nature; but besides that in such Cases, the visible Corruption of
Mankind justifies such Severities; how rarely do these happen, and how few
suffer by them, in comparison with those many and constant Evils which the
wickedness of men every day bring upon themselves, and others. For most of the
other Evils and Calamities of life are visibly owing to men's Sins. Bodily
Sickness, sharp and painful Distempers, which shorten men's lives, or make them
miserable, are the common effects of Intemperance, Luxury, or Wantonness;
Children inherit the Diseases of their Parents, and come into the World only to
cry and die, or to struggle some few years in the very Kingdom and Territories
of Death; and to languish under those mortal Wounds which they received with
the first beginnings of life.

Another great evil is Poverty, which many men bring upon themselves by
Idleness, or Prodigality, and some expensive Vices: It is not in every man's
power by the greatest Prudence and Industry to make himself rich; for time and
chance happens to them all; but in ordinary Cases Prudence and Industry,
joined with a religious regard for God and his Providence, will preserve a man
from the pressing Wants and Necessities of Poverty. Others, who do not make
themselves poor by their own Sins, are many times reduced to great poverty by
the Sins of other men; by Injustice, and Oppression, and Violence; by the
Miseries and Calamities of War, which brings a thousand Evils with it; which
makes many helpless Widows and Orphans, deprives men of their Patrons and
Benefactors, drives others from their plentiful Fortunes, to seek their Bread
in a strange Land; plunders Poor and Rich; lays a flourishing Country
desolate; puts a stop to Trade; makes Provisions dear, and leaves no work for
the Poor.

Some others are reduced to Poverty more immediately by the Providence of God,
without their own fault: Those who have no other support but their daily
labor, are quickly pinched by a long and Expensive Sickness, or by the
Infirmities of Age, or by the loss of their Eyes, or Hands, or Legs; others are
undone by Fire, or Shipwrecks, or the various Accidents of Trade, which the
most wary and cautious men cannot escape; but besides, that there are few of
these in comparison with the throngs and crowds of Idle, Prodigal, Self-made
Poor; God has made provision for all such Cases, that no man shall suffer
extreme want, by commanding the Rich especially, to supply the want of such
Poor, who are properly God's Poor, or the Poor of God's making; and commanding
this under the penalty of their Eternal Salvation, and the forfeiture of their
own Estates, if they prove unjust and unfaithful Stewards: So that though God
makes some men poor, it is the fault of other men if they suffer want. The
poverty they suffer is owing to the Providence of God; the wants and miseries
they suffer, are owing to the Sins, to the Uncharitableness of Men: For though
the World be unequally divided, of which more presently, yet there is enough to
supply the wants of all the Creatures that are in it; and God never intended
that any of his Creatures should want necessaries; that one man's plenty and
abundance should cause another man to starve: And thus it is in most of the
other miseries of life; it is the sin and the folly of Mankind which makes them
miserable, which is so obvious to every one, who will consider it, that I need
not expatiate on every particular. I believe there is no man but will confess,
that were all men good and virtuous, this World would be a very happy place;
and if the practice of moral and sociable Virtues would make Mankind happy, it
is no hard matter to guess, what it is that disturbs the Peace and Happiness of
the World.

2dly. Let us now consider, how unreasonable it is to reproach the Divine
Providence with those Evils and Miseries which Mankind bring upon themselves.
And laying down this as a Principle, that most men make themselves miserable,
it is very easy to defend and justify the Goodness of Providence.

For these Evils, which men complain of, are not justly chargeable upon
Providence; and therefore are un unreasonable Objection against Providence. God
does not bring these Evils upon Mankind, but men bring them upon themselves.
Supposing the nature of things, and the nature of man to be, what they now are,
and that men lived just as they now do, there must be the same Miseries in the
World, that there now are, though there were no Providence. Though God did not
interpose in the government of the World, yet Intemperance, Luxury and Lust,
would destroy men's health; Sloth, and Prodigality, and expensive Vices, would
make men poor; Pride, Ambition and Revenge, would make Quarrels, raise Wars,
and bring all the Calamities of War upon the World; if there were no
Providence, thus it must be; for excessive eating and drinking will oppress
Nature; and those who will take no honest pains to get Money, or will spend
what they have upon their lusts, must be poor; and those who will quarrel and
fight, must take what follows; these evils are not owing to Providence, because
Providence does not bring them; no more than Providence makes men wicked: Men
make themselves wicked, and wickedness makes them miserable; and we may as well
charge the Providence of God with all the wickedness of men, as with those
miseries which their own wickedness brings upon them.

Now since most of those evils which are in the World are not justly chargeable
upon Providence, the Goodness of God is very visible in those very Evils and
Calamities which Mankind suffer. For,

1. God has in ordinary Cases put it into every man's power to preserve himself
from most of the greatest evils and miseries of life, even from all those which
men bring upon themselves by their own sins. What could be done more than this
for a reasonable Creature, to make it his own choice, and to put it into his
own power, whether he will be happy or miserable? God has, not only in his
Laws, but in the nature of things, set before us life and death, happiness and
misery: All men see what the visible and natural punishments of Sin are, and
have a natural aversion to those evils, and may avoid them if they will; this
is a plain proof, not only of the Holiness of Providence, as I observed before,
in deterring men from sin by those natural evils which attend it, but also of
the Goodness of Providence, by showing men a plain and natural method, how to
avoid the miseries of life, and to make themselves easy and happy. Let the most
Skeptical Objector against Providence consider with himself, what God could
have done more to prevent the miseries of Mankind, without changing the nature
of man, or the nature of things. To have laid a necessity upon man, that he
should never choose, nor do any thing which will bring these evils on him, had
been to change his nature, to destroy the free exercise of his Reason, and the
liberty of choice; and yet men cannot live as they do, and escape these
miseries, unless all Nature be changed. We must have other kind of Bodies than
we have, or our Meat and Drink must have other virtues and qualities, to bear
the disorders and excesses of intemperance and lust, without feeling the
inconveniences of it. Fire must not burn, nor Water drown, if Wine must not
inflame, nor a flood of indigested Liquors extinguish the vital heat. The whole
World must be a Paradise, and bring forth fruit of it self, and all things must
be possessed in common, or the idle, slothful, prodigal Sinners must be poor.
Our Bodies must be invulnerable and immortal, or there must be no instruments
of death in the World; or men, who quarrel, will fight, and kill one another.
It is impossible, as the World now is, to separate sin and misery; but men may
avoid misery, if they please: And that is a very good World, and a good God
that made such a World, and a good Providence* which governs the World, wherein
men may make themselves happy, if they will.

2dly. Besides this, the Goodness of Providence is seen in hindering and
preventing a great many more evils and miseries which the sins and lusts of men
would bring upon the World, were they not under the restraints and government
of Providence. No man doubts, but there might be a great deal more evil and
misery in the World than there is, nor that many bad men are inclined to do a
great deal more hurt than they do; what is it then after all, that makes the
World so tolerable a place? If this be owing to the Providence of God, it is a
great argument of his Goodness, that he will not suffer foolish Sinners to make
themselves and others so miserable as they would; that as many furious Phaetons
as there are in the World, it is not yet all in flames; but the Moral, as well
as the Natural World, has its Temperate, as well as Torrid Zones; and what
shall we attribute this to, if we do not attibute it to Providence? To what
else can we ascribe our deliverance from those unseen Snares which were laid
for us, and which we knew nothing of, till we had escaped; nay, which, it may
be, we know nothing of to this day? how many wicked Designs prove abortive? how
many secret Plots are discovered, when ripe for execution? how often does God
put a hook into the nostrils of the proudest Tyrants, and by some cross
Accidents, or by weak and contemptible means, breaks their Power, and humbles
them to the dust? Sacred and Profane Histories are full of such Examples, which
can be attributed to nothing else but a Divine Providence, which sets bounds to
the Waves of the Sea, and to the Rage and Pride of men. The Scripture teaches
us to ascribe our deliverance from all the evils we escape, as well as all the
good we enjoy, to a Divine Providence; and then we must acknowledge, that the
Divine Providence prevents all that evil which bad men would do, but cannot; and
who knows how much this is? who knows how much evil bad men would do, had they
no restraint? that we have much more reason to adore the Divine Goodness for
restraining the Lusts and Passions of men, which prevents an universal deluge
of misery, than complain that he suffers so many miseries to afflict the World.

3dly. Especially if we consider in the next place, That God permits bad men to
do no more hurt and mischief, than what he overrules to wise and good
purposes. For God many times serves the wise ends of his Providence by the
wickedness of men, to punish the wicked, and to chastise the good; to exercise
the Graces and Virtues of good men, or to give terrible Examples of his
Vengeance on the wicked; and all this, how severe soever it may be, proves the
Goodness of Providence, because it is for the general good of the World, that
bad men should be punished, suppressed, destroyed, and that good men should be
made better, and become great and eminent Examples of Faith and Patience.
Whatever evils and miseries there are in the World, if there be no more than
the good government of the World requires; if no man suffers any more than what
he deserves, or than what will do himself good, if he wisely improves it; or
will do others good, if they will either take warning by his Sufferings, or
imitate his Virtues, all this is not only reconcilable with the Goodness of
Providence, but is an eminent instance of it; for to do good is an expression
of Goodness, though the ways of doing it may be very severe.

This is a sufficient justification of Providence, even as to those evils which
God himself immediately inflicts upon the World, that he inflicts no more, nor
greater evils, than what are for the good government of the World, as I have
observed before; but it is much more so with reference to those evils which men
bring upon themselves; for is it not wonderful Goodness in God to defend us
from our selves, to qualify the malignity of our own sins, to suffer us to do
our selves no more hurt, than what he can turn into great good to us, if we
consider our ways, and learn wisdom by the things which we suffer? So to
restrain bad men, that they shall hurt no body but those whom God thinks fit to
punish, or to correct, or to exercise with some severities; and that they shall
do no more hurt, nor hurt any longer than the Divine Wisdom sees useful to
these ends?

Let us then briefly review this Objection and Answer; and setting aside the
consideration of God and his Providence, let us suppose it to be the case of a
Father. And, I hope, what we our selves would allow to be a reasonable defense
of earthly Parents, will be thought a good justification of God and his
Providence.

Suppose then a Father has several Children, whom he providees very bountifully
for; and sends them abroad into the World in such hopeful circumstances, that
if they will be frugal, diligent and virtuous, they may live happily, and
increase their Fortunes: Should such Children turn Prodigals, and waste their
Estates in rioting and luxury, destroy their health, and suffer all the
miseries of sickness and poverty; would any man blame their good Father for
this; and would not such a good man think himself much injured, should he be
accused of unkindness and severity to his Children, only because after all the
kindness he could show them, they have made themselves miserable? especially if
we suppose this kind Father to keep such a watchful eye over them, and to take
such prudent and effectual care, as not to suffer them utterly to undo
themselves, to make their condition hopeless and desperate, but only to let
them feel the smart of their own folly, to bring them to more sober thoughts,
not to perish under it, till there is no hope left of reclaiming them. What
could a kind Father do more for Prodigals, unless you would have him maintain
them in their luxury and lewdness, which a wise and good Father cannot do? He
brought none of these miseries upon them, and it is kindness to let them smart
under them, to prevent their undoing as long as he can; he turns the miseries
they bring upon themselves only into a state of discipline; he suffers them to
injure one another to make them all sensible of their folly; and those who are
past recovery, he makes Examples of greater Severities to reform the rest: If
this would be thought a kind, merciful, and wise Conduct in earthly Parents,
apply it to the Providence of God, and you have an answer to most of the
miseries of Human Life.

3dly. In answer to this Objection against the Goodness of Providence, from the
many evils and miseries that are in the World, we may consider further, That as
most of these evils are owing to our own, or to other men's sins, so it is we
our selves who give the sting to them all: As many external Calamities as there
are in the World, and as the present state of this World requires there should
be in it; God has made abundant provision for the support of good men under
them. It is not always in our power to avoid many of the Sufferings and
Calamities of life, but it is our own fault if we sink under them. Natural
Courage and strength of mind, the powers of Reason, and a wise consideration of
the nature of things, the belief of a Good Providence, which takes care of us,
and orders all things for our good, and the certain hopes of immortal life,
will support good men under their sufferings, and make them light and easy: And
if God enable us to bear our sufferings, and to enjoy our selves under them, to
possess our Souls in patience, and to rejoice in hope; though we may suffer, we
are not miserable; and Sufferings without misery are no formidable Objections
against Providence; this is like the Bush, that was on fire, but was not burnt,
a signal token of the Divine Presence and Favor, and that can be no objection
against the Goodness of Providence. What is merely external, may afflict a good
man, but cannot make him miserable; for no man is miserable, whose mind is easy
and cheerful, full of great hopes, and supported with Divine Joys. But the
disorders of our Passions make us miserable, and make us sink under external
Sufferings. An immoderate love of this World, Pride, Ambition, Covetousness,
Anger, Hatred, Revenge, make every Condition uneasy, and any great Sufferings
intolerable. It is this that makes Poverty and Disgrace, the loss of Estate and
Honors, the Frowns of Princes, and the Clamours of the People, such
unsufferable Evils, which a wise and good man cannot only bear, but modestly
despise. It is this that terrifies us with the least approach of danger, and
distracts us with fear, and care, and solicitude, and with all the imaginary
evils, and frightful appearances, which a scared fancy can raise in the dark.
Especially when guilt makes men afraid, and look upon every misfortune,
disappointment, affliction, as a token of the Divine Vengeance, and a terrible
presage of the endless miseries of the next life.

External Evils and Calamities, as far as they are good, can be no objection
against the Goodness of Providence; and they are good, as far as the Providence
of God is concerned in them, for they are permitted and ordered by God for wise
and good ends; and if they do not prove good to us, it is our own fault, who
will not be made better by them.

Whatever men suffer, if their sufferings do not make them miserable, this is
no just reproach to Providence; for God may be very good to his Creatures,
whatever they suffer, while they can suffer, and be happy; not perfectly and
completely happy, which admits of no sufferings, but such a degree of
self-enjoyment, as reconciles external Sufferings with inward peace,
contentment, patience, hope; which is the happiness of a suffering state, and a
much greater happiness than the most prosperous Fortune without it; and if we
be not thus happy under all our Sufferings, it is our own fault.

Thus the Wiseman tells us, That it is not so much external Sufferings (which
is all that can be charged upon the Divine Providence) which makes men
miserable, but the inward guilt and disorders of their own minds; See Sermon
before the Queen on that Text.
18. Prove. 14. The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity, but a wounded
spirit who can bear? And if all that God inflicts on us may be born, our misery
is owing to our selves. But I have so particularly discoursed this upon another
occasion, that I shall enlarge no farther on it.

2dly. Another Objection against the Goodness of Providence, is God's partial
and unequal care of his Creatures; and I confess Partiality is a very great
Objection, both against Justice, and an Universal Goodness, and such the
Goodness of Providence must be.

The foundation of the Objection is this: That there are very different ranks
and conditions of men in the World; Rich and Poor, High and Low, Princes and
Subjects, and a great many degrees of Power, and Honor, and Riches, and
Poverty; and we cannot say, that God deals equally by all these men, whose
Fortunes are so very unequal: But there is no great difficulty in answering
this. For,

1. The Goodness of Providence consists in consulting the general good and
happiness of Mankind, and of particular men in subordination to the good of the
whole; and this fully answers the Objection: For though there are too many who
are not well satisfied with their own Station, and never will be, unless they
could be uppermost; yet I dare appeal to any man of common sense, whether it be
not most for the good of Mankind, that there should be very different Ranks and
Orders of men in the World.

There is not any one thing more necessary to the happiness of the World, than
good Government; and yet there could be no Government in an equality; and there
is nothing makes such an inequality like an unequal Fortune. Were all men
equally rich and great, there would be neither Subjects, nor Servants; for no
man will choose to be a Subject or a Servant, who has an equal title to be a
Lord and Master. And then no man could be rich and great, which are only
comparative terms; and which is worse than that, no man could be safe. And if
an inequality in men's Fortunes be as necessary as Government, that is a
sufficient justification of Providence, for Humane Societies cannot subsist
without it.

2dly. And yet it is a very great mistake to think, that the Happiness of men
differ as much as their Fortunes do; that a Prince is as much happier, as he is
greater than his Subjects; for all the World knows, that Happiness is not
entailed on Riches, and Power, and Secular Honors; as they have their
advantages, so they have very troublesome and sour allays; and, it may be,
upon a true estimate of things, as different a show and appearance as men make
in the World, they are pretty equal as to true Enjoyments. There is very little
difference in eating and drinking, while we have wherewithal to satisfy Nature;
for Appetite makes every thing delicious; and the hard Labor of a Poor man is
much more tolerable than Gout and Stone, and those sharp or languishing
Diseases, which so commonly attend the Softness and Luxury of the Rich; and as
for Opinion and Fancy it self, which creates the greatest difference, every
Rank of men make a Scene among themselves, and every man finds something to
value himself upon: That it may be, there is nothing wherein all Mankind are so
equal, as in Self-love, and Self-flattery, and a value for themselves; that
though there are many men who would change Fortunes with others, there are few
that would change themselves; and the difference of Fortunes is very
inconsiderable, while every man is so well satisfied with himself.

3dly. This inequality of Fortunes is for the great good of all Ranks of men,
and serves a great many wise Ends of Providence. It makes some men industrious
to provide for themselves and Families; it inspires others with emulation to
raise their Fortunes; it gives life and spirit to the World, and makes it a
busy Scene of Action, to keep what they have, and to make new acquisitions; to
excel their Equals, and rival those above them; And though through the folly
and wickedness of men, this occasions a great deal of mischief, yet the World
would be a very dull place without it, there would be no encouragement, no
reward for Virtue; Providence it self would have very little to do; for the
visible Rewards of Virtue, and Punishment of Wickedness, is in the change of
men's Fortunes; when Industry, Prudence, and Virtue, advance men of a low
Condition to the greatest Places of Trust and Honor, or at least to a
plentiful and splendid Station; and Prodigality, Luxury, and Impiety, bring
Misery, Poverty, and Contempt, upon Rich and Noble Families; Such Revolutions
as these are great Examples of the Wisdom and Justice of Providence; and
therefore the inequality of men's Fortunes is so far from being an Objection
against Providence, that there could be little visible Exercise either of the
Goodness or Justice of Providence without it.

I cannot without some indignation reflect upon the baseness and ingratitude of
Mankind, who live, and move, and have their being in God; who know how little
they deserve of him, and feel every day how many blessings they receive from
him, and yet seem never better pleased, than when they can find, or ignorantly
invent, some plausible Pretense to reproach his Goodness; the Sense of all
Mankind confutes such Objections; and I should not have thought it worth the
while to answer them, were it not a great satisfaction, and of great use, to
contemplate the Divine Goodness even on the darkest side of Providence: Which
will teach us a patient and thankful submission to God under all our
Sufferings, enable us to bear them, and direct us how to prevent, or remove
them; and give us a more transporting admiration of the Divine Goodness, when
we see it, like the Sun, break through the blackest Clouds. If the Goodness of
God conquer the Sins, the Perverseness of Mankind, and shines through all those
Miseries which foolish Sinners every day bring upon themselves; how good is
God, when his Goodness flows with an undisturbed, uninterrupted Current!

CHAP. VIII.
The Wisdom of Providence.
THE Unsearchableness of the Divine Wisdom, as I observed above, Chap. 4.
is a very good reason, why we should not judge or censure such mysterious
Passages of Providence as we cannot comprehend; but yet it becomes us to take
notice of, and to admire that wonderful Wisdom which is visible in the
government of Mankind. We cannot by searching find out God, we cannot find out
the Almighty to perfection: it is as high as heaven, what can thou do? deeper
than hell, what can thou know? the measure thereof is longer than the earth,
and broader than the sea, 11. Job 7, 8, 9. But though we cannot discover all
the Wisdom of Providence, no more than we can the Wisdom of the Creation, yet
we may discover enough to satisfy us, that the World is governed as well as
made with Infinite Wisdom: When we contemplate God, it is like losing our
selves in a boundless prospect, where we see a great many Glories and Beauties,
but cannot see to the end of it. We may discover admirable and surprising
Wisdom in that little we see of Providence, as I have already briefly observed
upon several Occasions; but we know so little of what has been done in the
World, and by what means it was done, and what ends it served, that it is no
wonder if we have as imperfect a view of the Wisdom of Providence, as we have
of the History of the World. But yet whoever diligently applies his mind to the
study of Providence, will see reason to admire a great many Events, which
careless Observers make objections against Providence; which will be of such
great use to confirm us in the belief of a Providence, and to give us a
profound veneration of the Divine Wisdom, that I shall venture to make some
little Essay of this nature, which though I am sensible must fall infinitely
short of the dignity of the Subject, yet will suggest some very useful
thoughts, and show us the most delightful and profitable way of studying
Histories, and Providence. And to do this in the best manner I can, I shall

1. Consider some great Events recorded in Scripture, which are as it it were
the Hinges of Providence, whereon the various Scenes of Providence turned.

2. I shall take notice of some other visible Marks and Characters of Wisdom in
the more common Events of Providence, especially such as are made objections
against Providence.

1. Some great Events recorded in Scripture, which gave a new face of things to
the World, and opened new Scenes of Providence.

The state of Innocence, wherein man was created, was a state of perfect
Happiness. There was no death, no sickness, no labor, or sorrow; but the fall
of man made a very great change in this visible Creation: Man himself became
mortal, and was condemned to an industrious and laborious life; according to
that Sentence; Cursed is the ground for thy sake; in sorrow shall thou eat of
it all the days of thy life; Thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth to
thee; and thou shall eat the herb of the field: In the sweat of thy face shall
thou eat bread, till thou return unto the ground; for out of it wast thou
taken: For dust thou art, and unto dust thou shall return, 3. Genesis 17, 18, 19.

This was a very severe Sentence, which deprived man of Immortality, and of the
easy and happy life of Paradise; condemned him to labor and sorrow while he
lived, and then to return unto dust; and yet the Wisdom as well as Justice of
Providence is very visible in it; it was not fit that when man had sinned,
Discourse of Death, chapter 2. sect. 1.
he should be immortal in this World; and an industrious and laborious life is
the best and happiest state for fallen man, Discourse of Judgm. chapter 1. sect. 8.
as I have elsewhere shown at large.

We know little more than this of the Antediluvian World, till we hear of the
general corruption of Mankind, That the earth was filled with violence, for all
flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth; insomuch, that it repented the Lord
that he had made man upon the earth, and it grieved him at his heart, 6. Genesis
This was so universal a Corruption, that there was but one righteous Family
left, only Noah, and his three Sons; and therefore God resolved to sweep them
all away with an universal Deluge, excepting that one righteous Family, whom he
preserved in the Ark, which he appointed Noah to prepare for that purpose.

The justice of this no man can dispute; for if all Flesh corrupt its ways, God
may as justly destroy a whole world of Sinners, as he can punish, or cut off
any one single Sinner. But that which I am now concerned for, is to show the
wonderful Wisdom of Providence in the destruction of the Old World by a deluge
of Water; and rightly to understand this, we must consider the several
Circumstances of the Story, and what God intended by it.

Now though that wicked Generation of men deserved to be destroyed, yet God did
not intend to put a final end to this World, nor to cut off the whole Race of
all Mankind, but to raise a new Generation of men from a Righteous Seed; and to
make the destruction of the Old World a standing Warning, and a visible Lesson
of Righteousness to the New: And a few Observations will satisfy us, that
nothing could be more wisely designed for this purpose:

1. Let us consider the Wisdom of Providence in destroying the Old World
without the utter destruction of Mankind. It was too soon to put a final end to
the World which he had so lately made, without reproaching his own Wisdom in
making it. There had been very little of the Wisdom of Government yet seen, but
one Act, and that concluding in all disorder and confusion; and had God left
off here, and put a final end to the Race of Mankind, it had been but a very
ill spectacle to the Angelical World, to see a whole Species of Reasonable
Beings so soon destroyed. The Old Serpent, who deceived our first Parents,
would have gloried in his Voctory, that he had utterly spoiled and ruined the
best part of this visible Creation, and even forced God to destroy the most
excellent Creature he had made on Earth. But God had threatened the Serpent,
that the Seed of the Woman should break his head, and therefore the whole
Posterity of Eve must not be destroyed, but a Righteous Seed must be preserved
to new-people the World.

But besides this, The destruction of the Old World being intended as a warning
to the New, it was necessary there should be some living Witnesses, both of the
destruction and the resurrection of the World, to assure their Posterity of
what they had seen, and to preserve the memory of it to all Generations. Of
which more presently.

2dly. The Wisdom of God was very visible in delaying so terrible an Execution
till there was no remedy. To destroy a World carries great horror with it, and
makes a frightful representation of God, if it be not qualified with all the
most tender and softning Circumstances. And I cannot think of any thing that
can justify Providence in it (excepting the last Judgment, when the Divine
Wisdom thinks fit to put a final end to this World) but the irrecoverable state
of Mankind, and the absolute necessity of some new methods of reforming the
World.

And therefore God delayed the destruction of the Old World, till all Flesh had
corrupted his ways, and there was but one Righteous Family left, which must be
in danger of being corrupted too by the universal wickedness of the Age.
However, it is certain, That though Noah might have preserved his own
Integrity, and have taught his own Family that Fear and Worship of God, yet he
could do no good upon the rest of the World; he was a Preacher of
Righteousness, but his Sermons had no effect: It is generally concluded by the
Ancients, that he was an hundred years in building the Ark, and all this while
he gave visible warning to them of the approaching Deluge: Now when it was
impossible by any ordinary means to put a stop to the wickedness of Mankind,
what remained but to destroy that corrupt and incurable Generation, and to
preserve righteous Noah and his Sons, to propagate a new Generation of men, and
to train them up in the fear and worship of God? Had he delayed a little
longer, the whole World might have been corrupt, without one righteous man in
it; and then he must either have maintained or preserved a World of Atheists
and profligate Sinners, or must have destroyed them all: But it more became the
Divine Wisdom, when Religion was reduced to one Family, to defer Vengeance no
longer, while he had one righteous Family to save, to preserve the Race of
Mankind, and to restore lost Piety and Virtue to the World.

3dly. The Wisdom of Providence in destroying the Old World is very visible in
the manner of doing it.

1st. For first it was a Miraculous and Supernatural Destruction, and therefore
an undeniable evidence of the Power and Providence of God. There are no visible
Causes in Nature to do this, and therefore it must be done by a Power Superior
to Nature.

Some men think it sufficient to disparage the Mosaical Account of the Deluge,
if they can prove the natural impossibility of it; and others, who profess to
believe the Story, think themselves much concerned to give a Philosophical
Account of it, without having recourse to Miracles, and a Supernatural Power,
which they say unbecomes Philosophers: But if it unbecomes Philosophers to
believe Miracles, I doubt they will think it very much below them to be
Christians, which no man can be, who does not believe Miracles; and if they
will allow of Miracles in any case, methinks they should make no scruple to
attribute the destruction of the World to a Miraculous and Supernatural Power.

The comfort is, the truth of the Story does not depend upon any Philosophical
Hypothesis; we do not believe, that the whole World was drowned, because we can
tell by what Natural Causes it might be drowned, but because Moses has recorded
it in his Writings, who, we know, was Divinely inspired: And we know also, that
there has been no satisfactory account given yet from the Principles of Nature
and Philosophy, how the whole World could be drowned; at least none that will
agree with the Mosaical History, either of the Creation, or of the Deluge; and
it is better to have no Account, than such an Account as confutes Moses, could
any such be given; for this confutes, or at least discredits the Story it self,
for which we have no Authentic Authority, when the Authority of Moses is lost.
But indeed it is no service to Religion to seek after Natural Causes for the
destruction of the World, any more than it is to resolve the making of the
World into Natural Causes; for it is great good nature in men to own a God, if
they can make and destroy a World without him; there can be no such thing as
natural Causes, till the World is made, and every thing endowed with its
Natural Virtues and Powers, and united into a regular frame, with a mutual
dependence and connection; and therefore it is a vain thing to talk of making
the World by Natural Causes, when it is demonstrable, that there can be no
Natural Causes till the World is made: And it is as certain, that Nature must
move unnaturally, and be put into an universal disorder, before the World can
be destroyed; for while Natural Causes keep their Natural Course, they will
preserve, not destroy the World; and therefore the destruction of the World is
not owing to Natural Causes, but to praeternatural Disorders; and what
Philosophy can give an account of that? What can put Nature into such an
universal disorder, but the same Divine Power which put it into order, and gave
Laws to it?

And this is what God intended in the destruction of the Old World, to give a
visible and lasting proof of his Being and Providence to the New, by such a
Miraculous Deluge, as could be attributed to no other Cause, but a Divine
Vengeance.

That universal Corruption of Mankind would persuade us, that the very belief
and notion of a God was lost among them; or if it be hard to conceive how that
should be, when the World by computation was not Seventeen hundred years old,
and Lamech, Noah's Father, lived fifty years with Adam himself, that it seems
impossible that the Tradition of God's creating the World should have been lost
in so short a time; yet at least they could have no sense of God's Justice and
Providence; they could not believe that God took any notice of their Actions,
or would execute such a terrible Vengeance on them for their sins. We do not
read of any one Act of Judgment which God exercised before the Flood; and it is
not improbable, that his sparing Cain, when he had killed his Brother Abel,
might encourage them with hopes of impunity, whatever wickedness they
committed; and therefore the Divine Wisdom saw it necessary to put an end to
the Old, and to begin the New World with a visible demonstration of his Power
and Justice, to teach men the fear, and reverence, and worship of that God, who
not only made the World, but has once destroyed it, and therefore can destroy
it again, with all its wicked Inhabitants, whenever he pleases.

Now to make this a lasting proof of God's Power and Justice, it must be
evident beyond all contradiction, that it was God's doing, and therefore it was
necessary that God should destroy the world in so miraculous a manner, as could
be attributed to no other Cause; for it is the true Spirit of Atheism and
Infidelity to attribute nothing to God, which they can ascribe to any visible
Cause.

Had all Mankind, excepting Noah and his Sons, been destroyed by Plague, or
Famine, or Wild Beasts, though such a general destruction would have convinced
Wise and Reasonable men, that the Hand, and the Vengeance of God was in it; yet
if we may judge of the rest of Mankind by the wonderful improvements in Wit and
Philosophy which our Modern Atheists have made, they would think scorn to
attribute Plague, or Famine, or such like evil Accidents to God, though all
Mankind were destroyed by them. But when they hear of a World drowned, and know
not where to find water to drown it, without a miraculous dissolution of
Nature; they must either laugh at the Story, which men in their wits cannot well
do, or they must believe a God and a Providence. But whatever shift the
Infidels of our Age may make to disbelieve the Universal Deluge, it must be
confessed, that it was a very wise and most effectual means to convince that
new Generation of men, while the uncorrupted Tradition of the Deluge was
preserved.

2dly. The Wisdom of the Divine Providence was seen in destroying that wicked
Generation of men, without destroying the Earth. God did not intend to put a
final end to the Race of Mankind, but the Earth was to be again inhabited by a
new Generation; and a Deluge of Waters was best fitted to this purpose, which
did no hurt to the Earth, when it was dried up again, but rather moistened and
impregnated it with new Seeds and Principles of life.

There are but two ways we know of to destroy this Earth, either by Water or
Fire; it has already been destroyed by Water, and will be destroyed by Fire;
and it is enough to satisfy any man, that this is not Accident, but a Wise
Design, to consider, that a Deluge of Water was made use of to purge and reform
the World, but Fire is reserved for the final destruction of it. Whereas, had
this Order been inverted, as it might have been, had it been mere Chance, it is
evident that the Earth could neither have been preserved from Fire, nor utterly
destroyed by Water, without a perpetual Deluge. A Deluge of Water does not
destroy the Earth, nor make it uninhabitable after the Deluge ceases; but Fire
destroys the Frame and Constitution of it, and melts all into one confused
mass; there is some defense against a Deluge, Noah and his Sons were preserved
in the Ark, to people the New World; but there is no defense against Flames;
the whole Earth, and all the wicked Inhabitants of it, must burn together: And
this is one wise Reason, why God chose to drown the World, not to burn it,
because the end of all things was not yet come.

3dly. There is great variety of Wisdom to be observed in God's preserving Noah
and his Sons in the Ark from perishing by Water.

For first, as I observed before, this was very necessary to preserve the Race
of Mankind to new-people the World, which much more became the Divine Wisdom,
than to have created man anew. When all flesh had corrupted his ways, it
became God to try new Methods of reforming the World; for this opens new and
surprising Scenes of Providence, and displays such a multifarious Wisdom in the
government of Mankind, as is much more wonderful than the Creation of a New
World would be: But had God destroyed the whole Race of men, and created a new
Man to inhabit the New World, this would have argued some defect in the first
Creation; for there can be no pretense for destroying Man to make him again,
but a design to make him better; to correct that in a second trial, which
Experience had discovered to be faulty in the first: But though the wisdom of
Government will admit of various Trials and Experiments, the Wisdom of Creation
wont: The Government of free Agents must be accommodated to their Natures, and
Dispositions, not only to what God made them, but to what they make themselves;
and therefore the Methods of Government must change, as men change themselves;
but the Natures of all things are made only by God, and if there be any fault
in them, it is chargeable upon the Divine Wisdom; and to make Man, and destroy
him, and make him again, would argue a great fault somewhere.

2dly. I observed also before, That to make the destruction of the Old World of
any use to propagate Religion and Piety in the New, it was necessary that some
Inhabitants of the Old World should survive the Deluge, to be Witnesses of that
Terrible Destruction.

Had no man survived, though God should have created man anew, that new
Generation of men could have known nothing of the Deluge, but by Revelation;
whereas God intended a sensible proof of his Power and Providence, which
Mankind wanted.

Besides that Revelation, which we may suppose God made to Adam of the Creation
of the World, and his own sense, that he himself was but just then made, and
was the first and the only man upon Earth, there are such visible Marks of a
Divine Wisdom and Power in the frame of the World, as one would think should be
sufficient to convince men, that the World was made, and is preserved, and
governed by God; and yet because no man saw the World made, neither Reason, nor
Revelation can persuade some men that God made the World. And is it reasonable
then to think, that when there are no remaining signs of a Deluge left, the
belief of a Deluge should for any long time have prevailed in the world without
any living Witnesses, who saw the Deluge, though we should suppose God to have
revealed it to new-created man? No man could see the Creation of the world,
because the world must be made before man was made to live in it; but though no
man saw the world made, there were some who saw the destruction which the
Deluge made, which was as visible a proof of the Divine Power, and a much
greater proof of a Just and Righteous Providence. No man who believes that God
destroyed the Old World with a Deluge of Water, can doubt whether God made the
world, and governs it; and for this the New World had the testimony of
Eyewitnesses, which is as sensible a proof of a God, and a Providence, as we
can possibly have.

3dly. The preservation of Noah and his Sons in the Ark, was an evident proof,
that this Deluge was sent by God: God forewarned Noah of it an hundred years
before it came, and commanded him to prepare an Ark, and gave him directions
how to make it. Thus much is certain, That Noah did know of it beforehand, and
prepared an Ark, which remained as a visible Testimony of the Flood to future
Generations. Now there being no Natural Causes of the Flood, there could be no
Natural Prognostics of it. Our Savior himself observes, That there were not
the least Symptoms of any such thing, till Noah entered into the Ark; and
therefore Noah had no other way of knowing this, but by Revelation; and it was
so incredible a thing in it self, that the rest of Mankind would not believe
him, though he warned them of it, and they saw that he believed it himself, by
his preparing an Ark for his own safety. And if we believe the Account that
Moses gives of it, that some of all sorts of Living Creatures, both the Beasts
of the Field, and the Fowls of the Air, were preserved with Noah in the Ark (as
we must believe, if we believe the Universal Deluge, unless we will say, that
God new-made all Living Creatures after the Flood) what account can be given of
this, that some of all sorts, in such numbers as God had appointed, and had
prepared reception for, should come of their own accord to Noah, when he was
ready to enter into the Ark, had they not been led thither by a Divine Hand?

4thly. The preservation of Noah and his Sons in the Ark did not only prove,
that the Deluge was sent by God, but was a plain Evidence for what reason God
sent such a Terrible Judgment; viz. To put an end to that wicked Generation of
men, and to new-people the world with a Righteous Seed. This Reason God gave to
Noah, and the nature of the thing speaks it. For when all the wicked
Inhabitants of the world were destroyed, and not one escaped the Deluge, but
only that one Righteous Family, which had escaped the Corruptions of the Age
too, and that preserved by the peculiar Order and Direction of God, this is a
visible Judgment upon all the wicked of the Earth, and makes a visible
distinction between Good and Bad men. When such Evils and Calamities befall the
world, as may be resolved into Natural or Moral Causes, as Plagues, and
Famines, and Wars, Fires, and Earthquakes; and it may be Good and Bad men share
pretty equally in the public Misfortunes; Atheists and Infidels will not allow
these Evils to be inflicted by God, much less to be the punishment of Sin, when
they make no visible distinction between the good and the bad; but the
Universal Deluge was both a Supernatural and a distinguishing Judgment; none
but God could thus destroy the Earth, and none but the wicked were destroyed;
and therefore this is an undiable demonstration of the Justice and
Righteousness of God, that he hates wickedness, and will punish wicked men.

There are some other Marks of Excellent Wisdom in the Universal Deluge, which
I shall only name, because, tho they are worth observing, yet they are of less
moment as to my present Design.

As the Deluge was to be a lasting proof of a Just Providence to the New World;
and as you have heard, was upon all accounts admirably fitted to that purpose;
so we may reasonably suppose, that when it came, it convinced that wicked
Generation of men, and brought them to repentance, which it gave them some time
for; and though it could not save them in this world, who knows, but that a
sudden repentance upon such a sudden conviction might obtain mercy for them in
the next. Noah was a Preacher of Righteousness; he had often reproved them for
their sins, and threatened them with a Deluge, but they would not believe him,
though they saw him preparing the Ark; but when they saw the Flood come, they
knew then the meaning of it, from what Noah had often told them; and this must
needs convince them of the terrible Justice and Vengeance of God: And the
gradual increase of the Flood gave them some time to repent in, and to beg
God's pardon; and I Am sure this makes a glorious representation both of the
Goodness and Wisdom of God in the most terrible Judgment that ever was executed
upon the world, if we had sufficient reason to believe, as there want not some
fair appearances of it, that God intended the Deluge as well to convince and
save all that could be brought to repentance in the Old World, as to reform the
New.

Thus since God had determined to destroy that wicked Generation of men, and to
preserve only Noah and his three Sons; to destroy the Earth by a Deluge, and to
shut up Noah in the Ark, was as great, or a greater mercy to Noah, than his
preservation was: Let us suppose, that instead of drowning the world, God had
at once destroyed all Mankind by Plague, or Thunder from Heaven, or some other
sudden stroke, excepting Noah and his Sons, who should be Eyewitnesses of this
Terrible Execution, and live to see the Earth covered with dead Bodies, and
none left to bury them; and their Cities lie waste and desolate without
Inhabitants; who can conceive, what the horror of such a sight would have been?
who would have been contented to live in such a world, to converse only with
the Images of Death, and with noisome Carcasses? But God in great mercy shut up
Noah in the Ark, that he should not see the Terror and Consternation of Sinners
when the Flood came; and he washed away all their dead Bodies into the Caverns
of the Earth, with all the marks and signs of their Old Habitations, that when
Noah came out of the Ark, he saw nothing but a new and a beautiful World;
nothing to disturb his imagination, no marks or remains of that Terrible
Vengeance.

This indeed destroyed all other living Creatures, as well as Sinners,
excepting those that were in the Ark with Noah; but this, I suppose, is no
great objection against Providence, that the Creatures, which were made for
man's use, were destroyed with man, since God preserved some of each Kind for a
new increase; and yet the Wisdom of God was very visible in this; for had the
World been full of Beasts, when there were but four men in it, the whole Earth
would quickly have been possessed by Wild and Savage Creatures, which would
have made it a very unsafe habitation for men.

To conclude this Argument, the sum of it in short is this: When the wickedness
of Mankind was grown universal and incurable, it became the Wisdom of God to
put an end to that Corrupt State, and to propagate a new Race of men from a
Righteous Stock; and to take the most effectual course to possess them with a
lasting belief of his Being and Providence, and with a religious awe of his
Justice and Power: To this end he destroyed the Old World with a Deluge of
Water, and preserved Noah and his Sons in the Ark; which had all the advantages
imaginable to deter men from sin, which brought a Deluge upon the Old World;
and to encourage the practice of true Piety and Virtue, which preserved Noah
from the Common Ruin.

We see in this Example, that numbers are no defense against the Divine
Justice, and therefore no security to Sinners; when all flesh had corrupted his
ways, God destroyed them all; nay we see, that the more wickedness prevails in
the world, the nearer it is to destruction; that the great multitude of Sinners
is so far from being a reasonable temptation and encouragement to sin, that it
is a fair warning to considering men, to separate and distinguish themselves
from a wicked world by an exemplary Virtue, that God may distinguish them also,
when he comes to Judgment, which an universal corruption of manners shows to be
very near; and it is a dangerous thing to sin with a multitude, when the
multitude of Sinners will hasten Vengeance.

Here we see, that though Sinners may be very secure, they are never safe; as
our Savior observes, it was in the days of Noah, they were eating and
drinking; marrying, and giving in marriages, until the day that Noah went into
the Ark, and knew not until the flood came, and took them all away, 24. Matthew.
37, 38, 39. God may delay punishment a great while, and seem to take no notice
of what is done below, till Sinners begin to think, 50. Psalm. 21.
that he is such a one as themselves; but their Judgment all this while neither
slumbers, nor sleeps; there may be the greatest Calm, and the serenest days,
before the most terrible Earthquakes; and the longer God has kept silence, the
more reason have we to expect a severe and surprising Vengeance; which makes
the Psalmist's Advice in such Cases very seasonable: v. 22.
Now consider this, ye that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces, and there be
none to deliver.

And who would be afraid, or be ashamed of Noah's singularity, to be good
alone, and to be the single Example of Piety and Virtue, that remembers, that
he alone with his three Sons, were saved from the Deluge? and he that would be
a Noah in the Ark, must be a Noah in a wicked World.

But this is sufficient to justify the Wisdom of Providence as to Noah's Flood,
which put an end to the Old World; and now let us take a view of the New.

Notwithstanding that late terrible Example of God's Power and Justice in the
destruction of the Old World, that new Generation of men began to grow very
corrupt; as God foresaw they would, but resolved to try some new methods, and
not to drown the world any more: When Noah had offered a Burnt-offering to the
Lord, of every clean beast, and of every clean fowl, after his coming out of
the Ark, The Lord smelled a sweet savor; and the Lord said in his heart, I
will not again curse the ground any more for man's sake; for the imagination of
man's heart is evil from his youth: Neither will I again smite any more every
living thing, as I have done, 8. Genesis 20, 21.

The first Exploit we hear of them, was their building the Tower of Babel;
which Story is so briefly related by Moses, that we cannot give a perfect
account of the Reasons and Circumstances of it. The most probable Account seems
to be this; that Nimrod the Son of Cush, and Grandson of Ham, in which Line
True Religion and Piety first decayed, affecting an Universal Empire, to
prevent the dispersion of the People, persuaded them to build a magnificent
Seat for his Empire, which should be a center of Union for them, at what
distance soever they should be forced to remove: That the whole Earth should be
but one Kingdom, and Babel the Royal Palace. Had this Design succeeded, the
whole world would have been but one People, and the Universal Monarchy in the
Line of Ham, which would quickly have endangered as general a corruption of
Mankind, as there was before the Flood.

Let us then consider what Course God took to prevent this, and the excellent
wisdom of it, which we have an account of, 11. Genes. 7, 8. That God confounded
their language, so that they could not understand one another's speech; and by
this means, scattered them abroad from thence upon the face of all the earth,
and they left off to build the city. Now not to take notice, that this was the
most ready way to people the whole Earth, even the remotest Corners of it,
which was for the great good of Mankind; found them work to do, forced them
upon the invention of Ingenious Arts, and by the benefit of Trade and Commerce,
made every Country, which was not wanting to it self, a little World, and every
part to enjoy all the pleasures and advantages of the whole: I say, besides
this, it was the most likely way that could be used at that time, to prevent
the Universal Corruption of Mankind. For,

1. This separated the Families of Sem and Iaphet from the Family of Ham, where
the Infection was already begun; and would have spread apace by the advantage
of Power and Empire. When Cain had slain his Brother Abel, God sent him away
out of Adam's Family, that his presence and Example might do no hurt; and if by
the daughters of men in 6. Genes. we understand, as some good Expositors do,
those who descended of Cain; and by the sons of God, the Posterity of Seth, in
whose Family the Worship of the True God was preserved, we may observe, that
Moses dates the general Corruption of Mankind from the union of these two
Families; When the sons of God saw the daughters of men, that they were fair,
and took them wives of all which they chose. And had the Universal Empire been
established in the Family of Ham, and the Posterity of Sem and Iaphet been
brought into subjection to them, as they must in a short time have been, what
less could have been expected from such a Union and Government, but another
Antediluvian corruption of all Flesh?

This dispersion then was necessary to prevent a general Corruption; but we see
in the Example of Cain, that a mere local separation is no security, for they
may come together again, as the Sons of God, and the Daughters of men in
process of time did. And therefore,

2dly. The most lasting dispersion and separation is by a confusion of
Languages, which hinders all intercourse and communication; at least till there
be a remedy found against it by learning each other's Language, which was a
work of time, and was never likely to be so general, as to be the means of a
common intercourse. This effectually divided them at first, and would always
keep Nations divided, till Foreign Arms should give new Laws, and a new
Language to a Conquered People.

3dly. I observe farther, That the more divisions of Languages were made, and
the greater the dispersion was, the greater security was it against a general
Corruption; which is a reason not only for separating the Family of Ham from
the Families of Sem and Iaphet, but for separating them from each other, and
dividing them into smaller Bodies: For the more Divisions there are, whatever
part were infected, the less could the Corruption spread, when there was no
communication between them.

4thly. This also divided Mankind into several little Independent Monarchies,
under the government of the Heads of their several Families; which kept all
Mankind under a stricter government, than if the whole world had been one great
Empire, which would have proved a Tyrannical Domination, but could have taken
little care of the Manners of Subjects; especially if the Government it self
was corrupt, the whole world must be corrupt with it. But when so many distinct
Societies were formed, this gave them distinct Interests, and made their Laws
and Customs, the very humor and genius of the People, so different from each
other, as would keep them distinct: And this would necessarily occasion mutual
Emulations and Jealousies to rival their Neighbors in Riches and Power; and
this cannot be done without wise Laws, and a strict Discipline, and the
encouragement of Labor and Industry, of liberal Arts, and all social Virtues,
and the suppression of such Vices, as weaken Government, and emasculate men's
Spirits: This effect we know in a great measure it had, as we learn from the
most early Accounts of the Grecian Commonwealths, where we meet with so many
excellent Laws, and such great Examples of Frugality, Temperance, Fortitude,
and a generous love of their Country, which may in a great measure be
attributed to their mutual Emulations, which taught them prudence and justice
at home and abroad, and forced on them the exercise of many Civil and Military
Virtues.

It had indeed been more for the peace and quiet of the world, that all Mankind
had been but one People, and one Kingdom, without divided Interests and
Governments; but such a profound state of ease is apt to loosen the Rains of
Government, and to corrupt men's minds with sloth and luxury; and therefore is
no more fit for a corrupt and degenerate State, than it would have been, that
the Earth should have brought forth Fruit of it self without Humane Labor and
Industry. But Jealousies and Emulations, the necessity of defending themselves
against Potent Neighbors, or the ambition to equal, or to outdo them,
restrains public Vices, and is a spur to Verture. (...).

It is true, this is the occasion of many Miseries to Mankind, of all the
Calamities and Desolations of War, and therefore we must consider,

5thly. That this is so far from being an Objection against Providence, while
God keeps the Sword in his own hand, that it is an admirable Instrument of
Government, and a signal demonstration of the Divine Wisdom.

God had promised, that he would not again any more smite every living thing,
as he had done, 8. Genes. 21. And yet Mankind could not be governed without
some restraints and punishments; and it did not become God to punish Men and
Nations, as often as they deserved it, by an immediate hand; and what then
could be more wisely designed, than so to order it, that if Men and Nations
were wicked, they should scourge and punish one another?

By this means God can chastise two wicked Nations by each other's Swords,
without destroying either: He can so lessen their Numbers, and exhaust their
Treasures, and impoverish their Countries, as to force them to peace, and to
reduce them to a laborious and frugal life, which will cure the wantonness and
luxury of Plenty and Ease.

If a Nation be grown incurably wicked, he can by this means destroy them,
without embroiling the rest of the world; he can carry them captive into
Foreign Countries, or make them Slaves at home, and subject them to the Yoke of
a Conqueror, who shall correct them, and teach them better.

In a word, The dispersion of Mankind by the confusion of Languages, which
divided them into distinct Societies, Kingdoms, and Commonweals, opened a new
Scene of Providence, with all the variety of Wisdom in the government of the
world. The Judgment it self was miraculous, and as plain an evidence of the
Divine Power, as the Deluge it self; for to new form a mind, to erace all its
old Ideas of words and sounds, and to imprint new ones on it in an instant,
shows such a superior Power over Nature, as none but the Author of Nature has;
and they must have been very stupid, if this did not renew and fix the
impression of a Divine Power and Providence. But the dispersion which this
confusion of Languages occasioned, and the division of Mankind into distinct
Societies, made the Exercise of many Moral, Civil, and Military Virtues as
necessary as their own Prosperity and Preservation: And if this had not so
universal an effect as might have been expected, yet it prevented an Universal
Corruption, and had a good effect in many Countries, and by turns in most; that
the world never wanted Examples of States and Kingdoms which increased and
flourished under a prudent and virtuous Government, nor of the ruin of
flourishing States by Idleness, Luxury, Injustice, Oppression, which weakened
and divided them at home, and made them an easy prey to their provoked, or to
their ambitious Neighbors.

But though the state of the world, as to some moral Virtues, and good Order
and Government, was much bettered by this means, yet Mankind generally declined
to Idolatry; that the Knowledge and Worship of the one Supreme God was in
danger of being utterly lost, and the lives of men to be corrupted by the
impure and filthy Rites and Mysteries of their Religion. This required a new
and more effectual remedy, and brings me to consider a new and wonderful Design
of the Divine Wisdom for reforming the World: I mean his choosing Abraham and
his Posterity to be his peculiar People, whom he would govern in so visible a
manner, that all the world might know and fear the God of Israel.

This is a large Argument, and full of Mysterious Wisdom; but my principal
intention at present is to consider it with relation to the rest of Mankind,
and how wisely it was designed by God to give some check to Idolatry, to
preserve the Worship of the True God, at least in Israel, from whence in time
it might be restored again, when lost in the rest of the world.

It has, I confess, a very strange appearance at first, that God should reject,
or at least neglect all the rest of Mankind, and choose but one Family out of
all the world to place his name among them: Is God the God of the Jews only, is
he not also of the Gentiles? 3. Romans 29. This the Vainglorious Jew imagined,
who despised the rest of the world, as reprobated by God; but the Apostle
abhors the thoughts of it, yes, of the Gentiles also; and St. Peter was at
length convinced by a Vision, That God was no respecter of persons; but in
every nation, he that fears him, and works righteousness, is accepted with
him, 10. Acts 34, 35. Thus it was from the beginning, though the Jews did not
think so; and the Apostles themselves at first could not easily be persuaded of
it; and yet how could any man entertain honorable thoughts of God, who could
conceive him so partial in his Favors, as to confine the peculiar Expressions
of his Love to one Nation, without any appearing concernment what became of the
rest of Mankind? But if this was, and was intended by God, for the general good
of the world, and was admirably fitted to cure Idolatry, and to restore the
Worship of the one Supreme God, it gives us a new and more glorious prospect of
the Wisdom of Providence. And to represent this as advantagiously as I can, I
shall first give you a general view of this admirable Design of the Divine
Wisdom, which will enable us the better to understand, and to give a more
intelligible and sensible account of the various Providence of God toward
Israel.

Now we must consider the world at that time as overrun with Idolatry, as we
may easily conclude, when Abraham 's Family is charged with it; as Joshua told
the People of Israel at Shechem; Thus says the Lord God of Israel, Your
fathers dwelt on the other side of the flood in old time, even Terah the father
of Abraham, and the father of Nachor, and they served other Gods, 24. Joshua 2.

Now all men must confess, That it became the Divine Wisdom to restore and
preserve the Faith and Worship of the One Supreme God, and to keep it alive in
the world, that it might in time, though by slow degrees, prevail over
Idolatry, and the Kingdom of Darkness, and reduce Mankind to their natural
obedience and subjection to God. and since Experience had proved, that neither
the Creation of the World, nor the Universal Deluge, nor the Confusion of
Languages, could preserve the belief of one Supreme God, the Maker and
Governor of the World; but the New World was as universally overrun with
Polytheism and Idolatry, as the Old World was with Violence; and that the very
dispersion of Mankind, and their division into distinct Kingdoms and Societies,
which was a good remedy against some other Immoralities, had probably
occasioned a multiplicity of Gods, while every Nation desired a God, as well as
a King of their own, to protect and defend them; I say, this shows what
absolute necessity there was, that the Divine Wisdom should find out some more
effectual and lasting means to convince the world of the Power and Providence
of one Supreme God: What other effectual means God might have chose for this
purpose, does not belong to us to inquire; but it becomes us very much, to
contemplate the Divine Wisdom in hat method which he did take to reclaim the
world.

Now the way God took was this. He chose Abraham and his Posterity for his
peculiar People, whom he governed in as visible a manner, as any Temporal
Prince governs his Subjects: He forbad them to own any other God besides
himself, and separated them from the rest of the world by peculiar Laws and
Ceremonies of Worship, to secure them from the Idolatrous Practices of their
Neighbors: He made himself known, and distinguished himself from all other
Country Gods, by the name of the God of Israel, the God of Abraham, and Isaac
and Jacob; not that he was only the God of that Nation, as other Nations had
their peculiar Gods, but the God of the whole world, though he was known and
worshipped only in Israel; and by this Name he triumphed over all the Heathen
Gods, and wrought such Signs and Wonders, as might have convinced all men, if
they would have been convinced, that there was no God but the God of Israel;
none like him, none that could be compared to him.

Consider then, what more sensible proof the world could possibly have of one
Supreme God, and of a Sovereign Providence, than to see a whole Nation
worshipping this one Supreme God; which at least would not suffer them to be
wholly ignorant of such a Being, but was a just reason to examine their natural
Notions of a Deity, and the Pretenses of their several Gods. Especially when
they see this Nation planted in a particular Country allotted them by their
God; and the old wicked Inhabitants destroyed, and driven out from before them,
by such a series of Miracles, as were an undeniable Evidence of such a Divine
Power, as all the Gods of these Countries were not able to oppose. And that
this Nation received their Laws both for Worship, and Polity, and Conversation,
immediately from God, were governed by men appointed by God, and directed in
all great Affairs by Divine Oracles and Prophets, with such a certainty of
event, as never failed: That while they adhered to the Worship of this One
Supreme God, they were always prosperous, as he promised they should be; but
when they declined to Idolatry, and worshipped the Gods of the Countries round
about them, then they were either oppressed by their Enemies at home, or
carried captive into Foreign Countries. This was a visible proof, that there
was a God in Israel, and such a God as would admit of no other Gods, nor allow
them to worship any other, but punished them severely whenever they did; and
all their other Gods could not help them, nor deliver them out of his hands.

This gave sufficient notice to the World of the Glory and Power of the God
Israel; but some will still be apt to ask, Why God did not as sensibly manifest
himself to all the rest of the World, as he did to Israel? why he had not his
Oracles and Prophets in other Nations? and they may, if they please, as
reasonably ask, why he does not immediately inspire every particular man with a
Supernatural Knowledge, and force the Belief of his Being and Providence upon
their Minds? Or why he did not by a Miraculous Power convert the old wicked
World, but destroyed them all, and preserved only that one Righteous Family,
which had escaped the general Corruption?

For much like this was the state of mankind with respect to Idolatry, when God
called Abraham out of Vr of the Chaldees: there was not one Nation left, that
worshipped the One Supreme God, and him only; nay, not one Family; 24. Josh. 2.
for Terah, Abraham's Father, was an Idolater, and probably all the rest of the
Family, excepting Abraham; for tho he be not expressly excepted in the Text, yet
neither is he necessarily included; and God's commanding him to leave his
Country, 12. Genesis
and his Kindred, and his Father's House, and his ready Compliance with this
Command, is reason to believe that he was the only person in the Family who had
preserved himself from all Idolatrous Worship: However, it appears, that he was
a man of that extraordinary Piety and Virtue, and so easily curable if he had
been an Idolater, that God thought him the fittest Person to reveal himself to,
and to begin a new Reformation of the World. And therefore as in the days of
Noah God destroyed all that wicked Generation of men by the Flood, and only
preserved Noah and his Sons to new people the earth, and to instill the Seeds
and Principles of Piety and Virtue into their Posterity; so the New world being
now universally corrupted by Idolatry, and God having promised Noah never again
to destroy every living thing, as he had done, he takes another course, and in
a manner creates a new People to be the Worshippers of the One Supreme God, and
in them to make his own Glory and Power known to the World; and chose Abraham,
a man of admirable Faith and Piety, to be the Father of this new people, which
should descend from his loins in his Old Age, not by the mere Powers of Nature,
but by Faith in God's Promise, 11. Heb. 11, 12.

The plain state then of the Case is this; When that new Generation of men had
universally corrupted themselves with Idolatry, notwithstanding all the means
God had used to possess them with a lasting sense of his Being and Providence,
God gives them up to their wilful Blindness, and leaves them to the Cheats and
Impostures of those wicked Spirits whom they had made their Gods, till he could
recover them from this Apostasy by such Methods as were agreeable to Human
Nature, and became the Divine Wisdom. The most effectual way to do this, was to
establish his Worship in some one Nation, which should be a visible Proof both
of the Unity of the Godhead, and of a Divine Providence; and because there was
no such Nation then in the World, he made a Nation on purpose, and allotted
them a Country to dwell in, and signalized them by extraordinary Providence,
as the Worshippers of the One Supreme God. This was a kind of a new beginning
of the world, which did not put an end to the Idolatrous World, as Noah's Flood
put an end to that wicked Generation, but yet did propagate a new Generation of
men in it, who should in time put an end to that Universal Idolatry, and make a
new World of it.

And this is a new Advance the Divine Wisdom made toward the Recovery of
Mankind. When Adam had sinned, he and his whole Posterity became mortal, and
were condemned to a laborious life, that in the sweat of their brows they
should eat their bread; which was the best Preservative against the Temptations
of Ease, and Sloth, and Luxury: When notwithstanding this, all flesh had
corrupted his ways, God destroyed that wicked Generation with an Universal
Deluge, and thereby gave a signal demonstration of his Power and Justice to the
New World: When this new Generation of men grew corrupt, God confounded their
Language, and dispersed them over the face of the whole earth, and formed them
into distinct Bodies and Societies, which prevented a general corruption of
Manners, taught them Civil Justice and many Moral Virtues, which were necessary
to the Support and Defense of Human Societies; but when they all declined to
Idolatry, which would endanger a new and universal Corruption of Manners, by
those impure Ceremonies with which wicked Spirits would choose to be worshipped,
some new and more effectual means were to be used to cure this evil. The
Universal Deluge, and the Confusion of Languages, had so abundantly convinced
them of a Divine Power and Providence, that there was no such Creature as an
Atheist known among them, till their ridiculous Idolatries in worshipping the
meanest Creatures, and Viler men, with ludicrous or abominable Rites, tempted
some men of Wit and Thought rather to own no God, than such Gods as the
Heathens worshipped: but tho these extraordinary Events were a manifest Proof
of a Divine Power and Providence, yet it seems they were not thought so express
and direct a Proof of the Unity of the Godhead, at least not a sufficient
Argument against the Worship of Inferior Deities, whom they supposed entrusted
with the immediate Care of particular Countries. And how could God give a more
sensible demonstration to the world, That he would not allow the paying Divine
Honors to any but himself, than by raising up a new People, distinguished and
separated from all the rest of the world, by the sole Worship of the One
Supreme God, and owned by him for his peculiar People, by as distinguishing
Providence; for this not only proves a Divine Power and Providence, but that
there is but One God whom we ought to worship.

And this may satisfy us, That God is not so partial in his Favors, as to
prefer one Nation before all the rest of Mankind; for they were no Nation nor
People when God chose them; for God entered into Covenant with Abraham and his
Seed, when there was none but himself; but when all the rest of the world were
Idolaters, God promised to multiply Abraham's Seed into a great Nation, and to
make them his own peculiar People; that is, he made a New People and Nation, in
great kindness to mankind, to preserve the Knowledge and Worship of the One
Supreme God, and by degrees to extirpate Idolatry out of the World.

But besides this, it was one of the peculiar Privileges of the Jews, 3. Romans 2.
That to them were committed the Oracles of God; and it is certain, it was for
the great good of the world, that these Divine Oracles, a System of Laws both
for Religious Worship, and Civil Conversation, should be deposited somewhere;
for their Idolatry did every day corrupt the Manners of men, and was likely in
time to destroy all the Natural Notions of Good and Evil; which made a Written
Law necessary, from whence men might learn their Duty whenever they pleased;
and it is evident these Laws could be given to no other People but the Jews,
who alone acknowledged and worshipped the One Supreme God: For it is not to be
conceived, That God should give Laws to Idolaters, who did not own and worship
him for their God, or that they should receive Laws from him. And tho these
Laws were immediately given only to the Jews, because there was no other Nation
at that time which owned and worshipped the One Supreme God, yet as the
Knowledge and Worship of God prevailed in the world, so these Laws would be of
more universal use; as we see it is even to this day: Nay, even while Idolatry
prevailed, the Writings of Moses and the Prophets very much reformed the Pagan
Philosophy, gave them better Notions of God, and of Religious Worship, and more
Divine Rules of Life, as is visible in the Philosophy of Pythagoras and Plato,
who are generally thought to have learnt some of their best Notions from their
Conversation with Jewish Priests. But yet the Question is not, What use the
World did make of this? But, What use they might have made of it? And whether,
as the state of the world then was, any thing could be more wisely designed,
than to preserve the Knowledge and Worship of the One True God, and a System of
Divine Laws, in a Nation raised up on purpose to season the world, and to
preserve it from an universal Apostasy.

But God had a more glorious Design than all this, in entering into Covenant
with Abraham, and choosing his Seed for his peculiar People: He had promised,
That the seed of the woman should break the serpents head; which contains the
Promise of the Messiah, who in the fullness of time was to appear in the world,
to destroy the works of the Devil: And this is the Covenant which God made with
Abraham, That in his seed all the nations of the earth should be blessed. It
was not fitting, that the Messiah and Savior of the World should descend from
Idolaters; and that when he came into the world, he should find no Worshippers
of the One Supreme God in it; and therefore God entered into Covenant with
Abraham, who seems to have been the only Man of that Age who was free from
Idolatry, and promises to multiply his Seed, and to preserve his Name and
Worship among them; and that the Messiah should descend from his Loins.

And if we consider what necessary Preparations were required for the coming of
the Messiah, and for his reception in the world when he should appear, it will
satisfy us how wisely this was designed by God. The Appearance of the Son of
God in the world was very surprising, and it could not be thought that any one
who made such Pretenses, should find credit, unless the world had beforehand
been prepared to expect him, and had some Infallible Marks and Characters
whereby to know him when he came. And this was the principal end of all the
Types, and Figures, and Prophesies of the Law, to contain the Promises and
Predictions of the Messiah, and the Characters whereby to know him.

The Temple it self, and the whole Temple-Worship, was little more than Types
and Figures of Christ, of his Incarnation, or living among men in an Earthly
Tabernacle, of his Priesthood and Sacrifice, his Death, and Resurrection, and
Ascension into Heaven, there to intercede for us at God's Right Hand, as the
High Priest entered once a Year into the Holy of Holies. Now this could not have
been done, had not the One Supreme God had a Temple, and Priesthood, and
Sacrifices on earth, that is, a People peculiarly devoted to his Worship and
Service; for the Temples, and Priests, and Sacrifices of Idols, could not be
Types of the Son of God, who came to confound all the Pagan Gods, and their
Idolatrous Worship. Thus there could have been no Prophesies of Christ, had
there been no Prophets of the True God; and these Prophecies would have met
with little Credit, had they been found in Idols Temples. So that God's choosing
the Posterity of Abraham for his peculiar People, was not only necessary to
preserve the Knowledge and Worship of the One True God in the world, but also
to receive and to convey down to Future Ages with an unquestionable Authority,
all the Types and Prophecies of the Messiah.

This gives us a general View of the Divine Wisdom, in that Covenant God made
with Abraham and his Posterity; and this will enable us to discover the
wonderful Wisdom of all the various Dispensations of the Divine Providence
toward the Jewish Nation; which will be both so useful and entertaining a
Meditation, that I cannot pass it over without some short Remarks.

Now God having chosen the Posterity of Abraham to be his peculiar People, on
purpose to make them a visible Confutation of Idolatry, and to establish and
propagate the Knowledge and Worship of the One Supreme God in the world, in
order to effect this, Four things were manifestly necessary.

1. That it should be visible to all that knew them, that God had chosen Israel
for his peculiar People.

2. That it should be as visible, That the God of Israel is the One Supreme
God, the Maker and Sovereign Lord of the whole World.

3. That the Worship of the One Supreme God should be preserved entire among
them; or that if they did decline to Idolatry, they should be visibly punished
for it.

4. That the Fame of this People, and of their God, should by degrees be known
over all the earth.

Now not to take notice of the Mystical Reasons of God's Providence toward
Israel, which is a very large and nice Argument, and not so proper to my
present Design; if most of the Remarkable Providence wherewith they were
exercised, did manifestly serve some one or more of these ends, we have a
visible Reason of them, not only sufficient to justify Providence, but to give
us a ravishing Prospect of the Divine Wisdom.

I shall begin with the Removal of Jacob and his Family into Egypt, the
Occasion of which is well known, but the Reason of it is not so well
considered. For it may seem strange, that when God had promised Abraham to
bestow the Land of Canaan on his Posterity for an Inheritance, he should remove
them out of the Land of Canaan into Egypt, there to continue many years under
grievous Oppression, before he thought fit to deliver them, and to give them
Possession of the Promised Land.

But to understand the wise Design of this, we must remember, That God was to
give a visible Demonstration to the world, that he had chosen Israel for his
peculiar People, and given them the Land of Canaan for their Inheritance; and
it was not so agreeable to this Design, that they should increase insensibly in
Canaan, and by degrees dispossess the old Inhabitants; for there had been
nothing singular and remarkable in this; and therefore they were to be a great
Nation, before God so publicly and visibly owned them for his People, and
visibly bestowed an Inheritance on them; and it was necessary they should have
some place to increase and multiply in, till God thought fit to transplant them
into the Promised Land: For this purpose God chose the Land of Egypt, and sent
Joseph beforehand thither, and advanced him to Pharaoh's Throne, to prepare a
Reception for them: And a very quiet and easy Retreat they found there for many
years, till Joseph was dead, and all the good offices he had done both for King
and People forgot, and the prodigious increase of Israel made the Kings of
Egypt jealous of their Numbers and Power; and then they began to oppress that
People with hard labor and cruel bondage, till the time appointed for their
Deliverance was come.

This Oppression of Israel may seem a very severe Providence; but there were
some very Wise Ends it served.

1. To make the People willing to leave Egypt, where they suffered such hard
Bondage; for whoever observes how ready they were upon all occasions to talk of
returning into Egypt, how they longed after the Onions, and Garlic, and
Fleshpots of Egypt, notwithstanding all the hardships they suffered there,
will be apt to think, that had they enjoyed Ease and Prosperity, all the
Miracles which Moses wrought would no more have persuaded Israel to have left
Egypt, than they could persuade Pharaoh to let them go.

2dly. The Advantage Pharaoh made of the Service of Israel, made him
obstinately resolve not to part with them; and his cruel Oppression made it
very just for God to punish him, and all Egypt with him; and this occasioned
all those Signs and Wonders which God wrought in Egypt by the hands of Moses,
whereby he visibly owned Israel for his People, and made his own Power and
Glory known.

3dly. The great proneness of Israel to Idolatry, even when God had delivered
them out of Egypt, is too plain a proof, that they had learnt the Egyptian
Idolatries while they lived there; the Golden Calf being, as some Learned Men,
not without reason, conclude, an imitation of the Egyptian Apis: And this made
it very just for God to punish their Egyptian Idolatry with an Egyptian
Bondage; especially considering, that this was the most likely way to give
check to their Idolatry, and to make them hate the Egyptian Gods like their
Egyptian Taskmasters, and to remember the God of their Fathers, and his
Promise and Covenant to bestow the Land of Canaan on them.

4thly. The Oppression of Israel in Egypt was an effectual means to keep them a
distinct and separate People. This was absolutely necessary, when God had
chosen them for his peculiar People, that they should be preserved from
incorporating with any other People; and this God took early care of, by
placing them by themselves in the Land of Goshen; where they grew up into a
distinct Body from Egypt, which made Pharaoh so jealous of them, when they
began to multiply; 1. Exodus 9, 10.
and that made him oppress them, and that oppression preserved the distinction,
which a kind and friendly usage might in time have destroyed; for it is rarely
seen that two People can live amicably together in the same Country, and under
the same Prince, without mingling and incorporating with each other, till they
forget all distinction between Nations and Families.

These are wise Reasons why God suffered the hard Bondage of Israel in Egypt;
and those mighty Signs and Wonders which God wrought in Egypt, were the most
effectual means both to convince the Israelites of God's peculiar care of them,
and to convince the world, that Israel was God's peculiar People, and that the
God of Israel was the Supreme Lord and Governor of the World. This account God
himself gives of it, 6. Exodus 6, 7, 8. Wherefore say unto the children of
Israel, I am the Lord, and I will bring you out from under the burdens of the
Egyptians -- And I will take you to me for a people, and I will be to you a
God: And ye shall know that I am the Lord your God, which brings you out from
under the burdens of the Egyptians. And as for the Egyptians, God tells Moses,
I will harden Pharaoh's heart, and multiply my signs and my wonders in the Land
of Egypt. But Pharaoh shall not hearken unto you, that I may lay my hand upon
Egypt, and bring forth mine armies, and my people the children of Israel, out
of the land of Egypt by great judgments. And the Egyptians shall know that I am
the Lord, when I stretch forth my hand upon Egypt, and bring out the children
of Israel from among them, 7. Exodus 3, 4, 5.

This is the first time we read of such Signs and Wonders as these; and
probably they are the first Miracles of this nature that ever were wrought; and
it becomes us to contemplate the Wisdom of Providence in it; for the wisdom of
Miracles, and the surprise and wonder of them, are two very different things.
Miracles offer violence to the order of Nature, and would be no commendation of
the Wisdom of Providence, should we consider them as Causes, not as Signs: It
would be a reproach to the Wisdom of Providence to say, that God wrought all
those Miracles in Egypt, because he could not have punished the Egyptians, nor
have delivered Israel without them; for it would argue a great defect in the
ordinary methods of Government, if God could not at any time save good men, and
punish and destroy the wicked without a Miracle. God can do whatever he pleases
by the wise direction and government of natural and moral Causes, and therefore
does not work Miracles because he needs them to supply the defects of natural
Powers, but to bear testimony to his own Being and Providence, and to give
authority to his Ministers and Prophets; and we must learn the wisdom of this
from the state and condition of the world at that time.

Mankind at that time were so far from being Atheists, that they would worship
any thing, the meanest and most contemptible Creatures, rather than have no
God; and they were so sensible how much they stood in need of a Divine
Providence, that one God would not serve them, but they wanted as many Gods,
not only as there were Nations, but as they had wants to supply. This was a
great corruption of the Light of Nature, and those Notions of One Supreme God
imprinted on our minds, and proclaimed by the whole visible Creation; but yet
was so universal and so prevailing, that their wisest Philosophers, who had
better notions of the Deity, were not able to resist the Torrent, and durst not
openly oppose the Worship of those Country Gods, for fear of a popular Rage
and Fury.

Now when neither the Light of Nature, nor the Works of Creation, and of a
common Providence, could secure the belief and worship of the One Supreme God;
what remained but for God to make some more sensible manifestation of himself
to the world? and let any man consider, what more effectual way could have been
taken to convince men of the Divine Power and Providence, than by Miracles,
especially such Miracles as are for the deliverance and protection of good men,
and the punishment and overthrow of the wicked.

When the Corruption of Mankind is such, that they will not learn from Nature;
there is no way of teaching them, but by something which is supernatural; and
when the beautiful, and regular, and uniform Order of Nature will not convince
men that there is a God, at least not that there is One Supreme God, who made,
and who governs this World, Miracles will. Those who will not believe that the
World was made, or had any Wise and Intelligent Cause, must confess, that
Miracles have a Cause, because they see them produced; and that that Cause is
not Nature, because they see them produced without any Natural Cause, or
against the Laws of Nature; nor Chance and Accident, because they are done at
the command of a Free Agent, at the word of a man; as all the Signs and Wonders
in Egypt were wrought at the word of Moses, whose word had no natural virtue
and efficacy in it to work Wonders. And therefore Miracles certainly prove,
that there is an Invisible, Intelligent Cause, who, if he did not make the
World, could have made it, if he had pleased; for whoever can in any one
instance act without, or against Nature, can create Nature too; For to do any
thing which Nature cannot do, is in that particular to make Nature; and he who
can make Nature in one instance, can do so in all; and this is a good reason to
believe, that the World was made, when we know that there is a Cause that can
make the World: And that Superior Power he exercises over Nature, proves that
he both can, and does govern the World; for he has the supreme and absolute
Government of Nature, who can, when he pleases, give new powers to it, or
suspend and reverse its Laws.

So that Miracles are a Supernatural Proof of a Divine Power and Providence;
and no man who believes that there ever was a true Miracle wrought, can be an
Atheist; and therefore it is no wonder that Atheists are such professed Enemies
to the belief of Miracles; but it is a great wonder that they can persuade
themselves to reject all those Authentic Relations we have of Miracles, both
from the Law of Moses, and from the Gospel of Christ, which are the most
credible Histories in the world, [if we look upon them as no more than
Histories] and have obtained the most universal belief. Especially this is very
unaccountable in those men who pretend to Deism, to acknowledge a God who made
the World; for cannot that God who made the World, and made Nature, act
without, or above, or against Nature, when he pleases? And may it not become
the Divine Wisdom and Goodness to do this, when it is necessary for the more
abundant conviction of Mankind, who are sunk into Atheism or Idolatry? when
Signs and Wonders are necessary to awaken men into the sense and belief of God,
and his Providence, which was the case in the days of Moses; or to give
Authority to Prophets to declare and reveal the Will of God to men, which was a
reason for Miracles as long as God thought fit to make any new and public
Revelations of his Will; when it is as reasonable and credible, that God, who
can, when he pleases, should some times work Miracles; as it is that he should
take care to preserve the knowledge of himself, and his Will, and to restore it
when it is lost; or to make such new discoveries of his Grace, as the fallen
state of Mankind requires; when, I say, the thing it self is so credible, and
so worthy of God, what reasonable pretense can there be for rejecting Miracles,
for which we have the Authority of the best attested History in the World?

But Atheism was not the Disease of that Age, which had run into the other
Extreme of Polytheism and Idolatry; and therefore though Miracles do prove the
Being and Providence of God, the Miracles of Moses were principally intended to
prove the Glory and Power of the God of Israel; that the God of Israel is the
One Supreme God, and that he had chosen Israel for his peculiar People; and
this he did by doing such things as no other God could do; such as made the
Egyptian Magicians confess, 8. Exodus 1.
that it was the Finger of God; and what more effectual way could be taken to
convince the world of One Supreme God, than such visible demonstrations of an
Absolute and Sovereign Power superior to all? Those who worshipped a plurality
of Gods, either had no notion of One Supreme God, whose Power rules over all;
or if they had, yet they believed that this Supreme God had committed the care
and government of Mankind to inferior Deities, whom they therefore worshipped
with Divine Honors, as the Disposers of their Lives and Fortunes; and either
paid no worship to the Supreme God, which was the more general practice; or
worshipped their Country-gods together with him, and that with the most
frequent, most solemn and pompous Worship. Now such great and wonderful Works
as these, which none of their Country-gods could do, was an evident proof, that
there was a Power, and therefore a God above them all, whom all Mankind ought
to fear and worship. This convinced Nebuchadnezzar of the Power of the God of
Israel, when he had delivered Shadrach, Meshach and Abed-nego from the fiery
Furnace; 3. Dan. 29.
he made a Decree, That every people, nation and langage which spoke amiss
against the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, shall be cut in pieces,
and their houses shall be made a dunghill, because there is no other God that
can deliver after this sort. Thus when God had delivered Daniel from the Lion's
Den, Darius made a Decree, 6. Dan. 26, 27.
That in every dominion of his kingdom men should tremble and fear before the
God of Daniel: For he is the living God, and steadfast for ever, and his kingdom
that which shall not be destroyed, and his dominion shall be even unto the end.
He delivers and rescueth, and works signs and wonders in heaven, and in
earth, who has delivered Daniel from ihe power of the lions.

Both these Kings were convinced by these great and wonderful Works, that the
God of Israel was the Supreme God; but Nebuchadnezzar's Decree only forbids men
to blaspheme God, Darius seems to command all People to worship him; for to
tremble and fear before him, signifies a religious veneration; but neither of
them appointed any solemn Worship to be paid him, much less did they forbid the
Worship of any other Gods.

But a little consideration would have carried them farther; for those mighty
Works which proved a Power superior to all Gods, proved a Sovereign Providence
too; that this Supreme God had not so committed the Government of the world to
any Ministers, or inferior Deities, but that he reserved the supreme disposal
of all things in his own hands; 4. Dan. 34, 35
as Nebuchadnezzar was convinced, that His dominion is an everlasting dominion,
and his kingdom is from generation to generation; and all the inhabitants of
the earth are reputed as nothing; and he does according to his will in the army
of heaven, and among the inhabitants of the earth, and none can stay his hand,
or say unto him, What do thou? This cut off all reasonable Pretenses of
paying Divine Worship to their Country-goods; for if there be a Superior Power
and Providence over them, at most they could be only Ministers of the Divine
Will, and therefore could have no title to Divine Honors, no more than
Ministers of State have to the Royal Dignity: And it was very reasonable to
conclude this, when they saw that this Supreme God would not suffer Israel,
whom he had chosen for his peculiar People, to worship any other God besides
himself: This was not unknown to the Egyptians, but was more manifest in
After-ages, when God so severely punished them for their Idolatry; and was made
evident to Nebuchadnezzar and Darius, when God delivered Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abednego, out of the fiery Furnace, who refused to worship the Golden Image
which he had set up; and delivered Daniel from the power of the Lions, when he
was cast into the Lions Den for praying to his God. This shows the strange
power of Prejudice and Custom; but yet we must confess, that this was wisely
designed by God for the cure of Polytheism and Idolatry.

Having thus vindicated and explained the Wisdom of Providence, both with
respect to the removal of Israel out of the Land of Canaan into Egypt, and the
hard bondage they suffered there; and their deliverance out of Egypt with a
mighty hand, and outstretched arm, with Signs, and Wonders, and Miracles; let
us now follow them into the Wilderness.

God having chose Israel for his peculiar People, and delivered them out of
Egypt; before he showed them openly to the world under such a peculiar
Character, it was necessary first to form their Manners; to take care that they
should own him for their God, and behave themselves as it became so glorious a
Relation: this could not be done in Egypt, where they were oppressed by hard
bondage; and therefore God first leads them into the Wilderness, remote from
the conversation of all other People, and upon all accounts a fit place both to
instruct and try them. I do not intend, as I said before, to inquire into the
Mystical Reasons of those various Providence with which God exercised them in
the Wilderness, to which our Savior and his Apostles so often refer, and which
they apply to the Gospel-state; but shall only consider the Wisdom of
Providence, as to the external and visible conduct of that People, to make them
fit to be owned before all the World for his peculiar People.

They had lived two hundred years in Egypt, and were tinctured with the
Idolatries, and had learnt the corrupt Manners of that People, and had all that
meanness and stupidity, and perverseness of humor, that a state of Servitude
and Bondage is apt to create; of which we have too many visible Instances in
their behavior toward Moses. All this was to be corrected before their
entrance into Canaan, which will give us the reasons of some very wonderful
Providence.

The first remarkable thing to this purpose to be observed, is God's delivering
the Law to them with all the most formidable Solemnities, in an audible Voice
from Mount Sinai: Which Moses tells them was such a thing as was never known
before, 4. Deuteronomy. 32, 33.
since the day that God created man upon the earth: Did ever people hear the
voice of God speaking out of the midst of the fire, as thou have heard, and
live? And the use Moses makes of it is very natural, to confirm them in the
Belief and Worship of the One Supreme God. 35.
Unto thee it was showed, that thou might know that the Lord he is God, 36.
there is none else besides him. Out of heaven he made thee to hear his voice,
that he might instruct thee; and upon earth he showed thee his great fire, and
thou heardest his words out of the midst of the fire. 39.
-- Know therefore this day, and consider it in thine heart, that the Lord is
God in heaven above, and upon the earth beneath; there is none else. For what
can convince men that there is One Supreme God, if such a terrible Appearance
as that on Mount Sinai, and the Law delivered in an audible Voice from Heaven,
will not convince them? Numa pretended to receive his Laws from the Goddess
Aegeria, as some other Lawgivers pretended to do the like, but no man knew any
thing of it but themselves; but here a whole Nation heard God speak to them,
and saw such an Awful Appearance upon the Mount, as made Moses himself fear and
tremble. I desire any man to tell me, how God, who is a Pure Invisible Mind,
could possibly give a more visible Demonstration of his Presence and Power? I
desire the Wittiest and most Philosophical Atheists, only for Experiment sake,
to suppose the Truth of that Relation which Moses gives us of this matter; and
that they themselves had been present at Mount Sinai, had seen the Smoke and
Fire cover the Mountain, had heard the Thunder and the Trumpet, and at last a
Voice delivering the Law with an unimitable Terror and Majesty, what would they
then have thought of this? Or what farther evidence would they have desired,
that it was God who spoke to them? This could be no Dream, nor melancholy
Apparition, or disturbed Fancy, for they had timely notice of it three days
before, and were commanded to sanctify themselves to meet their God; and if a
whole Nation had been imposed on after such fair Warning, it had been as great
a Prodigy and Miracle, as the Appearance on Mount Sinai, and would have argued
some Divine and Supernatural Infatuation, and that would have proved a God.

This then was as visible a Demonstration as could be given of the Presence,
and Power, and Majesty of God, who rejected all other gods from any share in
his Worship, and declares himself to be the Maker of Heaven and Earth; for I Am
sure the Wit of man cannot invent a more effectual Conviction than this.

Let us then consider the Wisdom of Providence in this, both with respect to
the Israelites, and to the rest of Mankind.

He that comes to God, must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of
them that diligently seek him. And therefore when God intended to restore his
own Worship again in the world, and to make Israel a Pattern and Example of it
to the rest of Mankind, it was necessary to give them as visible and ocular a
demonstration of the Power and Glory of God, as it was possible for Creatures
to have. When the whole World was overrun with Idolatry, and the Israelites
themselves so strongly inclined to it, nothing less than such an Appearance
from Mount Sinai was likely to establish the Faith and Worship of the One
Supreme God; and we see that this it self could very hardly do it; for
immediately after they had heard God speak to them, while Moses was in the
Mount, they made them a Golden Calf, and worshipped it; and as soon as they
mingled with any other people, they joined in their Idolatrous Worship; a sad
Example of which we have in their worship of Baal. Peor, 25. Numb. But this was
the highest evidence God could then give them of his Power and Glory; and it
did in time prevail; and in them all Mankind who know their Story, have a
visible demonstration of One Supreme God.

But not to insist on every Particular, which would be endless; it may seem
strange, that when God brought Israel out of Egypt to give them Possession of
the Promised Land, he should make them wander in the Wilderness forty years,
till all that generation of men which came out of Egypt were dead, excepting
Joshua and Caleb. The Apostle to the Hebrews gives us the general Account of
this matter, 3. Heb. 7. to the end; which resolves it into their Idolatry and
Infidelity. Wherefore as the Holy Ghost says, To day if ye will hear his
voice, harden not your hearts, as in the provocation, in the day of temptation
in the wilderness; when your fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my works
forty years. Wherefore I was grieved with that generation, and said, They do
always err in their heart, and they have not known my ways; so I swear in my
wrath, They shall not enter into my rest. Which he makes an admonition to
Christians, Take heed, brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of
unbelief, in departing from the living God; that is, in forsaking the True God,
and declining to Idolatry, as the Israelites in the Wilderness did. And to whom
swear he, that they should not enter into his rest, but to them that believed
not? So we see, that they could not enter in, because of unbelief.

The plain state of the Case is this; That Generation of men which came out of
Egypt, and remembered the Customs and Practices of that People, were so
strangely addicted to Idolatry, that all the Signs and Wonders they saw in
Egypt, in the Red Sea, and in the Wilderness, could not perfectly cure them;
but whenever they had opportunity, they joined themselves to the Heathen gods,
ate of their Sacrifices, and bowed themselves before them; that had these men
gone into Canaan, which was then a Land of Idolaters, they would certainly have
worshipped their gods, instead of destroying them, and have mingled themselves
with the People of the Land, and have learnt their Manners: for they who so
often tempted God, and disobeyed Moses, while they were in the Wilderness, in
expectation of the Promised Land, what would they have done, had they been once
possessed of it? So that to have given that Generation of men Possession of
Canaan, would not have answered God's orginal Design in choosing Israel for his
peculiar People; for in all likelihood they would have proved a Nation of
Idolaters, like the other Nations round about them: And therefore God deferred
the final Accomplishment of his Promise, till that Generation was all dead, and
a new Generation sprung up which knew not Egypt, nor had conversed with
Idolatrous Nations, but had seen the Wonders of God in the Wilderness, and had
learnt his Statutes and Judgments, and were sufficiently warned by the Example
of their Fathers, whose Carcasses fell in the Wilderness, to fear and reverence
the Lord Jehovah, and to make him their Trust. This is the very Account the
Scripture gives of it; and thus accordingly it proved; for that new Generation
of men were never charged with Idolatry; but we are expressly told, That Israel
served the Lord all the days of Joshua, and all the days of the Elders that
overlived Joshua, and which had known all the works of the Lord that he had
done for Israel, 24. Josh. 31.

All this, we see, was designed by God with admirable Wisdom, to make his own
Glory and Power known, and to publish his Choice of Israel for his peculiar
People, and to prepare them for himself, and to establish his Name and Worship
among them: And now God had made them fit Inhabitants of the Land of Promise,
without any longer delay he gives them the actual Possession of it; and
therefore let us now follow them into the Land of Canaan.

The History of the Wars of Canaan is sufficiently known; which presents us
with new Wonders and Miracles, not inferior to those which God wrought in
Egypt, and in the Red Sea; for God so visibly fought the Battles of Israel,
that they and all the world might know, that it was he that gave them
possession of that good Land, and drove out those wicked Inhabitants before
them; which declared his Glory, and made his Power known: And what I have
already discoursed concerning the Wonders and Miracles in Egypt, is equally
applicable to this, and I need add no more. Let us then consider Israel in
possession of the Land of Promise: And there are but two things more I shall
observe in the Jewish History till the coming of our Savior.

1. Their frequent Relapses into Idolatry, for which they were as frequently
and severely punished.

2. Their Captivities and Dispersions among the Nations, whereby God made
himself and his Laws more universally known in the world.

1. As for the first, nothing could be more directly contrary to God's original
Intention, in choosing the Posterity of Abraham for his peculiar People, than
their falling into Idolatry; and yet God foresaw, that this they would do, and
threatens to punish them severely when they did; which is the subject of Moses
his Prophetic Song, 32. Deuteronomy. and the whole History of the Jewish Nation may
satisfy us, that though God many times spared them when they were guilty of
other great Sins, yet they never fell into Idolatry, but Vengeance soon pursued
them; and they were either oppressed by their Enemies at home, or carried
Captive into Foreign Countries. When Joshua was dead, and all that Generation
which Joshua led into Canaan; There arose another generation after them that
knew not the Lord, nor yet the works which he had done for Israel: And they
soon declined to Idolatry, and served Baalim; they forsook the Lord, and served
Baal and Ashtaroth, 2. Judges 10, 11, 12, etc. And what follows gives us a
summary account of God's dealings with them all the time of the Judges. And the
anger of the Lord was hot against Israel, and he delivered them into the hands
of spoilers that spoiled them, and he sold them into the hands of their enemies
round about them: Whithersoever they went out, the hand of the Lord was against
them for evil, as the Lord had said, and as the Lord had sworn unto them; and
they were greatly distressed. Nevertheless the Lord raised up Judges, which
delivered them out of the hand of those that spoiled them. And yet they would
not hearken unto their Judges, but they went a whoring after other gods, and
bowed themselves unto them: They turned quickly out of the way that their
fathers walked in, obeying the commandments of the Lord; but they did not so.
And when the Lord raised them up Judges, then the Lord was with the Judge, and
delivered them out of the hands of their enemies all the days of the Judge.
(For it repented the Lord because of their groanings, by reason of them that
oppressed them, and vexed them). And it came to pass when the Judge was dead,
that they returned, and corrupted themselves more than their fathers, in
following other gods to serve them, and to bow down unto them; they ceased not
from their own doings, and from their stubborn way.

For this reason, as it follows in the Text, God resolved not to drive out any
from before them of the nations which Joshua left when he died. God had
promised to put out those nations by little and little, not consume them at
once, lest the beast of the field should increase upon them, 7. Deuteronomy 22. But
withal, Joshua assured them, That if they did in any-wise go back, that is,
relapse into Idolatry, and cleave unto the remnant of those nations, even those
which remain among you, which Joshua had not driven out; know for a certainty
that the Lord your God will no more drive out any of these nations from before
you; but they shall be snares and traps unto you, and scourges in your sides,
and thorns in your eyes, until ye perish from off this good land which the Lord
your God has given you, 23. Joshua 12, 13. And thus accordingly God dealt with
them; for he left the five lords of the Philistines, and all the Canaanites,
and the Sidonians, and the Hivites, that dwelt in mount Lebanon, from mount
Baal-Hermon, unto the entering in of Hamath; and they were to prove Israel by
them, to know whether they would hearken unto the commandments of the Lord,
which he commanded their fathers by the hand of Moses, 3. Judges 1, -- 4.

This was a wise provision God made to correct and punish Israel, whenever they
should decline to Idolatry; for these Idolatrous Nations, who still lived among
them, or round about them, were not more ready to tempt them to Idolatry, than
they were to oppress and afflict them, when God thought fit to chastise Israel:
The whole Book of Judges is a manifest proof of this; and the Story is so well
known, that I need not insist on Particulars: Let us then briefly contemplate
the Wisdom of Providence in those severe Judgments God executed on Israel for
their frequent Idolatries. God had chosen Israel for his peculiar People, to be
the Worshippers of the One Supreme God, and a visible confutation of the
Heathen Idolatries; but their great propensity to Idolatry, after all the Signs
and Wonders which God wrought in Egypt, and in the Red Sea, and in the
Wilderness, and in giving them possession of the promised Land, did threaten
the final Apostasy of Israel, which would have defeated God's wise and gracious
Design in choosing them for his peculiar People. For had they turned Idolaters
like the rest of the Nations, the Worship of the One Supreme God had been
totally lost in the world.

To prevent this, God never suffered their Idolatries for any long time to
escape unpunished; and if we would understand the true reason of this, we must
not consider these Judgments merely as the punishment of their Idolatries, but
as the wise Methods of Providence to preserve his own Worship among them
notwithstanding their Idolatrous Inclinations, and to make his Name, and Power,
and Glory, known to the world.

The whole world were Idolaters; but God did not punish other Nations for their
Idolatry, as he did Israel; which shows, that the punishment of Israel was not
merely for the punishment of Idolatry, but for the cure of it. For God having
chosen Israel for his peculiar People, the world was to learn from them, from
their Examples, and from their Rewards and Punishments, the knowledge and
worship of the One Supreme God. And could there be a more sensible confutation
of Idolatry, than to see a Nation which had been visibly consecrated to the
Worship of the One Supreme God, as visibly punished, whenever they declined to
Idolatry?

That new generation which sprung up after the days of Joshua, who had not seen
God's Wonders in Egypt and in the Wilderness, nor known the Wars of Canaan,
soon forgot the God of their Fathers, and wanted some new experiments of God's
Power and Presence among them; and whenever they declined to Idolatry, God took
care they should not want them, though they paid very dear for them; for he
delivered them into the hands of their Enemies, and brought many evils on them,
till they should remember the God of their Fathers: This account God himself
gives of it, 31. Deuteronomy. 16, 17. And the Lord said unto Moses, Behold thou shall
sleep with thy fathers, and this people will rise up, and go a whoring after
the gods of the strangers, whither they go to be amongst them, and will forsake
me, and break my covenant which I have made with them. Then my anger shall be
kindled against them in that day, and I will forsake them, and I will hide my
face from them, and they shall be devoured, and many evils and troubles shall
befall them, so that they will say in that day, Are not these evils come upon us
because the Lord our God is not amongst us? This the Psalmist tells us was the
effect of such Judgments, though not always so lasting as it ought to have
been. When he slew them, then they sought him, and returned and enquired early
after God; and they remembered that God was their rock, and the high God their
redeemer, 78. Psalm. 34, 35.

By these means God made them sensible of his Justice and Power, and reclaimed
them from their Idolatries, and restored his own Worship among them; for they
certainly knew by the threatenings of their own Law, for what reasons they were
thus punished; and indeed their own experience was sufficient to satisfy them
in this; for they no sooner forsook the God of their Fathers, and worshipped
others gods, but they were Oppressed by their Enemies; and when they repented
of their Idolatries, and returned to God, he raised up Saviors and Deliverers
who vanquished their Enemies, and restored them to Liberty and Peace:
Especially since those wonderful Deliverances which God wrought for them by the
hands of their Judges, gave that Generation of men, which knew not the Wars of
Canaan, new and visible proofs of God's Power and Presence among them. And we
know what effect this Discipline had: It did not wholly prevent their
Idolatries, which they were very prone to, when the memory of such Judgments
was worn out by a long Peace and Prosperity; but then the repetition of such
Judgments, as they repeated their Provocations, joined with the admonitions of
their Prophets, whom God raised up in several Ages, did generally bring them to
Repentance, and restore the Worship of God amongst them; till at last the Ten
Tribes grew incurable, and were therefore utterly rejected by God, and carried
into a perpetual Captivity, never to return more into their own Land; and
Judah, who would not take warning by the Punishment of Israel, was carried
Captive into Babylon for Seventy years; which so perfectly cured their
Idolatry, that we hear no more complaints of that after their return from
Captivity.

And this answered God's design with respect to the rest of the World, as much
as if they had never been guilty of Idolatry: For notwithstanding their several
relapses into Idolatry, it was well known that Israel was Consecrated to the
Worship of the Lord Jehovah; and when the Nations round about were witnesses of
God's Judgments against Israel when they forsook the Lord their God, and of
their Happy and Prosperous State while they kept his Covenant; it was a
convincing proof of the Power and Justice of the God of Israel, especially when
they should see the Ten Tribes utterly rooted out for their Idolatry, and Judah
carried Captive into Babylon, and the City and Temple of Jerusalem destroyed,
and the Land laid waste and desolate without Inhabitants; the Justice and Power
of God in driving them out of their Land, would then be as much taken notice
of, as his wonderful Providence in Delivering them out of Egypt, and placing
them in that good Land, was; as God himself tells Solomon in answer to his
Prayer at the Dedication of the Temple: 2 Cor. 7. 19, 20, 21, 22. But if ye
turn away and forsake my statutes and my commandments which I have set before
you, and shall go and serve other gods and worship them: Then will I pluck them
up by the roots out of my land which I have given them; and this house which I
have sanctified for my name, will I cast out of my sight, and will make it to
be a proverb, and a byword among all nations: And this house which is high,
shall be an astonishment to every one that passes by it; so that he shall say,
Why has the Lord done thus unto this land, and unto this house? And it shall
be answered, Because they forsook the Lord God of their fathers, which brought
them forth out of the land of Egypt, and laid hold on other gods, and
worshipped them, and served them; therefore has he brought all this evil upon
them.

For we must observe, That God had as well chose the Land of Canaan to be the
Seat of his Worship, as Israel to be his Worshippers; and the Inheritance of
the Land of Canaan was bestowed on them, in virtue of God's Covenant to be
their God, and they to be his People; that is, that they should worship no
other Gods besides him: And the breach of Covenant on their part by declining
to Idolatry, was a Forfeiture of their Right to the Promised Land; and the
proper Punishment of it was, either Oppression at home, which made them
servants and strangers in their own Land, or Captivity in Foreign Countries;
and this was so publicly known, that when any such evils befell Israel, the
Nations round about were able to give the Reason of it, Because they forsook
the Lord God of their fathers. So that the very Oppression and Captivity of
Israel, published the Supreme Power and Glory of the God of Israel, who is a
Jealous God, and will admit of no Partners in Worship; but when his own People
forsake him, and serve strange gods in the land which he had given them, and
separated to his own Worship, he makes them serve strangers in a land which is
not theirs, 5. Jer. 19.

2dly. These Captivities and Dispersions of Israel, especially the long
Captivity of Judah in Babylon, served other ends besides the Punishment and the
Cure of their Idolatry; for into what Country soever they were carried Captive,
they carried the Knowledge of the God of Israel along with them.

While they lived at home in their own Country, and had little Commerce with
any other people, the very Name of Israel was known only to their Neighbors;
and the God of Israel could be known no farther than Israel was: But when they
were carried Captive to Babylon, and dispersed through all the Provinces of
that vast Empire; this spread the Knowledge of God too, who by many wonderful
Providence owned these Captives for his People, and made the Heathens see and
confess his Glory and Power.

But the better to understand this, we must consider that wise Preparation God
made for it in those great Revolutions of States and Empires which began about
this time.

To prevent the general Corruption of Mankind, as I observed before, God
confounded their Languages, and thereby separated them from each other, and
formed them into several distinct Independent Societies and Kingdoms; which was
an effectual means to prevent the spreading of the Infection, and to force them
to the practice of a great many Moral and Political Virtues: But when the whole
world was corrupted by Idolatry, and God saw a proper season to begin a
Reformation, to make the Cure more easy and universal, it was necessary to
establish a more general Communication among mankind, which is the most
effectual means to spread a Wholesome as well as a Pestilential Contagion: And
since Commerce and Traffic was not so general in those days, as it is now,
there was no such ready way to do this, as by Force of Arms, which united a
great many Kingdoms and Nations into one; which besides all other advantages,
conveyed the knowledge of all memorable Actions into all parts of the Empire.

Now in the beginning of these great Empires (for tho the Assyrian Monarchy
began long before, yet Nebuchadnezzar was the Golden Head of that Image which
represented the Four Monarchies) God carried Judah Captive into Babylon, 2.
Dan. 38.
and thereby made himself known to be the Supreme and Sovereign Lord of the
world, over all the Babylonish Empire.

The first occasion God took to make himself known in Babylon, was
Nebuchadnezzar's Dream, which he had forgot; and none of the Magicians, or
Astrologers, or Sorcerers, of Chaldaeans, could show the King his Dream, much
less tell him the Interpretation of it; but Daniel did both; which made
Nebuchadnezzar acknowledge to Daniel, Of a truth it is, that your God is a God
of gods, and a Lord of kings, and a revealer of secrets, since thou could
reveal this secret, 2. Dan. 47. And this advanced Daniel to great Authority:
for the King made him ruler over the whole province of Babylon, and chief of
the governors over all the Wise men of Babylon. And we need not doubt but he
used his Authority, especially among the Wisemen of Babylon, who had the
greatest influence upon others, to propagate the knowledge of the One Supreme
God among them.

In the Reign of the same King, God magnified his Power in the Preservation of
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, from the Fiery Furnace; which occasioned a
Decree that gave great advantage to the Jews, and disposed all men to think
very honorably of their God; That every people, nation, and language, which
speak any thing amiss against the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego,
shall be cut in pieces, and their houses shall be made a dunghill, because there
is no other God that can deliver after this sort, 3. Dan. 28, 29. And that
experience Nebuchadnezzar had of the Power and Justice of God in his own
person, extorted from him as devout Praises of God, and as Orthodox a
Confession of his Faith in him, as any Jew could have made, 4 Dan.

Thus in the Reign of Belshazzar, who with his Princes, his Wives, and
Concubines, drank Wine out of the Golden Vessels of the Temple, God gave a
Glorious Testimony to himself by a Handwriting on the Wall, which as Daniel
expounded it, and the Event that very Night confirmed, foretold the immediate
Overthrow of his Empire by the Medes and Persians: This was a very sudden
Vengeance for their Idolatrous Revels, and the Profanation of the Holy Vessels
of the Temple, as Daniel very freely acquainted the King, 5 Dan. And tho his
Advancement by Belshazzar, who made him the Third Ruler in the Kingdom, was but
of a very short continuance, the King being slain that Night; yet it so
recommended him to Darius, who began the Second Monarchy of the Medes and
Persians, that he advanced Daniel to the same or greater Honor and Power, he
being made the first of the Three Presidents who had the Government of the
Hundred and Twenty Princes whom Darius set over the whole Kingdom.

In the beginning of this New Monarchy, God gave a fresh Demonstration of his
Power, in delivering Daniel from the Lions Den; for which reason Darius made a
Decree, That in every dominion of his kingdom, men fear and tremble before the
God of Daniel, 6. Dan. 25, 26, 27. So that by the Captivity of Judah, God made
himself known over all the Babylonian and Persian Monarchy; and this disposed
Cyrus, the Seventy Years of their Captivity being accomplished, to give them
liberty to return into their own Country, and to publish a Decree for the
Rebuilding the City and Temple of Jerusalem.

But still to preserve the knowledge of God among them, the Divine Providence
so ordered it, that when all had liberty to return, great numbers stayed behind
in Babylon, where they freely professed and exercised their Religion; which
together with the Civil Dependence of the Jewish State on the Persian Monarchy,
preserved a constant Correspondence and Intercourse between them; and that
preserved the knowledge of the Jews, and of their God.

The Grecian Empire, which put an end to the Persian, made the God of the Jews
still more known to the world: Alexander the Great came to Jerusalem, treated
the Jews with great kindness, consulted the Records of their Prophets, offered
Sacrifices to God, and not only confirmed their old, but granted new Privileges
to them: And thus God became known, not only to the Babylonian and Persian, but
to the Grecian Monarchy: And when after Alexander's Death the Empire was
divided, this caused a new dispersion of the Jews, especially into Syria and
Egypt: Ptolomy the King of Egypt having surprised Jerusalem, carried great
Numbers of them into Egypt, and having entertained a kind opinion of them
there, employed them in his Armies and Garrisons, and made them Citizens of
Alexandria; his Son Ptolomy Philadelphus procured the Translation of their Law
into Greek, which was a new Publication of their Religion; and after this,
Onias Built a Temple in Egypt in all things like to that of Jerusalem, where
they Worshipped God according to the Rites of the Jewish Law; that God was now
as much known in Egypt, as he was in Iudaea.

And to let pass a great many other things which contributed very much to
propagate the knowledge of the God of Israel in the World: To complete all, the
Power and Oppressions of the Assyrian Monarchs forced the Jews to pray the
Alliance and Assistance of the Romans, which ended, as such powerful Alliances
very often do, in their Subjection to the Roman Powers, who first Governed them
by Kings and Tetrarchs, and at last reduced them into a Roman Province. And
thus the Jews, and their God, and their Religion, became known over all the
Roman Empire. These Four successive Monarchies, did gradually increase and
spread the knowledge of One Supreme God over all the World, and thereby
prepared the way for the Kingdom of the Messiah, that Kingdom which the Prophet
Daniel tells us, the God of heaven would set up, which should never be
destroyed, 2. Dan. 44.

For the better to understand this, we must observe, that though the knowledge
of God made no public Reformation of the Pagan Idolatries, yet it greatly
disposed men to receive the Gospel, when it should be Preached to them: it
visibly reformed their Philosophy, and gave them the Notion of One Supreme
Being, as is evident from the Poets and Philosophers of those Ages, though they
still Worshipped their Country gods; it gave them some obscure knowledge of
the Jewish Prophecies concerning the Kingdom of the Messiah, and raised an
expectation even among the Romans of some great Prince who was to rise in the
East, as Tacitus observes. And though the knowledge of the God of Israel did
not reform Nations, yet we have reason to believe, that it made a great many
private Converts, who secretly forsook the Idolatries of their Countries, and
Worshipped the only True God. It is reasonable to think it should do so; and we
must confess it was wisely designed by God for that purpose, and some few
examples of this kind, which we know, may satisfy us, that there were many
more.

On the Famous Day of Pentecost, when the Holy Ghost descended on the Apostles
in a Visible appearance of cloven tongues like as of fire, there were at
Jerusalem great Numbers, not only of Jews, but of Proselytes out of every
Nation. Parthians, and Medes, and Elamites, and the dwellers in Mesopotamia,
and in Iudaea, and Cappadocia, in Pontus and Asia, Phrygia and Pamphilia, in
Egypt, and in the parts of Lybia about Cyrene, and strangers of Rome, Jews and
Proselytes, Cretes and Arabians, 2. Acts 9, 10, 11. Whether these were
Circumcised or Uncircumcised Proselites, is not said; but Proselites they were
out of all these Nations, who came up at the Feast to Worship at Jerusalem;
from whence we learn, that the dispersion of the Jews into all Nations made
great Numbers of Proselites, who either undertook the observation of the
Mosaical Law by Circumcision, and became Jews, or at least renounced all the
Heathen Idolatries, and worshipped no other God but the God of Israel.

The number of these last seems to have been much greater than that of
Circumcised Proselites; and if we believe some Learned men, there is frequent
mention made of them in Scripture under the names of worshipping Greeks, and
devout men, and those which feared God. When Saint Paul preached at
Thessalonica, there consorted with Paul and Silas of the devout Greeks a great
multitude, 17. Acts 24. The very name of Greeks proves them to be Gentiles, not
Jews, who are always distinguished from each other; and that they were (...),
devout or worshipping Greeks, proves that they were the Worshippers of the God
of Israel; for that Title is never given in Scripture to Idolaters, and their
frequenting the Jewish Synagogue sufficiently proves it; for no Gentiles
resorted thither, but those who worshipped the God of Israel. Of this number
was Lydia, 16. Acts 14. and Cornelius the Roman Centurion, who was not only a
devout man, and one who feared God himself, but all his Family were so too, 10.
Acts 2. and the Eunuch, 8. Acts 27. and almost in every place where St. Paul
preached the Gospel, we find great numbers of these worshipping Gentiles; at
Thessalonica and Philippi, as you have seen, at Corinth, 18. Acts 4. at Antioch
of Pisidia, 13. Acts 43. and we have reason to conclude, that thus it was in
other places; which shows what a great effect the dispersion of the Jews into
all these Countries had in making Proselites, some to the Jewish Religion, but
many more to the Worship of the God of Israel; which prepared them to receive
the Gospel when is was preached to them: For they were the Worshippers of the
True God, and were instructed in the Law and the Prophets, as appears from
their frequenting the Jewish Synagogues, and therefore were in expectation of
the Messiah, and were capable of understanding the Scripture Proofs of the
Christian Faith. It is certain the first Gentile Converts were of this sort of
men, who more readily embraced the Faith, than the Jews themselves; for they
had all the preparations for Christianity which the Jews had, but none of their
Prejudices: neither a fondness for their Ceremonial Worship, nor for the
Temporal Kingdom of the Messiah. Mr. Joseph Mede 's Discourse 3. on 17. Acts 4.
And therefore a very Learned man expounds that Text, 13. Acts 48. As many as
were ordained to eternal life, believed, of these devout and worshipping
Gentiles, that they were (...), ready disposed and prepared to receive the
Doctrine of Eternal Life by Christ Jesus.

And thus we are come to the days of Christ, whose appearance in the world was
the last and most effectual means God used for the recovery of Mankind; to
consider the Divine Wisdom in the Redemption of the world by Jesus Christ,
relates to the wisdom of the Christian Religion, not of Providence, and
therefore does not concern my present Argument; but if we take a brief review
of what I have said, we may the better understand in what sense Christ is said
to come in the fullness of time; for he came as soon as the world was prepared
to receive him. For I would desire any man, who complains that the coming of
Christ was too long delayed, to tell me in what sooner period it had been
proper for him to appear?

In every Age, as I have already shown, God took the wisest methods that the
Condition of Mankind would at that time allow to reform the world; and if
Christ appeared at such a time, as the Divine Wisdom saw most fit and proper
for his appearance, he appeared as soon as he could, if we will allow God to
dispense his Grace and Favors wisely. That he did so, no man can doubt who
believes the Wisdom and Goodness of God: But my business at present is to give
you a fair representation of all those wise Advances God made to this last
completing and stupendous Act of Grace and Love.

God had promised our first Parents immediately upon the Fall, That the seed of
the woman should break the serpent's head; and by virtue of this Promise all
truly good men were saved by Christ from the beginning of the world: But the
more to recommend the Love of God in the Incarnation and Death of our Savior,
it seems very congruous to the Divine Wisdom, that all other Methods should be
first tried for the reforming of Mankind, before the coming of Christ; and that
he should come in such a time when the world was best prepared to receive Him;
and as little as we understand of the unsearchable Counsels of God, it may
satisfy us, that upon both these accounts Christ appeared in the fullness of
time.

When all flesh had corrupted his ways, and there was but one Righteous Family
left, the only probable means of restoring Piety and Virtue to the world, was
to destroy all that Wicked Generation of Men, and to preserve that Righteous
Family to new-people the world.

When that New Generation began to corrupt themselves, God separated them from
each other by confounding their Languages; and formed them into distinct
Societies and Kingdoms, which was the most effectual way to stop the Infection,
and to force on them the practice of many Moral and Civil Virtues.

When notwithstanding this, they all declined to Idolatry, God chose Abraham
and his Posterity to be his peculiar People, to preserve the Faith and Worship
of the One Supreme God in the world; he gave them his Laws, committed to them
the Types and Prophecies of the Messiah, and punished them very severely when
they worshipped any other Gods; sent them into captivity, and by various
Providence scattered them almost over the face of the whole Earth, and thereby
propagated the knowledge of himself, and of his Laws; and the Prophecies of the
Messiah made numerous Proselites to the Worship of the One Supreme God, and
made ready a people prepared for the Lord, and then Christ came: And what
sooner time you fix on for the appearance of Christ, you will find it, either
before God had tried all other Methods for the reforming the world, or before
the world was prepared for the receiving of Christ.

And having thus, in the best manner I could, represented to you the wonderful
Wisdom of Providence from the beginning of the World to the appearance of
Christ in the Flesh, in some of the most remarkable Events which have happened,
I shall here break off; for though the Wisdom of Providence is not less
wonderful in those various Events which have happened to the Christian Church,
yet that is so large a Subject, and the Accounts of many things so imperfect or
doubtful, that I shall leave it to men of greater leisure, and better skill and
judgment in Secular and Ecclesiastical Story. But, I hope, that imperfect
Account I have now given, will teach you to reverence, not to censure the
Wisdom of Providence; for if we, who understand so little of God's ways, can
see such Excellent Wisdom in them, what unsearchable depths and mysteries of
Wisdom are there which we cannot discover!

But yet to complete the Jewish History, as far as the Scripture-account goes,
it will be necessary to take notice of the final Destruction of Jerusalem by
the Romans, which put an end to their State and Government, and dispersed them
into so many different Countries; for it seems very surprising, that God should
cast off his People, who were in Covenant with him, and to whom the Promises of
the Messiah were peculiarly made, so soon after the appearance of the Messiah
in the world.

And therefore to vindicate both the truth and faithfulness of God's Promise to
Abraham, and the Wisdom of his Providence in the final overthrow and dispersion
of the Jewish Nation, we must distinguish, as St. Paul frequently does,
especially in Romans 9. between the Carnal and the Spiritual Seed of Abraham; the
Children of the Flesh, and the Children of the Promise: Those who descended
from Abraham by Carnal Generation, and those who were the Children of Abraham
by faith in Christ Jesus, 3. Galat. 26, 29.

The Carnal Posterity of Abraham were chosen by God for his peculiar People, to
preserve his own Name and Worship among them; and for this purpose they were to
be a distinct Nation, separated from the rest of the world, and had the Land of
Canaan given them to live in; and they were to continue so till the coming of
the Messiah, according to Jacob's Prophesy, The scepter shall not depart from
Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh come, and to him
shall the gathering of the people be, 49. Genes. 10.

But the Blessings of the Messiah were promised only to the Spiritual Seed of
Abraham, as St. Paul proves, 9. Romans 3. Gal. That is to all those, whether Jews
or Gentiles, who believe in Christ Jesus; for Christ was the true promised
Seed, and in Christ are all the Promises of God, Yea and Amen; and therefore
nothing but faith in Christ can entitle us to the Promise of Abraham; as the
Apostle in these places confirms by several Arguments, which I cannot now
insist on.

Now if we thus distinguish between Abraham's Carnal and Spiritual Seed, and
those Promises which belong to Abraham's Carnal Posterity, and those which
peculiarly belong to his Spiritual Seed, there will appear no great difficulty
in God's destroying the City and Temple of Jerusalem, and dispersing the Jews
into all parts of the Earth.

God had accomplished what he intended by the Carnal Posterity of Abraham; that
is, he had preserved and propagated the knowledge of the One True God in the
world, and prepared men to receive Christ, when he should be preached to them;
and now Christ was come, the Spiritual Covenant took place; which was not
confined to Abraham's Carnal Posterity, but extended to all that believed in
Christ all the world over: So that God had no longer any one Nation for his
peculiar People, but those only were his peculiar People, whatever Nation they
were of, who believe in Jesus.

The Jews then considered as Abraham's Carnal Posterity, were God's peculiar
People no longer; nor did God's Promise oblige him to preserve them a distinct
Nation any longer; and therefore the Divine Providence might now as justly
destroy them as any other Nation, if they deserved it; and certainly the
Crucifixion of their Messiah, and their obstinate Infidelity did deserve it.
And when they had thus justly deserved a final Excision, the Divine Wisdom had
admirable Ends to serve by it.

This gave a glorious Testimony to Christ and his Religion in that terrible
Vengeance which befell his Murderers which Christ himself had so expressly and
punctually foretold, That no man, who knew what he had foretold with so many
particular circumstances, could be ignorant, why Jerusalem was destroyed.

The obstinate Infidelity of the Jews, who blasphemed the Name, and persecuted
the Disciples of Christ, did in some degree hinder the progress of the Gospel
among the Gentiles; but the Destruction of Jerusalem, and the miraculous
Preservation of the Christians, was so visible a Testimony to Christianity, and
delivered the Christian Church from such bitter and implacable Enemies, that
the Gospel had a freer passage, and prevailed mightily in the world.

And the Dispersion of the Jews into all Countries, as before it spread the
Knowledge of the One True God, so now it made them unwilling Witnesses to
Christianity, as being the visible triumph of the Crucified Jesus.

In a word, When all Mankind were Idolaters, God chose the Posterity of
Abraham, and multiplied them into a great Nation, to preserve and propagate the
Knowledge and Worship of the One Supreme God, and to prepare men to receive the
Gospel, which would in time extirpate all Pagan Idolatries. Wen Christ was
come, and the Gospel preached to the world, God rejected that Nation for their
Infidelity, and by that means gave a freer passage to the Gospel among the
Gentiles; and St. Paul intimates, That the time will come, when the Sincere
Faith, and Exemplary Piety of the Christian Church shall contribute as much to
the Conversion of the Jews, as they formerly did to the Conversion of the
Gentiles; for this seems to be the sum of the Apostle's reasoning, with which I
shall conclude this Argument. 11. Romans 30, etc. For as ye in times past have
not believed God, yet now have obtained mercy through their unbelief; Even so
have these also now not believed, that through your mercy, they also may obtain
mercy; for God has concluded them all in unbelief, that he might have mercy
upon all. O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God!
how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out!

Secondly, Let us now consider the Wisdom of Providence in some more common and
ordinary Events, especially such as are made Objections against Providence. I
have already upon other Occasions taken notice of several things of this
nature; but it will give us a more transporting sense of the Divine Wisdom, to
see as much of it as we can in one view.

In general, whoever considers what it is to govern a World, and to take care
of all the Creatures that are in it, must confess it to be a work of Infinite
and Incomprehensible Wisdom.

The Epicureans for this reason rejected a Providence, because they thought it
too much trouble for their gods, full of care, solicitude, and distraction, to
observe all that is done in the World; and to overruled and determine all
Events, as Wisdom, Justice, and Goodness, should direct; and indeed nothing
less than an Infinite Mind can do this, which sees all things at one view,
judges infallibly at first sight, and orders all things with a powerful thought.

But my chief design at present is, to show you the Wisdom of Providence in
some particular Cases, which either are not sufficiently observed, or not
rightly understood.

Some of the great Objections against Providence are the troublesome and
tempestuous state of this world; the uncertainty of all Events; the fickleness
and inconstancy of Human Affairs; the promiscuous dispensation of the good and
evil things of this life both to good and to bad men: And I have already
vindicated, not only the Justice and Goodness, but the Wisdom of God upon these
accounts; by showing what wise ends God serves by them, and what a wise use we
may make of such Providence. And therefore the principal thing I shall now
insist on, shall be some of those wise Methods God uses in Rewards and
Punishments; wherein the great Wisdom of Government consists: And I shall
briefly mention some few.

1. That God rewards and punishes men in their Posterity: This is so plainly
taught in Scripture, that it will admit of no dispute; though some men venture
to dispute the Justice, at least of one part of it, that God should visit the
sins of the Fathers upon the Children; which the Jews objected against God in
that Profane Proverb, the Fathers have eaten sower grapes, and the Childrens
teeth are set an edge, 18. Ezekiel. and by the answer God there makes, we may
learn in what sense God threatens to punish the Posterity of Bad men, and to
reward the Posterity of Good men, for their Fathers sakes; which does not
extend to the other World, where every man shall be Judged according to his own
Works, and the soul that sins, it shall dye; and as to this World, where we
may allow more to the Sovereignty of Providence without impeaching the Divine
Justice; yet God assures us, that a Righteous Son shall not be punished merely
because he had a Wicked Father; nor a Wicked Son be rewarded, merely because he
had a Righteous Father; for thus much the words must signify, if they relate
to this Life, as they certainly do, as well as to a Future State.

Now if neither a Righteous Son shall suffer for the Wickedness of his Father,
nor a Wicked Son receive the rewards of his Father's Virtue; this can afford no
pretense to impeach the Justice of Providence; but it gives occasion to inquire
in what sense God is said to visit the Sins of the Fathers upon their Children,
and to Bless and Prosper the Posterity of Good men for their sakes.

1. As for the First: If God does not punish a Righteous Son for the sins of
his Father, then to visit the iniquities of the Father upon the Children, must
be confined only to such Children as inherit the Vices, and imitate the
Wickedness of their Parents: That is, God has threatened to punish the Wicked
Children of Wicked Parents.

This, you will say, has nothing extraordinary in it; for God has threatened to
punish all Wicked men, whatever their Parents are; and if they are punished
only because they are Wicked, How is this to visit the iniquities of their
Fathers on them? But the Answer of this seems as obvious as the Objection; that
the Wicked Children of Wicked Parents shall be more certainly, and more
severely punished, than other Bad men ordinarily are.

1. As for the certainty of their punishment: We know a great many Bad men very
often escape the Divine Vengeance in this world; for all Wicked men are not
punished here as their Wickedness deserves: The Justice of the Divine
Providence, as I have already observed, does not require a sudden and hasty
Execution: Bad men may be prosperous many years, and be severely punished at
last; or may be prosperous all their Lives, and go down to their Graves in
peace, and only Answer for their Wickedness in the next World: But then God
threatens that a more speedy Vengeance shall overtake their Posterity, if they
are Wicked; that God will then remember, that they are the wicked Children of
wicked Parents, and not exercise the same Patience and Long-suffering to them:
And this is in a proper sense to visit the iniquities of their Fathers on them;
for though they are punished only for their own sins, yet the iniquities of
their Fathers are the reason why God punishes them in this world for their
sins, and makes them the Examples of his Justice, while other men as wicked as
themselves escape.

2. As for the severity of their punishments: No man shall be punished more
than his own sins deserve; but yet the wicked Children of wicked Parents may
be, and very often are, punished more severely than other Wicked men.

God does not punish all Bad men alike: For the punishments of this life are
more properly acts of Discipline, than acts of Judgment; and therefore are not
proportioned to the nature of the Crime, but to the circumstances and condition
of the Person, and to the Wise ends of Government; and if the wicked Children
of wicked Parents are punished, though for their own sins, yet the more
severely for their Fathers sake; this is to bear the iniquity of their Fathers.
To understand this, we must observe that the Scripture takes notice of a
certain measure of iniquity, which is filling up from one Generation to
another, till a last it makes a Nation, or Family, ripe for destruction; and
although those persons on whom this final Vengeance falls, suffer no more than
their own personal Sins deserved; yet because the sins of former Generations,
which they equal or out do, make it time for God utterly to destroy them; the
punishments due to the sins of many Ages and Generations, are all said to fall
upon them. This account our Savior gives of the Destruction of Jerusalem, 23.
Matt. 29, 30, 31, 32, 34, 35, 36. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees,
Hypocrites; because ye build the tombs of the prophets, and garnish the
sepulchers of the righteous, and say, if we had been in the days of our
fathers, we would not have been partakers with them in the blood of the
prophets. Wherefore ye be witnesses unto your selves, that ye are the children
of them which killed the prophets; fill ye up then the measure of your fathers
sins. -- Wherefore behold, I send unto you prophets, and wise men, and scribes,
and some of them shall ye kill and crucify, and some of them shall ye scourge
in your synagogues, and persecute them from city to city. That upon you may
come all the righteous blood shed upon the earth, from the blood of Abel to the
blood of Zacharias Son of Barachias, whom ye slew between the temple and the
altar. God may wait with patience upon a wicked Nation, or a wicked Family, but
when they sin on from one Generation to another, it all aggravates the account;
and when God sees it time to punish, makes the punishment very severe, or final.

2dly. The Righteous Posterity of good men are rewarded also for their Fathers
sake; for he shows mercy to thousands of them that love him, and keep his
commandments.

A Wicked Son may receive a great many Temporal Blessings from God, for the
sake of a Righteous Father; for it is evident from Scripture, that God shows
great Favor, and exercises great Patience to bad men, for the sake of the
good; but the Promise is made only to the Righteous Seed of Good men; for tho
it does not unbecome the Divine Goodness to show favor to bad men, especially
when it is for the sake of the righteous, which makes it the reward and
encouragement of Virtue; yet it does not seem fitting to make any general
Promise of favor to them, which would be an Encouragement of Vice.

The Righteous Seed then of Good men shall be blessed; but so shall the
Righteous Seed of Wicked men be, and what peculiar Privilege is this to the
Good? I answer; When God promises to bless the Righteous Posterity of Good men,
if it contain any thing peculiar, which God has not so expressly promised to
other good men, it must signify a more certain and a more lasting Prosperity in
this world. All good men are not prosperous in this world, nor has God any
where promised that they shall be so, no more than all wicked men are visibly
punished here; but as God visits the Iniquities of the Fathers upon their
Children, by executing a more speedy Vengeance on the Wicked Children of Wicked
Parents; so the Righteous Children of Righteous Parents shall be more certainly
prosperous than other good men; and the more uninterrupted successions there
are of such Righteous Parents and Righteous Children, the deeper root they
shall take, and be like a tree planted by the rivers of waters, that brings
forth his fruit in his season; his leaf also shall not wither, and what soever
he does shall prosper, 1. Psalm. 3.

This may suffice for a short Representation of this case; and as it is thus
stated, it is manifest, That there is no Injustice in it; let us then consider
what Wise Ends it serves, both with respect to Parents and to Children, and to
the Justification of Providence.

1. As to Parents: If they have any Natural Affection to their Children, this
is a very powerful Argument to restrain them from Vice, and to excite them to
Virtue. Most of the Labor and Toil which men undergo, is for the sake of their
Children, to provide for them while they live, and to leave them in easy and
happy Circumstances when they dye; to raise and perpetuate a Family, and to
secure them, as far as it is possible, from all adverse events. But how
successful soever Bad men may be in raising an Estate, they build upon a Sandy
Foundation, and leave a very perishing Inheritance to their Children;
especially if they raise an Estate by Injustice and Oppression, by defrauding
God and the Poor of their Portion, which many times makes it moulder away in
the hands even of a Righteous Heir. The more prosperous a wicked man is, the
more likely is his Posterity to be miserable, if he propagate his Vices to
them; for God will at one time or other reckon with wicked Families, as well as
men; and that will be a Terrible Account, when the wickedness of his father
shall be remembered before the Lord, and the sin of his mother shall not be
blotted out, 109. Psalm. 14.

And what an Encouragement is this to Good men, tho they themselves should be
unfortunate in the world, to know, That their Posterity shall reap the Rewards
of their Virtue; that if their Children should be wicked, there is some reason
to hope, that they may be more gently used, and it may be receive many Temporal
Blessings for their sakes; but if they be Righteous, they shall then take root,
and flourish in the earth; that the little which the Righteous man has
righteously got, shall prove a better, a more lasting and increasing
Inheritance, than the Riches of many wicked; and that a Liberal Charity, which
some men think is to defraud their Children, shall prove like Seed sown in the
earth, which repays all with a plentiful Harvest.

It is certain, were this firmly believed, and well considered, it would lay
the greatest obligation in the world, both on Bad and Good men to take care of
the Religious and Virtuous Education of their Children: The only way wicked men
have to cut off the intail of Misery from their Families, and to secure their
Children from that Vengeance which their own sins have deserved, is to train
them up in Piety and Virtue; and the only way Good men have to entitle their
Children to those Temporal Blessings, wherewith God thinks fit to reward their
Virtues upon their Posterity, which is the best Inheritance they can leave
them, is to make them Good. The wicked Children of wicked Parents, have their
own and their Fathers sins to hasten and increase their punishments; and the
Righteous Children of Righteous Parents, have their own and their Fathers
Virtues to secure and to augment their rewards.

2. As for Children: What greater obligation than this could be laid on them to
avoid the evil Examples, and to imitate the Virtues of their Parents? The
Wickedness of their Fathers makes it more dangerous for them to be wicked; for
when wickedness is entailed, the punishment of wickedness is entailed too; and
the longer Judgment has been delayed, the nearer it is, and the more severe it
is like to be. The wicked Son of a wicked Father, cannot promise himself to
escape so well as his Father did, because his Father's sins, which he imitates,
calls for a more speedy Vengeance on him; either to put a stop to wickedness,
or to root out a wicked Family, and to pull down the Leprous house: But what an
encouragement is it to the Children of Righteous Parents to imitate their
Virtues, that they may inherit all the Blessings of their Fathers? We think it
a great advantage for Children to inherit the fruits of their Parents Industry;
but to inherit the rewards of their Virtues is much greater: And this none but
virtuous Children can do. A Prodigal Son may inherit the Estate of an
Industrious Father, but cannot keep it; but a wicked Son of a virtuous Father
forfeits his Inheritance.

And though some Good men meet with very little, or with no reward in this
world, nay suffer very severely for their Virtue; this is no discouragement to
their Children, but gives them reasonoble hopes to expect the more: For an
exemplary Virtue shall have its reward at one time or other, even in this
world; and if the Father had it not, the Son, and the Son's Son through all the
Line of a virtuous Succession shall; when Good men suffer, or miss of the
rewards of Virtue in this world, they have the greater rewards in Heaven, and
their Children on Earth.

3. To reward Good men, and to punish the Wicked in their Posterity, better
answers the Wise ends of Providence in this world, than the Personal rewards
and punishments of every particular Good and Bad man. I have already observed,
that there are very wise Reasons why some Bad men should be Prosperous, and
some Good men Afflicted in this world; and since this world is not the place of
Judgment, the Divine Wisdom does not require that every Good or Bad man should
be rewarded according to his works; but yet the Wisdom and Justice of
Providence does require, that Virtue should be rewarded, and Vice punished, and
that in such degrees, and in such a manner, as shall lay all reasonable
restraints on the Lusts and Vices of men, and encourage their Virtues. Now
Virtue is rewarded, and Vice punished, when it is rewarded or punished, if not
in the Persons, yet in the Posterity of Good or Bad men; which leaves room for
the trial of the Faith and Patience of Good men, and for the exercise of God's
Goodness and Patience to sinners, and for the Ministries of Bad men in the
service of Providence, and yet very effectually discourages Wickedness, and
encourages Virtue.

2dly. Another instance of the Wisdom of Providence is, That God very often
punishes sin with sin, and many times with sins of the same kind. Our daily
observation may furnish us with examples enough of it, which are visible and
publicly known; and it may be, there are few Sinners but know some which
concern themselves, which the rest of the world does not know: Thus God
punished the Murder and Adultery of David, with the Incest and Rebellion of
his Son Absalom; and thus Oppression is often punished with Oppression,
Adultery with Adultery, Murder with Murder, and Wicked men are made Plagues
and Scourges to each other.

And God thinks it no dishonor to the Holiness of his Providence to attribute
all such retributions to himself; for God can serve the Wise ends of his
Providence by the sins of men, without contributing to their sins; and it is
certain, there is not a fitter Punishment in the world for Sinners, than to
suffer the Evils they do; that is, to be punished by the very sins which they
commit.

Nothing more sensibly convinces them of a Just Providence than this; nothing
can give them a more just abhorrence of their sins, than to feel the evils and
mischiefs of them* nothing can more awaken and rouse their Consciences, than to
suffer the Evils which they have done. And one would reasonably think, nothing
should make them more afraid to do any Evil, which they are unwilling to
suffer: So that nothing could better serve the Wise ends of Providence to
convince men of a Divine Nemisis and Vengeance, to give them an abhorrence of
their sins, and to make them afraid to commit them.

3. Another instance of the Wisdom of Providence, is in so often disappointing
both our hopes and fears. When we are in the greatest expectation of some great
good, either we are disappointed in what we expected, or if we have what we
wished for, it does not answer our expectations; we find our selves deceived in
our enjoyments, and that it had been better for us if we had been without them.
And when we are terrified with the apprehensions of some great evil which is
just ready to fall on us, either the evil does not come as we feared, or it
proves no Evil, but a very great Good to us. This is so often every man's case,
that I need only appeal to your own Observations for the proof of it.

Now what more effectual way could God take to convince us, that we live in the
dark, and know not what is good for our selves; that we disturb our minds with
vain hopes, and with as vain fears; that it becomes us to leave all to God, and
to depend securely on his Providence, who overrules all things with a
Sovereign Will: That this is the only way to be easy and safe; to choose nothing
for our selves, not to prescribe to Providence, but to do our duty, and then
quietly expect what God will do.

Is it possible there should be a happier temper of mind than this? more
honorable for God, or more secure for our selves? Does any thing more become
Creatures? Is there any more perfect act of Religion, than to depend entirely
on God, without hopes or fears, in a perfect resignation to his Will, with a
full assurance of his protection? And could Providence more effectually
convince us of this, than to let us see by every days experience, how apt we
are to be mistaken, and to choose ill for our selves; that our wishes and
desires, were they answered, would very often undo us; and that we are saved
and made happy by what we feared? and why then should we desire, why should we
fear any longer? let us do our duty, and mind our own business, and leave God
to take care of the world, and allot our portion in it.

4thly, We may observe also, that God very often defers the deliverance of Good
men, and the punishment of the Wicked to the utmost extremity.

When Wicked Tyrants and Oppressors are at the height of their Pride and
Glory, and Good men are reduced to a hopeless state, beyond the visible relief
of any Human Power. This was the case of Israel in Egypt, when God sent Moses
to deliver them with a Mighty Hand, and an outstretched Arm. This was several
times their case in the days of the Judges, when they were oppressed by their
Enemies, and God raised up Saviors and Deliverers for them: Thus it was in the
days of Hezekiah, when God in one night destroyed the mighty Army of the
Assyrians: Thus it was in Queen Hester's days, when that Wicked Haman had
conspired the destruction of the Jewish Nation: And there want not Examples of
it in Christian Story: Never was there a fiercer Persecution of Christians,
than when God advanced Constantine to the Throne, and not only restored Peace
to the Christian Church, but made Christianity the Religion of the Empire. And
if the Wisdom of Providence consists in giving us wise Instructions, I am sure
this furnishes us with many.

When things are reduced to that extremity, as to be past Human relief, it
makes it visible to all the world, that it is God's doing. Where there is Force
against Force, and Counsels against Counsels, though Providence determines the
Event, Human Power and Counsels very often monopolize the Glory, and leave God
out; but when God does that, which men are so far from being able to do, that
they cannot think it possible to be done, this awakens a sense of an Invisible
Power, and makes the Divine Glory and Providence known to the world.

When God exposes his own Church and People to such a suffering state, and
threatens them with Final Ruin, it is a severe Summons to repentance, and warns
them not to trust in vain words, crying, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of
the Lord; for God will purge his own House, and no External Relation or
Privileges shall secure us from Vengeance, if we walk not worthy of that holy
vocation wherewith we are called.

But such Deliverances as these give us great reason never to despair; they
teach us, That no case is desperate, when God will save; and therefore the less
expectation we at any time have of Human Succors, the more earnestly ought we
to implore the Divine Protection, and learn to live upon Faith, and Trust in
God.

When Good men are reduced to such Extremities, it makes them more fervent and
importunate in their Prayers, more serious in their Repentance, more sensible
how much they stand in need of God; and such surprising and unexpected
Deliverances inflame their Devotions, make their Praises and Thanksgivings more
hearty and sincere; which gives great glory to God, and betters their own minds.

5thly, The sudden Revolutions of the world, and the various and unexpected
Changes of men's Fortunes, which is thought one great Calamity of Human Life, is
intended by God to instruct us in some necessary and excellent parts of Wisdom.

Some Crafty Politicians, like Mariners, steer their course as the Wind blows,
and change as it changes. They have no other Rule for their Actions, but to
guess, as well as they can, where their advantage or safety lies; but
Providence very often disappoints them in this, by such hasty changes, and
short turns, as make them giddy; and this teaches us to act by Rule, not by a
politic foresight of Events; our Rule can never deceive us; what is just, and
right, and true, is always safe; but our Politics may, for things may not go
as we expect.

The various changes of men's Fortunes teach us to treat all men with great
humanity; not to be insolent when we are prosperous; nor to despise our
Inferiors, for we know not what they, nor we may be, before we die. Civility*
and modesty of conversation is always safe, but pride and insolence may create
us Enemies, who may in time, how mean soever they are at present, be able to
return our insolence.

The Divine Providence so orders Human Affairs, as to teach us most of the
wisest Rules of Human Life, both for our Religious and Civil Conversation; and
this I take to be a manifest proof of the Wisdom of Providence.

6thly, The Wisdom of Providence is often seen in the wise mixture and
temperament of Mercy and Judgment; when he corrects, but not destroys; humbles,
but does not cast down; when he makes us sensible of his displeasure, and gives
us just reason to fear, but without despair; when, as the Psalmist speaks, He
lifts up, and casts down; keeps us under the discipline of hopes and fears, and
tries our Faith and Patience, and Submission, and both threatens and invites us
to repentance, by the interchangeable Scenes of prosperous and adverse Events.
Thus the Psalmist tells us it is with good men. The steps of a good man are
ordered by the Lord, and he delights in his way; though he fall, he shall not
utterly be cast down, for the Lord upholdeth him with his hand, 37. Psalm. 23,
24. Thus 94. Psalm 14, 15. For the Lord will not cast off his people, neither
will he forsake his inheritance; but judgment shall return unto righteousness,
and all the upright in heart shall follow it. And he proves this by his own
Experience. Unless the Lord had been my help, my soul had almost dwelt in
silence. When I said, my feet slippeth, thy mercy, O Lord, held me up, 17, 18,
Verses. An Example of this ye have 27. Isaiah. Has he smitten them, that is
Israel, as he smote those that smote him? He smote Israel, but not as he smote
the Enemies of Israel; Or is he slain, according to the slaughter of them that
are slain by him? In measure when it shoots forth will thou debate with it?
He stays his rough wind, in the day of his east wind. This is to sing to God
of Mercy, and of Judgment; to learn righteousness by the things which we
suffer, but still to trust in his help.

CHAP. IX.
Concerning those Duties which we owe to Providence.
I Have now finished what I intended with relation to the Nature and
Justification of Providence; and all that remains is to explain and enforce
those Duties which we owe to Providence.

Natural Religion is founded on the belief of a God, and a Providence; for if
there be no God, there is no Object of our Worship; if there be no Providence,
there is no Reason for our Worship. But a God, that made the world, and takes
care of all the Creatures that are in it, deserves the Praises and Adorations
of all. A God, who neither made the world, nor governs it, is nothing to us; we
have no relation to him, he has nothing to do with us, nor we with him; but a
God in whom we live, and move, and have our being, is the Supreme Object of our
love, and fear, and reverence, and hope and trust, and of all those religious
and devout Affections, which are due to our Maker and Sovereign Lord.

This is so plain, that it is enough to name it; but the nature and extent of
those Duties which we owe to Providence deserves a more particular
consideration.

As to instance in some of the chief.

1. To take notice of the Hand of God in every thing that befalls us; to
attribute all the Evils we suffer, and all the good things we enjoy, to his
Sovereign Will and Appointment: This is the foundation of all the other Duties
which we owe to Providence; and the general neglect of this makes us defective
in all the rest.

Now if the Divine Providence has the absolute government of all Events, you
must confess it your duty to take notice of Providence, and to acknowledge God
in every thing; for this is only applying the general Doctrine of Providence to
particular Events; without which particular application the general belief of a
Providence will and can have no effect upon us.

The Psalmist complains of those wicked men, who regard not the works of the
Lord, nor the operation of his hands, 28. Psalm. 5. And a great many such there
are, who have a general notion and belief of a Providence, but take no notice
of what God does, or take no notice of God in what is done. Most men are too
apt to attribute all Events to the immediate and visible Causes; and though at
other times they will own a God and a Providence, yet as to particular Events,
take as little notice of God, as if he had nothing to do in it. Such a belief
of Providence as this, is of no use at all in Religion; it neither gives glory
to God, nor has any influence upon the government of our lives.

But if we will own Providence to the true ends and purposes of Religion, we
must not content our selves with a general belief of God's governing the world,
but whatever our state and condition be, or whatever extraordinary good or evil
happens to us, we must receive all as from the Hand of God. If we are poor, we
must own this to be God's will and appointment that we should be poor; if we be
rich, we must consider, that it is God's Blessing which makes rich; if we lose
our Estates by Injustice and Oppression, we must acknowledge, as Job did, The
Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away: And whatever Evils and Miseries befall
us, we must say with good old Eli, It is the Lord, let him do what seems him
good. Or with David, I was dumb, and opened not my mouth, because it is thy
doings.

Without believing God's government of all Events, we deny a particular
Providence; and unless at the very time, when any good or evil befalls us, we
see and acknowledge God's hand in it, we can have no present affecting sense of
his Providence: All such Acts of Providence are lost, as far as our taking no
notice of them can lose them; God loses the glory of his Goodness, Mercy,
Patience, or Justice, and we lose those Divine Comforts and Supports, or those
Spiritual Instructions and Admonitions, which a due sense and acknowledgment of
Providence would have furnished us with.

And therefore let us accustom our selves in all Events, in the first place to
take notice of God, and his Providence; which will teach us how to behave our
selves in all Circumstances, and how to make the best and wisest use of
whatever happens; and it was necessary to premise this; for it is in vain to
teach men their duty to Providence, till they have learnt to attribute all
particular Events to the Providence of God; and to live under a constant sense
and regard of it.

2dly, When we have thus affected our minds with a just sense of the Divine
Providence in every thing that befalls us, we must in the next place take care
to compose our Souls to a quiet and humble submission to the Sovereign Will and
Pleasure of God in all things.

All men confess, that it is our duty to submit to the Will of God; and if all
the Events of Providence are God's doings, and what God does is his Will, as
the Scripture assures us it is, and Reason tells us it must be, unless God does
any thing against his own Will, then we must submit to the Providential Will of
God in all Events, as well as to the Commanding Will of God in obeying his Laws.

The Sovereign Authority and Dominion of God requires this of us; for we are
his, and he may dispose of our Condition and Fortune in the world, as he
pleases. The Absolute Power of God makes it both prudent and necessary; 9. Job
4.
For who has hardened himself against him, and prospered; that is, against his
Providential Will; for that whole Dispute is about Providence: And the Wisdom
and Goodness of God makes it both reasonable, and our interest, to submit to
him; for all his Providence, how severe soever they may appear, are ordered
for the good of those who do submit to him. So that it is our duty to submit,
because he is our Sovereign Lord; whether we will submit or no, we must suffer
his Will, because we cannot resist his Power; and there is no danger in
submitting to God, for he will consult our present and future Happiness, and do
better for us, than we could choose for our selves.

This is plain enough; but that which I principally intend, is to consider the
nature and various acts of that Submission which we owe to Providence, or to
the Providential Will of God; and I shall distinctly inquire, what submission
we owe to Providence under all the Evils, Afflictions, and Calamities of life,
and in those several states, conditions, and relations of life, which the
Providence of God places us in.

1. What submission we owe to Providence under all the Sufferings and
Afflictions which we meet with in this world. I do not mention a happy and
prosperous Fortune, for it requires no great submission to be prosperous, this
is what all men desire and choose; but to submit, is to make our own Wills, and
Desires, and Fears, and Aversions, and natural Passions and Affections, stoop
and yield to the Will of God, which there is no occasion for, but in a
suffering and afflicted state.

Now when we suffer such things as are very grievous to flesh and blood,
submission to the Will of God does not require that we should not feel our
Sufferings, that we should not be afflicted with them, that we should not
complain of them; for to submit to God is not to put off the sense and passions
of human Nature; it does not alter the nature of things, nor our opinions about
them: Afflictions are afflictions still, and will be felt, and though we must
bear them in submission to God, yet we must bear them as Afflictions can be
born, and as human Nature can bear them; with pain, and grief, and reluctance,
with sighs, and groans, and complaints, with vehement and importunate desires
and Prayers to God and man to help and deliver us.

We have frequent examples of this in Scripture: The Psalms of David as they
abound with all dutiful Expressions of Reverence and Submission to the Will of
God; so they are very full of complaints and of the most passionate sense of
Sufferings represented so as to be felt, in such a strain of moving Eloquence,
as not Art, but Afflicted Nature teaches. But we have one Example above all
others, and that is the Example of our Savior Christ, who suffered with Fear
and Reluctance, and with earnest Prayers to his Father, If it be possible, let
this cup pass from me.

The truth is, the greater our fears, and sorrows, and aversions are, the
greater is our submission to God: it may be thought a great weakness of Nature
to be so much afraid of our Sufferings; but it argues the greater strength of
Faith, and is a more glorious Victory over self, to make our very fears and
aversions submit to the Divine Will; for the more what we suffer is against our
own will, the greater is our submission to the Will of God. Submission to God
does not consist in courage and fortitude of mind to bear Sufferings, which men
may have without any sense of God; and which the profoundest Reverence for God
will not always teach us; but he submits, who receives the Bitter Cup and
drinks it, though with a Trembling heart and hand.

This ought to be observed for the comfort of those who have a very Devout
sense of God, and Reverence for his Judgments, but betray great weakness of
Mind, and disorders of Passions under their Sufferings; who are very impatient
of Pain, and have such soft and tender Passions, that every Affliction galls
them, and when they reflect upon these Disorders, this creates new and greater
Troubles to them; for they conclude, that all this is want of a due Submission
to the Will of God: But Religion was never intended to extinguish the Sense and
Affections of Nature, to reconcile us to Pain, or to make all things
indifferent to us; and while there is any thing that we love, it will be
grievous to part with it; and while there is any thing that we fear, it will be
grievous to suffer it. Religion will rectify our Opinions of things, and cure
our fondnesses, and set bounds to our Passions; but when all these flattering,
or frightful disguises are removed, which magnified the Good or Evil that is in
things, yet Good and Evil they are, and will excite in us either troublesome or
delightful Passions; and this will exercise our Submission to God, to part with
what we love, and to suffer what we fear; and were not this the case, there
were no use of Submission.

To explain this in a few words, let us consider how that man must suffer, who
suffers with Submission to God; and that is the Submission which we owe to
Providence. Now a man who suffers with Submission, must not reproach and
censure the Divine Providence, but think and speak honorably of God, how
hardly soever he deals with him; he may complain of what he suffers both to God
and men, but he must not complain of God: This was Job's Behavior; Naked came
I out of my mother's womb, and naked shall I return thither: the Lord gave, and
the Lord has taken away, and blessed be the name of the Lord: in all this Job
sinned not, nor charged God foolishly, I Job 21, 22. And the Prophet David was
an Example of the like Submission; I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because
thou did it, 39. Psalm 9. He submitted silently and patiently as to God's
hand, opened not his mouth against God, though he complains of the Wickedness
of men, and of the severity of his Sufferings; Deliver me from all my
transgressions, make me not the reproach of the foolish: remove thy stroke away
from me; I am consumed by the blow of thine hand, 8, 10.

To reproach and revile Providence, to fret against God, or as Job's Wife
advised him, to curse God, to be weary of his Government, and impatient to
think that we cannot resist, and cast off so uneasy a yoke; this is directly
contrary to Submission. Such men suffer God's Will because they cannot help it;
but they would Rebel if they could; those who are so outrageous against what
God does, and so impatiently angry with God for doing it, only want power to
stay his hand, and to pull him from his Throne.

Submission to God, is the Submission of our Wills to the Will of God: Now
though no man can absolutely choose sufferings; for suffering is a natural Evil,
and therefore not the object of a free choice; yet men may choose suffering
against the natural bias and inclination of their own wills in Subjection to
the will of God: Of this our Savior is a great Example, who expressed a great
aversion against suffering, Prayed earnestly, Father, if it be possible, let
this cup pass from me, nevertheless, not my will, but thy will be done, Our own
wills will draw back and recoil at suffering; For no affliction is for the
present joyous but grievous; but yet a will that is subject to God, will deny
it self, and choose that God's will should take place; And this is our
Submission to the Will of God in suffering; yet how uneasy soever it be to us,
we are so far from complaining against God, that we would not have it otherwise
when God sees fit it should be so; that though we do not, and cannot choose
sufferings, yet we choose that the Will of God should be done, though it be to
suffer.

Another act of Submission to God, is when we wait patiently on God, till he
think fit to deliver us; when notwithstanding all we suffer, our hope, and
trust, and dependence is still on God. To submit to God, is to submit in Faith
and Hope, to submit as to the Corrections and Discipline of a Father; for it is
impossible for any man to submit without Hope, as impossible as it is to be
contented with final Ruin. When we cast off our Hope in God, there is an end of
our Submission, then we shall come to that desperate conclusion, Behold, this
evil is of the Lord, why should I wait on the Lord any longer, 2 Kings 6. 33.
But never was there a greater expression of Submission than that of Job, Though
he slay me, yet will I trust in him: -- he also shall be my salvation, for a
hypocrite shall not come before him, 13. Job 15, 16. This the Psalmist has
fully expressed 27. Psalm 13, 14. I had fainted unless I had believed to see
the goodness of the Lord in the land of living. Wait on the Lord, be of good
courage, and he shall strengthen thine heart: wait I say on the Lord. To Hope
in the Mercy and Goodness of God, even when he strikes, to wait Patiently till
he will be Gracious, to make our complaints to him, and to expect our
Deliverance and Salvation only from him; this is to Submit to the Will of God,
to make his Will our Will, to attend all the motions of his Providence, as
patiently and diligently as a Servant does the commands of his Lord, as it is
elegantly represented, 123. Psalm 1, 2. Unto thee lift I up mine eyes, O thou
that dwell in the heavens! Behold! as the eyes of servants look upon the
hand of their masters, and as the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her
mistress; so our eyes wait upon the Lord our God, until that he have mercy upon
us.

This is that Submission which we owe to Providence, under all the Evils and
Calamities of Life; and if we would make this Submission easy and cheerful, we
must possess our Souls with a firm persuasion of the Wisdom and Goodness of
God: We must not look upon him a mere Sovereign and Arbitrary Lord; for to
submit to mere Arbitrary Will and Power, is, and will be, very grievous; but we
must represent God to our minds under a more lovely and charming Character, as
the Universal Parent, who has a tender and compassionate regard for all his
Creatures; Who does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men; who
corrects us for our profit, that we may be partakers of his holiness; and
proportions the severity of his Discipline, either to the ends of Public
Government, or to our Spiritual wants: Such an Idea of Providence as this, will
reconcile us even to Sufferings, when we know they are good for us, and
intended for our good: When we know that it is a kind hand which strikes, we
shall kiss the Rod, and submit to Correction with as equal a mind, as we do to
the prescription of a Physician, how severe the methods of cure are. Were our
minds thoroughly possessed with this belief, how easy would it make us under
some of the most severest trials. Nothing indeed can make pain easy, for that
is matter of sense; but a good persuasion of the Providence of God, will
fortify our minds to bear it; and that is much the same thing, whether our
pains be less, or our minds stronger. But as for other Afflictions, which
depend very much upon Opinion, and afflict us more or less, as we apprehend
them, a firm belief of the Wisdom and Goodness of God, who inflicts them on us,
will in a great measure cure the pain and trouble of them.

We have, it may be, lost some part of our Estates, a dear Friend, or near
Relation; a Child, it may be an only Child, but all these are uncertain
Comforts; and when the case is doubtful, whether it be good for us, or not; we
ought in all reason to acquiesce in the Divine Will, and conclude, that is best
for us which God does; because he is infinitely wiser than we are, and more
concerned for our happiness, if we will make a wise use of his Providence, than
we our selves are.

Nay, this will teach us an implicit faith in God beyond our own prospect of
things; though we can no more guess the reasons of our Sufferings, than Job
could; yet while we believe God to be wise and good, we are secure; a wise God
can never mistake, and a good God will consult our happiness, and that is
reason enough in the most difficult and perplexed cases to submit patiently to
Providence.

Secondly, There is a submission also due to the Will of God, with respect to
the several states, conditions, and relations of life, which the Divine
Providence has placed us in. We can no more choose our own state and condition
of life, than we can choose, when and where to be born, what our Parents shall
be, how they shall educate us, and dispose of us in the world, what success we
shall have, what Friends, or what Enemies we shall meet with, what Changes and
Revolutions we shall see, either in our private Fortunes, or in public
Affairs. Nothing of all this is at our own choice, and therefore whatever our
Circumstances are, any farther than it is our own fault, they are not imputable
to us.

Now since we cannot choose our own Fortune, nor order Events as we please, the
only submission we can owe to God in such cases, is humbly to acquiesce in what
God does, and faithfully to discharge the duties which belong to that state,
and condition, and circumstances of life, which the Providence of God has
placed us in.

This is to submit to the Providential Will of God, to submit to the disposals
of Providence; and to submit to God's disposal, is to act in that sphere and
station which Providence assigns us, and to comply with the Laws of it. And
thus the Providence of God, though it be not the rule of our Actions, yet may
change our duty, and must do so, as it changes our condition; for every
condition and relation having peculiar duties belonging to it, our duty must
change, as our condition does. The duties of Princes and Subjects, of
Magistrates and private Men, of a low and mean, and of an exalted and plentiful
Fortune, of Parents and Children, of Masters and Servants, are of a very
different nature; and as these relations change, our duty must change with
them; and when we conform our selves to our condition, we submit to Providence,
which gives us no new rules of life; but may impose new duties on us, by
putting us into a new state.

This ought to be carefully considered, because there are dangerous extremes on
both sides. Some think the visible appearances of Providence are sufficient to
alter our duty without changing our state and relations; that the Successes of
Providence will justify such Actions, as neither the Laws of God nor men will
justify; and that to serve Providence, when a fair opportunity is put into
their hands, they may dispense with the most known and unquestionable duties:
Others have such a just abhorrence of this, which overturns all Divine and
Human Laws, that they run into the contrary extreme; and for fear of allowing
that Providence can change our duty, and alter the nature of good and evil,
they will not allow, that Providence can so much as change our relations and
state of life, and with such a change of our condition, change our duty: For no
man can deny, but that if our condition and relations are changed, our duty
must change too.

To give a plain Example of this. When Saul pursued David, and God delivered
Saul into David's hands while he was asleep in the Cave; The men of David said
unto him, behold the day of which the Lord said unto thee, Behold I will
deliver thine enemy into thine hand, that thou may do to him, as it shall
seem good to thee. Here is an Argument from Providence to justify David's
killing Saul, whom God had so wonderfully delivered into his hands; but David
did not think that Providence would justify him against a Divine Law;
Providence gave him an opportunity to kill Saul, but the Divine Law forbad him
to take it; for Saul was his King still, and he was his Subject. And therefore
He said unto his men, the Lord forbid that I should do this thing unto my
Master, the Lords anointed, to stretch forth my hand against him, seeing he is
the Lord's anointed, 1 Samuel 24. 4, 6. The same Answer David gave to Abishai,
when he found Saul the second time sleeping in the Trench, And Abishai said to
David, God has delivered thine enemy into thine hand this day; now therefore
let me smite him, I pray thee, with the spear, even to the earth at once, and I
will not smite him the second time. And David said to Abishai, destroy him not;
for who can stretch forth his hand against the Lord's anointed, and be
guiltless? 1 Samuel 26. 8, 9. Providence had not unkinged Saul, nor made David
King; that is, it had not altered the relation, and therefore could not absolve
him from the duties of his relation, from those duties which a Subject owes to
his Prince, and therefore could not justify the killing him.

This shows, that the Divine Providence cannot alter the Rules of Action,
without altering our Condition, and Relations, and Circumstances of Life; and
where it does so, it must of necessity change our Duty; for different Relations
and Conditions require different Duties: When a man of a Servant becomes a
Master, or of a Subject a Prince, his Duties and Obligations must change with
his Relations, for such relative Duties are annexed to Relations, and belong to
particular persons, only as invested with such Relations; and as the person
changes his Relations, so the Duties he owes, and the Duties which are owing to
him, must change likewise.

It is a vain pretense in this case to set up the Laws of God against our
submission to Providence; for we do not oppofe the Providence of God against
his Laws. The Laws of God prescribe us the Rules of our Duty in all Conditions
and Circumstances of Life; the Providence of God chooses our condition for us,
and that directs us what Laws we are to observe, what Duties we owe, and to
whom: So that there is and can be no dispute about the Rules of Duty; the
Duties of all Conditions and Relations are fixed and certain; the only dispute
that can be, is this, Whether, when our Condition and Relations are changed,
they are changed by God? and whether we must submit to the Providence of God in
such a Change, by what means soever such a Change is brought about? If all the
private and public changes of men's state and condition are directed and
governed by God, and are his Will and Doings, as I have already proved; if we
must submit to Providence, we must submit to that state and condition which
Providence places us in: For there is no other way of submitting to Providence.

And since we cannot choose our own Fortune, much less govern Kingdoms and
Empires; since God keeps all these Events in his own hands, it would be very
hard, if we must not submit to the condition which Providence chooses for us;
that when God allots us our condition, it should be unlawful for us to do what
our condition requires to be done: For if our present condition and
circumstances of life do not determine our duty, it is impossible ever to know
what our duty is.

But there are some material Questions concerning our submission to Providence,
with respect to our several states and conditions of life, which deserve to be
considered.

1. As first, Whether it be consistent with our submission to Providence, to
endeavor to better our Fortune, and to change our state of life. Now this
there can be no doubt of in general, though I fear many men are to blame in it.
Submission to Providence does not forbid a poor man to enrich himself, when he
can do it by honest and prudent Arts; for though God allots every man his
portion in the world, yet he has reserved to himself a liberty of changing men's
Fortunes, as they deserve, and as he sees fit. That it often is so, experience
tells us; we see men rise from low and mean beginnings to great riches, and
honor, and power; and since God has not forbid any man to advance his Fortune
by honest means, submission to Providence does not stake a man down to the low
and mean beginnings of life. This is the present reward and encouragement of
diligence, prudence, and virtue; That the diligent hand makes rich; that a man
who is diligent in his business, shall stand before princes, 3. Prove. 14, 16.
and shall not stand before mean men. That the merchandise of wisdom is better
than the merchandise of silver, and the gain thereof than fine gold: That
length of days is in her right hand, and in her left riches and honors.
Providence gives us many Examples of this nature to encourage all men's Industry
and Virtue, which, whether it advance their Fortunes or no, will make their
lives easy and happy, and better their minds, and make them useful to the
world, and a credit to a low Fortune; which may be better for them than to
change their station: Nay sometimes we see men of a noble and sprightly genius
come into the world in such mean circumstances, that they can hardly peep above
the Horizon; but by degrees they ascend, and grow brighter, and shine with a
Meridian luster, as if their obscure beginnings were intended on purpose to
inspirit the lower end of the world, and to show what Industry and Virtue can
do.

But though submission to Providence does not hinder us from using all honest
endeavors to better our Fortune; yet it makes us easy and contented in a low
Fortune, patient of disappointments, and not envious at the better Successes,
and greater Prosperity of others, especially of those who were our equals. All
which signifies no more, than quietly and submissively to suffer God to dispose
of our own and of other men's Fortunes, as he pleases. We may like some other
condition better than our own, but submission to Providence will make us easy
and contented with what we have; because it is God's Will, and what he orders
for us; and if we believe well of God, we must believe that it is good for us.
We may endeavor to increase our Estate, and get a little higher in the world;
but if our endeavors want success, we must take it patiently, and wait God's
time, and be contented to tarry where we are, if he does not think fit to
advance us; and not repine if he advance others before and above us; for it is
God's will to advance them, and it is not his will to advance us, and he has
wise Reasons for both, and we ought to acquiesce in his Will with an implicit
faith.

We may endeavor to better our Fortune, but we must not force our selves
upwards, must not be restless or vehement in our desires; must use no base or
wicked Arts to make our selves great. This is not to submit to God, but to
carve out our own Fortune, without any reverence to the Laws, and to the
Providence of God. Nothing will content such men, but to be rich and great, and
they will boggle at nothing that will make them so; God sometimes suffers such
men to prosper, but they do not prosper in submission to Providence; but if I
may so speak, they commit a rape upon Providence; and Providence deals with
them accordingly, and makes them the sport of Fortune: When they have taken a
great leap, it tosses them up, and keeps them hovering awhile in the Air, and
then flings them down into irrecoverable and unpitied Ruin. Though no men can
advance themselves whether God will or no, because all Events are in God's
hands; yet when men advance themselves by sin, the means of their advancement
is their own, not the Will of God; but submission to Providence requires us
quietly and contentedly to keep our station, till God sees fit to advance us,
at his own time, and in his own way.

2dly, What submission is due to God in the changes of our Fortune and
Condition, and that whether it be from low to high, or from high to low.

As for the first, There are few men who find any difficulty in submitting to
Providence, when it advances them to a higher station; but some few such there
are, who love their ease and retirement, and the conversation of their Friends,
and the security of a private life, before noisy greatness, and the endless
Fatigues of Public Ministries; who had rather enjoy themselves, and be Masters
of their own time, and thoughts, and actions, than to be admired and flattered
Slaves, to be envied by some, to be courted by others, to be Servants to all;
to be exposed to Censorious Tongues, to the Frowns of Princes, to the
Emulations of their Equals, and to all the changes and vicissitudes of Fortune.
It is not often that men of this temper are in any great danger of such
troublesome Honors; there are enough that snatch at them before they are
offered, to secure those who have no mind to have them; but sometimes this does
happen, and then it is matter of duty and conscience for men to sacrifice their
own ease and private satisfactions, to the Service of God, and of their
Country: And it would be as great a fault obstinately to decline such
Services, as the Providence of God call them to, as it is vanity and ambition
to affect them; for God has a right to the Services of all his Creatures, and
may employ them in what station he pleases; then we may certainly conclude,
that Providence chooses our station for us, when it is what we did not, and
would not choose for our selves.

2dly, But the greater and more common difficulty is in submitting to the other
Change, from a high to a low Fortune. There are many who suffer such a change
as this, though most of them may thank their own Lusts and Vices for it; but
there are very few who submit to it. I do not only mean, that they do not bear
such a change of Fortune with that patience and submission, which is due to the
Divine Will, when this change is manifestly owing to Providence, and not to
their own fault; but that they will not submit to their condition, that they
will not submit to be poor, when the Providence of God has made them so. Some
men, if they meet with misfortunes, will be sure to make their Creditors pay
for it, and be their own Carvers too, and raise an Estate out of forced and
Knavish Compositions. Others, though they are very poor, will not submit to the
state of Poverty, will not bring their minds to their condition; they cannot
stoop to the mean and frugal and industrious life of Poverty: They have always
lived well and easily, and they expect to live still as they have lived, and to
be maintained according to their quality, and the figure they have formerly
made in the world; they cannot work, but to beg they are not ashamed, though a
truly great mind would prefer the meanest employment before it; for that is no
dishonor to any man, to live by his own industry, when the Providence of God
has brought him low. All that I have now to say, is only this, that when men
are reduced to poverty, submission to Providence requires that they should
submit to their condition, imitate the humility, and modesty, frugality, and
industry of poor men, and not expect to live still, as rich men do; for charity
was never intended for the rich, nor to excuse the industry of the poor.

There is indeed great regard to be had to the honor of men's birth and
character: Those who have any humanity must needs be very tenderly and
compassionately affected to see men of great honor reduced to want, or forced
to mean and servile Employments to supply their wants; and we owe so much to
the modesty of Human Nature, and to a sense of Honor, to be as ready to defend
some men from meanness, as others from want; but yet submission to Providence
requires all men to comply with their condition, as far as their rank and
character, and the rules of decency will permit: That a man has been once rich,
is no reason why he should not work, or find out some honest, though mean way
of living, when he grows poor. This is certain, Those who do not submit to the
condition which Providence has put them into, and behave themselves as that
conditon requires, do not submit to Providence; and therefore if Providence
make us poor, we must consider not how we lived when we were rich, but how it
becomes a poor man to live.

3dly, There is another very material question, How far we must submit to
Providence; but the answer is very plain, We must submit as far as the
condition Providence puts us into requires our submission. Providence creates
no new duty, but by putting us into new circumstances; and what the
circumstances we are in make our duty, that is our submission to Providence,
and we owe no other submission.

As for instance; If a Thief breaks open my House, or robs me upon the Road,
submission to Providence does not hinder me from pursuing and taking him, and
recovering my own of him, and bringing him to punishment, if I can; for my
being robbed, lays no obligation upon me patiently to lose what is unjustly
taken away, if I have any honest way left of recovering it; nor of suffering
such a Criminal to escape, if I can bring him to punishment. And thus it is in
all the Injuries we receive from men; though we must own the Divine Providence
in whatever we suffer, yet submission to Providence requires no more of us,
than what the Laws of God and men require in such circumstances, and therefore
allows us to right our selves, as far as the Laws of God, and the Laws of men,
if they be just and equal, will allow us. But if the Providence of God should
put us into the hands of our Enemies, and make it necessary to contract with
them for our Lives and Liberties, we must humbly submit to Providence, which
brought us into this necessity, and religiously observe our Contracts, how
disadvantageous soever they are; because Providence has now altered our
condition, and brought us under new obligations.

This is the usual way whereby God brings about the great Changes and
Revolutions of the world, by such Power as forces a compliance, and translates
Kingdoms and Empires; and though nothing is more grievous than unjust force,
yet Nature teaches men to submit, when they cannot resist; and Power will
absolve us from all former obligations, unless in such cases as we are expressly
commanded by God not to submit to Power, though we sacrifice our lives for it;
and I know no such case, but the true Worship of God, and the Profession of our
Faith in Christ. We may defend our selves against private Injuries, as far as
Law and Justice will defend us; we may resist unjust and usurping Powers, as
long as we can resist; but the Providence of God which governs the world, makes
it lawful to submit, when we cannot resist; and when by such submissions new
Kingdoms are erected, and we are become the Subjects of new Powers, then
Providence has changed our Relations, and made it our duty to submit.

4thly, There is another Inquiry also of great moment, how our submission to
Providence under all our Sufferings and Changes of Fortune, requires us to
behave our selves toward men, who are the Causes and Instruments of such
Misfortunes. For if it be the will of God that we should suffer such things,
why should we be angry with the men who do them? why should we punish them? why
should we revenge our selves of them? when they only execute the Divine
Counsels, and do what God saw fit that we should suffer. Does not Joseph thus
excuse his Brethren for selling him into Egypt, that it was God who sent him
thither: And does not David for this reason forbear his revenge on Shimei, Let
him curse, for God has said unto him, Curse David?

But the answer to this is short and plain, that God's overruling men's
wickedness to serve wise and good ends, does not excuse their wickedness, nor
excuse them from the just punishments of their wickedness; the sin is their
own, though it be wisely ordered by God for our trial or correction; but the
wise Government of God makes no change in the nature of men's Actions, nor in
their Deserts: God himself will punish their wickedness, though he serves wise
ends by it, and has commanded men to do so; for no man sins by the will of God,
though no man suffers any thing but by God's will.

But yet Submission to Providence will greatly mitigate our Resentments, and
calm our Passions, and keep them within the bounds of Reason and Religion. When
we consider, that whatever we suffer is appointed for us by God; that how
wicked soever men are, we can suffer nothing by their wickedness, but what God
for wise Reasons sees fit we should suffer; this will satisfy us that we are
more concerned with God than with men; that tho Men be the Rod wherewith we are
scourged, it is God that strikes; and a Reverence for the Divine Judgments will
make us take less notice of the Instruments of our sufferings.

In short, Submission to Providence leaves us nothing to be angry with men for,
but their own wickedness; that we suffer, tho we suffer by their wickedness,
yet it is not so much their doings as God's, who orders these sufferings for
us, and without whose Order and Appointment no man can hurt us; and therefore
we must not be angry with men for our sufferings, but reverence God: Whatever
their Personal Hatred, or Malice, or Revenge be, how much soever they intend or
desire to do us hurt, we may securely despise them, as out of their reach, for
we are in the hands of God: And if our Sufferings are not owing to men, any
otherwise than as Instruments in God's hands, why should we be angry with men
for what we suffer? Why should we revenge our Sufferings on them, when we
suffer by the Will of God? We may be angry at their Wickedness, and at their
ill will to us, but humbly submit to our Sufferings, as the Will of God.

Now I need not say, how this will calm and temper our Passions, because it
leaves so little of self in our Anger and Resentments; let men be as angry with
Wickedness as they please, and punish it as it deserves, this is a Virtuous
Anger, and never transports men to excess; it is self-love which inflames our
Anger, and sharpens our Revenge; not that such Wickedness is committed, but
that we are the Sufferers by it; for men are never so angry in another man's
Cause, as they are in their own, tho the Wickedness, the Affront, the Injury is
the same; but Personal Injuries and Affronts are most provoking; that is, we
love our Selves more than we hate Wickedness, when our Anger is excessive.

But now if men have nothing to do with us, nor we with them, as to the case of
Suffering; if all this be ordered and appointed by God, here is little room for
Personal Resentments; for that we suffer by their Wickedness, is God's doings,
and therefore we have nothing to be angry with them for, but that they are
wicked; and then tho our own Sufferings will give us a greater sense and
abhorrence of their Wickedness, and make us more personally concerned to punish
it; yet our Passions will be more gentle and easy, the more we attribute our
Sufferings to God, and the less to Men.

Secondly, Another Duty we owe to Providence is, An entire Trust and Dependence
on God. The state of a Creature is all Dependence; and Faith, and Hope, and
Trust, are the Virtues of a dependant state, and can in reason have no other
Object but that Being on whom we depend, the great Creator and Governor of the
world, in whom we live, move, and have our being. All other Dependancies are
vain, because none else can help us; but God has all Events in his hands, he
can help us, if he pleases; and he will help us, if we trust in him.

The Scripture abounds with Exhortations to trust in God, with promises to
those who do trust in him, with Examples of God's Care and Protection of those
good men, who make him their only Hope and Trust; but yet the Duty it self
needs some Explication, and therefore I shall consider the Nature of this Hope
and Trust, and what are the various Acts of it, or wherein the Exercise of it
consists.

1. The Nature of this Faith, and Hope, and Trust in the Divine Providence.
What it is to hope, and trust, and depend on God or Men, we all know and feel;
but the Question is, What it is we must trust God for, and how far we must
depend on him? For must we believe, That God will do every thing for us, which
we trust in him to do? If, suppose, we have a Child or a Friend dangerously
sick, must we firmly believe that God will spare their lives, and restore their
health, if we trust in him to do it? Must a Merchant confidently expect a safe
and advantageous Voyage, if he trust in God for it? Has God any where promised
to give us whatever we trust in him for? Or does the Nature and Reason of
Providence infer any such thing? And yet what does Trust in God signify, if we
must not depend on him for those good things which we want, and desire, and
trust him for? What do all the Promises made to Hope and Trust in God signify,
if they give us no security that we shall obtain our Desires of God? Nay,
indeed, how can any man hope and trust in God, when he has no assurance that he
shall obtain what he hopes for? I doubt not but such thoughts as these make
most men so distrustful of Providence, that tho they talk of trusting in God,
they trust in him without hope, or any comfortable expectations, unless they
have some more visible assurances to rely on. This makes most men's hopes ebb
and flow, as their external circumstances change; if they are prosperous, and
have great numbers of Friends, and have their Enemies at their feet, then they
are full of hope, and can trust securely in God, when they have the means of
helping themselves in their own hands, and see no body that can hurt them; but
if their condition be perplexed and calamitous, and they see no prospect of
human relief, their spirits sink, and as much as they talk of Providence, and
Trusting in God, they find no support in it.

To understand this aright, wherein the Glory of God, and our own Peace and
Security is so nearly concerned, we must consider, That our Faith, and Hope,
and Trust in God, must either rely on the Word and Promise of God; or on the
general Belief and Assurance of his Care of us, and of the Goodness and Justice
of his Providence; as to trust in men, is either to trust their Promise or
their Friendship.

1. As for the first, we may and ought securely to rely on the Promises of God,
as far as they reach, for he who has promised, is able also to perform. But
then we must have a care of expounding Temporal Promises to a larger sense than
God intended, or than Providence ordinarily makes good, which calls the Truth
of God, or his Providence, into question, and discourages our Faith and Trust
in God; when we see Events not to answer God's Promises, nor our Expectations.

To state this matter plainly, we must proceed by degrees, and distinguish
between the Promises made to States and Kingdoms, and to Private and Single
Men, or rather to men in their private and single capacities.

Most of the Temporal Promises under the Law of Moses, concerned the Public
State of the Jewish Church and Nation; that if they walked in the Laws and
Statutes of God, he would bless them with great Plenty and Peace, or give them
Victory over their Enemies: That he would have respect unto them, and make them
fruitful and multiply them, and establish his Covenant with them, 26. Lev.
which are Public and National Blessings: And tho there is a great difference
between the Jewish and Christian Church, with respect to Temporal Promises, yet
there does not seem to be any great difference between a Christian Nation, and
the Jewish State. When a Nation has embraced Christianity, and the Church is
incorporated into the State, and true Religion and Virtue is encouraged, and
Vice suppressed; such a Religious Nation has a title to all the National
Blessings which God promised to the Jewish Nation, if they observed his Laws;
for Solomon's Observation is universally true, That righteousness exalts a
nation, but sin is the reproach of any people: And excepting what was typical
in the Jewish State, there is much the same reason for God to protect and bless
a Religious Christian Nation; viz. for the public encouragement of Religion,
and for the reward of a National Piety and Virtue; and therefore as the
Christian Church inherits all those Spiritual Blessings which were typified in
the Jewish Church; so a Christian Nation succeeds to all those Temporal
Promises which were made to the Jewish State, or else all these Promises of the
Law would be of no use to us now.

So that these National Promises we may securely rely on as to their utmost
extent and signification; and I am satisfied, there cannot be one Example
given, wherein these Promises have failed: God has oftentimes suffered a wicked
Nation to be prosperous to scourge their wicked Neighbors, but he never
suffers a truly righteous and religious Nation to be oppressed.

Now the largest and most comprehensive Promises in Scripture are of this
nature, such as concern the public state of Kingdoms and Nations; but even in
the most flourishing state of the Jewish Church the case of particular men was
very different; some bad men were prosperous, and good men afflicted; and
therefore those Promises which concern good men in their private and single
capacities, must be more cautiously expounded to a more restrained and limited
sense, accommodated to the different states and conditions of good men in this
world; and to their different seize in Virtue. As for example.

When Solomon tells us of Wisdom, Length of days is in her right hand, and in
her left riches and honor, 3. Prove. 16. Will any man expound this to signify,
That all wise men, who are truly religious and prudent, shall live till old
age, and attain to riches and honors? Did God then intend that there should be
no different ranks and degrees of men in the world? that there should be no
poor men as well as rich? or did he intend that no poor men should be wise?
Wisdom indeed will advance a Prince to great riches and honor, as Solomon
tells us his Father David instructed him; He taught me also, and said unto me,
Let thine heart retain my words, keep my commandments, and live. Get wisdom,
get understanding: Forget her not, neither decline from the words of my mouth.
Forsake her not, and she shall preserve thee; love her, and she shall keep
thee. Wisdom is the principal thing, therefore get wisdom; and with all thy
getting get understanding. Exalt her, and she shall promote thee; she shall
bring thee to honor when thou do embrace her; she shall give to thine head
an ornament of grace, a crown of glory shall she deliver to thee, 4. Prove. 4 --
9. This was the best Advice that could be given to a young Prince to make him
rich and great; for religious Wisdom will certainly advance him beyond all the
Politics of Machiavel; and if Solomon, in imitation of his Father David,
directs his Instructions to his Children, and particularly to that Son who was
to inherit his Throne, as he himself seems to intimate, 1, 2, 3. Verses, we
must not conclude, that because he tells his Son, that Wisdom will make him a
glorious Prince, that therefore Wisdom will advance all men to riches and
honor: Wisdom will give a luster even to poverty it self, and sometimes
advances the poor to riches and honors, and increases the riches and honors
of the Rich and Honorable; but we must not always expect this, much less
pretend a promise for it; for there always were, and always will be, poor wise
men.

Thus when the Wiseman tells us, That the hand of the diligent makes rich, 10.
Prove. 4. And see thou a man diligent in his business, he shall stand before
kings, he shall not stand before mean men, 22. Prove. 29. No man can think, that
the meaning is, that every diligent man shall be rich; for there are such mean
Employments, as can never raise an Estate by the greatest industry; much less
can we think, that diligence in such mean Employments shall make men known to
Princes; or that all diligent men, whatever their Employment or Profession be,
shall serve Kings: This is impossible in the nature of the thing, and therefore
cannot be the meaning of these Promises. And yet such kind of Promises as
these, signify a great deal for the encouragement of Wisdom, and Industry, and
Virtue; not that every wise, and prudent, and diligent man shall be rich and
honorable, but that every man shall find the rewards of Religion and Virtue
proportioned to his capacities and state of life; and that this is God's way of
promoting men, when he advances them in favor, and good will to them; and
therefore this is the only way wherein we must expect the blessing and
protection of God.

But then there are some Promises which are equally made to all good men, and
they are a sure foundation of our hope and trust, if we be truly good men, in
all conditions. As that God will never leave them, nor forsake them, 13. Hebr.
5. That he will always take care of them, as a Father takes care of his
Children. That tho he may not think fit to advance them in the world, yet he
will provide Food and Raiment for them; as our Savior proves by many
Arguments, 6. Matthew. 25 -- 34. Take no thought for your life, what ye shall
eat, or what ye shall drink, nor yet for your bodies, what ye shall put on; is
not the life more than meat, and the body than raiment? and will not that God,
who has given us our Lives, and our Bodies, give us what is absolutely
necessary for their support? Behold the fowls of the air, they sow not, neither
do they reap, nor gather into barns, yet your heavenly father feeds them; are
ye not much better than they? -- Therefore take no thought, saying, what shall
we eat, or what shall we drink, or wherewith shall we be clothed? (for after
all these things do the Gentiles seek) for your heavenly father knows ye have
need of all these things. But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his
righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you.

This is an absolute Promise, and gives absolute security to good men; that if
they take care to serve God, God will take care to feed and cloth them, either
by blessing their ordinary prudence and industry, or when that fails, by
extraordinary Providence, by providing for them without their care or labor,
as he feeds the Fowls of the Air, who neither sow, nor reap: And to name but
one Promise more, which is our security in all conditions; St. Paul assures us,
That all things work together for good to them that love God, 8. Romans 28. which
is such a general security, as is a foundation for an universal hope in God:
That though we cannot know in every particular case, what God will do for us,
yet we certainly know, that he will order all things for our good.

Thus far we have the Promises of God to trust to; That God will always take
care of us, and in particular, that he will provide Food and Raiment for us,
which is all that he has absolutely promised to good men, and is all that our
Savior allows us absolutely to pray for; Give us this day our daily bread: And
this, good men, whose faith does not fail, but against all discouragements
trust securely in God's provision, may ordinarily expect from God, even in an
afflicted and persecuted state, where Famine it self is not the persecution;
for I dare not extend this so far as to say, that no good man shall ever die of
want; for some extraordinary Cases are always excepted out of the most general
and absolute Promises relating to this life, and reserved to the government of
the Divine Wisdom. But good men may have Food and Raiment, and yet be exposed
to many inconveniences and sufferings; and therefore for our farther security
we are assured, That all things shall work together for good to them that love
God.

2. And this brings me to consider, what it is to trust in God in particular
cases, when we have no particular promises what God will do for us in such
cases, but only a general assurance of God's care of us, and of the Wisdom,
Justice and Goodness of his Providence. We must particularly trust in God for
our daily Provisions, for our preservation from any present evils which
threaten us; for the success of our undertakings in all the particular Actions
and Concernments of our lives; but what can such a particular trust mean, or
what foundation is there for it, when we have no particular promises, that God
will protect or succeed us in such particular cases? and notwithstanding God's
care of us, and the Justice and Goodness of his Providence, he may not answer
our expectations in such cases, but may order things quite otherwise than we
desire?

Now this, I confess, were an unanswerable difficulty, did a particular trust
in God signify a firm belief and persuasion, that God will do that particular
thing which I rely and depend on him for; for no man can have any reason to
believe this, or in this sense to trust in God without an express Promise, or
some private Revelation: Now it is certain, there are no such particular
Promises, which we can with any reason apply to our selves, contained in
Scripture; and private Enthusiasms are a dangerous pretense; the dreams of
Self-love, and the Visions of an heated Imagination.

I grant, that under the Law there were such particular Promises, and
particular Revelations made to good men, which were a sure foundation for a
particular faith and trust in God, as to some particular Events; especially as
to the Events of War; which were commonly undertaken by God's express Command,
managed by his Direction, with a certain promise of success; as is evident in
the Wars of Moses, and Joshua, and the Judges; and in After-ages God did the
same thing, either by his Oracle of Vrim and Thummim, or by his Prophets.

But there is no such thing among us now; and therefore such a faith and trust
in God we cannot have, nor does God expect it from us; we have nothing to
depend on as to the certainty of Events, but must trust to that assurance we
have of God's care of us, and of the Wisdom and Goodness of his Providence, and
therefore must consider what trust and dependence that is which we owe to
Providence.

Now to trust Providence, is not to trust in God, that he will do that
particular thing for us which we desire; but to trust our selves and all our
concernments with God, to do for us in every particular case which we recommend
to his care, what he sees best and fittest for us in such cases.

The difference between these two is very plain; and I think every one will
confess, that such a general trust and affiance in God is a much more excellent
virtue, and does much more honor to the Divine Nature, than merely to trust
his Promise, which secures us of the Event. To rely on God for the performance
of his Promise, does honor to his Truth and Faithfulness; but to trust God to
choose our condition for us, to do for us either what we desire, or what he
likes better; argues such an entire dependence on God, and an absolute
resignation to his Will, with a perfect assurance of his Wisdom and Goodness,
that it is impossible a Creature can express a greater veneration for the
Divine Perfections. I am sure, we do not think, that any man does us so much
honor by taking our word for what we expressly promise to do for him, as that
man does, who commits all his Concernments with a secure confidence to our
disposal, without knowing what we intend to do.

But for a more particular explication of this, let us consider, what this
trust in God signifies, and what security it gives us.

1. What this trust in God signifies: since it does not signify an assurance,
that God will do what we desire, what is the meaning of it? Now this signifies,

1. That all the Good we hope for, or expect, we expect from God alone; that we
have no other reliances and dependences but only on God: though we justly value
the kindness of our Friends, and the Patronage and Protection of Princes and
powerful Favorites, and thank God when he raises up such Friends and Patrons
to us, yet our entire trust and hope is in God: That since we know that all
Events are in God's hands, we are sure none can help us but by God's
appointment, and we desire to be at the disposal of none but God; and therefore
in Scripture our trust in God is always opposed to our trust in men, in
Princes, in Human Counsels, Policy, or strength; It is better to trust in the
Lord, than to put confidence in man; it is better to trust in the Lord, than to
put confidence in Princes, 118. Psalm 8, 9 Now know I, that the Lord saves his
anointed, he will hear him from his holy heaven, with the saving strength of
his right hand. Some trust in chariots, and some in horses, but we will
remember the name of the Lord our God: they are brought down and fallen, but we
are risen and stand upright, 20. Psalm 6, 7, 8. All wise men are greatly
satisfied and pleased to see the probable means and instruments of their safety
and defense, because God ordinarily works by means; but Good men know that they
are but instruments in God's hands, and no Wise man puts his trust in the
instruments, be they never so good, but in the Workman. Thus much our trust in
God must necessarily signify, that we have no reliance but only on God, who is
the Supreme Disposer of all things; that we depend as entirely on him, as if
there were no second and intermediate Causes, which are to be employed and
used, but not to be the final Objects of our trust.

2dly. Our trust in God signifies our absolute dependence on the Wisdom, Power,
and Goodness of God to take care of us: It is a committing our selves to God,
putting our selves absolutely into his hands, with a full persuasion that he
will do what we desire, or do what shall be better for us; that he will answer
our requests, or deny them with greater Wisdom and Goodness than he could grant
them.

All men must grant that this is a perfect trust in God, and such a trust and
dependence as we owe to Providence; for if God Govern the World, and take care
of all his Creatures with infinite Wisdom and Goodness, does it not become all
reasonable Creatures to give up themselves securely to the Government of
Providence? If we believe that infinite Wisdom and Goodness takes care of us,
what need we know any more? Would we desire any thing else, or can we wish for
any thing better than what infinite Wisdom and Goodness can do for us? or would
we have any thing which infinite Wisdom and Goodness does not think fit to give
us?

This indeed does not give us that security which some men desire, that we
shall never suffer those particular evils which we fear, and which we see
coming upon us; or that we shall obtain some other blessings which we are
passionately fond of; but it gives us a much better security than this, that we
shall have always what is good for us; which is more than we can promise our
selves, should God always grant our own desires.

This gives us a most profound rest and peace of mind, delivers us from all
careful and solicitous thoughts for times to come, which are many times more
terrible than the evils we fear; it teaches us to do our Duty with the best
prudence and industry we can, but to leave all Events to God's disposal; to
make known our requests to God, and to cast all our care upon him, for he
cares for us. It will not make us wholly unconcerned and indifferent whatever
happens, because the natures of things are not equal or alike indifferent;
Riches and Poverty, Health or Sickness, Honor or Disgrace, War or Peace,
Plenty or Famine, cannot be alike indifferent to any man who has his senses
about him; but it will make us quiet and patient under all Events, and help us
to bear the most adverse Fortune with such an unbroken greatness of mind, as is
natural to a firm and steadfast Trust and Hope in God. This is properly to trust
Providence, not to trust that God will do every thing for us which we desire,
which is to command and govern, or at least to direct Providence, not to trust
it; but to live securely under the Care and Protection of God, without
disturbing our selves with unknown and future events, in a confident assurance
that we are safe and happy in God's hands.

2dly. Tho our Trust in God does not signify an absolute security what God will
do for us, yet it is the most certain way to obtain whatever we wisely and
reasonably desire of God: When we trust in God, he reserves to himself a
liberty to judge whether it be good for us; but if what we desire be good for
us, our trust and dependence on God will engage Providence on our side.

Trust in God refers our Causes to him to judge for us, and to do what he sees
fit; and we have God's Word and Promise for it, That if we do trust in him, he
will take care of us, that we shall want nothing that is good, and shall be
delivered from all evil; 31. Psalm. 21, 22. O how plentiful is thy goodness,
which thou have laid up for them that fear thee, and that thou have prepared
for them that put their trust in thee before the sons of men; thou shall hide
them privily by thy own presence, from the provoking of all men; thou shall
keep them secretly in thy Tabernacle from the strife of tongues. Thus 37. Psalm.
40, 41. The salvation of the righteous comes of the Lord, who is also their
strength in the time of trouble. And the Lord shall stand by them and save
them, he shall deliver them from the ungodly, and shall save them because they
put their trust in him. The whole 91 st. Psalm is so plain and full a proof of
this, that I need name no more: To trust in God, is called dwelling in the
secret place of the most high, or under the defense and protection of the most
high; that is, such a man puts himself under God's protection, and he that does
so, shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty; that is, he shall defend thee
under his wings, and thou shall be safe under his feathers; his faithfulness
and truth shall be thy shield and buckler: And the Psalmist particularly
reckons up most of the evils which are incident to human life, and promises
security against them all; Because thou have made the Lord, which is my refuge,
even the most high, thy habitation, there shall no evil befall thee, neither
shall any plague come nigh thy dwelling. This Psalm indeed is a Prophecy of our
Savior, and in the height and latitude of the expressions is applicable only
to him, but yet it gives a general security to all who trust in God, of
Protection from all evil. This no man can promise himself, who does not trust
in God; for how is Providence concerned for them who expect nothing from it?
Nay, this is a reason why such men should be disappointed and fall into misery,
to convince them that God does govern the world, and that no human Strength or
Policy can save them: But Trust in God makes us the Subjects and the Care of
Providence; for if God does govern the world, none so much deserve his
Protection, as those who commit themselves to his Care. A Good Man will not
deceive or forsake those who depend on him, much less will a Good God.

Thirdly, Another Duty we own to Providence, is Prayer; to ask of God all those
Blessings and Mercies which we need. The universal practice of all Nations who
owned a God, and that Natural Impulse all men find to seek to God in their
distress, shows what the sense of Nature is; but yet some of the Ancient
Philosophers were much puzzled how to reconcile Prayer with their Notions of
Necessity and Fate: and indeed, were Providence nothing else but a Necessary
Chain of Causes, or Fixed and Immutable Decrees, there would be no great
Encouragement to Pray to God, who upon this supposition cannot help us, no more
than he can alter Destiny and Fate: but if God governs the world with as great
Liberty and Freedom as a wise and good man governs his Family, or a Prince
governs his Kingdoms, there is as much reason to pray to God, as to offer up
our Petitions to our Parents, or to our Prince; for if we must receive all from
God, what imaginable reason is there, that we should not ask every thing of him.

But it will be necessary to discourse this matter more particularly; for we
live in an Age wherein men are very apt to reason themselves out of all
Religion, and to form such Notions of God and his Providence, as make it
needless, nay, absurd, to worship him.

The Apostle tells us, That he that comes to God, must believe that he is, and
that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him, 11. Heb. 6. No man can
be a devout Worshipper of God, who does not believe that there is a God to
worship, and that this God does take care of mankind, and that he has a
peculiar Favor for those who worship him; that he is a Rewarder of them that
diligently seek him: For if God neither take any care of us, or take no more
care of those who worship him, than of those who do not, there is no just
reason can be given, why any man should worship him. But the Apostle in this
supposes, That to believe there is a God, and that he governs the world, and
that we shall be the better for worshipping, is a reasonable Foundation for
Religious Worship; and therefore such Notions of God and his Providence, as
allow no peculiar Rewards and Benefits to Worshippers, are certainly False, how
Philosophical soever they may appear, and Impious too, because they shut all
Religious Worship out of the world.

And yet some men can by no means understand for what reason they should pray
to God: they comply with the Superstitious Customs of the Country, to avoid
Scandal and Public Censure, but think they might as well let it alone, as for
any advantage they hope for by their Prayers: And I am very much of their mind,
that they had as good not be present at Prayers, as not to pray; for no man can
pray to any advantage, who despises Prayer: It will therefore be highly
necessary plainly to state this matter, and to show you,

That the belief of the Divine Providence lays the strongest Obligation on us
to pray to God.

The Scripture-Proofs of this are so plain, that they cannot be avoided; and so
well known, that I need not at large repeat them. There is no Duty we are more
frequently commanded, none we are more earnestly exhorted to, than to pray to
God; we have the Examples of all good men for it, and of Christ himself, who
spent whole nights in Prayer; and we have the encouragement of as express
Promises as any in Scripture, That if we pray to God, he will hear and answer
us; which is all the Encouragement we can desire for our Prayers. As the
Psalmist speaks; O thou that hear prayers, unto thee shall all flesh come,
65. Psalm. 2. To thee they shall pray, because thou hear Prayers. For thou,
Lord, art good, and ready to forgive, and plenteous in mercy to all them that
call upon thee. In the day of my trouble will I call upon thee, for thou will
answer me, 86. Psalm. 5, 7. The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him,
to all that call upon him in truth. He will fulfill the desire of them that fear
him; he also will hear their cry, and will save them, 145. Psalm. 18, 19. But
nothing can be more express than our Savior's Promise; Ask, and it shall be
given unto you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto
you: For every one that asks, receives; and he that seeks, finds; and to
him that knocks, it shall be opened, 7. Matt. 7, 8.

And what great things are attributed in Scripture to the Power of Prayer? St.
James assures us, That the effectual fervent prayer of the righteous man
avails much; and proves it from the Example of Elias, who was a man subject
to like passions as we are, and he prayed earnestly that it might not rain, and
it rained not on the earth by the space of three years and six months; and he
prayed again, and the heavens gave rain, and the earth brought forth fruit, 5.
James 17, 18. And all those Wonders which the Apostle to the Hebrews attributes
to Faith, belong to this Prayer of Faith, 11. Heb. 32, 33, 34. For this reason
Jacob's Name was changed into Israel, when he wrestled all night with the
Angel, and would not let him go, till he had blessed him; Thy name shall be
called no more Jacob, but Israel; for as a prince have thou power with God and
men, and have prevailed, 32. Genesis 28.

One would think that this were abundantly sufficient to convince all men of
the Duty, Necessity, and Advantages of Prayer; for if God govern the world, and
we must expect his Blessing and Protection only in answer to our Prayers; if he
himself makes Prayer the necessary Condition of our receiving, it is in vain to
dispute the Philosophy of it, for we must ask, if we will receive. We can
receive of none but God, and he has promised to give to none but those who ask;
and therefore tho we may receive many good things without asking, as God does
good both to the evil and to the good, yet we can never be secure that we shall
receive; and the good things we do receive without asking, seldom prove
Blessings to us, and as seldom lasting.

But to satisfy these men, if it be possible, in the Reasonableness and
Necessity of this Duty, and to give them a true Notion of Prayer, let us
briefly consider their Objections against it. And the sum of all is this, That
they cannot conceive how our Prayers should signify any thing with God, or
obtain any Blessings for us, which he would not have bestowed on us without our
asking. To be good and virtuous, they will allow is necessary to entitle us to
the Favor and Protection of Providence; and there is reason to believe, that
God will do good to good men, whether they ask or not; but they cannot see for
what wise ends Prayer serves, or how it should be any reason for God to give.
Does not God know our wants before we ask? Or does he need to be informed by
our Prayers, what we would have him do for us? Are not our Wants, and his own
Essential Goodness, a sufficient Motive for him to give? Or does he want to be
entreated and importuned? Which would argue a want of Goodness. In short, Can
God be moved and changed by our Prayers, to alter his Counsels, to do that good
for us which otherwise he would not have done, or to divert those evils which
he intended to have brought on us? Which represents God as changeable as man,
and derogates from the Immutability of his Nature and Counsels.

Now in answer to this, let us consider in the first place, Whether these
Objections do not prove too much? That is, Whether they do not equally destroy
the Reasonableness of making any Prayers or Petitions to Men, as well as to God?

There is a great difference indeed upon this account, that good men may be
ignorant of our wants, and may need to be informed; but is this the only reason
of asking, to inform men of our wants? Does any good man think himself bound,
tho he know our wants, to supply them without our asking? Do we think it any
diminution to any man's goodness, that he will not give, unless he be asked?
Good men, indeed, do a great many good offices without being asked, and so does
a good God; but in most cases they think it very reasonable to be asked, and
that it is Pride and Stomach not to ask, and that is reason enough not to give.
It does not become some men to ask, when it may become others to give; for it
requires some Interest, and some pretense to Favor and Kindness, to have a
right to ask; but all men expect, that those who depend on them, and know that
they may have for asking, should ask for what they want: Parents expect this
from their Children, and a Prince from his Subjects; and will see their wants,
and let them want on, till they think fit to ask: And if wise and good men
expect this from their dependants, a Wise and Good God may as reasonably expect
this from his Creatures, who have their whole dependence on him: For let any
man show me the difference; if it be consistent with Wisdom and Goodness to
expect to be asked, why may not a Wise and Good God expect this, as well as a
Wise and Good Man?

Thus as changeable as men are in their Wills, and Counsels, and Passions, Do
we use to charge any man with fickleness and inconstancy, only because he gives
when he is asked, and will not give when he is not asked? That is, does it
prove any man to be mutable, to change only as a Wise and Immutable Rule
requires him to change? Such uniform and regular changes as these, prove an
Immutability of Counsels; and if this be the standing Rule of Providence, it
argues no more change in God to give when we ask, and not to give when we do
not ask, than it is to punish a man when he is wicked, and to reward him when
he is good.

The Passions and Affections of Human Nature are the most fickle and inconstant
things; and when they move mechanically by external and sensible impressions,
either against Reason, or at least without it, they betray men to that
uneveness and uncertainty in all their actions, as disparages both their Wisdom
and Goodness; for when they do good by such blind Impulses, and strong and
heady Passions, they do good by Chance; and another Torrent of different
Passions may do as much hurt.

But yet it is no disparagement to the Immutability of Wisdom and Goodness, to
be moved by Passions, when Reason and not mere sense moves them; for Reason is
an even and steady Mover. To say that a man's Passions and Affections are moved
by Reason to do that which he never intended to have done without that Reason,
does not unbecome the wisest and best man in the world; and therefore to say,
that a good man is moved by Prayers, and Entreaties, and Complaints, to pity
and compassion, and to do good, contrary to his former intentions and
inclinations, is no Reproach to him.

Nor is it any Reproach to the Divine Nature and Providence, to say, That God
is moved by our Prayers and Entreaties to do that for us, which otherwise he
would not have done; for it neither unbecomes God nor men to be moved by
Reason. We live in a Critical Age, which will not allow us to speak
intelligibly of God, because we want words sufficiently to distinguish between
the Motions and Actings of the Divine Mind, and the Passions of Creatures. Our
Conceptions of the Divine Nature are very imperfect, and so must our words
necessarily be, and therefore unless you will venture the Censure of some men,
who conceal their Atheism under a Religious Silence and Veneration, and will
not allow any thing to be said or thought of God, for fear of thinking and
speaking dishonourably of him; you must not say that God hears or sees, because
he has no bodily ears or eyes; or that there are any such Affections in God as
Love or Hatred, Joy or Sorrow, Anger or Repentance, Pity and Compassion,
because those sensible Commotions which accompany these Passions in men, are
not incident to the Divine Nature.

But if the Scripture be a good Rule both of believing and speaking, we may
very honorably say that of God, which God says of himself, and believe that
all these Affections are in God, in such a perfect and excellent manner as
becomes an Infinite and Eternal Mind. Some men think, that the Scripture's
attributing Love, and Joy, and Delight, Hatred, Sorrow, and Compassion, to God,
is no better reason to ascribe such affections to him, than it is to say, that
God has bodily Eyes, and Ears, and Feet, and Hands, because the Scripture
attributes them also to God: But there is a wide difference between these two;
for the Scripture has taken sufficient care to inform us, that God is an
infinite and unbodied Spirit, without Shape or Figure, and that is reason to
believe, that these are only allusive and metaphorical Expressions, which
represent the Powers by the Instruments of the Action; seeing by Eyes, and
hearing by Ears; but these affections, which are attributed to God, are not
Instruments, but Powers, and are as essential to a Mind, as Wisdom and
Knowledge. A pure Mind must have pure and intellectual Affections, which move
with greater strength and certainty, though without the disturbance of humane
Passions. It is impossible to conceive a Mind without Wisdom and Knowledge, or
to conceive Wisdom and Knowledge without an intellectual Approbation and
Abhorrence; for perfect Wisdom must approve and disapprove; and the several
ways of approving or disapproving, constitute the several Passions and
Affections of the Soul, and therefore these must be as perfect in God as Wisdom
is, though as void of sensible passions, as a pure Spirit is.

Now, if God have such Affections as these, which may be moved in a manner
suitable to the Divine Perfections, then Prayer may move him, and prevail with
him to show Mercy and Kindness: Thus the Scripture represents it; and without
such a representation as this, there can be no reason, nor foundation for
Prayer.

Not to show you this in particular, how God has been moved by the
Intercessions of Good men to change his Counsels, and to spare those whom he
had threatened to destroy, of which we have a famous Example in the Intercession
of Moses for Israel, when they had made the Golden Calf, and worshipped it, 32*
Exodus 9, 10, etc. Of which the Psalmist tells us, He said he would destroy
them, had not Moses his chosen stood before him in the breach, to turn away his
wrath, lest he should destroy them. 106. Psalm. 23. I say, not to insist on such
Examples now, I shall only observe, that most of our Savior's Arguments and
Parables, whereby he encourages our Faith in Prayer, are resolved into this
principle, That God is moved by our Prayers in some Analogy and Proportion as
men are; that whatever effect of our Prayers we may reasonably expect from
Wise, and Kind, and Good men, that we may more certainly expect from God.

Our Savior promises, 7. Matthew. 7, 8, 9, 10. Ask, and it shall be given unto
you: seek, and ye shall find: knock, and it shall be opened unto you. For every
one that asks, receives: and he that seeks, finds: and to him that
knocks, it shall be opened. This is as full a promise as can be made; and yet
for their greater security, he proves to their own sense and feeling, that it
needs must be so: We know and feel what the natural Kindness and Tenderness of
Earthly Parents is for their Children, how ready they are to answer all their
reasonable requests, especially when it is for the supply of their necessary
wants; and thus he assures us it is with God, and much more, because there is
no comparison between the Kindness and Tenderness of Earthly Parents, and the
Goodness of God. What man is there of you, whom if his son ask bread, will he
give him a stone? Or if he ask fish, will he give him a serpent? If you then
being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall
your Father which is in heaven, give good things to them that ask him?

Thus our Savior represents the power of importunity by the parable of a man,
who came to his Friends to borrow some Bread of him when he was a bed, which
was so unseasonable a time, as made it troublesome and uneasy; but tho mere
Friendship could not prevail with him to do it, importunity did, 11. Luke 5.
etc. and by the parable of the importunate Widow, and the unjust Judge, who tho
he had no regard to Justice, yet was conquered by her importunity, to avenge
her of her Enemy; And shall not God avenge his own elect, which cry day and
night unto him, tho he bear long with them? 18. Luke 2. etc. If importunity
will prevail, where neither Friendship, nor the love of Justice will prevail,
how much more will it prevail with a Good, and Merciful, and Righteous God?

Indeed most of our Savior's Parables proceed upon that likeness and
resemblance which is between Human Passions, and the Affections of the Divine
Nature, that we may certainly expect that from God, which we can reasonably
expect from Wise and Good men in the like cases; what either Friendship, or a
love of Virtue, or Natural Affections, or Interest; and Relation, and Private
Concernment will do, that God will do for us, as is evident in the Parables of
the Lost Sheep, and Lost Groat, and Prodigal Son, which could have no
foundation, were not God in some analogy moved as men are: It is certain our
Savior intended we should understand it so, when he makes it the reason of our
Faith and Hope in Prayer: And if it be thus, we see the reason and necessity of
Prayer, and know how to pray to God, so as to prevail; to pray to God, as we
would in the like cases ask of men, with the same Importunity, Ardour,
Vehemence, Sorrow and Contrition, Trust and Dependence; for what will prevail
with men, will much more prevail with God.

And indeed, there are very wise reasons, why God should make Prayer the
necessary Condition of our Receiving: as, that his Power and Providence may be
universally owned and acknowledged by Mankind; That we may live in a constant
dependence on him, and be sensible, that all we receive is his gift; to lay
restraints upon men's ungoverned Lusts and Appetites, that they may never expect
success without Prayer; and therefore may never dare attempt any thing for
which they dare not pray.

These are wise Reasons, why God should not give, unless we ask; and therefore
if we believe that God governs the World, it is our Interest as well as our
Duty to pray to him; for we have no Title to his Protection without it. Let us
then in all Conditions make our humble and hearty Prayers and Supplications to
God, and recommend our Selves, and all our Concernments to him. I say, in all
Conditions, because God has the Supreme and Sovereign disposal of all. There
are too many who think, that when all things are prosperous, when they have
Goods laid up for many years, when they have Powerful Friends, and their
Enemies at their feet, that there is no great need then to pray to God, because
they do not want Him. The Psalmist himself was tempted by a prosperous Fortune
to great security; In my prosperity, I said, I shall never be moved. But God
quickly convinced him, that his security did not consist in External Supports,
but in the Divine Favor; Lord, by thy favor thou have made my mountain to
stand strong; thou did hide thy face, and I was troubled, 30. Psalm 6, 7. No
man is safe but in God's Protection; there are a thousand unseen Accidents, and
surprising Events, which may disappoint all other hope and confidence; but they
that trust in the Lord, shall be as Mount Zion, which cannot be removed, but
abides for ever: as the mountains are round about Jerusalem, so the Lord is
round about his people, henceforth for ever and ever, 125. Psalm 1, 2.

Others think it to as little purpose to pray, when their Condition is
desperate and hopeless; when they cannot see how God can save them without a
Miracle, and Miracles they must not hope for. But what is it that God cannot do,
who has all Nature at his command? We must not indeed expect Miracles; but he
who has the Absolute Government of the Natural and Moral World, can do what he
pleases, without Miracles: Nothing is impossible to God, and nothing is
impossible to him that believes, who prays to God in Faith and Hope.

Nay, the Example of our Savior teaches us something more than this; That tho
we were as certain that God would not deliver us from what we fear, as he was
that it was appointed for him by God's Immutable Decree and Counsel, to dye
upon the Cross; yet it is not in vain to pray as he did, O my father, if it be
possible, let this cup pass from me; nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou will. And the Apostle to the Hebrews tells us, That tho God did not deliver him
from death, yet he heard and answered his Prayers: Who in the days of his
flesh, when he had offered up prayers and supplications, with strong crying and
tears, unto him that was able to save him from death, and was heard in that he
feared, 5. Heb. 7. That is, tho God did not deliver him from Death, he
delivered him from his Fears, sent an Angel to comfort him, and enabled him to
endure the Pain, and to despise the Shame of the Cross. And tho God should in
like manner afflict us, or we should have great reason to believe he will do
so; yet, if in answer to our Prayers and Cries he should pull out the Sting of
Afflictions, and sweeten them with Divine Comforts, and some unexpected Allays,
and give us Courage and Patience to bear them, it is equivalent to a
Deliveranee, and usually better for us than to have been delivered; for when
God inflicts such Punishments on us, even when he mercifully hears our Prayers
and Cries, we may be sure that he intends it for some great good to us; and to
reap the Benefits of Afflictions, without feeling the Sting of them, is better
than to be delivered from them; this is to be heard in what we fear.

This may satisfy us as to the Necessity and Obligation of this Duty of Prayer;
and what great Reason and Encouragement we have in all conditions to pray to
God. But we must remember, That Praise and Thanksgiving is as essential a part
of the Divine Worship, and as much due to God's Care and Providence over us, as
Prayer is.

I need not enlarge on this, because all Mankind acknowledge it a duty to
praise our Benefactors, which is only to acknowledge from whom we have received
the good things we have: And if God be the Giver of all good things to us, Can
we do less than acknowledge that we receive all from God? The whole Book of
Psalms is full of Examples of this kind; and there is so little need to prove
this to be a Duty, that every man who is sensible of any Kindness that is done
him, can no more avoid thanking his Benefactor, than rejoicing in the benefit
he has received. It is not only matter of Duty, but of Necessity to do it, till
men have put off Human Nature, and lost the sensations of it.

We must not indeed conceive so meanly of God, as if he were charmed with the
Praises of his Creatures, as some vain men are with Popular Applause: A Wise
man is above this; much more God: A man who knows himself, thinks neither the
better nor worse of himself for Popular Praise, or Reproach: Praise is due to
Virtue; but if it miss of it, the World may suffer by it, not the Virtuous man,
if he have that command of his Passions and Resentments, as a Wise and Good man
ought to have. Praise is nothing else but the good opinion of other men
concerning us; and Reproach their ill opinion; and if they be mistaken in their
opinions, they make us neither better nor worse, unless we make our selves so;
but the World may suffer by it; for a Good man when he is unjustly reproached,
tho he may support himself with a sense of his Innocence and Virtue, yet he
loses the Pleasure and Freedom of Conversation, the Authority of his Example
and Counsels, and many Advantages and Opportunities of doing good.

To apply this to God: I need not prove, that so Glorious and Perfect a Being
is infinitely above our Praises; that we can add nothing to Him by our most
Triumphant Hymns and Hallelujahs, any otherwise than as He sees it infinitely
reasonable and congruous for the happiness of Creatures, and a great instrument
of Providence that they should Praise him: God suffers nothing by it, if we
refuse to Praise him; but we do, and the World does; and he has no other
satisfaction in it, than to see his Creatures do what becomes them, and what
will make them happy.

All the Blessings we receive from God, especially such as concern this Life,
lose their true Taste and Relish without Praise. To Contemplate and Adore the
Divine Wisdom and Goodness, which encompasses the whole Creation, and Dispenses
His Favors with a liberal hand, is a more transporting pleasure than all the
enjoyments of the World can give us. Here is a noble exercise of Love, and Joy,
and Admiration, which are the most delightful Passions of the Soul, and as far
above the pleasures of Sense, as a man excels a Beast. This makes us feel our
selves happy, not only in what we at present have, which, if we look no farther
than intermediate Causes, is very uncertain; but in a secure prospect of
Happiness while we adhere to God. A Soul which is ravished with the Praises of
God, and possessed with a lively Sense of his Goodness, can fear no Evil, is
out of the reach of solicitous cares; is contented in every condition as
allotted him by God; nay, is patient under Sufferings themselves, which are the
Corrections or Discipline of a kind Father: He considers how much good he
receives from God, and how far it exceeds all the Evils he suffers; and
therefore he has reason to bless God still, as Job did; for shall we receive
good from the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil? especially when the
good we receive, proves the very evils we suffer to be good, because they are
inflicted by a good God.

All these Graces and Virtues are owing to the belief of a Divine Providence,
and cannot be had without it; they belong to that Submission to God, and trust
in his Providence, which I have already explained; but it is Praise and
Thanksgiving which awakens that vigorous Sense of God, which exercises all
these Virtues, and gives us the ease and satisfaction of them.

Thus when God loses his Praise, we lose the ease and security of our Lives:
But this is not all; for the World also in a great measure loses the benefit
and advantage of God's Government, which as much disappoints the wise designs
of Providence.

Not to own our Benefactor, is to lose the sense of our dependence, which makes
all the Goodness of God lost on Sinners; for the Goodness of God cannot affect
any man, cannot lead him to repentance, can be no reason, nor encouragement to
Virtue, if it be not owned.

This spoils the very Blessings, which God bestows on us, which we shall never
use to our own happiness, without owning and praising the Giver of them. He who
remembers that he receives all from God, and is affected with the Divine
Goodness and Bounty in giving, will use the good things he receives, according
to the mind and intention of the Giver; and this is the only way to enjoy the
benefit of the gift.

God does not give men riches merely to look on, or to imprison, or to spend on
their Lusts; nor advance them to Honors, to make them proud and insolent; nor
give them a large Portion of This World to make them forget the Next; he who is
thankful to God for all his Blessings, cannot do this; for this is the highest
ingratitude to affront and provoke God with the abuse of what he gives; and he
who does thus, loses the Blessing, though he has the Gift. A Covetous man is
never the better for his Riches, because he cannot use them; and a Voluptuous
man is much the worse, because he uses them to his own hurt. When high Places
and Dignities make men Proud and Insolent, it forfeits the Honor of them; and
he who forgets, and by forgetting loses the next World, has a very hard
purchase of this.

Nay, such men do not only disappoint God's Goodness to themselves, but
frustrate the gracious designs of his Providence in making them the Instruments
and Ministers of his Goodness to others. For those who take no notice of the
Divine Providence, but are very unthankful to God for what they have, are so
far from doing any good, that they generally do great mischief to others, as
well as to themselves.

Those who are sensible that they receive all from God, and are thankful for
it, remember that they are but God's Stewards; which is a great Honor, but a
great Trust too, and requires Faithfulness; in thankfulness to God who has so
liberally provided for them, they think themselves bound to imitate his
Goodness, to supply the Wants, and undertake the Patronage of those who want
their help, and in the judgment of Prudence and Charity deserve it.

But an unthankful man has no more regard to his Fellow Creatures then he has
to God; a Covetous man, who will not supply his own wants, to be sure will not
relieve the wants of others; and if a Voluptuous man does any kindness, the
receivers pay dear for it; for he makes them the partners or instruments of his
lusts. A Rich Sinner helps to Debauch a whole Neighborhood, and a powerful
Sinner to Oppress them; and the daily experience of the World tells us, what
mischief Riches, and Honor, and Power, do in the hands of Wicked and
Unthankful men.

This I think may satisfy any considering man in the absolute necessity of
Praise and Thanksgiving, which is not only such an acknowledgment of the Divine
Glory as becomes Creatures, but is necessary to our own Happiness, to our wise
improvement of the Blessings of God, and to the good Government of the World;
and all men must confess, that this is a Wise and Just reason for God to recall
his Gifts, to take away what he had given to unthankful men, and to give them
no more, not only because they disown their Benefactor, but because they abuse
all that he gives them to their own, and to other men's hurt: All that he gives
is lost on them; He loses the Praise, and they themselves, and every body else
the comfort and advantage of it.

And thus I have finished this Discourse of Providence; whereby I hope it will
appear, that there are great Reasons to believe a Providence, that the
Objections against it are Ignorant Mistakes; and that nothing tends so much to
the Ease and Comfort, and good Government of our Lives, as to acknowledge God
to be the Supreme and Sovereign Lord of the World.

THE END.
ERRATA.
PAge 11. line 3. r. and that. p. 13. l. 27. del. made. p. 38. l. 17. for or r.
and uniform. p. 97. l. 34. r. counsels. p. 189. l. 14. f. on r. of. p. 208. l.
4. f. should r. should. p. 227. l. 3. f. end r. means. p. 272. l. 9. r. victory.
p. 273. l. 3. f. that r. the. l. 17. f. or r. and. p. 280. l. 30. r.
undeniable. p. 287. l. 25. r. virtue. p. 291. l. 16. r. that. p. 327. l. 31. r.
Messiah; l. 33. r. whatever. p. 332. l. 26. f. an r. on. p. 344. l. 19. r.
foot. p. 338 l. 34. r. reasonable. p. 340. l. 20. r. Nemesis. p. 353. l. 2. r.
how severe soever. l. 22. dele most.

Books Published by the Reverend Dr. Sherlock, Dean of St. Paul's, Master of
the Temple, and Chaplain in Ordinary to Their Majesty's.
AN Answer to a Discourse, entitled, Papists protesting against Protestant
Popery, Second Edition, Quarto.

An Answer to the Amicable Accommodation of the Differences between the
Representer and the Answerer, Quarto.

A Sermon preached at the Funeral of the Reverend Dr. Calamy, Quarto.

A Vindication of some Protestant Principles of Church-Unity and Catholic
Communion, from the Charge of Agreement with the Church of Rome, Quarto.

A Preservative against Poperty, in Two Parts, with the Vindication, in Answer
to the Cavils of Lewis Salran, Jesuit, Quarto.

A Discourse concerning the Nature, Unity, and Communion of the Catholic
Church, First Part, Quarto.

A Sermon preached before the Lord Mayor, November 4th. 1688. Quarto.

A Vindication of the Doctrine of the Holy and Ever-Blessed Trinity, and the
Incarnation of the Son of God, Second Edition, Quarto.

The Case of the Allegiance due to Sovereign Powers, Stated and Resolved,
according to Scripture, Reason, and the Principles of the Church of England,
4to.

A Vindication of the Case of Allegiance due to Sovereign Powers, Quarto.

A Sermon preached at Whitehall before the Queen on the 17th. of June, being
the Fast Day, Quarto.

A Practical Discourse concerning Death; in Octavo, Seventh Edition, Price 3 s.
In Twelves, Price 2 s.

A Practical Discourse concerning a Future Judgment. Third Edition. Octav.

A Sermon preached before the House of Commons, Ian. 30. 1692. Quarto.

A Sermon preached before the Queen, Feb. 12. 1692. Quarto.

The Charity of Lending without Usury; and the true Notion of Usury briefly
stated; in a Sermon before the Lord Mayor on Easter-Tuesday, 1692. Quarto.

A Sermon preached at the Temple-Church, May 29. 1692.

A Sermon preached before the Queen, June 26. 1692. Quarto.

A Sermon preached at the Funeral of the Reverend Dr. Meggot, late Dean of
Winchester, December. 10. 1692.

An Apology for writing against Socinians, in Defense of the Doctrines of the
Holy Trinity and Incarnation, in Answer to a late Earnest and Compassionate
Suit for forbearance to the Learned Writers of some Controversies at present,
Quarto.

A Discourse concerning the Divine Providence, Quarto.

Printed for Will. Rogers.

Books lately printed for William Rogers.
SErmons and Discourses, in Three Volumes. Octavo.

The Rule of Faith; Or, An Answer to the Treatise of Mr. I. Sergeant. Octav.

A Thanksgiving-Sermon at Lincoln's End Chapel, 1688. on Ezra 9. 13, 14.

A Sermon preached before the Queen, on Matthew. 5. 44.

A Sermon preached before the King and Queen at Hampton Court, on Luke 10. 42.

A Sermon preached before the Queen, on Matthew. 25. 46.

A Sermon preached before the House of Commons upon a Monthly Fast; on Eccles.
9. 11.

A Sermon preached before the Lord Mayor at Bow-Church, upon a Monthly Fast, on
Ier. 6. 8.

A Sermon preached before the Queen, on Acts 24. 16.

A Sermon preached before the Queen at White Hall upon the Monthly Fast,
September. 16. 1691. on Zech. 7. 5.

A Sermon preached before the Queen, on Psalm 73. 25.

A Thanksgiving Sermon before the King and Queen at White Hall, October. 27.
1692. on Jeremiah 9. 23, 24.

These Ten in Quarto.

A Discourse against Transubstantiation, Octavo. Alone. Price 3 d. Stitcht.

A Persuasive to frequent Communion in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper.
Octavo stitcht 3 d. In Twelves, bound, price 6 d.

Sermons concerning the Divinity of our Blessed Savior, Octavo.

A Sermon preached before the Queen at White Hall, April 9. 1693. concerning
the Sacrifice and Satisfaction of Christ, on Heb. 9. 26.

A Sermon concerning the Unity of the Divine Nature and Trinity, on 1 Timothy 2. 5.

These all by his Grace, John, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.

Reflections on two Books, the one Entitled, The Case of Allegiance to a King
in Possession, the other, An Answer to Dr. Sherlock 's Case of Allegiance to
Sovereign Powers; in Defense of the Case of Allegiance to a King in Possession,
on those Parts especially wherein the Author endeavors to show his Opinion to
be agreeable to the Laws of this Land. Quarto.

A Brief Disquisition of the Law of Nature, according to the Principles and
methods laid down in the Reverend Dr. Cumberland's (now Lord Bishop of
Peterborough's) Latin Treatise on the Subject. As also his Confutations of Mr.
Hobb's Principles put into another Method. With the Right Reverend Author's
Approbation. By I. Tyrrell. Octavo.

Serious and Seasonable Advice to the English Soldiers of His Majesty's Army,
in Twelves, Price 3 d.

The Exact Effigies of his Grace, John, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, on a
large Sheet of Paper, curiously Engraven by Mr. White, from Mrs. Beal's
Painting. Price 12 d.


