A Vindication OF A PASSAGE IN Dr. Sherlock's SERMON PREACHED Before the
Honorable House of Commons, May 29. 1685. FROM THE Remarks of a late pretended
Remonstrance, By way of Address from the Church of England, To both Houses of
Parliament.

Imprimatur.

C. Alston, R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a sacris Domesticis.
Julii 6. 1685.


LONDON: Printed for I. Amery, at the Peacock in Fleetstreet; and A. Swalle, at
the Unicorn at the West End of St. Paul's Churchyard. 1685.

A VINDICATION OF A Passage in Dr. Sherlock's Sermon, etc.
WHen I first saw that Pamphlet, which bears the Title of, A Remonstrance, by
way of Address from the Church of England, to both Houses of Parliament, with
some Remarks upon Dr. Sherlock's Sermon, I was not so curious to examine the
Contents of that Paper, as to see what he had to say against that Sermon, which
received so great an Approbation from the House of Commons; and turning over
the Page, I was soon directed by the Margin to the place; where I find these
words pricked out for the subject of his Remarks.

I deny not, but some, who are Papists, in some junctures of affairs, may and
have been very Loyal; but I am sure the Popish Religion is not; the Englishman
may be Loyal, but not the Papist; and yet there can be no security of those
men's Loyalty, whose Religion in any case teaches them to Rebel. Now this being
an Address from the Church of England, which is so well acquainted with Popish
Loyalty, any one would in reason have expected, that the Doctor should have
received a Reprimand for touching that Cause so gently; and in my Conscience,
had any one attacked him there, he would have found more trouble, and been put
to more shifts, in vindicating the Personal Loyalty of Papists, than in proving
that the Popish Religion does not teach Loyalty: which is the Accusation
brought against him by the Author of this Remonstrance; that he charges the
Popish Religion with being Disloyal, though some who are Papists may be Loyal.
And I should have wondered at the discretion of this Writer (had he given any
Specimen of Wit or Understanding in any thing else) that he would engage in so
baffled a Cause. The better way had been to have thanked the Doctor for his
Complement, and to have left the Doctrine of their Church to have shifted for
itself.

But I confess, I have so great a kindness for the Doctor, that I am unwilling
he should continue under so scandalous an Imputation, of having charged the
Church of Rome with any Doctrines which she dishowns, which had at all times
been very wicked, but at this time had been folly and madness; and therefore
not to enter into the Merits of the Cause, which this Writer has given no just
occasion for, I shall only very briefly consider, what he urges in vindication
of the Popish Loyalty.

The first Argument he uses to prove, that their Religion does not teach them
to Rebel, Remonst. p. 2.
is because they themselves (though they are very zealous for their Religion)
deny that it does. Do both in their public Writings and private Discourses,
declare and maintain, that their Religion teaches no such Doctrine, and that
they are ready to maintain and practice true Loyalty, with the hazard of their
Lives and Fortunes. As for their practicing true Loyalty, I shall civilly wave
that, because the Doctor has thought fit to do so, and therefore it is no
Argument against him; for it is no new thing for men to act contrary to the
Principles of their Religion, and sometimes to be better than their Religion in
its just consequences teaches them to be, as I charitably hope many Roman
Catholics are. But who are these men, and what is their Authority, who teach,
that the Deposing Heretical Kings, or those who are Favorers of Heretics, is
no Doctrine of the Church of Rome? I say, the Deposing Doctrine; for I grant,
they do not teach Rebellion by that name: for when a Prince is deposed by the
Authority of their Church, they absolve their Subjects from their Fealty, and
then it is no Rebellion to Rebel. And I wish our Author had not some such
reserve in those doubtful terms, Rebelling and True Loyalty: for to resist and
dethrown a deposed Prince, is not Rebellion, according to the Doctrine of the
Church of Rome; nor to defend him, True Loyalty.

But does this Gentleman think, we have no other way of knowing the Doctrine of
their Church, but by what they say, is the Doctrine of their Church? Suppose
some of these Sayers be so ignorant, that they know not what is the Doctrine of
their Church; some so crafty, as to conceal it; some so heretical as to deny
it, and to be censured, and excommunicated for it at Rome; what does their
saying so or so signify to us? who have the authentic Decrees of their Popes
and Councils. They are very angry with us, when we allege the Testimonies of
their private Doctors, though of the greatest Note and Eminency among them,
whose Writings have been published with the greatest Authority, and received
with the greatest Applause, and yet they have the modesty to send us to an
Irish Remonstrance, and the Writings of P. W. or to the renowned Author of the
Roman Catholic Principles, to learn the Doctrine of the Church of Rome;
admirable Vouchers for the Church of Rome, some of whom at least are no better
than Apostates themselves, and are condemned for such at Rome.

Suppose we should be persuaded by the Authority and Rhetoric of this Author,
that the Church of Rome does not teach the Deposing Doctrine, and should assert
it against all the Jesuits in the World, and one of them should answer in the
very words of this Remonstrance. What reason has any man to say, that our
Religion does not teach us to Rebel (that is to Depose and Murder Heretical
Princes) when we who are so jealous of our Religion, that we voluntarily suffer
the loss of our Estates, our Liberties, and our Lives, rather than renounce the
least tittle of it; do both in our public Writings and private Discourses,
declare and maintain that our Religion does teach the Deposing Doctrine, and
that we are ready to maintain and practice it with the hazard of our Lives and
Fortunes? What a fine case are we in now! when the Doctrine and Practice of the
Jesuits proves, that the Deposing Doctrine is the Doctrine of the Church of
Rome; and the Doctrine and Practice (says our Author) of some other nameless
Party proves, that it is not the Doctrine of the Church of Rome; and yet I see
no reason, why the Jesuits may not pass for as good Catholics as any other
Order amongst them, nor why Baronius, and Bellarmine, and Suarez, etc. may not
be thought as good Catholic Doctors, as some few late Writers. This Argument
then will prove nothing because it proves both parts of a contradiction to be
true, that the Deposing Doctrine is, and is not, the Doctrine of the Church of
Rome.

Had he ingenuously acknowledged, that the Deposing Doctrine had been decreed
and practiced by their Popes and General Councils, that no Pope or Council
since Gregory the Seventh had ever condemned it, that the Jesuits do still
maintain it, and yet in the late Censure of some other Jesuitical Doctrines,
the present Pope thought fit to let the Deposing Doctrine escape without
censure; but notwithstanding this, they did utterly disown it, and would do so,
though they knew the Church of Rome had defined it, or ever hereafter should do
so, this had been something to the purpose to satisfy both Prince and People
of their Loyalty. But to say, that this is not the Doctrine of the Church of
Rome, is to outface all mankind, who have eyes in their heads, and skill enough
to read the Decrees of their Popes and Councils; and to found their Loyalty
upon this supposition, that the Deposing Doctrine is not the Doctrine of the
Church, gives too great a suspicion that if this were the Doctrine of the
Church of Rome, or ever should be so, or they should ever be convinced that is
so, then they would be for the deposing of Princes too; and whatever some
little inferior People in Communion with the Church of Rome think of these
matters, while the governing part of the Church believes otherwise, as they
certainly do at this day, (if the Pope and his Adherents are the governing
part) Princes have no security, that Popes will not challenge and exercise this
authority, but their want of power to do it; and this, I am sure, is wholly
owing to the Reformation: for till Princes had Subjects who valued not the
Popes authority, they themselves were the Popes Vassals, and must necessarily
be so again, could they extinguish this pestilent Heresy, the great fault of
which is, that it has given strength and security to Princes, by weakening the
Pope.

But our Author proceeds: It Is true, some persons in communion with Rome have
broached Tenants inconsistent with Loyalty; but it is true likewise, their Books
have been condemned and burnt (as they often tell us) by the public
Executioner. It is true indeed, Mariana's Book de Rege and Regis institutione,
Suarez defensio fid. Cath. and Sanctarellus Tractatus de Haeresi, and it may be
some others, were condemned to be burnt by the Parliament at Paris; but no
thanks to the Church of Rome for this, who never condemned these Doctrines. It
is said indeed, that Mariana's Book was censured by the Pope; and it is true,
the Pope did censure one of his Books, as we learn from Alegambe in Biblioth.
Script. Societ. Jesu, p. 258. but not that de Rege which was burnt at Paris:
And as for Sanctarellus, his Book was printed at Rome by the express allowance
of Vitellescus the General of the Jesuits; and when the Parliament of Paris
took great offense at it, and examined some of the Jesuits what they thought of
it, Father Coton answered, that they disliked it. And being farther asked, how
they could disapprove what their General allowed, he replied, That their
General being at Rome, could do no less. Upon this they enquire what they would
do, if they were at Rome; the Jesuit frankly answered, They should think as
they do at Rome, as Gramondus relates. And how this proves that the Church of
Rome is such an Enemy to the Deposing and King-killing Doctrine, I cannot tell:
for it seems, that those who upon some prudent considerations may condemn such
Doctrines at Paris or London, may prove good Catholics at Rome, such influence
has a different Climate upon some men's Faith.

But he adds, The Roman Catholics do frequently declare, that it is an
Article of Faith in their Church, and expressly declared in the Council of
Constance, that the King-killing, Doctrine, or Murder of Princes Excommunicated
for Heresy, is damnable and Heretical, as being contrary to the known Laws of
God and Nature.

But whatever the Roman Catholics declare (which we have but one nameless
Author's word for, the Author of the Roman Catholic Principles, Roman Cathol.
principles, p. 6.
who yet assigns this as the chief reason, why many Catholics of tender
Consciences refuse the Oath of Allegiance, because they cannot renounce the
Deposing Doctrine as heretical; which is strange, if, as he says, the Council
of Constance has condemned it as damnable and heretical) I am sure the Council
of Constance declares no such thing. He directs us to Sess. 15. of that
Council, where indeed I find this Proposition condemned: Quilibet Tyrannus
potest and debet. That any Tyrant may and ought lawfully and meritoriously be
killed by any of his Vassals and Subjects by treachery or flattery, Conc. To.
12. p. 144.
notwithstanding any Oath of Fealty, Non expectata sententia vel mandato
judicis cujuscunque, without expecting the Sentence or Command of any Judge. So
that the Council condemns the killing of a Tyrant, not of a Heretic; and the
killing of a Tyrant who is not condemned and deposed, not of one who is
excommunicated for Heresy. And that last clause, without expecting the
Sentence and Command of any Judge, supposes that it is no fault to do it, but
may be a very lawful and meritorious act, to kill such Princes as are deposed
by superior Judges, that is, by the Pope or Council, which is the only
Authority that ever pretended to judge or depose Sovereign Princes: and
therefore when Suarez was urged with this Decree, Suarez Defens. fid. lib. 6.
cap. 4.
he answers, Where do you find in the Acts of that Council, that this extends
to Princes Excommunicated or Deposed by the Pope.

This Council of Constance owns the fourth Council of Lateran for a General
Council, Council. Constance. Sess. 39.
and Decrees, that every new-elected Pope before the publication of his
Election, shall profess to maintain this among other General Councils, to the
least tittle, with the expense of his life and blood; and therefore what the
Doctrine of this Council was about Deposing Princes, we may learn from the
Council of Lateran, which expressly defines, That if the Temporal Lord being
required and admonished by the Church, Si vero dominus temporalis requisitus
and monitus ab Ecclesia, terram suam purgare neglexerit ab hac Haeretica
faeditate, per Metropolitanum and caeteros Comprovinciales Episcopos
excommunicationis vinculo innodetur, and si satisfacere contempserit infra
annum, significetur hoc summo pontifici, ut ex tunc ipse Vassallos ab ejus
fidelitate denunciet absolutos, and terram exponat Catholicis occupandum, qui
eam, exterminatis haereticis, sine ulla contradictione possideant, and in fidei
puritate conservent, salvo jure Domini Principalis, dummodo super hoc ipse
nullum praestet obstaculum, nec aliquod impedimentum opponat; eadem nihilo
minus lege servata circa eos, qui non habent Dominos Principales. Council. To.
11. p. 148, 149. Edit. ^abb.
shall neglect to purge his Country from the filth of Heresy, he shall be
Excommunicated by their Metropolitan and his Suffragan Bishops; and if he
neglect to make satisfaction within a year, this shall be signified to the
Pope, that from thenceforth he may declare his Subjects Absolved from their
Fealty, and expose his Country to be seized by Catholics, who shall possess it
without any contradiction, and preserve it in the purity of the Faith, provided
the principal Lord may receive no damage by it, if he do nothing to hinder
these proceedings; and yet the same Law shall be observed as to those who have
no principal Lords over them. That is, all Sovereign Princes, and Emperors,
who are liable to the Sentence of Excommunication and Deprivation, if they do
not purge their Dominions of Heresy. Now this I take to be Deposing Doctrine.

But we need not go to the Council of Lateran to learn the sense of the Council
of Constance in this point. Pope Martin the Fifth, Council. Constable. Sess. 45.
in his Bull for confirmation of this Council, speaks very home to the Case,
That all Heretics, and their followers of both Sexes, and those who hold and
defend such Heresies, or communicate with such Heretics publicly or secretly,
Omnes and singulos Haereticos hujusmodi, necnon Sectatores ipsarum haeresum and
errorum utriusque sexus, tenentes and etiam defendentes eosdem, and Haereticis
ipsis quo modo libet public vel occulte in divinis vel alias participantes,
etiamsi Patriarchali, Episcopali, Regali, Reginali, Ducali, aut alia quavis
Ecclesiastica vel Mundana praesulgeant dignitate -- Excommunicatos singulos
diebus dominicis and festivis in praesentia populi nuntietis, and per alios
nuntiari faciatis: Et nihil ominus contra eosdem omnes and singulos, utriusque
sexus, hujusmodi errores tenentes, approbantes, defendentes, dogmatizantes, ac
fautores and receptatores, and defensores eorundem, exemptos and non exemptos,
and quemlibet ipsorum, cujuscunque dignitatis, status praeeminentiae, gradus,
ordinis, vel conditionis (ut praefertur) existant, auctoritate nostra
diligenter inquirere studeatis, and eos quos per inquisitionem hujusmodi
defamatos, vel per confessionem eorum seu per facti evidentiam, vel alias
hujusmodi haeresis, aut erroris labe respersos reperietis, auctoritate
praedicta etiam per excommunicationis, suspensionis, and interdicti, necnon
privationis dignitatum, personatuum and officiorum, aliorumque beneficiorum
Ecclesiasticorum, ac feudorum, quae a quibuscumque Ecclesiis, Monasteriis ac
aliis locis Ecclesiasticis obtinent, ac etiam bonorum and dignitatum
saecularium ac graduum scientiarum quarumcunque facultatum, and per alias
poenas, sententias, and censuras Ecclesiasticas, ac vias and modos, quos ad hoc
expedire, seu opportunos esse videritis, etiam per captiones and
incarcerationes personarum, and alias poenas corporales, quibus haeretici
puniuntur, seu puniri jubentur aut solent juxta canonicas sanctiones. Conc.
Constable. Sess. 45 To. 12. p. 271.
in Religious Offices or any other way, though they shine in the Dignity of
Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops, Kings, Queens, Dukes, or any other
Ecclesiastical or Secular Title, shall be pronounced Excommunicate in the
presence of the People, every Sunday and Holy Day. And that the Archbishops,
Bishops and Inquisitors, shall by our Authority diligently inquire concerning
them who hold, defend, or receive such Heresies and Errors, of what Dignity,
State, Pre-eminence, Degree, Order, or Condition soever they are: and if they
be found quilty, shall by the foresaid Authority proceed against them by
punishments of Excommunication, Suspension, Interdict, as also of deprivation
of their Dignities, Offices, and Benefices Ecclesiastical, and also of their
Secular Dignities and Honors; and by any other Penalties, Sentences,
Ecclesiastical Censures, which they shall judge fitting, even by taking and
imprisoning their Persons, and executing upon them any corporal Punishments
with which Heretics use to be punished, according to the Canonical Sanctions.
This is the Council, which our Author tells us expressly declares, that the
King-killing Doctrine or Murder of Princes excommunicated for Heresy, is
damnable and heretical, as being contrary to the known Laws of God and Nature;
and yet for ought I can perceive by this Bull, the greatest Emperor in the
world, if he be a Heretic, or a Favourer of Heretics, if the Pope have as
much power as authority, may be burnt, as John Huss, and Ierom of Prague, were
by this Council.

The account of that Article, Quilibet Tyrannus, in short is this: The Duke of
Burgundy had caused Lewis Duke of Orleans to be murdered; Johannes Parvus a
Divine of Paris, to justify this action, defended that Proposition, That a
Tyrant might be killed by any of his Subjects, without expecting the Sentence
or Command of any Judge; which Mariana asserts to be certainly true, Richerius
Hist. Conc. Gener. part 2. p. 162.
and that the only difficulty is to know, who is a Tyrant. So that this is a
true Commonwealth-Principle, like the seventeenth Article of John Wickleff,
which was condemned also in this Council; Populares possunt ad suum arbitrium
dominos delinquentes corrigere. The people may correct their Lords or
Governors, when they do amiss, according to their own will and pleasure. And
this I grant is not the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, which reserves this
power wholly to it self, though it has been defended by many Jesuits, such as
Mariana and Suarez, from whence our late Rebels learnt their Maxims of
Government. But these two Questions ought to be carefully distinguished, or
else we may indeed injure the Church of Rome; Whether the People have an
inherent right in themselves to Depose, or Punish, or Murder Tyrannical
Princes; and whether the Pope have authority to Depose Princes for Heresy or
other causes, and to Absolve their Subjects from their obedience: The first is
not the Doctrine of the Church, (though it be of many Jesuits) but is expressly
condemned by this Council; though Mariana truly observes, that the condemnation
of this Proposition, Quilibet Tyrannus, is not confirmed by the Popes Bull, as
the condemnation of the Articles of Wickleff and Huss expressly is; which gives
some suspicion, that he did not much like it, especially considering what
Gerson tells us, that this Doctrine of Johan Parvus was branched out into nine
Articles, and he was very zealous to have had them all distinctly condemned,
but could not obtain it; and therefore complains, Errorem illum non
sufficienter sed valde diminute damnatum esse, That this Error was not
sufficiently, but very imperfectly condemned; which he attributes to that
kindness many of them had for the Duke of Burgundy. However, I do not find this
Doctrine defined in any of their General Councils, and it is condemned (though
Gerson says imperfectly) in this, and therefore is not to be accounted the
Doctrine of the Church of Rome. But as for the Popes Deposing power, it is not
only asserted by Jesuits, but decreed by their Councils, and therefore must be
accounted the Doctrine of their Church.

But our Author proceeds: That no Catholics, as Catholics, believe that the
Pope has any direct or indirect authority over the Temporal Power and
Jurisdiction of Princes: so that if the Pope shall pretend to absolve or
dispense with his Majesty's Subjects from their Allegiance upon account of
Heresy and Schism, such Dispensation would be vain and null, and all Catholic
Subjects (notwithstanding such Dispensation or Absolution) would be still bound
in Conscience to defend their King and Country, at the hazard of their Lives
and Fortunes, even against the Pope himself, in case he should invade the
Nation. And yet we see that Popes challenge this Deposing power, and their
Councils own and decree it; and where to find the Roman Catholic Faith, but in
the Decrees of their Popes and Roman Catholic General Councils, I cannot
guess. And if we may take and leave what we please of their Councils, and be
good Catholics still, I see no reason why we may not reject the Decrees of
their Councils about Transubstantiation, Purgatory, Indulgences, the Invocation
of Saints, and Worship of Images, and continue as good Catholics as they are,
who renounce the Authority of their Councils as to the Deposing Doctrine. I am
sure the Council of Constance would have condemned these men for Heretics, who
should presume to reject any Doctrine, which this or other General Councils had
determined; for in the Bull of Martin V. in the Articles of Inquiry after
Heretics, they were to ask them this Question among others: Whether he
believed, that what this holy Council of Constance, representing the Universal
Church, has approved and does approve in favor of the Faith, and the
salvation of Souls, is to be held and approved of all Christian people; Council.
To. 12. p. 268.
and what it has and does condemn as contrary to Faith and good Manners, that
is to be held, and believed, and professed by them to be condemned.

It were easy to multiply Testimonies to this purpose; as the Deposition of
the Emperor Frederick II. in the General Council at Lions by Pope Innocent IV.
the Breve of Paul V. to the English Catholics, against taking the Oath of
Allegiance; but my Author has given no occasion to proceed any farther. He
appeals to the General Council of Constance, and I join issue with him here,
and leave it to every man to judge, whether that Council has decreed the
King-killing Doctrine, or Murder of Princes Excommunicated for Heresy, to be
damnable and heretical.

The first of those three Treatises against the Oath of Allegiance, which are
published by the Title of The Jesuits Loyalty, proves at large that the
Deposing Doctrine is the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, by several very
material Arguments. 1. That Popes have taught it as sound Doctrine, proving it
from Scripture and Tradition, and condemned the contrary as erroneous in Faith,
pernicious to Salvation, wicked folly and madness, and inflicted Censures on
them that held it.

2. That Popes have in the highest Tribunals of the Church deposed Sovereign
Princes, and absolved their Subjects from their Allegiance; and this with the
advice and consent of their Councils, and not only Patriarchal, but sometimes
even General.

3. That Popes, and General Councils by them confirmed, have denounced
Excommunication to such as should obey their Princes after such Sentence of
Deposition and Absolution of their Subjects from their Allegiance.

4. That a General Council, confirmed by the Pope, has made a Cannon-law,
regulating the manner of Deposing Princes in some case, and absolving their
Subjects from their Allegiance.

5. That all Catholic Divines and Casuists that have treated of it, from the
first to the last, (after Calvin's time) in all the several Nations of
Christendom, have asserted this power of the Pope, without so much as one
contradicting it in all that time.

6. That all Catholic Emperors, Kings, (yea, even they that were deposed)
States, Magistrates, and Lawyers, and finally all the Catholics in the world,
for the time being, have (by tacit consent at least) approved and received this
Doctrine of Popes, Divines and Casuists, and these Censures, Canons, and
Practices of Popes and General Councils.



This is enough in all Conscience, if it be well proved (as I think truly the
greatest part of it is) to prove the Deposing Doctrine to be the Doctrine of
the Church of Rome; and when there is so great and potent a Party among
themselves, who appear so zealous in this Cause, I cannot understand what fault
the Doctor committed in charging them with that which they are so ambitious to
be charged with. If it be a Calumny, Popes and Councils, Divines and Casuists
and Lawyers, are the Authors of the Calumny (not those who believe it upon
their report) who are the properest Judges, what authority it is they
challenge; and all the world knows what it is they exercise as often as they
can.

There is indeed an Answer given to this Treatise by one of those Catholic
Divines (as they call themselves) who will not own this to be the Doctrine of
the Church. I read it over with great zeal and expectation to see it confuted,
which I profess I should have been very glad to have seen fairly done: for I
take no pleasure in the Errors and Mistakes of any Church; and I think he has
proved, that those Kings and Emperors who were deposed, did not like the
Deposing Doctrine, as any one would guess; and I confess, I thought it at first
a bold attempt in the Author of that Treatise to prove the contrary, which is
the only matter of fact, wherein he has apparently the better of his
Adversary; but as for other matters (excepting the Opinions of all Catholic
Divines and Casuists before Calvin, which may admit of some debate) he yields
it all, and laughs at his Adversary for taking so much pains to prove what no
body denies, viz. that Popes have taught this Doctrine, that Popes and Councils
have made such Decrees, and have actually executed them upon Kings and
Emperors; and that their most eminent Divines and Casuists have defended this
Doctrine, and justified such Decrees and Practices: but yet he says, all this
does not prove it to be the Doctrine of their Church, nor de fide.

Now this does not concern the Doctor, who did not meddle with their Church nor
Articles of Faith, but asserted that the Popish Religion is not Loyal, and that
in some cases it teaches Subjects to Rebel. Now if the Doctrine and Decrees of
Popes and Councils be no part of the Popish Religion, whether they be in a
strict sense Articles of Faith or not; if the Decrees of Councils to depose
Heretical Princes or the Favorers of Heretics, and to absolve their Subjects
from their Allegiance, do not teach Subjects to Rebel in such cases, then
indeed the Doctor may be mistaken, especially if it be any comfort to a deposed
Prince, that he is deposed by virtue of a Decree of Popes and Councils; but yet
the Popes power of Deposing Princes, is no Article of Faith.

But yet it may be of good use to set this matter in a clear light, and to hear
the utmost that can be said to vindicate the Church of Rome from teaching so
pernicious a Doctrine as this. And what the Answerer to the first Treatise
against the Oath of Allegiance says, is contained in a narrow compass, and I
shall reduce it into as easy a method as I can. The truth is, I generally like
what he says very well, and think he has proved that it ought not to be the
Doctrine of the Church, and that no man is bound to believe it, whatever Church
teaches it; but I think he has not proved, that it is not the Doctrine of the
Church of Rome. He frankly acknowledges, that this Deposing Doctrine has been
taught by Popes, and has been decreed by General Councils (which our
Remonstrancer denies) let us hear then how he vindicates the Church of Rome
from teaching such a Doctrine, and truly I cannot find that he ever attempts it.

1. He says indeed this is not the Doctrine of the Church, and we believe it is
not, if by Church he means the Universal Church of all Ages; but yet it may be
the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, which teaches a great many Doctrines which
the Primitive and Apostolical Churches never heard of: and therefore though it
be true what he says, That all the Ages before Gregory the Seventh were
positively against the Deposing Doctrine; P. 18.
That this was a Doctrine brought in in the Eleventh Century, against the
Judgment and Practice of Ten before; P. 10.
That the Fathers were not of this mind; and a great deal to this purpose: yet
this does not prove that the present Church of Rome does not teach this
Doctrine; which is plain matter of fact to be seen in the Decrees of their
Popes and Councils, as he himself acknowledges.

Thus he proves, That this Doctrine is not an Article of Faith: For two things
are necessary to make an Article of Faith. First, That the Point have been
originally revealed by Christ; And Secondly, That this Revelation have been
preserved by an uninterrupted and uniform Practice of the Faithful; and if any
of these conditions are wanting, he denies any engagement of the Church in
these concerns, or that the Church has believed, taught, or practiced this
Deposing Doctrine: that is to say, If any Church teaches such Doctrines, as
have not the true Characters of Articles of Faith, she does not teach true
Articles of Faith; but yet such Doctrines may be Articles of Faith in the
Church of Rome, though they be not Articles of the Catholic Faith; for if no
Church can make Articles of Faith for her self, which are not Articles of the
Catholic Faith, then no Church can be guilty of Heresy, for she never can
have an heretical Faith, if nothing can be the Faith of the Church, but what is
Catholic; which indeed is the only expedient I know of in the World, to prove
the Church of Rome not to be guilty of Heresy; but then it will justify all
other Churches, as well as the Church of Rome.

I thought all different Churches or Communions of Christians had been
distinguished from each other by their Articles of Faith, and Ecclesiastical
Policy, their Canons, or Laws of Discipline; and if I would know, what is the
Doctrine, Government, or Discipline of the Church of Rome, or of the Church of
England, I must not enquire either what the Scripture teaches, or what was
taught many Ages since by the Primitive Fathers, but must examine the
Authentic Records of these Churches, the Decrees of Popes and Councils, their
Articles and Canons; for it is impossible to know, what is believed and
practiced in the Church of Rome, or England at this day, but by such Records:
What is the true Catholic Faith, and what is the Faith of the Church of Rome,
or of the Church of England, are two very different Questions, and must be
proved different ways; we must learn the Catholic Faith of the Church from the
Doctrine of the Scriptures, or the Writings of the Primitive Fathers; but we
must learn the Faith of the Church of Rome, or England, or any other Church, by
their own Writings, confirmed by the highest Authority that is in such a
Church: And therefore as we must learn the Doctrine of the Church of England,
from our Articles and Canons, so we must learn the Doctrine of the Church of
Rome, by the Definitions, Decrees, Constitutions, Canons of Popes and Councils,
whose Authority is received and acknowledged in the Church of Rome; and as he,
who renounces the 39 Articles, or any of them, does so far separate from the
Church of England, and renounce its Authority and Communion; so do those, who
renounce the Decrees and Definitions of Popes and Councils, so far forth
renounce the Church of Rome, the Doctrine, Government, and Discipline of it.
And as it would be absurd to say, That the Church of England does not renounce
Transubstantiation, because this Author thinks, it is a Catholic Doctrine; so
it is equally absurd to say, That this Doctrine of Deposing Princes, is not the
Doctrine of the Church of Rome, though taught by Popes and Councils, that is,
by the highest Authority of that Church, because this Author believes, That,
notwithstanding what Popes and Councils say, it is not the Doctrine of the
Universal Church in all Ages; which is a good reason indeed to prove, That we
ought not to receive such Doctrines, though taught by the Church of Rome, but
is no proof, that this is not taught by the Church of Rome.

Thus it is nothing to the purpose, as far as we are concerned in this
Controversy, Whether Popes or Councils be Fallible or Infallible, Whether what
they decree be an Article of Faith, or not, Whether it be true or false; for if
the Popes and their Councils be the highest Authority in the Church of Rome, we
must learn from them, What is the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, be it true or
false, as we do, what the Doctrine of the Church of England is, from the
Articles and Canons agreed on in Convocation; though we do not pretend that the
Convocation is Infallible, or that what they determine must be true, because
they determine it.

All the little (not to say senceless) Distinctions, which this Answerer uses,
tend only to prove, That what is decreed by Popes and Councils, is not
therefore the Doctrine of the Church, that is, of the Universal Catholic
Church, unless it have the confirmation of Catholic Tradition, which I will
easily grant him; but yet it may, and must be the Doctrine of the present
Church of Rome, if it be determined by all the Authority, that is in that
Church: For that is the Doctrine of any Church, which is agreed on, and
determined by the highest Authority in it; and I know no greater Authority in
the Church of Rome, than that of Popes and Councils; and therefore the Deposing
Doctrine being defined and decreed by Popes and Councils (as he himself
acknowledges) must be the Doctrine of the Church of Rome.

2. No says this Answerer, Councils have made a Canon for the Deposing
heretical Princes, but have not defined, That the Pope or Council have
Authority to do it. Councils use to define those things, P. 13.
which they intend we should be obliged to believe. To make a Canon is one
thing, to define is another. Decreeing and Supposing are plainly not defining;
and therefore this Deposing Doctrine is no Article of Faith in the Church of
Rome; nor are they bound to believe it, because though it has been decreed, it
has not been defined in any Council. An admirable Apology for the Church of
Rome! The Council of Lateran (says this Answerer) made a Decree concerning
Deposition; P. 14.
the Council of Lions assented to an actual Deposition; therefore they were
both persuaded, they or the Pope, had power to depose. I, for my part, see not
what more can be made of it. And for my part, I see not what more need be made
of it, to justify the Doctor, or any one else, who charges the Church of Rome*
with the Deposing Doctrine. He may dispute with his Adversary, if he pleases,
Whether such a Deposing Canon, prove the Deposing Doctrine to be an Article of
Faith; but I think it is much at one, Whether a Prince be deposed by an Article
of Faith, or by a Decree or Canon. If that Canon, which decrees the Deposing of
Princes, and Absolving their Subjects from their Allegiance, teaches Subjects
to rebel, and the Church of Rome has made such a Canon, (as evidently they
have, if Roman Catholic General Councils be the Representative of that Church)
I think it does not mend the matter much, whether the Deposing Doctrine be an
Article of Faith or not. And yet I am not satisfied, but, that to decree what
shall be done, includes a virtual Definition of that Doctrine, on which that
Decree is founded. To decree, that an heretical Prince shall be Deposed,
signifies something more than a bare Definition, that an Heretical Prince may
be deposed; and I believe all mankind, who have not lost common sense by
Metaphysical Subtilities, have always taken it for granted, That a Decree
includes a Definition. Nay to decree without a Definition, supposes the
Deposing Doctrine, whereon the Decree of Deposition is founded, to be so
universally received and acknowledged, that there was no need of an express
Definition; which, I think, ties it as hard upon the Church of Rome, as any
Definition could do.

The Sum is this: This Answerer acknowledges, That Popes and Councils have
decreed the Deposing Doctrine, but will by no means grant, that this is the
Doctrine of the Church, (there by meaning, the Universal Church of all ages)
nor that they are bound to believe it, and I readily grant him all this, but do
still averr, That it is the Doctrine of the present Church of Rome; which is
all that I intend to prove, for I never thought it was the Doctrine of the true
Catholic Church, or that any Christian ought to believe it. As the Church of
Rome is distinguished from other Communions of Christians, we have no other way
to learn what she teaches but from Popes and Councils, who are the highest
Authority in that Church, and they teach the Deposing Doctrine; and therefore
those, who live in Communion with that Church, and own its Authority, must own
it too. Those who disown this Doctrine, so far disown the Authority of the
Church of Rome, and may be the better Subjects for being the worse Papists,
which I think is no great Commendation to that Religion.

3. Now since Popes and Councils have decreed and thereby defined the Deposing
Doctrine, and this Answerer does and must believe the Church of Rome to be the
Catholic Church. I desire to know, how he can avoid that Inference, That this
Deposing Doctrine, ever since it has been decreed by Popes and Councils, has
been the Doctrine of the Church? For is not the Church of Rome the Church
still, since it decreed the Deposing Doctrine? and is not a General Council,
the Representative of the Church of that age, wherein this Council is held? And
are not the Decrees of such a Council then the Doctrine of the Church? No, says
our Answerer, I do not understand, how the Church can be engaged, Answer to the
first Treatise, p. 5.
unless she proceeds on those Grounds, on which alone a Church as a Church, or
Congregation of Faithful can proceed. Which he there tells us, is a revelation
by Christ, preserved by an uninterrupted and uniform practice of the Faithful,
that is, by that exploded Oracle of Infallible Tradition. But If any, or all of
those, who make the Church believe not, or act on other grounds than these, I
conceive they believe and act, not as a Church or as faithful, but as Men, or
Scholars, or in some other Capacity. -- The truth is, when Councils leave their
proper work, defining and declaring to Posterity the Faith received from their
Ancestors, and fall to discoursing, or rather acting on discourses formerly
made, they are not in strict formality, Councils, I mean in that propriety in
which they are held to be Infallible, but men assembled to be a Council, and
proceeding now, not as a Council, but as so many men. And must this pass for
good Catholic Doctrine; that all the men in the Church may err, and yet the
Church cannot err, which preserves Infallibility in the Church by as great a
Miracle, as the species of Bread and Wine in the Sacrament without a Subject.
But, I beseech you, When are General Councils Infallible? When they decree and
define, what is Infallibly true. Right! And thus the Convocation of the
Province of Canterbury or York are as Infallible, as any General Council. Nay
any private Christian is as Infallible as either, if he adhere to Infallible
Tradition. But I thought it had been Catholic Doctrine, That a General Council
are no longer to be considered as men, but as the Church representative, which
is under the Conduct and Influence of an Infallible Spirit to secure them from
Error: But it seems even a General Council may err; only then they err not as a
Council, but as Men: but how shall we know, when they are a Council, and when
they are Men? Truly this is not to be known, till they have made their
Definitions and Decrees; and then if they be agreeable to Catholic Tradition,
they acted as a Council, if not they were only Fallible Men. But who shall be
Judge of this? Who is the Keeper of this C^tholick Tradition? Why every Man
must judge for himself, Ibid. p. 71.
It is the sense written in the hearts of the Faithful, and appearing in their
Actions: The Writing foretold by the Prophet, Jerem. 3. in the bowels and
hearts of the house of Israel. And thus I hope in time our Quakers may be good
Catholics.

The Sum then of his Argument, whereby he proves, That the Deposing Doctrine is
not taught by the Church, though it be taught by Popes, and General Councils,
is this, That the Pope is not Infallible, at least that his Infallibility is
but a probable Opinion; That General Councils are not the Church, but Fallible
Men when they err, and Infallible only when they do not err; That though Popes
and Councils and all the Men in the Church teach this Doctrine, yet the Church
does not teach it. Now, Whether these Propositions be true or false, I enquire
not, but desire all good Catholics to observe, That they must renounce the
Infallibility and Authority of the Popes and General Councils of the Church of
Rome, or acknowledge the Deposing Doctrine to be the Doctrine of the Church.

This Distinction between the Church and the Men of the Church, destroys all
the Visible Authority of the Church, and leaves every man at liberty to judge
for himself, What is Catholic Tradition; which is so loose a Principle, that a
Doctor of the Church of England would be ashamed of it; let them no more talk
of a Visible Church, if the whole Visible Authority of the Church be not the
Church; if all those men, in whom the teaching and governing Authority of the
Church resides, whether Popes and Councils may teach such Doctrines, and yet
the Church not teach them; does the Church cease to be a Church, when it
teaches any thing contrary to Catholic Tradition? Then it seems there was no
Church during all the time of those Popes and Councils, which taught the
Deposing Doctrine; nor is there any Roman Catholic Church to this day, wherein
these Doctrines are still taught, and will be so, till those Decrees of Popes
and Councils be repealed, which teach these Doctrines: Or, are they a Church,
and yet the Church not teach, what they, who are the Church, teach with all the
Authority of a Church? Or, are they a Church, and no Church, at the same time?
Is not the Sentence, which a Judge pronounces by the Authority of a Judge, a
Judicial Act, though it be contrary to Law? And by the same reason, Are not the
Decrees of the Council, which is, the, Church representative, the Acts of the
Church, though they be contrary to Catholic Faith and Tradition? Does a Judge
cease to be a Judge, or the Church to be the Church, when they pronounce false?
And if not, Are not such false Judgments, or erroneous Decrees, the Acts of the
Judge, or of the Church still? Let him but tell me, Whether he will have a
Church or no Church, and he shall find me very civil in granting either; but
how this Doctrine will relish with good Catholics, I cannot guess.

In short these men, who will not allow the Deposing Doctrine to be the
Doctrine of the Church of Rome, though they acknowledge it to have been decreed
by Popes and Councils, go upon these Principles;

1. That Popes and Councils may and have decreed such Doctrines, as are
contrary to Scripture, and Catholic Tradition.

2. That no good Catholic is bound to own such Doctrines, though decreed by
Popes and Councils.

3. That the Doctrine of the present Church of Rome, is not the Doctrine of the
Catholic Church.

4. That men are good Catholics not by adhering to the Doctrine of the present
Church of Rome, but of the Scriptures expounded by Primitive and Catholic
Tradition. All this I firmly believe, they are the very Principles on which our
Reformation is founded, and by which we justify our selves against the
Innovations of the Church of Rome; but though these principles will justify
the Reformation, yet they will not prove, That this Deposing Doctrine is not
taught by the present Church of Rome.

Let us then now return again to our Remonstrancer, and having got rid of the
Council of Constance, and proved, That it is so far from condemning, that it
has approved and confirmed the Deposing Doctrine, What remains is nothing but
Insinuation, and Address, without the least appearance of an Argument: but let
us hear what it is; Remonst. p. 2.
and he proceeds thus.

I say seeing Roman Catholics do thus generally declare their Loyalty, I think
they ought no more in Justice to be charged with disloyal Principles, for the
extravagancy of some few of that vast body, and those censured and condemned
too by them, than I am to be charged with the Principles of the like Disloyalty
and Injustice, because some of my Children have been for the Bill of Exclusion,
and others who communicated with me, have written scandalous Pamphlets,
Narratives, etc. tending to Treason and Rebellion.

This is spoke in the Person of the Church of England, and a very fair Speech
he has made for her, wherein there is not any one thing fairly represented. For
1. the Doctor does not charge Loyal Papists with disloyal Principles, only
says, That the Popish Religion is not Loyal; but it is possible, that many
Papists may not believe this to be the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, as many
of them profess not to do; others may abhor the Doctrine, and renounce the
Authority of the Church of Rome in this particular, though they hold Communion
with her in her Worship; others may have such a Natural and Inbred Loyalty,
such a Love to their Prince and Country, as antidotes them against the
Infection of bad Principles; now these men may be Loyal, as the Doctor
acknowledges, and may act upon very Loyal Principles too, but they are not the
Principles of the Popish Religion; and there is some hazard, that while men
embrace a Religion, and own the Authority of a Church, which teaches the
Deposing Doctrine, they may be corrupted by their Religion, when there happens
any competition between their Loyalty and Religion; which is all the Doctor
asserted, and which any disinterested Person would have thought as inoffensive
as it is true. And since this Passage has raised such an unjust clamor against
the Doctor, I shall only observe, what just reason there is for such a
Jealousy after all their declarations of Loyalty, in that (some very few
excepted) they obstinately refuse the Oath of Allegiance, which there can be no
colorable pretense for, but that they will not forswear the Deposing Doctrine,
and there is reason to suspect, That those who will not abjure so pernicious a
Doctrine, may be persuaded to practice it, when time serves. Pope Paul the
Fifth, An. 1606. by a Breve written to the English Catholics, declared and
taught them, as Pastor of their Souls, That the Oath of Allegiance, established
by Parliament 3. Jac. salva fide Catholica, et salute animarum suarum praestari
non posse, cum multa contineat, quae fidei ac saluti aperte adversantur; cannot
be taken without violating the Catholic Faith, and injuring the Salvation of
their Souls, as containing many things, which are manifestly contrary to Faith
and Salvation. Now as the Author of the First Treatise against the Oath of
Allegiance well observes (p. 11.) there are not in it (multa) many things to
which this censure is possibly applicable, unless this be one, That the Pope
has no power to depose the King, or absolve his Subjects from their Oath of
Allegiance. Now, when, in Obedience to the Pope, the Roman Catholics to this
day obstinately refuse this Oath, Is there not reason to suspect, that they are
not clear in this point? and then, let any man judge, what security there is of
their Loyalty.

2. He says it is unjust, That they should be charged with Disloyal Principles
for the extravagancies of some few of that vast body, and those censured and
condemned too by them. This I must acknowledge would be very unjust, but it is
not true. Those whom he calls a few, are no less than Popes and General
Councils, and their most eminent Divines, Schoolmen, Casuists, Canonists, for
several ages; who neither were, nor could be censured, because they were the
Highest Authority in the Church; whereas in truth it is only some few, who have
taught the contrary, and those indeed have been censured and excommunicated at
Rome, as some English Chatholicks can inform him.

3. He makes the Church of England say, That some of her Children were for the
Bill of Exclusion. If he would have passed for a Church of England man, he
should have observed a better Decorum in personating the Church, and not have
made her say such things, as no Ingenuous Papist would affix to her. If ever
the Loyalty of the Church of England was tried, it was in that Affair, which
she had no other Interest, but a sense of Duty, to oblige her to; and I know
not any one man, who was firm and steadfast to the Church, but was so to the
Succession too, though he underwent the Imputation of being a Papist, or
Popishly inclined for it. It is sufficiently known, that the prevailing party
of these Houses of Commons, who were for the Bill of Exclusion, were ready
prepared to accommodate and comprehend away the Church of England; and he
might, with equal truth, and honesty have charged the Rebellion of 41 on the
Sons of the Church of England, as the Bill of Exclusion. But this is so
barefaced a Calumny, that it confutes it self, and shames its Author.

4. Let us then consider, What comparison there is between the case of the
Church of Rome, and of the Church of England; or, Whether there be the same
reason to charge the Church of England with disloyalty, that there is to charge
the Church of Rome. The Church of Rome teaches the Deposing Doctrine by all the
Authority that is in that Church; the Church of England teaches the strictest
Obedience to Princes, without any reserved cases, and threatens eternal
Damnation to all Rebels, how religious soever their Pretenses are. Those who
teach the Deposing Doctrine, speak the sense of the Church of Rome, are her
true and genuine Sons; those who allow Subjects in any case to rebel,
contradict the Doctrine of the Church of England; and therefore it is as unjust
to charge the Church of England, with the Treasons and Rebellions, which are
committed contrary to her declared Doctrine, as it is just to charge the Church
of Rome with such practices, as she her self decrees and teaches. If Roman
Catholics be loyal to a deposed and excommunicated Prince, no thanks to the
Church of Rome for it, who forbids them to be so. If any in Communion with the
Church of England be disloyal, this is no fault of the Church, which teaches
Loyalty. And since he has been pleased to mention the Bill of Exclusion, I
would desire him to tell me at his leisure, What Roman Catholic Nation, who
had all the Power in their hands, would have suffered a Protestant Prince to
have succeeded quietly to his Throne? We know how it fared with Henry the
Fourth of France, notwithstanding the Parliament of Paris burnt Mariana's Book,
and what Henrician Heretics in those days signified. But our Church teaches
better, and the true Sons of the Church practice better, and will never repent
of what they have done, though they be unjustly reproached by Fanatics for
doing it, and as unjustly charged by as kind Remonstrating Friends, as any Rome
affords, with opposing it.

And now I come to his convincing Argument; That the Papists do not hold such
pernicious Doctrines; That he sees so many Kings and Princes in other Countries
no less jealous of their Lives and Authorities than others, who yet profess and
maintain that Religion, and think themselves secure by their Principles, when
they dare not trust the Calvinist. The Church of Rome, you know, Sir, never
wants Miracles, and it may be, this is none of the least. For my part I dare
not pretend to give a Reason, Why any man professes that Religion, much less,
Why Princes do so; and yet it is not more impossible, that men should maintain
a Religion against their Interest, than believe contrary to their Senses. I
suppose, it is as much against the Interest of Princes to be actually deposed
by Popes and Councils, as it is to profess a Religion, which teaches the
Deposing Doctrine; and yet when Henry the Fourth was deposed by Gregory the
VII. and Frederick the Second by Pope Innocent the Fourth in the Council of
Lions, and in such other Instances of the actual exercise of this Deposing
Doctrine, neither the deposed Princes and Emperors, nor other Catholic Kings,
renounced the Communion of the Church of Rome for it; and if Kings can be
contented to continue in the Communion of that Church, which actually deposes
Princes, nay, deposes themselves, it does not seem to me so convincing an
Argument, That the Church of Rome does not teach the Deposing Doctrine, merely
because Princes, who are jealous of their Lives and Authority, hold Communion
with it.

If they can persuade Princes, That there is no Salvation to be had in any
other Church, those who have a mind to be saved, must be contented to dispense
with some temporal Inconveniences to save their Souls; and indeed they have
made the way to Heaven so very easy, that it may persuade Princes, who love
their Pleasures, to bear with the Rudeness and Insolences of Popes. And yet no
man ever denied, but the Papists may be very good Subjects to Popish Princes;
while they obey the Pope, the Pope commands their Subjects to obey them; the
only danger is, when the Pope and the Prince are not of a side, whom the
Subjects shall obey then, the deposed Prince, or the deposing Pope; and it is
no greater wonder, that a Popish Prince can more securely trust his Popish
Subjects, than Calvinists, than that a Calvinistical Prince places more
confidence in his Calvinistical Subjects, than in Papists; for generally,
neither Papists, nor Calvinists, can endure any Prince but of their own
Religion; but now any Prince, whether Papists or Calvinists, may be secure in
the Loyalty of the Church of England, which reverences the Person and Authority
of their Prince, whatever his Religion be.

As for what he adds concerning our present King* (whom God long preserve)
there is less reason for him to fear the Deposing Doctrine (though he did
believe it to be the Doctrine of the Church of Rome) than for any other
Catholic Prince in the World. For as the case stands, it is (...)

FINIS.

