The Dean of St. PAUL's SERMON BEFORE The Lord MAYOR, AT St. BRIDGET's Church,
on Tuesday in Easter-Week. 1692.

Stamp, MAYOR. Jovis xiv. die April' 1692. Annoque Regis and Regine Wiliel and
Mariae, Angliae, etc. quarto.
THIS Court does desire the Reverend Doctor Sherlock, Dean of St. Paul's, to
print his Sermon preached at St. Bridget's Church on Tuesday in Easter-Week
last, before the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Governors of the several Hospitals
of this City.

GOODFELLOW.

The Charity of Lending without Usury. AND The True Notion of Usury briefly
stated.

IN A SERMON Preached before the RIGHT HONORABLE The Lord MAYOR, AT St.
BRIDGET's Church, on Tuesday in Easter-Week. 1692.

By WILLIAM SHERLOCK, D. D. Dean of St. Paul's, Master of the Temple, and
Chaplain in Ordinary to Their MAJESTY'S.

IMPRIMATUR.

April 23. 1692.

GEO. ROYSE.

LONDON: Printed for William Rogers at the Sun, over against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleet street. MDC XC II.

VI. LUKE 35. But love ye your enemies, -- (and do good, and lend, hoping for
nothing again,) and your reward shall be great, and ye shall be the children of
the Highest, for he is kind to the unthankful, and to the evil.
OUR Conformity to the Death and Resurrection of our Savior, consists in dying
to sin, and walking in newness of life, which St. Paul tells us is represented
by the External Ceremony of Baptism; the baptized Person being buried with
Christ in Baptism, and rising out of his watery grave a new born Creature, 6.
Romans 3, 4. For in that he died, he died unto sin once; but in that he lives,
he lives unto God: Likewise reckon ye also your selves to be dead indeed unto
sin, but alive unto God, through Jesus Christ our Lord, 9, 10. And the
principal Exercise of this Divine Life, which is our conformity to the
Resurrection of Christ, is a Divine Conversation. If ye then be risen with
Christ, seek those things which are above, where Christ sits at the right
hand of God: Set your affections on things above, not on things on the earth,
3. Col. 1, 2. And to set our affections on things above, does not only signify
to think sometimes of Heaven, and to desire to go to Heaven when we dye, which
very worldly-minded men may do; but to lay up for our selves Treasures in
Heaven, which are durable and eternal, in opposition to those perishing
Treasures on Earth, which are subject to Thieves, to Moths and Rust. 6. Matthew.
19. 20, 21. To make to our selves friends of the mammon of unrighteousness,
that when we fail, they may receive us into everlasting habitations, 16. Luke
9. Now ye all know what this means: viz. To purge our minds from the love of
Riches, and from all covetous Desires; to improve our Estates in Acts of Piety
and Charity, for the Service of God, and to supply the wants of the poor and
miserable: to return our Money into the other World, where it will increase
into Eternal Life and Glory: for this is truly to have our Conversation in
Heaven, to live above this World, to sit loose from all the Enjoyments of it;
to live to God, and another World, to improve every thing we enjoy here, to
secure and advance our future Happiness: when men are Charitable upon these
Principles and these designs, they must live a very heavenly Life; For where
our Treasure is, there our hearts will be also.

This our Ancestors, who appointed this Annual Solemnity, seem to have been
very sensible of, That there is no particular Grace or Virtue, the exercise of
which is a more visible demonstration of a Divine and purified Mind, which is
risen with Christ, and lives to God, as Christ does, than the Grace of Charity;
and therefore that there was no time more proper to exercise Charity, and to
exhort Christians to Charity, and to show Charity in all its Pomp, and humble
Bravery, than the Feast of the Resurrection; wherein we commemorate the Love of
our Lord in dying for us, and his triumph over Death, and in full assurance of
a blessed Immortality, of which the Resurrection of our Savior was an ocular
Demonstration, send our Hearts and our Eyes after him to Heaven, and
contemplate that Glory to which he is advanced, and to which he has promised to
advance us.

This then is my proper work at this time, to exhort you to Charity; proper
both to the nature of this holy Feast, and to the original Institution of this
Solemnity; and it may reasonably be hoped, that the Annual Returns of it,
wherein all the Arguments to Charity are so earnestly pressed on you, should
keep this Divine Fire always burning and glowing in your Breasts. You have so
often heard all the Arguments to Charity, that it is impossible you should
forget them; and there is one that is worth all the rest, which no Christian
can forget, who remembers that there is a Heaven and a Hell, and which no
Christian can resist, without despising his Soul, and Eternal Life and Death;
and that is, That Heaven is the Reward of Charity; that Hell is the Punishment
of Uncharitableness; which is so plainly and expressly taught, and so frequently
repeated by our Savior, that it is as certain and unavoidable, as that there
is a Heaven and a Hell; and if Heaven be not a sufficient Encouragement to
Charity, nor Hell sufficient to deter us from Uncharitableness, it is to no
purpose to use any other Arguments, which can never persuade, if these cannot;
or if they could, would neither carry us to Heaven, nor keep us out of Hell;
for to be charitable only for temporal reasons, is to give our goods to feed
the poor, without a true Divine Charity; which St. Paul tells us, will profit
nothing, 1 Cor. 13. For such a Charity as does not raise us above this world,
can neither carry us to Heaven, nor keep us out of Hell. And therefore instead
of drawing together all the Arguments for Charity which you have so often
heard, and showing them in a new dress, my design at present is to recommend to
you a very excellent, but a very neglected part of Charity, which our Savior
presses on us in my Text, viz. The Charity of Lending, Do good, and lend,
hoping for nothing again.

In speaking to which Words, I shall 1. Show you what this Duty is* 2. What an
excellent Charity it is to lend. And how this may be improved to the most
excellent purposes.

1. What this Duty is, or what our Savior means by lending, hoping for nothing
again. And it can signify but two things; and I see no reason to think, but
that our Savior might mean both. 1. To Lend, without hoping for any increase;
or to lend freely, without Usury. 2. To lend, where the very Principal may be
in danger, when we have little reason to hope that we shall ever see our own
again.

1. To lend freely, without Usury; for our Savior commands this, as an Act of
Charity, Do good, and lend: And tho to lend, even upon Usury, may in many cases
prove a great kindness to the Borrower, yet Charity is not the motive of the
Lender, it is not Charity, but Traffic and Merchandise of Money: And tho the
Jews were expressly forbid to lend their Brethren upon Usury, yet our Savior
intimates there was something like this, and equivalent to it, which spoiled
the Charity of lending, even without Usury; that they would not lend to the
poor; who though they should repay them what they borrowed, yet were never
likely to be in a condition to lend to them again; but they would lend to the
Rich, from whom they expected the like returns of kindness; as you may see in
the Verses before my Text; 33, 34. And if ye do good to them that do good to
you, what thank have ye? for sinners also do even the same. And if ye lend to
them, of whom ye hope to receive, (not only your own, but the like kindness of
lending to you when your occasions require it), what thank have ye? for sinners
also lend to sinners, to receive as much again; (...), equal returns of
kindness; which if it be not Usury of Money, is Usury of Kindnesses, but is not
Charity; like inviting our Rich Friends and Neighbors to a Feast, who can
invite us again; which tho it be no fault, is no Charity; for that consists in
entertaining the poor, who can make us no return, 14. Luke 12, 13, 14. And thus
our Savior exhorts us here, but do you do good, and lend, hoping for nothing
again; neither for Usury, nor for such returns and exchanges of kindness.

It was for the sake of this Duty, that Usury was so strictly forbidden by the
Jewish Law, that men might the more freely lend their Money to those who
wanted, when they had no present use for it themselves; and had no way to
increase it; and as far as the Reason and Charity of this Law extends, so far
it still obliges, and so far Usury is still forbid to Christians.

This is not well considered by those who so universally condemn all Usury; and
because the right understanding of this will be of great use to settle some
men's minds, and to explain and enforce this duty of lending, which I now
recommend to you, it cannot be thought a digression from my present Design, to
give you the true, but short state of this matter.

It is confessed on all hands, That Usury is forbid by the Law of Moses; but
the great mistake is concerning the Nature of Usury, or what that is which the
Law forbids and condemns by the name of Usury.

Some think that all Increase of Money, when men lend a Sum of Money to receive
the Principal again with Interest, is the Usury which the Law forbids; and
therefore that this is absolutely unlawful in all cases, and in all degrees;
though we all know, That Trade, to which we owe all the Riches and Greatness of
our Nation, and so many excellent Charities too, cannot be maintained without
it: That some men, who now live comforrably in the world, maintain their
Families with Credit and Reputation, and do many acts of Charity themselves,
could not Trade at all; others could not drive such flourishing and spreading
Trades without borrowed Money, nor borrow without Interest: That many Widows
and Orphans are maintained by Interest, who must in a few years be Beggars, had
they no other way to live, but to spend the Principal. This is so contrary to
the sense and reason of mankind, and to all the rules of Justice and Charity,
and so impracticable in the present state of the world, that while it is
possible to put any other sense upon the Law, I would never think of this. And
the comfort is, that the Law expounds it self otherwise, and gives no color
for such an Interpretation as this, That all Increase of Money is forbid by it.

For 1. The Law it self allowed the Jews to take Usury of Strangers of other
Countries, though not of their Brethren, or natural Jews, 23. Deuteronomy. 20. Unto a
stranger thou may lend upon usury, but unto thy brother thou shall not lend
upon usury. And therefore God did not absolutely forbid the Jews to increase
their Money, for they might lend to strangers upon Usury; which proves, that
this was not an universal Law to them, much less is it so to all mankind. And
that proves that there is no moral and intrinsic evil in Usury; for if all
Usury had in its own nature been unlawful, God could not have allowed the Jews
to take Usury of strangers; for he cannot allow the least moral evil. The truth
is, I never could yet see the least shadow of an Argument to prove, that Usury
is evil in its nature, unless that Money cannot beget Money, be thought an
Argument; but that is as good an Argument against buying Corn or Wine, or any
thing else with Money; for it is unnatural for Money to beget Corn or Wine: But
if the barren nature of Money, that it cannot naturally propagate it self, be a
reason against Usury of Money, this is no reason against Usury of Corn, which
is equally forbid: for it is natural for Corn to propagate its kind, and
multiply it self; and yet the Usury of all Victuals is as much forbid, as the
Usury of Money, 23. Deuteronomy. 19. Now if Usury be not morally evil, it can be
unlawful to none, but those to whom God has forbid it; and there being no
prohibition of it in the New Testament, which is the Law of the Christian
Church, it cannot be unlawful to Christians, whatever it was to the Jews.

2. And yet the Jews themselves were not expressly forbid, however they might
understand it, to lend their Money upon Usury, to All their own Brethren, but
only to the Poor: So that had any Rich Jew come to borrow Money of them, for
any thing that appears by the Law, they might have lent Money to him upon
Usury. This Observation will clear this whole matter; and therefore I shall
turn you to all the Texts of the Law, which forbid Usury, and the reading of
them will convince you, That Usury was forbid only in favor of the Poor.

The first Text is, 22. Exodus 25. If thou lend money to any of my people that
is poor by thee, thou shall not be to him as an Usurer, neither shall thou lay
upon him Usury: Where no Usury is forbid, but only lending to the poor upon
Usury: Thus 25. Lev. 35, 36, 37. And if thy brother be waxen poor, and fallen
to decay with thee, then thou shall relieve him. -- Take thou no usury of him,
nor increase, but fear God, that thy brother may live well with thee: Thou
shall not give him thy money upon Usury, nor lend him thy victuals for
increase. It is true, in the Repetition of this Law, 23. Deuteronomy. 19, 20. it is
only said, Thou shall not lend upon usury to thy brother, usury of money, usury
of victuals, usury of any thing that is lent upon usury. Unto a stranger thou
may lend upon usury, but unto thy brother thou shall not lend upon usury,
that the Lord thy God may bless thee in all that thou set thine hand unto,
in the land whither thou go to possess. This seems to forbid lending upon
Usury to any Jew, whether Rich or Poor; but this being only a repetition of
those Laws in Exodus and Leviticus, in all reason must be expounded by them;
and though the poor are not expressed, the Circumstances of the place prove,
that they only are meant; for though Rich men may sometimes have occasion to
borrow Money, yet none but the Poor, who have no Money to buy can ever have
occasion to borrow Victuals upon Usury; and the difference the Law makes
between a Brother and a Stranger shows, that it is intended as an Act of
Charity, which they owe to their Brethren, though not to Strangers. For which
Reason also they were forbid to make any of their Brethren Bondmen, though they
might buy the Children of the Heathen and Strangers for Bondmen and
Bond-maids, 25 Levit. 39. etc. and the Blessing God promises shows, that it is
the Reward of Charity.

In other places, where Usury is mentioned, some Circumstance or other
determines it to the Poor. This was the case, when Nehemiah reproved the Nobles
and the Rulers for exacting Usury, 5 Nehem. When the Prophet Isaiah threatens
great Desolations against the Land, he thus describes it, And it shall be as
with the People, so with the Priest -- as with the Lender, so with the
Borrower, as with the taker of Usury, so with the giver of Usury to him, 24
Isai. 2. That is, the Lender and the Usurer shall be reduced to the same
Distress and Poverty, as those suffer, who borrow upon Usury; which shows, that
none but poor men used to borrow upon Usury in those days. Thus when the
Prophet Jeremiah complains, Woe is me my Mother, that thou have born me a man
of strife, and a man of contention to the whole earth, I have neither lent on
Usury, nor men have lent to me on Usury, yet every one of them does curse me,
15 Jer. 10. it plainly intimates, that Usury is such an Oppression of the Poor,
as both deserves and very often procures Curses. And therefore the Prophet
Ezekiel joins Usury with the Oppression of the Poor, and other acts of
Violence, 18 Ezekiel. 7, 8, 10, 11, 16, 17. He who has oppressed the poor and
needy, has spoiled by violence, has not restored the pledge, has given forth
upon Usury, and has taken Increase, he shall die. But he that has neither
oppressed the poor, nor has withheld the pledge, neither has spoiled by
violence, but has given his bread to the hungry, and clothed the naked with a
garment, that has taken off his hand from the poor, that has not received
Usury nor Increase, he shall live. Which makes it very plain, what is meant by
Usury, when to take Usury is joined with Violence and Oppression of the Poor;
and to lend without Usury is rekoned among Acts of great Charity and Goodness.

There is but one place more, as I remember, that mentions Usury, 15 Psalm 5.
and there putting forth Money to Usury is joined with taking a Reward against
the Innocent, which shows, that it was an Act of Violence and Oppression. For
indeed among the Jews, who were no Merchants, nor maintained any Foreign Trade
with other Nations, no men had occasion to borrow Money, much less Victuals,
but to supply their present wants, and to take advantage of the Necessities of
the Poor, to increase their own Fortunes by increasing their Poverty, was
against all the Laws of Goodness and Charity; and therefore this Usury, which
was the only Usury known in those days, is strictly forbid, as all other acts
of Oppression are. All other kinds of Usury are introduced by Trade and
Commerce, and though it is against Charity to lend upon Usury to men, who
borrow to supply their wants, yet if men borrow to increase their Trade and
Fortunes, there is Justice and Equity in it, that the Lender shall make some
Increase of his Money, as well as the Borrower. This is not properly Usury, but
Traffic and Commerce, and I know no reason, why men may not Trade with Money,
as well as with other Commodities.

And this I take to be the true reason, why the Jews were permitted to take
Usury of Strangers, but not of their Brethren, because their Heathen Neighbors
were Merchants, as is plain of Tire and Zidon, 23 Isai. They improved their
Money by Trade, and therefore it was fit they should pay Interest for it;
especially if they were to lend upon Usury only to such Strangers as came among
them for Trade, but did not dwell and sojourn with them; which seems probable
from 25 Levit. 35. where the Stranger that sojourns with them seems to be
entitled to the like Charity as a Brother. If thy Brother be waxen poor, and
fallen to decay, thou shall relieve him, yea, though he be a stranger, or a
sojourner, that he may live with thee, take thou no Usury of him, nor Increase.
For a Stranger never signifies a Proselyte of Justice, who by Circumcision was
incorparated into the Body of Israel, made a Brother, and entitled to the
Privileges of a Natural Jew, but only a Proselyte of the Gate, who renounced
Idolatry, but did not undertake the Observation of the Law of Moses; and yet
they were not to take Usury of these Strangers if they were poor, no more than
of their Brother, according to that Law, 22 Exodus 21. Thou shall not vex a
stranger, nor oppress him, for ye were strangers in the land of Egypt.

The Answer our Savior gives to the Servant who hid his Talent in the Napkin,
seems to justify this Account, unless we can suppose, that his Lord would have
been pleased with unjust and wicked Gain. 25. Matthew. 27. Thou ought to have
put my money to the Exchangers, and then at my coming, I should have received
mine own with Usury. So that though it was unlawful to lend Money upon Usury to
the Poor, it was not so to the Exchangers, who traded in Money. And our
Savior's driving the Money Changers out of the Temple, no more proves that he
disallowed that Profession, than that he disallowed selling Oxen, and Sheep,
and Doves for Sacrifice, for he drove them out also; the Fault was not in the
Merchandise no more of Money, than of Sheep, or Oxen, or Doves, but they made
his Father's house, a house of merchandise. 2 John 14, 15. etc.

It is certain the ancient Fathers, who were professed Enemies to Usury,
opposed it under this Notion; for their great Arguments against Usury, are
levelled against Uncharitableness and Oppression of the Poor, as appears from
Gregor. Nyssen, St. Ambrose, St. Basil, and others; and yet it is no wonder,
should we meet with some Passages in them against Usury considered, as Trading
and Merchandise of Money: For it is well known, that they were not much greater
Friends, to Trade and Merchandise, than they were to Usury, which they thought
unbecoming a Christian, as ministering only to Covetousness and Luxury. And yet
I suppose, the greatest Enemies at this day to Usury, will not carry the
Quarrel so far, as to condemn Merchandise. And yet under this Notion of
Covetousness and sordid Gain (which is equally applicable to all Trade.) Usury
is forbid the Clergy by the Seventeenth Cannon of the First Council of Nice;
but no Council ever forbad it to the Layety, or threatened Church Censures
against them for it, which they would certainly have done, had they thought it
evil in its self.

This may satisfy us in what Sense Usury is forbid, both by the Law of Moses
and the ancient Writers of the Christian Church, viz. as contrary to Charity;
when we lend upon Usury, where Charity requires us to lend freely: When we take
Increase of the Poor, who borrow to supply their Wants, and sink them still
more irrecoverably into Poverty by such Exactions: This always was, and always
will be hateful to God, and to all Good Men, and yet such detestable Usurers
there are among us, who grow rich upon the Ruins and Spoils of the Poor, and
drink the Tears of Widows and Orphans; but when to lend without Usury is no
Charity, and to take Usury is no Oppression, there Usury it self is no Crime.

And hence we learn (which is the great thing I aimed at) that Usury was forbid
only for the sake of lending, which proves, that to lend freely to the Poor, is
a great and necessary Act of Charity: Though a Man never took a Penny for Usury
in his Life, yet if he neither gives, nor lends to the Poor, he is guilty of
all that Uncharitableness, for which Usury is condemned; nay in most Cases,
even these worst sort of Usurers are the more charitable Men: For excepting
some very hard Cases, it is greater Charity to lend even to the Poor for Usury,
than not to lend at all.

For this Reason the Emperor Leo was forced by a new Constitution to permit
Usury, which his Father out of a pious Zeal, had wholly forbid, because he
found, that when Men were forbid to take any Usury, they would not lend at all,
which was a greater Hardship to the Poor, than Usury it self.

Merely not to take Usury is no Virtue, but to lend to the Poor without Usury
is. To lock up our Money in our Chests to rust and canker, and to do no good
with it, is what St. James so severely threatens rich Men for, Go now ye richl
men, weep and howl for your miseries, which shall come upon you; your riches are
corrupted, and your garments are moth eaten; your gold and your silver is
cankered, and the rust of them shall be a Witness against you, a Witness of
your Covetousness and Uncharitableness, that you have done no good with it, but
hoarded it up to rust and canker for want of use. 5 James 1, 2, 3.

This Controversy then may be stated and decided in a few words. Usury is a
very great Sin, that is, to lend our Money upon Usury to those who borrow for
Necessity and Want, and to exact such Payments with Rigor and Severity, to
strip such miserable People of that little that remains, to imprison their
Persons, and make them end their Lives in a Goal. To lock up our Money, and do
no good with it, is to hide our Talent in a Napkin; for Money is improveable,
and must be improved, either for Charity or Increase, to be a new and perpetual
Spring of Charity. To declaim against Usury, and not to exhort men to lend to
the Poor, without Usury is to mistake or overlook the true End and Design of
the Law, and to betray uncharitable Men to a greater Evil than Usury it self;
but if men lend freely to the Poor in such Proportions, as Charity requires,
they may very innocently and virtuously, without transgressing this Law against
Usury, lend their Money for Increase to the Rich.

2. But our Savior seems to mean something more by lending, hoping for nothing
again, not only to lend freely without Usury, but to lend, where the Principal
may be in Danger, when we cannot reasonably promise our selves to receive our
own again: no man can deny, but this is great Charity; but then this must be
conducted by the measures and proportions of giving: what Charity will oblige
us to give, it will as reasonably oblige us to lend, but where the Return is
very hazardous, it can oblige us to lend, no more than what it would become us
to give, and yet in such Cases, lending may be a greater Charity than giving,
which is the Second thing proposed, which I can speak but briefly to.

2. The Excellency and Advantages of this Charity of Lending, and how it may be
improved to the best Purpose.

Now if we compare Giving and Lending together, Lending has much the Advantage
of Giving, as to the true End and Purposes of Charity.

To Lend is a greater Obligation, to Industry than to give, and there cannot be
a greater Kindness done to the Poor, next to keeping them from starving, than
to teach them Industry. I need not tell you that there are many Poor, who will
never work, while they can meet with charitable People to give; nay, who choose
to be sick, to be lame, to be blind, to move Charity, rather than work to
supply their Wants; but when Men have nothing to live on, but the Improvement
of lent Money, which they know, they must repay, when it is called for, this
must make them industrious; for it both encourages their Industry, and keeps
the Rod over them; especially were this made a standing Rule to give nothing to
those who are able, but will not work, who have a Stock lent them to trade
with, and neglect to improve it.

Thus what we give does but one single Act of Charity, for we can give it but
once, but what we lend may circulate, as the Blood does in our Veins, and
communicate Warmth and Spirits to more Parts of the Body than one: that is,
what we lend, may be lent again, and do a great many successive Charities, as
great, or greater than that one single Charity had been, if we had given it:
And that certainly is one of the greatest and noblest Charity, which is most
diffusive.

But yet to make this Charity of Lending the more effectual, it must be
confessed, that a Public Bank of Charity raised out of such free Loans, will
have many Advantages above any Private Acts of this Nature; and I can by no
means think this either impracticable or difficult.

I doubt not but most of this Honorable Assembly could contrive very
Advantageous ways of doing this, were men but Charitably disposed. For suppose,
you should make your Hospitals, or your Companies, such Public Banks, or if it
could be more Public, still the more Useful, and the more secure, where
charitable People, may safely deposite their Money without Use, or those who
cannot spare the whole Interest, may abate some part of it, and where the
running Cash may be lodged, which Men expect no Interest for, this might easily
rise to a very vast Sum, which with wise Improvement would make a sure and
lasting Fund of Charity.

And could any thing in the World be more easy than this, which no man could
feel? What would it be to a Rich Man, who has many thousands employed in Trade,
or secured at Interest; or if he knows when he has enough, has no need to
increase it, to drop some thousands into such a free Bank, to sanctify and
prosper his Trade, and other ways of Gain, and to secure a Blessing to his
Posterity? How many others are there, who could spare a hundred, or it may be
some hundred pounds out of their Stock, and not feel the want of Interest, or
at least, if they could not spare the whole Interest, might spare the half, or
third part of it? How many are there, who have some hundreds by them useless,
which they would not, and could not with any reason grudge to lay up in a safe
Bank? How many are there, who would easily be persuaded to lend, were there
such a safe Bank to receive it, who are very unwilling to give? And were there
such a Bank of Charity once settled, there would be very little need of giving.

For I know not any kind of Charity, but might be provided for in this way,
were men but free and liberal in lending. It would enlarge your Hospitals,
clear your Streets of Beggars, the great Reproach of this City; maintain those
who cannot work, and employ those who can; put poor Children to Apprentice,
provide Stocks for Ingenious and Industrious Young Men, who want them, redeem
Prisoners, and, which Justice and Honor requires of you, as far as possibly
you can, may in some measure provide a Fund for your Orphans.

This would advance the Glory of this great City, it would perpetuate and
consecrate the Memory of such worthy Persons, as would begin and promote such a
lasting and extensive Charity; the Children which are unborn, would rise up and
call them blessed; it would draw a great share of the Charitable Money of the
Nation into your hands, which would quicken Trade, and increase your Riches,
and above all, it would procure all the great Rewards which are promised to
Charity, both in this World, and in the next.

But whatever becomes of this Proposal, you must always remember, that it is
great Charity to lend as well as to give: This is what our Savior expects from
us, this is what he Commands, To do good, and lend, hoping for nothing again;
and if out of a greedy desire of gain, we will lend nothing freely to the
Relief and Encouragement of the Industrious Poor, this will make all our other
Usury and Increase, which is Lawful and Innocent in it self, when it neither
Oppresses the Poor, nor stops our Charity, to become sin.

FINIS.
Books Published by the Reverend Dr. Sherlock, Dean of St. Paul's, Master of the
Temple, and Chaplain in Ordinary to their Majesty's.
AN Answer to a Discourse, Entitled, Papists Protesting against Protestant
Popery. Second Edition. 4to. An Answer to the Amicable Accommodation of the
Differences between the Representer and the Answerer. 4to. A Sermon at the
Funeral of the Reverend Benjamin Calamy, D. D. 4to. A Vindication of some
Protestant Principles of Church-Unity and Catholick-Communion from the Charge
of Agreement with the Church of Rome. 4to. A Preservative against Popery, being
some plain Directions to Unlearned Protestants how to dispute with Romish
Priests. In Two Parts with the Vindication, in Answer to the Cavils of Lewis
Sabran Jesuit. 4to. A Discourse concerning the Nature, Unity, and Communion of
the Catholic Church, First Part. 4to. A Sermon Preached before the Right
Honorable the Lord Mayor, and Aldermen of the City of London, on Sunday
November 4th. 1688. 4to. A Vindication of the Doctrine of the Holy and Ever
Blessed Trinity, and the Incarnation of the Son of God, etc. The Second
Edition. Quarto. The Case of the Allegiance due to Sovereign Powers stated and
resolved according to Scripture, Reason, and the Principles of the Church of
England. Sixth Edition. Quarto. A Vindication of the Case of Allegiance due to
Sovereign Powers, etc. Quarto. A Sermon Preached at Whitehall before the Queen
on the 17th. of June. 1691. being the Fast Day. Quarto. A Practical Discourse
concerning Death. The Fifth Edition. Octavo. A Practical Discourse concerning a
Future Judgment. Second Edition. Octavo. A Sermon Preached before the
Honorable House of Commons at St. Margarets Westminster January 30th. 1691/2.
Quarto. A Sermon Preached before the Queen at Whitehall Febr. 12. 1691/2.
Quarto.
Printed for William Rogers.


